The fundamental thesis of actualism
 is:
  
Or, equivalently:
Possibilism denies thesis A.  More specifically, according
to the possibilist, there are things that do not, in fact, exist but which
could have existed — things like possible Aliens (in the
sense above), possible people that were never born, and so on.  Note that
this is not merely to say that there could have been Aliens, or that there
could have been people other than those who actually exist.  Nearly
everyone believes that.  Rather, it is to say that there really
are, quite literally, things that do not actually exist but which
could have.  (An important but significantly different notion of
possibilism to which many of the issues in this article do not apply was
developed by the philosopher David Lewis, and is discussed in the
supplemental document
 Classical Possibilism and Lewisian Possibilism.)
As will be discussed in detail below, possibilism provides an elegantly
simple, general account of the truth conditions of our modal
discourse. The possibilist challenge to actualism is to give an
analysis of our ordinary modal beliefs that is consistent with thesis A
and, hence, which doesn't appeal to possible but nonactual objects.  There
are two central aspects to the possibilist challenge: the challenge of
possible worlds, and the challenge of possible objects.  The latter will
be the central focus of this article, but, for the sake of completeness,
we begin with a brief discussion of the former.
Claims such as ‘It is possible that there are Aliens’ and
‘It is necessary that human beings are mortal’ are known
as modal claims, because the sentential prefixes ‘it is
possible that’ and ‘it is necessary that’ indicate a
‘mode’ in which the statements they precede are true. Modal
claims of these (and many other) forms are ubiquitous in our thought and
discourse. Many of our reflective and creative thoughts seem to be about
possibilities (consider, for example, the possibility that there are
clean, fuel-efficient automobiles that cause no harm to the environment)
and much of our logical reasoning involves drawing conclusions which, in
some sense, necessarily follow from premises that we already
believe. Modal logic is the logic of possibility and necessity and the
study of modal logic, as a discipline, has flourished in the latter half
of the twentieth century. This was due in no small part to the
introduction of the concept of possible worlds to investigate the
truth conditions of modal claims. A large part of the logic of possibility
and necessity seems to be captured by treating the modal operators
‘it is necessary that’ and ‘it is possible that’
as quantifiers over possible worlds. That is, the following semantic
analyses seem to capture a large part of the logic of modality:
Notice that it is a consequence of analysis (b) that true claims
asserting a possibility imply the existence of possible worlds.
On the face of it, then, the possible worlds analysis of the truth
conditions of basic modal statements just sketched appears to entail the
existence of nonactual possible worlds, and hence appears directly to
contradict thesis A.  Consequently, actualists either have to try
to develop a semantics — a theory of meaning — for modal statements
in terms that do not entail
the existence of nonactual possible worlds, or at least to provide an
account of possible worlds on which this consequence is rendered
metaphysically innocuous.
The power of the possible worlds semantics — and the distinct
lack of any persuasive alternatives — is very attractive to many
actualists, and they are loathe to give it up (so long, of course, as
they do not have to abandon actualism). Consequently, actualists
typically grasp the second horn of the above dilemma and adopt some
sort of actualistically acceptable, “sanitized” version of
this theory on which possible worlds are conceived as
theoretical abstract objects which actually exist. Many such
theories of abstractly-conceived worlds have been developed, some with
better success than others (see, for example, Plantinga [1974] and
[1976], Adams [1974], Fine [1977], Chisholm [1981], van Inwagen
[1986], or Zalta [1983] and [1993]). Some take worlds to be maximal
possible states of affairs, others take them to be maximal possible
properties or propositions, still others treat them as maximal
consistent sets of some sort, and yet others treat them as part of a
more general theory of abstract objects.  For purposes here, it will
serve well enough just to assume some generic version of this view on
which such abstractly conceived worlds can perform their theoretical
tasks in virtue of certain actualistically unobjectionable modal
properties. (A fairly detailed example of such an account, and some of
its philosophical ramifications, can be found in the supplementary
document
 An Account of Abstract Possible Worlds.)
The second step in the actualist analysis of modality is to find a way to
do without possible but nonactual individuals — also known
as mere possibilia or contingently nonactual
individuals.  The central reason for introducing such entities, at least
in modern discussions, is this: Possible but nonactual individuals enable
us to provide compelling semantic analyses of modal claims involving the
quantifier ‘there is’. To see this, consider, first, a
non-modal claim involving such a quantifier: ‘There are
philosophers’. Such a claim would typically be regimented in
first-order logic as ‘There is an x such that x is
a philosopher’ or, using more formal notation (in which
‘Px’ abbreviates the predicate ‘x is a
philosopher’): ∃xPx.  On the usual
“Tarskian”
 semantics[2]
 for  classical, first-order logic, 
 given the intended meaning of ‘Px’, the truth
condition for this claim is — unsurprisingly —
that there is an individual x that is a philosopher.
And because there is in fact such an individual — the
philosopher Plato, say — the claim is true.  According to
Tarskian semantics, then, the truth value of a general statement is
determined ultimately by simple facts about whether or not specific
individuals exhibit certain properties.
Now consider the modal claim ‘It is possible that there are
Aliens’. It is natural to regiment this claim as ‘It is
possible that there is an x such that x is an
Alien’, which is typically formalized as follows:
Now, how are we to understand the truth condition for (1)?  Because
nothing that actually exists could be an Alien, the truth of (1) does not
appear to depend upon any simpler facts about individuals.  (1), if true,
must simply be a brute fact.  And this seems puzzling: How can that simply
be the end of the matter?  How can a rather complex truth about what there
could be just be true without being grounded in simpler truths
about individuals?  And thus the possibilist: By introducing possible
worlds and (contingently nonactual) possibilia into our ontology,
we can define a truth condition for (1) in terms of simpler facts about
individuals in other possible worlds.  Specifically, according to possible
world semantics, sentence (1) is true if and only if:
But, it is a fact about the logic of the quantifier ‘there is’
that such quantifiers commute with one another. In other words,
(2) implies (3):
So the truth conditions of (1) imply (3). But if (3) is true, then
so is the ordinary modal claim ‘Something is possibly an
Alien’, i.e.,
for which (3) provides the truth conditions. Thus, given the simplest
logic concerning modal and quantifier claims, (1) implies (4).  In other
words, the simplest quantified modal logic tells us that (5) implies
(6):
The problem for the second step of the actualist treatment of modality may
now be stated more precisely, namely, A is inconsistent with
(6).  A asserts that everything there is actually exists. But
then (6) to asserts the existence of a possible Alien.  By hypothesis,
however, there are no possible Aliens among the actually existing
 individuals.[3] 
 Thus, according to the simplest quantified modal logic, our ordinary modal
beliefs have logical consequences that seem to be inconsistent with
 actualism.[4]
 The problem described in the previous paragraph resurfaces for the
actualist in an apparently more troublesome way when we consider sentences
involving quantification into nested, or ‘iterated’, modal
contexts. (This problem was first raised in a forceful way by McMichael
[1983b].)  Consider, for example, the following sentence:
(7) is represented in a standard modal language as follows:
To see the problem, note that an actualist might successfully develop a
semantics that explains the truth of general modal existentials
like (1) in a way that avoids the implication from (1) to (4) and hence
avoids appealing to possibilia — indeed, the supplemental
document
 An Account of Abstract Possible Worlds
 seems to provide just such an account.
However, (8), while still general — like (1), it is not, on its
face, “about” any particular individual — its truth
conditions seem nonetheless to require a merely possible individual in a
way that (1) does not.  Like (1), it asserts the general possibility of an
individual having a certain property, viz., being a son of
Ratzinger — so far so good.  But it continues on to assert (via
an occurrence of the initial, existentially quantified variable
‘x’ within the iterated modal context
‘◇Px’) a further possibility regarding that
very individual: it says that Ratzinger could have had a son a
and that, possibly — i.e., in some possible world
— he is a priest.  Unlike (1), then, it appears that (8)
requires us to understand the general possibility that there be an
individual with a certain property P in terms of a specific
mere possibile (as no actually existing thing could be
Ratzinger's son) so that we can track that individual from one
possible world to another to understand the nested possibility that it
have another property Q.  So the iterated modal operator in (8)
appears to force a commitment to possibilia upon us in a way that
(1) does not.  We will return to the problem of iterated modal operators
at several points below.
As the reader who works through the remainder of this essay will
discover, the simplest quantified modal logic has numerous consequences
that seem incompatible in some way or another with actualism. In the
next section, we will discover still other such consequences. Though we
have succeeded in describing the issues surrounding actualism in more
precise terms, we have only scratched the surface of the debate. Much
of the debate turns on the precise characteristics of the modal logic
being proposed as a logic for actualism. This debate can only be
understood if one can contrast the characteristics of these proposed
alternative logics with the characteristics of the simplest modal
logic. Thus, we will spend the next section of this essay describing
the characteristics of the simplest modal logic. Only then will we be
in a position to evaluate the more complicated alternatives developed
by actualists in the attempt to avoid commitment to nonactual
possibles. For example, it is important to see just how Kripke's modal
logic (Kripke [1963]) employs a variety of special techniques that
yield a logic consistent with thesis A (these will be documented
below).
The remaining sections of this essay, therefore, contain the following
material. In Section 2, we describe, in a precise way, both the
characteristics of the simplest quantified modal logic and its
controversial theorems. (As we acquire more sophisticated logical tools,
we will revisit some of the examples already discussed; the redescription
of these examples in more sophisticated logical terms may prove to be
instructive.) We also show why each of the controversial theorems is
objectionable from the standpoint of actualism. In Section 3, we outline a
modal system developed by Saul Kripke that appears to be consistent with
thesis A. However, in Section 3.3, we will discover that Kripke's
system introduces special problems of its own. Finally, in Section 4, we
discuss the various attempts actualists have made to solve these problems
and to find a quantified modal logic and corresponding metaphysics of
necessity and possibility that are consistent with thesis A.
Roughly (and rather abstractly) speaking, a logic is a collection of
formal languages together with a model theory, that is, a formally 
rigorous semantics for those languages that, in particular, yields a precise
account of what it means for a formula, or sentence, of a
given language to be true under a given interpretation, or model, of the language.  
 
 A formula of a language
L is logically true, or valid, if it is
true under any interpretation of L, and a set of
formulas entails a given formula if the latter is true under any
interpretation of L that makes the members of the former
true.  Ideally, validity and entailment for L can be 
precisely captured in a
system of axioms and rules of inference, in the sense that, for any given formula
φ of L, (i) φ is valid if and only if it is a theorem of the
system, and (ii) for any set Γ of formulas of L, Γ 
entails φ if and only if φ can be derived from Γ in the system. Validity and entailment as defined in the Tarskian semantics of classical first-order logic can be precisely captured in this sense.
The languages of first-order modal logic (with identity) are defined just
like those of classical first-order logic, but with the following
additional clause in the definition of the notion of a formula for a given
language L:
 More specifically, first-order modal languages will have variables,
individual constants,
n-place predicates, atomic formulas such as
‘Pacb’ and ‘x=y’, and
the usual boolean, quantified, and modal formulas involving the familiar
logical constants ‘~’ (negation), ‘→’
(material conditional), ‘∀’ (the universal quantifier),
and ‘□’ (the necessity operator). The other common
boolean connectives ‘∧’ (conjunction), ‘∨’
(disjunction), and ‘↔’ (material equivalence), the
‘existential’ quantifier ‘∃’, and the
possibility operator ◇ are all defined in the usual way.  Notably, the
formula ◇φ is defined as ~□~φ, reflecting the
modal intuition that to say that φ is possibly true is to say that
φ is not necessarily false.  For convenience, a complete specification
is provided in Section 1 of the supplementary document
 The Simplest Quantified Modal Logic.  
 It would serve well to spend a moment or two examining these
definitions to making sure that you understand the kinds of statements
that are expressible in this language.
The simplest semantics for first-order modal languages defines, for a
given modal language L, a class of interpretations having two
distinguishing features: (1) each interpretation
I in the class has two mutually exclusive domains — a
nonempty domain w of possible worlds (which includes a
distinguished “actual world” w0) and a
nonempty domain D of individuals; and (2) given any individuals
a1,…,an in D and
given any possible world w in w, each
interpretation I specifies, for each n-place predicate
π, whether π applies
to a1,…,an (respectively)
at w or not. Given that specification, the semantics then defines
truth conditions for every formula of the language. The definition of
truth even accommodates “open” formulas (i.e., formulas with
free variables) by appealing to assignment functions f
which assign to each variable α some object f(α)
in D.  (For purposes below, for an assignment function f,
let f[α,a] be f if f(α)
= a, and otherwise let it be the assignment that is exactly
like f except that it assigns a to α instead of
f(α).)  Given an assignment function f, a
denotation function d is determined for the terms (constants and
variables) of the language generally.  Specifically, if a term τ is a
constant, dI,f(τ) is the
individual in D that I assigns to τ.  If τ is a
variable, then dI,f(τ) is
f(τ).
Given an interpretation I for L and an
assignment f, the notion of truth at a world
(under I and f) for formulas φ of L is
then defined recursively for all of the formulas of the language. The
three most important parts of this definition are the clauses for atomic,
quantified, and modal formulas. Here are examples of each that will be
especially useful for purposes here; let w be a world of I:
A formula φ (in which the variable x might occur free) is
then defined to be trueI just in case φ is
trueI,f at the actual world w0,
under every assignment f. (Effectively then, in the definition of
truth, formulas free variables are treated as if those variables were all
universally quantified.)  Validity and entailment are defined as indicated
 above. For convenience, one may consult the
precise definition in Section 2 of the supplementary document
 The Simplest Quantified Modal Logic.
 It would serve the reader well to study these definitions if they are unfamiliar.
We now have a logic in the sense noted above — a collection of
formal languages together with a method of interpreting them — which
we will call the Simplest Quantified Modal Logic (SQML).  It is a well
known fact that validity and entailment in the semantics for SQML can be
captured in a complete system of axioms and rules of inference
(a.k.a. a proof theory), which we will refer to as
as SQML.  (There is no serious danger if one were to forget that
‘SQML’ refers to the logic and ‘SQML’
refers to the proof theory, for given the completeness of SQML,
in most contexts it doesn't much matter whether we are referring to the
entire logic or its proof theory.)  SQML combines classical
propositional logic, classical quantification theory, and the logic with
identity — a.k.a. classical first-order logic with identity
(FOL=) — with S5 propositional modal
logic (a.k.a. KT5).  For convenience, we reproduce the axioms and
rules of inference of these systems in Section 3 of the supplementary
document
 The Simplest Quantified Modal Logic.  
 We presuppose familiarity with FOL= here. The addition of
S5 strengthens FOL= with three axiom schemas —
the K schema, the T schema, and the 5 schema (see below)
— and the Rule of Necessitation (RN), which permits one to infer
□φ from any given theorem φ. Each of the axioms of the
resulting logic SQML is true in every interpretation in the class
described in the previous paragraph. Moreover, the rules of inference
‘preserve truth’ (and preserve logical truth). That is, the
rules of inference permit one to infer only (logical) truths from any set
of premises consisting solely of (logical) truths. Notice (importantly)
that open formulas are assertible as axioms and provable as theorems
in SQML. Familiarity with this logic will be presupposed in what
follows.
The problem that SQML poses for actualist philosophers is that, while
all of its logical axioms appear to be true, some of the logical
consequences of these axioms appear to be false. Consider first the
fact that the new modal axioms added by SQML
to FOL=, i.e., all instances of
the K, T, and 5 schemas, all seem
true. The K schema asserts that if a conditional is necessary,
then if the antecedent is necessary, so is the consequent:
It is easy to see that this is true in every interpretation of the
class of simplest interpretations: if a conditional is true in every
possible world and the antecedent of the conditional is true in every
world, then the consequent of the conditional is true in every
world.
The T schema asserts that a formula true in every possible world is
simply true:
Clearly, this is true in all interpretations — if a sentence
is true in every possible world, it is true in the distinguished actual
world.
The 5 schema asserts that if a formula φ is possible, then it is
necessarily the case that it is possible:
It is not hard to see that this is logically true. If a formula is true in
some possible world, then from the point of view of every possible world,
the formula is true in some possible world. That is, if a formula is true
at some possible world, then at every possible world, there is some
possible world where the formula is true. (The formal validity of
the 5 schema is proved in the supplementary document
 The 5 Axiom Schema is Logically True.)
However, the controversies surrounding actualism and modal logic center on
the following theorems, (the instances of) which are all logically true
and provable from the axioms and rules of SQML. The first of
these is the so-called Barcan Formula (more correctly, the
Barcan schema), after Ruth Barcan Marcus, who was the first
logician to study the principle explicitly (Barcan [1946]):
or, in the equivalent form (by the
 definitions
 of ‘∃’ and ‘◇’) found most often in the
literature:
That all instances of BF are logically true is proved rigorously in
the supplementary document
 The Barcan Formula is Logically True.
 That all instances of BF are derivable from the system of
axioms and rules of SQML follows immediately from the semantic
completeness of that system relative to the semantics of SQML.  (A system
of axioms of rules is semantically complete relative to a corresponding
semantics if every logical truth of the semantics is derivable in the
system.)  However, the proof of this fact (discovered by Prior [1956]) is
of independent interest and will be relevant to the discussion below, so
we display it explicitly in the supplementary document
 Proof of the Barcan Formula in SQML.
 
Two further controversial principles we shall discuss are Necessary
Existence and the Converse Barcan Formula:
Demonstrating that NE and all instances of CBF are logically true in the
semantics for SQML is left as an exercise for the reader.  As above,
however, it is useful to see their derivations from the axioms and rules
of SQML.  These can be found in the supplementary documents
 Proof of NE in SQML 
 and 
 Proof of CBF in SQML.
With the logic SQML laid out before us, it is instructive to consider why
its consequences BF, NE, and CBF offend the
actualist's philosophical sensibilities.
  
Consider first the Barcan Formula.  Our Alien example has already provided
us with an example of BF in action: where φ is
‘Ax’, BF asserts that proposition (1) of
Section 1.2 implies (4), or, in terms of their ordinary language
counterparts, that (5) implies (6) — from the mere possibility of
Aliens BF entails that there are, in fact, possible Aliens.  Since,
by assumption, no actually existing thing could be an Alien, (4) and (6)
are true only if there are mere possibilia, hence, only if the
actualist's central principle A is false.
To facilitate discussion of NE, let us introduce a unary predicate
‘E!’ to express actual existence.  For the actualist,
recall, there is no distinction to be drawn between being and existence,
between the things that are and the things that exist.  Hence, given an
explicit predicate to express existence, the actualist principle A
can be expressed formally as follows:
But we can say more.  For the actualist position isn't that it's just an
accident that there are no mere possibilia; that there just
don't, as a matter of fact, happen to be any.  Rather, for the
actualist, principle A is a necessary truth; it is not even
possible that there be mere possibilia.  Thus, we can
strengthen A to:
which we can express more formally in terms of our new predicate as:
  
Now, turning our attention to NE proper, the actualist's problem
with NE revolves around the notion of contingency.  Possibilists
and actualists alike can agree that a contingent being is one for whom
both existence and nonexistence are, from a metaphysical standpoint,
equally possible.  That is:
For an actualist, of course, the first conjunct is superfluous, since
everything actually exists and hence, obviously, everything possibly
exists.  But possibilists will want to count nonactual possibilia
— possible children of Joseph Ratzinger, for example — as
contingent as well in virtue of the fact that they
only accidentally fail to exist; metaphysically, like actually
existing beings that could have failed to exist, their existence and their
nonexistence are equally possible.  (We therefore adopt the more inclusive
definition in the interest of metaphysical neutrality.)  Actualists and
possibilists alike, then, generally agree that there are contingent beings
in the sense above:
Now for the crux of the matter.  For the actualist, we noted, there is no
distinction to be drawn between being and existence.  Another way to
express this — perhaps stronger, but common among actualists
— is to say that there is no difference in meaning between
‘x exists’ and ‘there is such a
thing as x’.  Notably, this is the influential view of Quine
[1948] (p. 23):
Hence, actualists often simply define the existence predicate
‘E!’ in terms of the existential quantifier thus:
Two significant consequences follow.  First, under E!Def,
thesis A, in its formal guise A*, now falls out as
a logical truth of SQML. For it is a simple theorem of the
first-order logic on which SQML is built that everything is identical to
something: ∀x∃y(y = x).
Given E!Def, this theorem is exactly A*.  NA* then
follows in the proof theory of SQML by an application of the Rule of
Necessitation. Second, under E!Def, NE —
∀x□∃y(y = x) — is
logically equivalent to:
Hence, under the actualist's understanding of existence, NE says
that everything exists necessarily and hence (by the
 definitions
 of ‘∃’ and ‘◇’) that nothing can
possibly fail to exist — ~∃x◇~E!x
— from which it immediately follows, contrary to CB, that
there are no contingent beings, beings (like us) for whom existence
and nonexistence are equally possible.  Thus Arthur Prior's remark in
[1957] (p. 48) that classical quantified modal logic (effectively,
SQML) is “haunted by the myth that whatever exists exists
necessarily.”
  
Indeed, from an actualist perspective, matters are even worse, as SQML
entails an even stronger result.  By applying the Rule of Necessitation
to NE, one obtains:
Hence, under E!Def, NNE can be rewritten as:
That is, for an actualist, it is a theorem of SQML that it
is necessary that everything necessarily exists, that anything
that there could have been already exists necessarily. It follows that it
is not even possible for there to be contingent beings, contrary
to very strong, ordinary modal intuitions.
It is worth noting briefly why the possibilist finds NE
and NNE
 unproblematic.[5]
 Since the possibilist denies principle A
and holds that there are in fact things that do not actually
exist, he will reject the actualist's definition DefE! of the
existence predicate ‘E!’; for metaphysical applications
of SQML, it will simply be introduced as a primitive 1-place predicate.
The possibilist can then embrace both CB — that there are
contingent beings — and NE/NNE.  For to say that an
object is contingent is to say that it either could exist but in fact does
not, or that it does exist but in fact might not.  As noted already, for
the possibilist, there are of course many examples of both the former and
the latter.  CB is thus satisfied.  But, in accord with NE,
every contingent being a is nonetheless necessary, in the
sense that, regardless of whether or not a exists in fact, there
would still have been such an object as a.  With the
rejection of DefE!, NE! no longer follows — from the
fact that, necessarily, there is such a thing as a it does not
follow that a necessarily exists, that a is
necessarily actual.
So for the possibilist, NE and NNE are unproblematically
true and can be rendered consistent with our modal intuitions by
distinguishing being from actual existence.  For actualists, however, who
categorically reject any such distinction, NE can mean only that
all actually existing things are necessarily actual and NNE that
anything that could have existed already does.  NE and NNE
thus provide the actualist with additional reasons to abandon SQML.
Finally, there is CBF. For the actualist, the most
immediate problem with CBF is simply that the instance
together with the actualist thesis NA* entails NE!
directly.  For purposes below, however, it will be useful to point out a
further, related, problem.  Say that a property P or
relation R is existence entailing just in case it is not
possible that anything have P, or bear R to anything,
without existing.  Otherwise put, if an object exemplifies P, or
bears R to anything, at a world, it exists at that world.  The
thesis commonly known as serious actualism is that, necessarily,
all properties and relations are existence-entailing.  (See Plantinga
[1983] and [1985], Fine [1985], Pollock [1985], Menzel [1991], and Deutsch
[1994] for further discussion of serious actualism.)  In semantic terms,
this amounts to the constraint that an object in the extension of a
property at a world must fall under the range of the quantifier at that
world.  More formally, serious actualism can be expressed schematically
as follows:
Depending on the system, □SA is often derivable by successive
applications of the laws of Generalization, some basic quantificational
logic, and Necessitation from a simpler schema that it will also be useful
to name explicitly:
SA and □SA are obviously quite consistent with, if not
entailed by, the actualist point of 
 view.[6]
 But given that some property necessarily holds
of everything, □SA and CBF entail NE!.  (See
 An Informal Derivation of NE! from □SA and CBF.)
Given the controversial consequences of SQML, one can understand why
actualists would seek a reformulation of first-order modal logic that
both: (1) defines interpretations so that BF, NE,
and CBF are not logically true, and (2) weakens the proof
theory of SQML so that BF, NE, and CBF are not
derivable as theorems of the logic. Kripke's logic appealed to
actualists and serious actualists for these very reasons.  The system
of Kripke [1963] invalidates BF, NE, and CBF both
model-theoretically and proof-theoretically.
It is illuminating both to see exactly how Kripke was able to
construct interpretations on which BF, NE,
and CBF are not logically true and to see exactly how Kripke
modified the logic of SQML so that these these schemata and sentences
are no longer theorems. These techniques will be the subject of the
next two subsections.
The key insight in Kripke's (first-order) quantified modal logic is
the replacement of the single domain D of individuals in the
interpretation of a first-order modal language with a function
dom that assigns to each world w of the interpretation its
own distinct domain of individuals
dom(w). No restrictions are placed on
the domain of a world; any set of individuals, including the empty set,
will do. Thus, instead of a single domain common to all worlds, domains
are permitted to vary from world to world. Intuitively, of course,
dom(w) represents the objects that
exist in w. In particular, the domain of the
actual world represents — of course — the things that are
actual, the things that exist simpliciter. Interpretations like this
for first-order modal languages in which each world has its own domain
are known as Kripke models.
The central semantic difference between Kripke models and
interpretations for SQML is that, in a Kripke model, when a quantified
formula ∀xφ is evaluated at a world
w, the quantifier ranges only over the objects that
exist in the domain of w. Thus, in particular, the
sample clause in the definition of truth for quantification above must
be revised for Kripke models M as follows, where,
again, f is an assignment function and w a world of M:
Again, a little less formally, under the Kripke model M and assignment f, ‘∀xPx’ is
true at
w just in case, for all individuals a
that exist in w, the predicate
‘P’ applies to a at
w.
Kripke's changes to the semantics of first-order modal languages
are relatively simple. Nonetheless, unlike the semantics for SQML,
Kripke's semantics yields a set of logical truths that is fully
compatible with actualism. In particular, all three of the principles
with which the actualist takes issue — BF, NE,
and CBF — turn out to be invalid in Kripke's
semantics. Consider first BF in the form
For definiteness, let φ be the formula ‘Ax’
expressing that x is an Alien (in the sense of
 ‘Alien’
 introduced above). As we
noted, even though there are no Aliens in the actual world
w0, there could have been; that is, there
is a possible world w in which there are Aliens. Thus,
on Kripke's way of evaluating quantified formulas, the antecedent
to BF — ‘◇∃xAx’ —
comes out true at the actual world:
‘◇∃xAx’ is true at
w0 if and only if there is some world
u at which ‘∃xAx’ is true,
and that, in turn, is true at such a u just in case
some entity that exists in u is an Alien
there. Assuming, as we are, that there is such a world, then,
‘◇∃xAx’ is indeed true, i.e., true at
the actual world. However, as we also noted, no actually existing thing
is an Alien. Thus, there is nothing in the domain of the actual world
such that ‘◇Ax’ is true of it, that is,
nothing a in the actual world and no world
u are such that ‘A’ is true of
a at u. So, in the case in question,
the antecedent of BF is true, but the consequent is
false. So BF is not valid, that is, there are models in which
some of its instances are false.
It should be obvious why NE is also invalid in Kripke's
semantics: domains of worlds can be empty. Thus, let
M1 be a Kripke model containing at least
one actual individual (i.e., at least one object
a∈dom(w0))
and a world w that has an empty domain. Then,
obviously, a does not exist in w,
and hence ‘∃y(y=x)’ is false at
w when a is assigned to ‘x’. Thus,
‘□∃y(y=x)’ is false
at w0 when a is assigned to
‘x’, and so, because a is in the domain of
the actual world w0, NE is false in
M1.
Although Kripke's semantics does not presuppose serious actualism,
it is consistent with it, so it is still important that CBF turn out
invalid in the semantics to avoid the argument to NE noted above when
serious actualism is assumed.  To see that CBF is indeed invalid, first,
let M2 be a Kripke model in which NE is false. (We just
proved the existence of such a model in the previous paragraph, of
course.)  Next, let the predicate ‘P’ express a
property in M2 that is necessarily both
existence-entailing and universal, that is, a property which is
exemplified at each world w by everything that exists at w
and by nothing else.  The property existence, of course, is the
simplest example of such a property.  We can represent the universal,
existence-entailing character of this property formally
in M2 simply by stipulating that the extension of
‘P’ at any world
w of M2 is
dom(w), so that all and only the things that exist at each
world are in the extension of ‘P’ at that world. Now,
note that, under these conditions, it is true in
M2 (i.e., true at the actual world
w0 of M2) that
□∀xPx: intuitively, everything that exists in every
possible world has the property P (i.e., the property that the
predicate ‘P’ denotes) in that world. Let
a be any object in the actual world
w0 that fails to exist in some world
w. (Since, by hypothesis, NE fails in
M2, there must be such an object in
dom(w0).) Because
P is existence-entailing, a is not in the
extension of ‘P’ at w. So there
is something in the actual world w0 that
does not have the property P in every possible world, i.e.,
‘∀x□Px’ is false in
M2. Hence, the instance
‘□∀xPx→∀x□Px’
of CBF is false in M2.
Note that the invalidity of CBF reopens the door to serious
actualism SA in Kripke's semantics, as it was the combination
of SA with CBF that led to trouble (i.e., trouble for
the actualist) in SQML.  And it is easy to see formally that this is
the case by constructing a Kripke model in which SA is
true. Note first that the thesis of serious actualism can be expressed
as the thesis that all properties are existence-entailing; there is no
possible world in which something has a property but fails to exist in
that world. In first-order languages, properties are represented by
predicates, and having a property is represented semantically by being
in the extension of a predicate.  Thus, to represent a property as
existence-entailing in a Kripke model, one simply ensures that, at
every possible world w, the extension of the predicate
representing that property consist only of things that exist
in w. Hence, to represent
all properties as existence entailing, and hence, to make SA
true, one ensures that this is so for all the predicates of one's
language. Formally, then, let M3 be any
Kripke model satisfying the condition that, for every n-place
predicate F and world w, F is
interpreted so that, at w, F applies only to
things that exist in w; more formally, for individuals
a1,…,an
of M3, F applies to
a1,…,an
at w only if
a1,…,an
∈ dom(w). This condition ensures
that SA (indeed □SA) is true in M3.
The compatibility of SA with Kripke's semantics is yet further
evidence of its suitability as a formal semantics for the actualist. A
question that remains is: What sort of logic does this
semantics yield?
A logic formulated in a given language L* is said
to be sound with respect to a semantics for
L* if and only if every formula of L*
that is a theorem of the logic is valid (logically true) relative to
that semantics (i.e., is true in every interpretation or model of the
semantics). A logic is said to be complete with respect to a
semantics for L* if and only if every formula of
L* that is valid relative to that semantics is a
theorem of the logic. A sound and complete logic for a semantics is a
good thing, of course, as it provides a purely syntactic,
proof-theoretic mechanism for demonstrating the semantic validity of
formulas in the
 language.[7]
SQML is sound and complete relative to the semantics given above for
its language L. Since, as we saw in the previous
section, BF, NE, and CBF are invalid in Kripke's
semantics, SQML is obviously not sound with respect to that semantics.
Hence, Kripke must modify
SQML to block their derivation without blocking the derivation of any
valid formulas.
There are two elements to Kripke's solution to this problem. Note
first that a typical proof of NE will involve open formulas (i.e.,
formulas containing free variables) to which the Rule of Necessitation is
subsequently applied.  Notably the proof in the supplementary
document
 Proof of NE in SQML
 makes use of the following logical axioms (see lines 1 and 2):
By contraposition and the definition of the existential quantifier, the
latter axiom is equivalent to ‘x=x →
∃y(y=x)’. Thus, given
‘x=x’, we have
‘∃y(y=x)’. The crucial step now is the
application of Necessitation in line 6 to this formula — containing,
we note, a free occurrence of ‘x’ — to yield
‘□∃y(y=x)’, which in turn
yields NE, by the Rule of Generalization.
To repair this “flaw” in SQML, Kripke adopts
the generality interpretation of theorems containing free
variables, that is: a formula φ containing free variables
α1,…,αn, when asserted
as a theorem (and hence, in particular, as an axiom), is taken to be an
abbreviation for its universal closure
⌈∀α1…∀αnφ⌉.
Thus, under this proposal, the proof of NE noted above fails. For
the axioms used in the proof, because they involve free variables, cannot
stand as they are. Rather, they must be taken to be abbreviations of
respectively. From the second axiom displayed above we can derive
‘∀x(x=x →
∃y(y=x))’ and, from this
‘∀x(x=x) →
∀x∃y(y=x)’ (by the
quantifier distribution axiom). So using the first axiom displayed above,
we can now derive
‘∀x∃y(y=x)’ by Modus
Ponens, and, finally, by Necessitation we can derive only
‘□∀x∃y(y=x)’. This
latter proposition, for Kripke, is uproblematically and uncontroversially
true — in every possible world, every individual existing in that
world is identical to something (viz., itself). To derive NE from
this, however, we need CBF — in particular, the instance
‘□∀x∃y(y=x) →
∀x□∃y(y=x)’. But, as
Kripke points out, the usual SQML proof of CBF also depends
essentially on an application of Necessitation to an open formula derived
by universal instantiation — the same “flaw” that
infects the proof of NE.  (See the inference from line 1 to line 2
in the supplementary document
 Proof of the Converse Barcan Formula in S5.)
 Hence, it, too, fails under the
generality interpretation of free variables. The proof of BF found
 in
 Proof of the Barcan Formula in S5
 fails for the same reason. Hence, the
usual SQML proofs of all three actualistically unacceptable principles
fail in Kripke's system.
However, the generality interpretation of theorems containing free
variables is not quite enough to purge quantified modal logic
of NE and its ilk. For valid proofs of NE, BF,
and CBF can still be generated in SQML from the proofs noted by
simply replacing free occurrences of the variable
‘x’ with occurrences of a constant
‘c’. The second element of Kripke's solution,
therefore, is to banish constants from the language of quantified
modal logic; that is, to specify the language of quantified modal
logic in such a way that variables are the only terms.
Note that, because theorems involve neither constants nor free variables
in Kripke's system, the Rule of Generalization has no purchase; any
quantifier prefixed to a theorem in virtue of the rule would be vacuous
(and hence could be inferred from the easily provable
theorem ⌈φ →
∀αφ⌉, for α not occurring free in
φ). However, there remain validities of Kripke's system that, in SQML,
can only be proved by applications of Generalization to theorems
containing free variables, e.g., ‘∀x(Px
→ Px)’. Moreover, the inability to assert theorems
containing free variables makes it impossible to prove any de re
modal validities. For the logical form of all such propositions involves a
modal operator within the scope of a quantifier, and hence, the proof of
any such proposition would appear to require the application of
Necessitation to a formula in which a variable occurs free —
‘∀x□(Px → Px)’,
for example, in SQML, requires the application of the Rule of
Necessitation to ‘Px → Px’ followed,
once again, by an application of Generalization.
Kripke's solution cleverly involves jettisoning both Generalization and
Necessitation as rules of inference and incorporating just enough of them
as needed into the statement of his logical axioms — slightly
revised from their SQML guises. In particular, Kripke's system declares
the result of prefixing universal quantifiers and modal operators, in any
order, to propositional tautologies (whether or not they contain free
variables) to be axioms. Thus, in particular, both
‘∀x(Px → Px)’ and
‘∀x□(Px → Px)’
count as axioms in Kripke's system.
Kripke's system is presented in detail in
the supplementary document
 Kripke's Quantified Modal Logic.
 With his modifications in place — broadly, the generality
interpretation of free variables, the removal of individual constants,
and the relocation of Generalization and Necessitation into the
logical axioms themselves — Kripke is able to demonstrate that
his system is sound and complete relative to his semantics. Soundness,
in particular, tells us that no invalid formula is provable in the
system. Hence, since NE, CBF, and BF are all invalid in Kripke's
semantics, soundness guarantees that they are all unprovable in his
system.
On the face of it, Kripke's logic provides the actualist with a
powerful alternative to SQML. However, although BF, NE, and CBF are
neither valid nor provable in Kripke's system, the system is open to
several serious objections.
First, Kripke regards the loss of free variables from assertible
sentences as a mere inconvenience. But this seems much too facile; a
great deal of mathematical reasoning is carried out in terms of
formulas with free variables, especially when reasoning about
"arbitrary" objects from which one intends to draw general conclusions.
One should at least wonder why such reasoning cannot be carried out in
a modal logic. Far more serious, however, is the loss of individual
constants. It is surely a sad irony that a system whose motivation is
to capture our modal intuitions — most notably, intuitions about
contingency — cannot so much as permit us to talk about specific
contingent individuals and say of those individuals
that they are contingent.
Alarming as this problem might be, however, it is in fact more a
formal rather than a philosophical objection to Kripke's system.
Although Kripke himself might not be particularly pleased at the
prospect, it seems that the proper response to these problems is simply
to alter those features of classical quantification theory and/or
classical propositional modal logic that give rise to invalid
inferences such as the above. (Arguably, Kripke has already made a
similar move in adopting the generality interpretation of free
variables.) Obvious suspects here are universal instantiation and
necessitation. After all, there is nothing sacrosanct about either
classical quantification theory or classical modal logic. If they are
inconsistent with strong modal intuitions, then their revision is
required and fully warranted.
So its current inability to name contingent beings does not of itself
constitute much of an objection to Kripke's system. It is likely that
it could be patched up so as to allow it this expressive capacity.
Far more serious is the fact that, despite the invalidity and
unprovability of the actualistically objectionable
principles BF, NE, and CBF, Kripke's system does
not appear to have escaped ontological commitment to possibilia. A
semantics for a language provides, in particular, an
account of how the truth value of a given sentence of the language is
determined in a model by the meanings of its semantically significant
component parts, notably, the meanings of its names, predicates, and
quantifiers. Now, truth-in-a-model is not the same as truth
simpliciter. However, truth simpliciter is usually understood simply
to be truth in an intended model, a model consisting of the
very things that the language is intuitively understood to be
“about”. So if we are to take Kripke models seriously as
an account of truth for modal languages, then we must identify the
intended models of those languages. And for this there seems little
option but to take Kripke's talk of possible worlds literally: the set
W in an intended Kripke model is the set of all possible worlds. If
so, however, it appears that Kripke is committed to possibilia. For
suppose that the modal operators, properly interpreted, are literally
quantifiers over possible worlds. And suppose it is possible that
there be objects — Aliens, for example — that are distinct
from all actually existing objects.  Letting ‘A’
express the property of being an Alien, we can represent this
proposition by means of the sentence ‘◇∃yAy
∧ ~∃x◇Ax’, i.e., while there
could be Aliens (◇∃yAy), no actually
existing thing could be an Alien
(~∃x◇Ax). On Kripke's semantics, the first
conjunct of this sentence can be true only if there is a possible
world w and an object a such that a is an
Alien at w. But given the second conjunct, any such
object a is distinct from all actually existing
things. Hence, using Kripke's semantics to provide us with an account
of truth, we find ourselves quantifying directly over possible worlds
and mere possibilia (see Williamson [2000], 206-7).
That BF, NE, and
CBF are unprovable in Kripke's system, it seems, is metaphysically
irrelevant.  For it appears that, nonetheless, the semantics itself is
wholly committed to possibilism.
An option for the actualist here, perhaps, is simply to deny that Kripke
models have any genuine metaphysical bite. The real prize is the logic,
which describes the modal facts of the matter directly.  Kripke's
semantics is simply a formal instrument that enables us to
prove that the logic possesses certain desirable metatheoretic features,
notably consistency. But this position is unsatisfying at best. Consider
ordinary Tarskian semantics for nonmodal first-order
logic. Intuitively, this semantics is more than just a formal
artifact. Rather, when one constructs an intended model for a given
language, it shows clearly how the semantic values of the relevant parts
of a sentence of first-order logic — the objects, properties,
relations, etc. in the world those parts signify — contribute to the
actual truth value of the sentence. The semantics provides insight into
the “word-world” connection that explains how it is that
sentences can express truth and falsity, how they can carry good and bad
information. The embarrassing question for the actualist who would adopt
the proposed instrumentalist view of Kripke semantics is: what
distinguishes Kripkean semantics from Tarskian? Why does the latter
yield insight into the word-world connection and not the former? Distaste
for the metaphysical consequences of Kripke semantics at best provides a
motivation for finding an answer to these questions, but it is not itself
an answer. The actualist owes us either an explanation of how Kripke's
semantics for modal languages does not commit
us to possibilism, or else he owes us a semantical alternative.
We now turn to the work of actualists who have tried to address the
possibilist challenge. The relevant literature is quite extensive, but
actualist responses to the challenge seem largely to fall into two broad
categories, which we will call trace and no-trace, or
strict, actualism. The difference comes down to this. Actualists
and possibilists alike agree that there are (in at least some
sense or other) contingent beings, beings that actually exist but which
(in at least some sense or other) might have failed to be.  Trace
actualists believe alongside possibilists that, necessarily, for any
contingent being x, even if x had failed to be (in the
relevant sense), there would still have been some sort of metaphysical
vestige, or trace, of x, either the object x itself in some
ontologically attenuated state or a surrogate, or proxy, thereof (Bennett
[2006]).[8]
Consequently, for the trace actualist, as for the possibilist, there
would still have been information about x, i.e., true or
false propositions definitely and specifically about x, notably,
the proposition [x does not exist]. Structurally, then, the
semantical universe of the trace actualist looks quite a lot like the
possibilist's universe — for every merely possible object on the
possibilist's account, one finds instead an actualistically acceptable
vestige of that object. Hence, the trace actualist is able to
reconstruct quantified modal logic along the lines of one of their
possibilist counterparts, SQML or Kripke's logic. Strict actualists, by
contrast, categorically reject the idea that there are, or could have
been, traces of nonexistent objects and consequently often find themselves
forced to accept rather more awkward quantified modal logics that are more
suited to their metaphysical commitments.
There are any number of representatives of, and variations on, these two
categories of actualist. For brevity, I will focus only on a few salient
accounts.
We begin with a form of trace actualism that offers a way to preserve
the formal, theoretical benefits of SQML in its entirety simply by
reinterpreting its intended semantics so as to eliminate its apparent
commitment to possibilia. On this form of actualism, the truth
condition for the modal claim “There might have been Aliens”
is just what it appears to be on the semantics of SQML, namely, that in
some possible world, there is an object that is an Alien at that world.
However, this truth condition does not commit us to
mere possibilia, to entities that fail to be actual. Instead, the
new form of actualism is based on the idea that this truth condition is
committed to the existence of contingently nonconcrete objects,
i.e., actually existing objects that are, in fact, nonconcrete, but which
could have been Aliens (hence could have been concrete). This theory has
been recently put forward by Linsky and Zalta ([1994], [1996]) and
Williamson ([1998], [1999], [2013]) (though Williamson eschews the word
‘actual’ (as well as ‘being’) in his formulation
of the theory and speaks only in terms of ‘existence’ and its
cognates). These philosophers claim that a nonconcrete object of the sort
in question is not an Alien, but instead has the modal property of
possibly being an Alien. In other words, modal claims such as “There
might have been Aliens” (formalized, once again, as (1)) can be
interpreted to be true in virtue of the actual existence of objects that
are nonconcrete (and hence which are not Aliens) at our world, but which
are Aliens (and hence concrete) at some other possible world. Thus,
unlike possibilia, the nonconcrete objects involved in the truth
conditions of such modal claims actually exist. To say this is to use
‘exist’ and ‘actual’ similar to they way
Platonists use them when they claim that mathematical objects exist or are
actual. However, unlike mathematical objects, which
are necessarily nonconcrete, the objects required for the truth
of modal claims are only contingently nonconcrete — they are
nonconcrete at our world but concrete at other possible worlds. Similarly,
ordinary concrete objects (like the tables, animals, planets, etc., of our
world) are assumed to be contingently concrete — they are concrete
at some worlds (including ours) and not at other worlds.
With this basic idea in hand, the “new actualists” (to give
them a simple label) point out that our ordinary modal claims can be given
a straightforward analysis by: (1) regimenting ordinary modal discourse in
the simplest possible way using SQML and (2) semantically interpreting
SQML by appealing to contingently concrete objects and contingently
nonconcrete objects (both of which are assumed to actually exist). This
interpretation, the new actualist argues, allows him to accept
principle A and its formal expression A* — taking the
existence predicate ‘E!’ to be defined as
in DefE! — and reveals that the controversial consequences of
SQML — BF, CBF, and NE/NE* — do
not contradict our modal intuitions, once those intuitions are understood
in terms of a more subtle conception of the abstract/concrete
distinction.
To see why, reconsider the definition and discussion of SQML and reexamine
BF. For an actualist, from the fact that there might have been
aliens (◇∃xAx), BF entails that there exists
something that could have been an Alien
(∃x◇Ax).  But, it was asked, doesn't this
contradict the intuition (described at the very outset) that no
actually existing thing could have been an Alien? Here, the new
actualist argues that this intuition is legitimate only when it is
properly understood as the intuition that no concrete thing
could have been an Alien. Recall that our thought experiment asked us
to “imagine a race of beings that is very different from any
life-form that actually exists anywhere in the universe; different enough,
in fact, that no actually existing thing could have been an Alien, any
more than a given gorilla could have been a fruitfly.” According to
the new actualist, the relevant intuition here — that nothing could
have been an Alien — is grounded in the fact that when we look
around us and examine all the concrete objects there are, we note
that none of them could have been an Alien (just as no gorilla
could have been a fruitfly).  However, this leaves room to claim that
there exist (contingently) nonconcrete objects which could have
been Aliens. According to the new actualist, these contingently
nonconcrete objects have been overlooked because (1) no one has correctly
drawn the proper distinction between contingently nonconcrete and
necessarily nonconcrete objects, and (2) everyone has assumed that
concreteness was an essential property of concrete objects (see
below).
Thus, according to the new actualist, whenever there is a true claim of
the form “There could have been something which
is F”, BF doesn't imply anything that is
incompatible with our modal intuitions. For the conclusion that it
entails, namely, that “There exists something that could have been
an F”, does not require us to suppose that there is
some concrete object that could have
been F. Rather, BF requires only the existence of
a something that could have been F, and that thing might
well be contingently nonconcrete.
NE and CBF are equally harmless according to the new
actualist. For, while it is true that Socrates exists necessarily on the
new actualist's account, he is not a “necessary being”. For a
necessary being is one whose ontological status does not change from world
to world — it is either concrete in every possible world or
nonconcrete in every possible world. Socrates, by contrast, is concrete in
some worlds and nonconcrete in others. There is thus still a robust sense
in which Socrates is a contingent being — he might have failed to be
concrete, failed to exist in space and time.  And that, the new actualist
argues, is the actual foundation of our belief that Socrates is a
contingent being.  Similar to the possibilist, then, since the existential
quantifier ranges over absolutely all the things there could be —
necessarily/contingently concrete and necessarily/contingently nonconcrete
alike — the new actualist, too, will not accept
 the original definition of contingency above.
 Rather, she will introduce an additional predicate C! to express
the property of being concrete and define contingency accordingly:
That is, a contingent being is one for whom both concreteness and
noncreteness are equally possible.  Since, therefore, NE is an
actualistically acceptable consequence of SQML, the Converse Barcan
Formula (CBF) is rendered acceptable as well, for the fact that it,
together with thesis A or serious actualism (SA),
implies NE!, is of no consequence for the new actualist.
Once it is seen that BF, NE, and CBF require only
contingently nonconcrete objects and not possibilia, it is
natural to reconceive the nature of concrete objects. According to new
actualism, ordinary concrete beings are concrete at some worlds and not at
others. This, as just noted above, is the sense in which they are
contingent. Traditional actualists have described worlds where these
objects are not concrete as worlds where these objects have no sort of
being whatever. By contrast, the new actualist just rests with their
nonconcreteness at the world in question, and argues that that should
suffice to account for our intuition that such objects “are not to
be found” in such a world. Moreover, new actualists reconceive the
idea of an “essential” property of a concrete object. Instead
of saying that Socrates is essentially a person because he is a person in
every possible world where he exists, new actualists say that he is
essentially a person because he is a person in every world where he is
concrete.
So by recognizing the existence of contingently nonconcrete objects and by
reconceptualizing both the contingency of concrete objects and the notion
of an essential property in what seem to be harmless ways, there appears
to be a way to interpret SQML so that it is consistent with actualism.
Specifically, in the “intended” new actualist model of SQML,
everything in the one domain D both is and is actual. To
account for the validity of BF, NE, and CBF, D
is understood to include: (1) contingently concrete objects, (2)
contingently nonconcrete objects, and, if there are such (3) necessarily
concrete objects and (4) necessarily nonconcrete objects. All of these
objects in D, according to the new actualist, actually exist.
By reconceptualizing possibilia, then, new actualism appears to
offer a very simple and elegant solution to the possibilist challenge that
involves no theoretical alteration to the language, semantics, or proof
theory of SQML. In particular, the new actualist is able to preserve
simple and straightforward truth conditions for our paradigmatic modal
claim (1) as well as more complicated propositions like (7) and (8) that
involve nested modalities. (Further details are provided in the
supplementary document
 New Actualism and Iterated Modalities
 for the interested reader.) Thus, the new actualists can argue that
their view shows why a single formalism, SQML, suffices as a
regimentation for the modal claims of natural language no matter
whether one is an actualist or a possibilist. Both possibilists and
actualists can employ SQML to represent our modal beliefs, though each
will interpret the formalism in different ways to suit their own
purposes.  New actualism thus appears to show, somewhat surprisingly,
that SQML is metaphysically neutral.
Objections to new actualism are addressed in the document
 Problems with the Actualist Accounts.
 One of the best known responses to the possibilist challenge was developed
by Alvin Plantinga [1974].  First, Plantinga analyzes possible worlds on the 
approach described at the end of Section 1.1 above and in the supplementary
document 
 An Account of Abstract Possible Worlds. 
 To summarize: he defines world to be a state of affairs of a
certain sort.  A state of affairs for Plantinga is a proposition-like
entity that either obtains — [Socrates' having been a
philosopher], say — or does not — [There being
Aliens], say.  One state of affairs s includes
another s′ if it is not possible that s obtain
without s′ obtaining.  A state of affairs is
a possible world, then, just in case it is possible that it
includes all and only the states of affairs that obtain.  Since, for
Plantinga, worlds are states of affairs and states of affairs are all
actually existing abstract entities, his account addresses  the
challenge that possible worlds pose for actualists.
Second, the heart of Plantinga's answer to the challenge of possible
objects is the notion of an individual essence. Plantinga's
precise definition of this notion is a bit complex, but the idea itself is
quite simple. Consider first the venerable distinction
between essential and accidental
properties. Intuitively, the essential properties of an object are those
properties that make the object “what it is”. More exactly,
they are the properties that the object couldn't possibly have lacked. Its
accidental properties, by contrast, are those that it just happens to have
but might well have lacked. Thus, the property [being a horse] is
intuitively not a property that the champion racehorse Secretariat could
have lacked; he couldn't have been a rabbit, say, or a stone. The
property [being a horse] is thus essential to the 1973 Triple Crown
winner Secretariat. By contrast, Secretariat could easily have lacked the
property [being a racehorse]. Under different circumstances —
if, say, he'd injured a leg as a colt — he might have spent his days
frolicking in the fields. That property is therefore accidental to
Secretariat. So the first part of the definition of an individual essence
— the “essence” part — is that an individual
essence is an essential property of anything that has it. And the
“individual” part of the definition is simply that if
something has a given individual essence, then nothing else could possibly
have that same individual essence. (We provide the definition Plantinga
actually uses in the document
 Plantinga's Definition of an Individual Essence.)
Examples of individual essences are a little harder to come by than
examples of essential properties. There are fairly strong intuitive
grounds for the thesis that having arisen from the exact sperm and egg
that one has is an individual essence of every human person, or at least
of every human body. A different sperm and the same egg, say, would have
resulted in a perhaps similar but numerically distinct person. Less
controversial from a purely logical standpoint are what Plantinga
calls haecceities, i.e., “purely nonqualitative”
properties like [being Plantinga], or perhaps, [being identical with
Plantinga], that do no more than directly characterize the object per
se as that very thing, and nothing more. Pretty clearly,
Plantinga has the property [being Plantinga] essentially — he could
not exist and lack it; any world in which he exists is, ex
hypothesi, a world in which he is Plantinga, and hence a
world in which he exhibits the property in question. Moreover, nothing but
the individual Plantinga could have had that property; necessarily,
anything that has it is identical to Plantinga. Hence, [being
Plantinga] is an individual essence. Importantly, Plantinga takes
individual essences, like all properties, to exist necessarily, even if
they are not exemplified. (Interested readers may wish to read the
supplementary document
 Background Assumptions for Plantinga's Account.)
Briefly put, Plantinga's solution to the possibilist challenge is to
replace the possibilia of Kripke's semantics with individual essences,
in particular, with haecceities.  We follow the development of this
solution found in Jager [1982] (which Plantinga [1979, n. 8]
endorses).  As in Kripke's semantics, this semantics is designed for a
first-order modal language L* with no individual constants.  An
interpretation I of L* consists again of two mutually
disjoint nonempty sets: the set of possible worlds and the set of
haecceities. And, as with Kripke, there is a function
dom that assigns to each possible world w its own
distinct domain dom(w). However, instead of the possible
individuals that exist in w, this domain consists of those
haecceities that are exemplified in w, or more
exactly, that would have been exemplified if w had
been actual. To highlight this important metaphysical difference with
Kripke's semantics, Plantinga refers to these essences collectively as
the essential domain of w.
But how, exactly, does I assign values to predicates?  After all,
it is not haecceities to which predicates apply at worlds, it is the
things that exemplify them; [being an Alien], if it were
exemplified, would not be a property of essences, but of
individuals. Plantinga's trick is to talk, not about exemplification,
but coexemplification. Properties
P and Q are coexemplified just in case some
individual exemplifies both P and
Q. So, for example, given that there are men who are philosophers,
the properties [being a man] and [being a philosopher] are
coexemplified in the actual world.  For any world w, we say that
P and Q are coexemplified in
w just in case w includes [P and Q's being
coexemplified].  Thus, given that it is possible that there be, say,
purple Aliens, the properties [being purple] and [being an
Alien] are coexemplified in some possible world w.  More
generally, a relation R is coexemplified with properties
P1,…,Pn
(in that order) just in case (i) there exist individuals
i1,…,in
that exemplify
P1,…,Pn,
respectively, and (ii)
i1,…,in (respectively)
stand in the relation R. And for any world
w, R is coexemplified with
properties
P1,…,Pn (respectively)
in w just in case w includes [R's being coexemplified with
P1,…,Pn].
In Plantinga's system, then, a 1-place predicate P applies
to a given haecceity e at a world
w just in case the property expressed by P is
coexemplified with the e at
w. And an n-place predicate R applies to haecceities
e1,…,en at w
just in case the relation expressed by
R is coexemplified with
e1,…,en
at w. For any haecceities
e1,…,en
and possible world w in our interpretation
I, then, I specifies, for each
n-place predicate R, whether or not R
applies to
e1,…,en at w.
Note that, because Plantinga is a committed 
 serious actualist,
 the assignment of haecceities to predicates
by I is so constrained that a predicate can be applied to
haecceities e1,…,en
at w only
if e1,…,en are in the
essential domain of w.
The denotation function f for I works fundamentally just as
in SQML and Kripke's logic, only now, of course, it assigns
haecceities to variables instead of possibilia.  There is, however, an
important difference in the assignment of truth values to sentences.
Specifically, unlike Kripke, Plantinga assigns uses a de re
interpretation of negation and necessity in assigning truth values to
sentences.  That is, for Plantinga, sentences of the form ~φ and
□φ that contain a free variable, ‘x’, say, are
thought of as predicating properties (negative or modal, as the case may
be) to the individual whose haecceity is assigned to
‘x’.  To illustrate, suppose ‘x’ is
taken to denote Socrates' haecceity hs and the
‘P’ expresses the property of being a philosopher.
Then, under the denotation assignment in question,
‘~Px’ is true at a world w just in case
Socrates's haecceity hs is coexemplified with the
property of failing to be a philosopher at w.  But since Plantinga
is a serious actualist, Socrates must exist at w in order for this
to be so.  Hence, for Plantinga, ‘~Px’ is true
at w just in case (i) Socrates'
haecceity hs is in the essential domain of w and
(ii) it is not the case that hs is coexemplified
with [being a philosopher] at w.  By the same token, for
Plantinga, ‘□Px’ is true at w just in case
Socrates has the property of being a philosopher essentially
at w.  Hence, for Plantinga, ‘□Px’ is true
at w just in case (i) Socrates'
haecceity hs is in the essential domain of w and
(ii) hs is coexemplified with [being a philosopher]
at every possible world w* in which it is exemplified (i.e., in
which Socrates exists).
We illustrate the most important clauses of Plantinga's formal
haecceitist semantic theory with some simple cases:
Referring back to our Alien example, then, the proposition that it is
possible that there are Aliens, ◇∃xAx, is true on this
account if and only if there is a possible world
w and a haecceity e such that
‘A’ applies to e at
w, i.e., if and only if the property [being an Alien]
and e are coexemplified in
w.  However, since no such haecceity is exemplified in the actual
world, i.e., since there is no such haecceity in its essential domain,
nothing (i.e., nothing actual) is a possible Alien, that is, 
∃x◇Ax is false.  Hence, as in Kripke's semantics,
the Barcan Formula is invalid on Plantinga's semantics.
Notice also that Plantinga's account can also provide truth conditions for
iterated modalities. The problem, recall, was that sentences like
appear to require mere possibilia to serve as the values of the
quantifier, since no actually existing thing could be a son of the current
pope. For Plantinga, the solution is simply that quantifiers range over
haecceities, and that, in particular, (8) is true in virtue of there being
an unexemplified haecceity h such that (i) in some possible world,
the [son of] relation is coexemplified with h and
Ratzinger's haecceity hr and (ii) in another world, that
very same haecceity is coexemplified with [being a priest].
In sum, then, in Plantinga's account there is a haecceity for
every possibile in Kripke's. And for every property that
every possibile enjoys at any given world w in Kripke's
account, there is an individual essence that is coexemplified with that
property in (the Plantingian counterpart of)
w. Plantinga's semantics would thus appear to generate precisely
the same truth values for the sentences of a modal language as
Kripke's. Hence, it would appear that Plantinga has indeed successfully
developed a semantics for modal languages that comports with actualist
scruples.  
Jager (1982) has also provided a complete axiomatic system for the above
formalization of Plantinga's semantics.  To avoid the derivation of
NE, BF, and CBF, Jager, like Kripke, adopts both the generality
interpretation of theorems containing free variables and thus defines his
system without the Rule of Generalization.  Rather, all variables in all
theorems are universally quantified.  Additionally, as noted above, and
for the same reason, Jager works in a language L* that banishes
individual constants so as to avoid the reconstruction of the undesired
proofs in their terms and hence suffers from the same expressive
shortcomings noted already in regard to Kripke's axiomatic system
above.
Further, more philosophical objections to Plantinga's account of
actualism are addressed in the document
 Problems with the Actualist Accounts.
Many propositions are singular in form. That is, as opposed to
general propositions like [All men are animals] and [There are
Aliens], some propositions are, in the words of Arthur Prior,
“directly about” specific individuals — for example, the
proposition [Winston Churchill was a German citizen]. Such
propositions — often referred to as Russellian propositions
— are typically expressed by means of sentences involving names,
pronouns, indexicals, or other devices of direct reference. As we've seen,
possibilists believe that there are singular possibilities (i.e., singular
propositions that are possibly true) about things that don't actually
exist, viz., possibilities involving mere possibilia. Similarly,
haecceitists also believe there are singular possibilities that are in a
certain clear sense directly about things that don't exist, viz.,
possibilities that, were they actual, would entail the exemplification of
haecceities that are, in the actual world, unexemplified.  Say that
a strict actualist is an actualist who rejects the idea that
there are, or could be, singular possibilities that are directly about
things that do not exist.  Since it is necessary that there are no such
possibilities, it follows that, had some actually existing
individual a failed to exist, there have been no singular
propositions about that individual; or, as Prior often puts it, there
would have been no facts about a, not even the fact
that a fails to exist (see, e.g., Prior [1957], pp. 48-49).  A
strict actualist, then, as we might put it, believes that, necessarily,
all possibilities are either wholly general or, at most, are directly
about actually existing individuals only.
Arthur Prior was the first philosopher to attempt to revise modal logic to
comport with strict actualism.  It was Prior [1956] who first proved that
BF is a theorem of the proof theory of SQML and he clearly saw that the
theoremhood of NE required the proponent of SQML to accept either
possibilism or “the myth that whatever exists exists
necessarily” ([1968], p. 48).  Prior's goal, therefore, was to
address the possibilist challenge by developing a system of quantified
modal logic consistent with both actualism and the existence of contingent
beings.
  
Prior's solution — his system Q (Prior [1957] Chs. IV and V)
— has two prongs: rejecting the interdefinability of the modal
operators □ and ◇; and restricting the Rule of
Necessitation. The central notion that underlies Prior's system is
the notion of necessary statability.  Say first that [φ] is
the proposition expressed by a sentence φ, and that φ is true in a
world only if the proposition [φ] it expresses is.  Prior's idea
is that a sentence φ that expresses a singular proposition [φ]
about a contingent individual a is not even statable —
hence neither true nor false — in worlds in which a
doesn't exist.  Thus, a sentence φ is necessarily
statable only if all of the individuals referred to in the sentence (hence
all of the individuals the proposition [φ] that it expresses is about)
are necessary beings.  Prior indicates necessary statability by means of a
new operator
‘S’: the formula ‘Sφ’
means that φ is necessarily statable.
Given this spadework, Prior argues against the interdefinability of
□ and ◇ as follows.  Suppose φ expresses a singular
proposition [φ] about a contingent individual a.  If
there is no possible world in which φ is false, then, of course,
as on any possible world semantics, it is not possible that φ
itself be false, i.e., ~◇~φ is true.  However, it does not
follow that φ is necessarily true, i.e., that □φ is
true.  For in order for that to be the case, φ would have to be
necessarily statable.  And for that to be the case, a would
have to exist necessarily.  But by hypothesis a is
contingent.  Hence, even though we have ~◇~φ, we cannot infer
□φ.  Accordingly, instead of the usual interdefinability of
□ and ◇, in Prior's Q we have that a proposition is
necessarily true iff it is both necessarily statable and not possibly
false:
A notable consequence of Prior's view is that many logical truths are not
necessary.  For example, for any object a, there is obviously no
world in which the proposition [Pa→Pa], hence the
sentence ‘Pa→Pa’, is false.  Thus, if
φ is a logical truth, it follows that ~◇~φ is also
true (indeed, logically true).  However, if a is a contingent
being, this sentence is unstatable at worlds where a fails to
exist, and hence is neither true nor false in those worlds.  Hence, it is,
in particular, not true in those worlds.  So it is not necessarily
true.
  
For Prior, then, we can always infer that a logical truth is not possible
false, that is, he accepts the following rule of inference, which we might
call the Rule of Weak Necessitation:
Thus, from 
 ⊢(Pa→Pa) 
 we have that 
 ⊢~◇~(Pa→Pa).  
 Full necessitation, however, requires necessary statability.  Given
(Q□◇), this can be expressed in the following derived rule:
 Thus, although we have 
 ⊢Pa→Pa,
 ⊢□(Pa→Pa) 
 does not follow without
 ⊢S(Pa→Pa), 
 which is never the case in Q.
As noted, Prior's chief goal was a quantified modal logic consistent with
the existence of contingent beings and that means, first and foremost,
blocking the derivation of NE.  As in standard predicate logic,
in Q we have
 ⊢∃y
y=x, i.e., following DefE! (which, in a
 first-order context, Prior would accept), 
 ⊢E!x.
By RWN, then, we have 
 ⊢~◇~E!x
 and, hence, by universal generalization (a
 valid rule in Q),
That is, it is a logical theorem of Q that, for any
object a, it is not possible that a fail to exist
— not a happy feature of a purported logic for contingent beings.
Properly understood, however, Prior argues, the theorem only reflects the
fact that no proposition about a is statable — even the
proposition that a doesn't exist — in a world if a
itself does not.  The theorem in question would be problematic only we
could infer ⌈□φ⌉ straightaway,
which is precisely what is prevented by the modifications
to SQML noted above that are found in Q.  Rather, we get
only the weaker, indeed trivial, theorem (SE!a →
□E!a) that E!a is necessary if it is necessarily
statable, i.e., in effect, if a exists necessarily.  Prior
therefore claims that our intuitions about possible nonexistence can be
salvaged by defining φ to be weakly possible just in case it
is not necessary, i.e., just in
case ⌈~□φ⌉ is true.  Thus, the
nonexistence of a contingent being a, while not strictly
possible, is nonetheless weakly possible; more exactly, despite the
theoremhood of ‘~◇~E!a’ in Q,
‘~□E!a’ can be consistently asserted
in Q.  NE is thus not a theorem of Q.
(Specifically, Revised RN will not warrant the inference on line 6
of the
 derivation of NE in SQML.)
  
More generally, it is easy to see that, not only NE,
but BF and CBF are not theorems of Prior's logic. The
proof of BF relied both on the interdefinability of possibility
and necessity as well as on the unrevised Rule of
Necessitation. (Specifically, the interdefinability of possibility and
necessity plays a crucial role behind the scenes in line 3 of the
proof of Lemma 1 in the
 derivation of BF in SQML,
 and the Rule of Necessitation was used in the proof of DR1 in line 2
of the proof of the main Theorem, which is equivalent to BF proper.)
Likewise, the proof of CBF cannot proceed in the usual way using
Revised RN. (Specifically, we cannot appeal to Revised RN on
line 2 of the
 derivation of CBF in SQML.)
Objections to Prior's Q and its philosophical underpinnings are addressed
in the document
 Problems with the Actualist Accounts.
A notable gap in the foundations of Prior's Q is that it has no clear
semantics.  Presumably, modal operators are to be interpreted as
quantifiers over worlds, but Prior himself never explicitly provides an
account of possible worlds nor a formal semantics to provide any insight
into what the truth conditions for sentences of Q are supposed to be.
This is understandable.  Kripke models are still the norm for modal
semantics.  But, as already seen, they appear only to mask commitment to
possibilia by invalidating NE, BF, and CBF.
It is therefore not immediately clear what semantical options remain for
the strict actualist.
Building on Prior's metaphysical intuitions, Adams [1981] sketches an
alternative, strict actualist semantics for modal discourse and a
corresponding logic.  As this is arguably the most important and
influential defense and development of strict actualism to his point, I
will take particular pains to clarify Adams' arguments and extract and,
where necessary, develop the underlying logic of his account.
Adams' approach centers around his notion of a “world
story”. The intuitive idea is that a world story is a complete
“description” of things as they could be. Somewhat more
rigorously, say that a set s of propositions is maximal
if, for any proposition p, 
s contains either p or its negation ¬p, and that s is
consistent if it is possible that all the members of s be
true together. The idea, then, is that a world story is simply a
maximal consistent set of propositions. Given this, a proposition
p is true in a world story w just in case p
is a member of w.  And the actual world story is simply
the one such that a proposition p is true in it if and only if
p is, in fact, true.  In particular, then, the truth conditions for
our paradigmatic modal statement (1), ‘Possibly, there are
Aliens’ (formally, ◇∃xAx), are straightforward
and, on the face of it, innocuous from a strictly actualist perspective:
(1) is true if and only if the proposition expressed by ‘There are
Aliens’ is true in some possible world.
However, Adams finds that this simple intuitive idea needs modification in
order for it properly to reflect strict actualism.  Because there are, in
fact, no Aliens and since, by hypothesis, no actually existing thing could
have been an Alien, it of course follows for the strict actualist that
there are, in fact, no singular propositions that are in any sense about
merely possible Aliens or “vestiges” of some ilk that play
their role.  For Adams, world stories generally ought to reflect this fact
about the actual world story.  That is, as with Prior, a singular
proposition p about some (actually existing) individual a
should be true in a world story w only if the proposition [a
exists] is also true in w — or, as Prior would put it,
only if ‘a exists’ is statable in w.  Thus,
just as there are in the actual world story no singular propositions about
individuals that could have existed but do not, likewise, in no other
world story w are there any singular propositions about individuals
that would not have existed had w been actual, i.e., if all the
propositions in w been true.  In general, then, world stories are
not fully maximal in the sense above.  Rather, a world story is maximal
only with respect to the propositions that would exist if it were
actual.
At first sight, Adams' view seems almost exactly Prior's with the addition
of world stories and a rather more metaphysically robust conception of
propositions.  And indeed, as far as the metaphysics goes, this is so.
But there are critical differences in the logic that Adams derives from
the metaphysics.  Adams' justification for the view (recounted in the previous
paragraph) that no world w contains singular propositions about
individuals a that do not exist in w is very similar to the
reasoning Prior used to justify his view that no such proposition p
— notably, the proposition [~E!a] that a does not
exist — is true with respect to w.  This was
essentially how Prior justified the logical truth of
‘~◇~E!a’ and, hence, its theoremhood in his
logic Q.
However, Adams does not follow Prior here.  Instead, Adams goes on to
identify two notions of truth relative to a world story, both of which
comport with strict actualism but which yield different sets of logical
truths. Notably, the two notions differ on
‘~◇~E!a’. Specifically, some propositions can be
considered true relative to a world story w in virtue of being
included in w. Intuitively, these are propositions that would have
had the property of being true (and hence, by serious actualism, would
have existed) if w had been actual. Say that these propositions are
true in w. However, certain singular propositions that are
not true in w can clearly be considered true with respect
to w in another, broader sense. For suppose w is a world
story that includes no propositions about Adams. Then, even though
[Adams does not exist] is not true in w —
there would have been no such proposition, after all,
had w been actual — we can see, from our perspective
in the actual world — 
“outside” w looking in, so to speak — that w
nonetheless represents an Adams-less world; that, in a clear sense,
despite its exclusion from w, [Adams does not exist]
correctly describes, or characterizes, w:
When a proposition correctly characterizes a world story w,
whether or not it is included in w, Adams says that the
proposition is true at w.  Every proposition that is
true in w is therefore true at it as well; for if
[a exists] is not true in w, then [a does not
exist], and everything it entails, is true at w.
In light of this distinction, Prior's Q can be seen to be based
upon truth in a world while Adams bases his logic upon truth
at a world.  The difference this makes is quite profound.  Most
notably, since propositions of the form [a does not exist] can be
true at a world without being true in it, sentences of the form
‘~◇~E!a’ do not turn out to be logical truths for
Adams.  Consequently, Adams is able to restore the equivalence of
‘□’ and ‘◇’:
‘~◇~E!a’, in particular, is once again
logically equivalent to ‘□E!a’.
This is not to say that the system suggested by Adams' approach is
without complications of its own.  Adams only provides a series of
logical principles concerning truth at a world and only gestures toward
the corresponding axioms.  Nonetheless, it is possible to extract a
fairly comprehensive logic from those principles (see Menzel [1991]).
Adams begins by asserting, in effect, the validity of classical
propositional logic.  Hence, Adams can be understood to be adopting some
complete axiomatization of classical, truth-functional propositional
logic.  Adams then broadens his observations about propositions of the
form [a does not exist] to singular propositions generally.  He
expresses this in terms of propositional functions, which for purposes
here can be thought of as atomic formulas:
Note that this principle is essentially 
 serious actualism, 
 and corresponds directly to the schema 
 □SA
 above.  Given universal generalization and Adams' slightly weakened
version of necessitation (see below), the only axiom he needs is the
SA schema:
The truth of such propositions as [Adams does not exist] at some world
story complicates the logic of quantification for Adams.  For, while
[Adams does not exist] ([~E!a]) might be true at some world
story w, it is surely not the case that [Something does not
exist] ([∃x ~E!x]) is true at w as well.
More generally, where φα/τ is the result of
replacing all free occurrences of α in φ with occurrences of
an arbitrary term τ that is substitutable for α in
 φ,[9] 
 the necessitation of the law of existential generalization:
is not logically valid on Adams' approach.
□EG is obviously derived in SQML by applying the
rule of Necessitation to the law of existential generalization.
Adams' solution is therefore to restrict Necessitation to the
so-called “free” quantificational fragment of his system.
More specifically, where τ is again substitutable for α in
φ, the usual universal instantiation schema is:
 
 To avoid the untoward inference above, Adams adopts the schema:
or, expressed in terms of its existential counterpart:
 Thus, applying Necessitation to FEG, then, yields only:
Thus, instead of the problematic inference above, from the truth of
[~E!a] at w, by □FEG, it follows by only that
[E!a → ∃x~E!x] is true at w.
So, where a is Adams, from the truth of [Adams does not exist]
at w it only follows — trivially, due to its false antecedent
— that [If Adams exists, then something does not exist] is
true at w.
Full classical quantification theory (in non-modal contexts) can be
reintroduced into Adams' system (as he desires) simply by adding a
schema expressing that all names and free variables denote existing
things:
Necessitation is then restricted to the free quantification fragment
simply by allowing its application only in proofs not involving any
instance of E!:
The restriction on Nec here prevents the SQML derivation
of 
 BF, 
 CBF, and
 NE. 
 The proof of BF in particular requires the necessitation of the
formula ∀x□φ → □φ (see line 2
in the proof of the main Theorem). But this formula is only derivable
in Adams' system from the instance
∀x□φ → (E!x →
□φ) of FUI together with the instance E!x
of E!. Hence, the SQML proof of BF cannot be
replicated.  The SQML proofs of CBF and NE fail in Adams'
system for similar reasons.
Importantly, serious actualism together with a certain interpretation of
modal statements leads Adams [1982, pp. 28ff] to abandon several
principles of basic modal propositional logic. This interpretation is
captured in the following general principle:
 As a special case (where n=0) we have:
We can express these principles axiomatically as follows.  Say that a
formula φ is modal if it is of the
form ⌈□ψ⌉, 
⌈~□ψ⌉,
⌈◇ψ⌉
or ⌈~◇ψ⌉, and that, for a term
τ, it is de re with respect to τ if it is modal and
contains a (free, if τ is a variable) occurrence of τ; then we
have:
Note that the effect of MSA is that a modal statement (or existential
quantification of such) containing a name expresses a modal property de
re of the individual denoted by the name and hence should be treated
semantically, in effect, as an atomic statement, i.e., as a predication
— hence the evident formal similarity to the serious actualism
principle SA.  Thus, for Adams, ‘Necessarily, Adams is not an
Alien’, say, expresses, in effect, that Adams has the property of
being such that, necessarily, he is not an Alien; again, ‘Possibly,
Socrates does not exist’ expresses, in effect, that Socrates has the
property of possibly not existing.  And given this interpretation
of modal statements of the sort in question this is just what we should
expect.  For if they are in effect atomic sentences, i.e., predications of
modal properties to objects, it follows that all statements of the sort in
question are false at worlds in which a does not exist.  For by
serious actualism, an object a can have a property at a world only
if it exists there.  The principles are thus fully justified on the
grounds of serious actualism:
The logical implications of Adams' understanding of the truth conditions
for proposition expressed by de re sentences are dramatic. For if
the proposition [Necessarily, Adams is not an Alien] is identical
or, at least, logically equivalent to the atomic proposition [Adams is
necessarily-not-an-Alien], then, while [Necessarily, Adams is not
an Alien] is in fact true — for at every world, Adams-less or
not, [Adams is an Alien] is false — it is not the case that
[Adams is necessarily-not-an-Alien] is true at worlds in which
Adams does not exist, since, by serious actualism, Adams has no properties
at such worlds. Hence, [Necessarily, Adams is
necessarily-not-an-Alien] is false simpliciter.  Since
[Adams is necessarily-not-an-Alien] is at least logically
equivalent to [Necessarily, Adams is not an Alien], their
necessitations are logically equivalent as well.  Hence, [Necessarily,
necessarily, Adams is not an Alien], too, is false. Thus, we have
‘□~Aa’ and
‘~□□~Aa’, i.e.,
‘~(□~Aa → □□~Aa)’,
i.e., the characteristic principle
of the modal propositional logic S4 is, in general, invalid.
By the same token we lose the characteristic principle of the logic
S5.  For the proposition [Possibly, Socrates exists] is
obviously true.  However, according to the Adams, this is at least
logically equivalent to the atomic proposition [Socrates
possibly-exists].  So by serious actualism again, it is not true in
worlds where Socrates does not exist.  Hence, [Necessarily, Socrates
possibly-exists] is false simpliciter.  But [Socrates
possibly-exists] is, at least, logically equivalent to the
proposition [Possibly, Socrates exists], so their necessitations
are equivalent as well.  Hence, [Necessarily, possibly, Socrates
exists] is false.  Thus, we have ◇E!s and
~□◇E!s, i.e., ~(◇E!s →
□◇E!s), i.e., the characteristic principle
of S5 is also, in general, 
invalid.[15]
As a consequence, Adams follows Prior in rejecting the usual logical
equivalence of necessity and possibility albeit, for Adams, only in modal
contexts rather than across the board.  For in denying that Adams is
necessarily not an Alien at an Adams-less world u, i.e., in
affirming the truth of [~□~Aa], at u, it does not
follow that he is possibly an Alien, i.e., it does not follow for Adams
that [◇Aa] is true at u. Indeed, on Adams' semantics
for modal propositions at worlds once again, its negation
[~◇Aa] is true at u.  In place of the modal schema
4, therefore, Adams proposes a weaker principle that, in modal
contexts, reflects the notion of weak necessity reflected in
Prior's principle RWN above; specifically:
Similarly, in denying that Socrates' existence is possible at a world
w in which he doesn't exist, i.e., in affirming the truth of
[~◇E!s] at w, it does not follow that his
non-existence is necessary at w, i.e., it does not follow that
[□~E!s] is true at w. Indeed, as just noted, on
Adams' semantics for modal propositions at worlds, it is false outright at
w since [□~E!s] is true there if and only if, at
w, Socrates has the property of necessarily-not-existing. Thus,
[~□~E!s] is true at w.  In place of the 5
schema, therefore, Adams proposes the following weaker principle that, in
modal contexts, reflects Prior's notion of weak possibility:
  Weakening 4 and 5 to W4 and W5,
  respectively, forces a final repair.  Specifically, if □◇ is considered a logical
  axiom, then 4 and 5 are immediately derivable from
  W4 and W5 by Nec.  But the solution is
  straightforward and requires a weakening of □◇ along
  Priorean lines, albeit one that, unlike Q□◇, preserves
  the logical truth of □◇.  Consider the following
  definition:
  Then □◇ simply needs to be weakened to
  Unlike Q□◇, A□◇ does not require that
  the individual constituents of the proposition [φ] themselves exist
  necessarily in order for the necessity of [φ] to follow from the
  impossibility of [~φ].  Rather, it requires only that, for any given
  world w, those constituents exist simpliciter, so that
  [φ] can be evaluated, from the perspective of w, with respect
  to any world u, regardless of whether or not its constituents
  exist in u.  Given the restriction on Nec, it is not
  possible to derive the necessitation of □◇ from
  A□◇ and that prevents the derivation of 4 and
  5 from W4 and W5.  Given E!, however,
  □◇ still falls out as a theorem.
Objections to Adams' world story semantics are discussed in the
document
 Problems with the Actualist Accounts.
McMichael [1983a] has proposed an actualist semantics that avoids
certain
 objections to haecceities 
as well as certain  
 objections to world stories.
 Like Plantinga, McMichael introduces a class of
properties, which he calls roles, that serve as surrogates of a
sort for possibilia. Importantly, however, unlike haecceities,
roles are all purely qualitative, except perhaps insofar as they involve
actually existing individuals, and are not in general assumed to be
essential, or essentially unique to, any given individual. As such, they
cannot play the vestigial role that either unexemplified haecceities play
in Plantinga's actualism or that possibly
concrete nonconcretia play in new actualism.
McMichael's account builds on a very rich and elaborate theory
of n-place relations, and it is necessary to lay out at least
some of its basic concepts in order to understand the account.  First,
some terminology.  In general, the arity of a relation is the
number of places it has, that is, the number of arguments it takes to
form a proposition.  Thus, [being happy] is a 1-place relation
and therefore has arity 1, while [being between] has arity 3.
Note that, for McMichael, the term ‘relation’ encompasses
both properties and propositions: properties are 1-place, or unary,
relations and propositions are 0-place relations.
Instead of necessity and possibility, McMichael's primitive modal
notion is inclusion, a 2-place relation that can hold between
relations of the same or different arity.  Because it is McMichael's
only modal primitive, inclusion cannot be defined, but, intuitively,
in the case of properties, the idea is that one property P
includes another
Q just in case, necessarily, anything that has
P has Q.  Thus, the property [being red] includes the
property [being colored]. Again, intutively once again, one binary
relation
R includes another R′ just in
case, necessarily, for any objects x and
y, if x bears R to
y, then x bears
R′ to y.  So, for example, the conjunctive relation
[being both a child and an heir of] includes the relation [being
a child of].
Inclusion can also hold between an n+1-place relation and
an n-place relation, relative to one of the argument places
of the 
 former.[10]
 Thus, in particular, a 2-place relation
Q can include a property P, relative
to one of its two argument places: intuitively, Q
includes P, relative to its first argument place, if
and only if, necessarily, whenever two things a and
b stand in the relation Q,
a exemplifies P. And if the inclusion
were with respect to the second argument place, of course, it would be
b that exemplifies P. So, for example, the relation
[brother of], relative to its first argument place, includes the
property [being male]; whenever any object a bears the
[brother-of] relation to some object b,
a has the property [being male]. Again, [brother-of],
relative to its second argument place, includes the property [being a
sibling].
A (unary) role is just a “purely qualitative” property of a
certain sort, where (as described in more detail in the supplementary
document on
 Qualitative Essences)
 a purely qualitative property is a property that
“involves” no particular individuals. Thus, such
properties as [being a philosopher] and [being someone's
mother or maternal aunt] are purely qualitative, while [being a
student of Quine] and [being Johnson's mother or a friend of
Boswell] are not.  Given this, McMichael defines a
property P to be a unary role if (i) it is
exemplifiable, (ii) it is purely qualitative, and (iii) for any purely
qualitative property Q, either P includes
Q or P includes the complement ~Q
of Q. A role is thus a complete (nonmodal)
“characterization” of the way something could be,
qualitatively.  Intuitively, then, the role @(a) of a given
object a is a “conjunction” of all of the purely
qualitative, nonconjunctive properties that a
exemplifies. Thus, for example, Socrates' role @(Socrates) includes
the properties [being a philosopher], [being
snub-nosed], [being the most famous teacher of a famous
philosopher], [being condemned to death] and so
 on.[11] 
 The notion of role generalizes in a natural way to
all n-place relations, including, notably, propositions
(i.e., 0-place relations) and binary (i.e., 2-place) relations. A
0-place role is simply McMichael's version of a possible
world. Similar to Adams' world stories, a 0-place role is a
conjunction of purely qualitative propositions that is both maximal
(with regard to purely qualitative propositions) and possible:
possible world w is a conjunction of purely qualitative
propositions such that, for any qualitative
proposition P, w includes either P or its
complement, but not both. Thus, the actual world in particular is the
conjunction of all true qualitative propositions. Similarly, the
binary role @(Boswell,Johnson) that Boswell bears to Johnson is,
intuitively, a conjunction of all of the purely qualitative,
nonconjunctive binary relations that Boswell bears to
 Johnson.[12] 
 As one might suspect, it can be shown on McMichael's theory that a binary
role includes a unique unary role with respect to each of its argument
places.  In particular, the binary role @(Boswell,Johnson) includes
@(Boswell) relative to its first argument place and @(Johnson)
relative to its second. 
Importantly, McMichael also introduces a notion of accessibility
between roles to capture intuitions about possibility, notably, de
re possibility. To see how this notion works into McMichael's
account, note that Adams [1979] has argued persuasively that no purely
qualitative property, no matter how complex, can serve as an individual
essence for a contingent being. (This point is also discussed in the
supplementary document on 
 Qualitative Essences.) 
 Hence, in general, roles — being purely qualitative
— are not individual essences. Rather, they are general properties
that are (in general) exemplifiable by different things (though not
necessarily things in the same possible world). Because of this, none of
the objections to Plantinga's haecceities is relevant to roles, as the
fact that haecceities are individual essences lies at the heart of those
objections. At the same time, McMichael is able to provide a semantics for
(8) — ◇∃x(Sxp ∧ ◇Px) — that does not run afoul of the iterated modalities objection. The
basic trick is to “alter the criterion for deciding what an individual
might have done” [Ibid., 73]:
Thus, a little more formally, where F is the property
[being foolish], and s is Socrates, a simple
modal sentence such as
is true just in case some unary role accessible to the actual role
of Socrates includes the property of being foolish.  Naturally enough,
McMichael takes accessibility to be transitive — intuitively, if
Socrates could have played a role R1 other than his actual role
@(Socrates) and, had he played that role, he could have played another
role R2, then R2 is in fact a role he could have played, i.e., R2 should
be considered accessible to @(Socrates).
Similar to Plantinga's semantics, then, quantifiers do not range
over individuals, but over roles. This enables McMichael to avoid the
iterated modalities objection and, in particular, to provide a
compositional semantics for our iterative paradigm (8). Specifically, (8)
is true if and only if
(10) captures the idea that an individual such as Ratzinger could
have been a parent. Adams, of course, got this far in his account of
(8). But,  unlike Adams,
 with roles at his disposal, McMichael can continue his analysis of (8) and
unpack the existentially quantified formula
‘∃xCxy’. Specifically, (10) holds if and only
if
That is, in accordance with McMichael's recursive definition of truth,
(11) unpacks the quantified formula ‘∃xCxy’
in terms of the [child of] relation that is expressed by the
embedded atomic formula ‘Cxy’. Specifically, the
truth of (8) consists in the existence of a binary role s that
includes the [child of] relation and, relative to its second
argument place, a role accessible to Ratzinger's
role Rr. Note that, being a binary role,
s also includes a unique role relative to its first
argument place. And because it includes the [child of]
relation and, relative to its second argument place, a role
R accessible to Ratzinger's role
Rr, s will include,
relative to its first argument place, a role R′
that can only be exemplified by a child of whatever exemplifies
R, i.e., a child of such an object as
Ratzinger.
To capture the intuition that no such child could be identical to any
actually existing thing, then, McMichael can simply deny that the
role R′ that would be exemplified by such a child is
accessible to the role of any actually existing thing.
Importantly, accessibility between roles is also the mechanism McMichael
uses to account for possible nonexistence. Specifically, if a unary
role R1 is accessible to a binary
role R2 then McMichael takes this intuitively (and
ensures it formally) to mean that, if @(a,b)
= R2, then it is possible that a exist and
exemplify R1 without b
 existing.[13]
 Similarly, to say simply that it is possible that a given individual
— Socrates say — fail to exist is, on McMichael's
semantics, to say that some possible world (i.e., some 0-place role) is
accessible to @(Socrates).  As McMichael [Ibid., p. 78] puts it:
All of the controversial consequences of SQML are invalid in
McMichael's role semantics. BF, in particular, fails because the
semantics allows for interpretations in which the domain of actual
individuals is empty but the domains of other worlds are not. In such
interpretations, ◇∃xE!x is true but
∃◇xE!x is not. (Obviously, NE fails in such
interpretations as well.)
Unlike Adams' account, the characteristic S4 schema is valid due
to the transitivity of the accessibility relation among roles.  However,
the Brouwerian schema, 
and hence also the 5 schema (which follows from the
system S4 + B) are not valid.  The technical details of this
are complex, but the intuitive reason why B fails in McMichael's
semantics is similar to Adams' reasons for the failure of the 5
schema. As with Adams, in McMichael's account, for Socrates' existence to
be possible at a world is for him to have the property of possibly not
existing. Hence, in worlds in which Socrates does not exist (i.e., worlds
accessible from his actual role @(Socrates)), there is no such thing as
Socrates to exemplify any properties, in particular the property of
possibly existing. Hence, by serious actualism, in worlds in which he
doesn't exist, Socrates does not have the property of possibly
existing. Hence, as with Adams, it is true, but not necessary, that
Socrates' existence is possible, i.e., we have ◇E!s but not
□◇E!s.
For similar reasons, τ=τ is not logically necessary for McMichael
for terms τ generally. For identity is a relation and hence, by
serious actualism, in worlds in which Socrates, say, does not exist,
Socrates stands in no relations to anything, himself in particular. Thus,
when s is Socrates, □s=s is not true.
Objections to McMichael's role theory are addressed in the
 document
 Problems with the Actualist Accounts.
A rather different strict actualist approach to the possibilist challenge
is broached by Menzel [1990] and is clarified and refined by Ray [1995].
A very similar approach is elaborated in great formal and philosophical
detail by Chihara [1998]. For ease of reference, call this approach
“model-theoretic actualism”.
All non-skeptical approaches to modality agree that Kripke models provide
key insights into the meaning of our modal discourse and the nature of
modal reality. However, as we have seen, the naive “intended”
model of Kripke semantics leads to possibilism. As seen above, the
standard sort actualist response — what David Lewis calls
“ersatzism” — has been to define actualistically acceptable notions
of possible worlds or possible individuals to serve as replacements for
the elements of
w and D in the naive intended model,
thereby (or so it is argued) preserving the semantical and metaphysical
benefits of Kripke models while avoiding ontological commitment to
possibilia. As just seen above, however, ersatzism is still
problematic. By contrast, the model-theoretic account does not attempt to
identify worlds and possibilia as acceptable abstract entities of
some sort. Rather, these notions are abandoned altogether.
To get at the idea, note first that the notion of an intended Tarski
model makes perfectly good sense for a formalization of nonmodal
discourse about the actual world. To illustrate, suppose we have a
given a piece of nonmodal discourse about a certain event, a baseball
game, say. Suppose now we formalize that discourse in a nonmodal
language L′; that is, for each referring expression in
the disourse (e.g., ‘Mark McGwire’, ‘second
inning’, etc.), there is a unique constant of L′,
and for every simple verb phrase in the discourse (‘is a home
run’, ‘is out’, ‘relieves’, etc.) there
is a unique predicate of L′. Then we can form a Tarski
model ML′ for
L′ whose domain consists of the actual objects that the
speakers are talking about in the discourse (fans, players, equipment,
etc.) and which interprets the predicates of L′ so that
they are true of exactly those (n-tuples of objects in the
domain that are in the extension of the corresponding verb phrases of
the discourse. In this way we form the intended model of
L′, the piece of the world that it is intended to be
about.
According to proponents of model-theoretic actualism, the fallacy of both
ersatzism and possibilism is the inference that things must work in
largely the same way with regard to Kripke models. A Kripke model is
basically an indexed collection of Tarski models. Just as there is an
intended Tarski model for a nonmodal language L′
constructed from the actual world, the accounts above infer that, for a
given formalization L of modal discourse, there must be an
intended Kripke model constructed from all possible worlds. And, depending
on one's tolerance for possibilia, this leads either to possibilism or one
of its ersatz variations.
For model-theoretic actualists, the modal upshot of a Kripke model, what
it tells us about modal reality, is found in
its structure rather than its specific content. The elements of a Kripke
model are therefore irrelevant; it is
easiest just to take them all to be pure sets, or ordinal numbers, 
or some
other type of familiar mathematical object. Consequently, there can be no
notion of a single intended model, because, for every model, there are
infinitely many others that are structurally isomorphic to it and, as noted,
structure is all that matters on the model-theoretic account. In place of
intended models, the model-theoretic account offers the notion of an
intended* model. To get at the idea, suppose one has an
intended Tarski model M of the actual world, a model
that actually contains entities in the world and assigns extensions to
predicates that reflect the actual meanings of the adjectives and verb
phrases those predicates formalize. Now replace the objects in that
model with abstract objects of some ilk to obtain a new model
M′ that is structurally isomorphic to
M. Then M′ also models the
world under a mapping, or embedding, that takes each element
e′ of M′ to the element
e that it replaced in M. We can thus
justifiably think of M′ as a sort of intended
model because, even though it doesn't necessary contain
anything but pure sets (or some other type of mathematical object),
under an appropriate embedding it models the actual world no less than
M. To distinguish models like
M′ that require a nontrivial embedding into the world from
models like M, model-theoretic actualists call the former
intended* models.
According to model-theoretic actualism, the notion of an intended* Tarski
model is all that is needed for modeling the modal facts. From these, a
notion of an intended* Kripke model can be defined. Assume that
L is a model language that formalizes some range of
modal discourse about the world. Roughly, then, an intended* Kripke
model M is simply a Kripke model such that (i) the
Tarski model indexed by the distinguished index
w0 is an intended* Tarski model of the
actual world, (ii) every Tarski model M in
M could have been an intended* model of the
world, that is, the world could have been as M
represents it, and (iii) necessarily, some Tarski model in
M is an intended* model of the world, i.e., no matter how
the world had been, there would have been an intended* Tarski model of it
in
 M.[14]
Truth in a model on the model-theoretic account is defined as usual as
truth at the distinguish index w0 of the model, hence, a
sentence φ is true simpliciter if and only if it is true at the
distinguished index of some (hence, any) intended* Kripke model. Given the
definition of an intended* model, it follows that a modal formula
‘◇φ’ is true if and only if, for some intended*
Kripke-model M, φ is true in some Tarski-model M
in M, that is, in some Tarski-model M
in M that could have been an intended* model of the
world. Thus, in particular, (1) is true if and only if
that is, given the definition of an intended* Kripke model, if and only if
there is a Tarski model M that could have been an intended* Tarski
model and such that, if it had been, there would have been aliens.
According to model-theoretic actualism, then, intended* Kripke models
adequately represent the modal structure of the world simply by virtue of
their own modal properties. And because the only Kripke models that are needed 
for providing
a semantics for modal languages are constructed entirely
out of existing objects, Kripke's semantics
conforms with the thesis of actualism, but does so without the elaborate
metaphysical apparatus of the ersatzist accounts.
That said, certain refinements to Kripke models are introduced by
model-theoretic actualists to deliver a more appealing quantified
modal logic than Kripke's.  First, to comport with serious actualism
(and to validate SA as a logical truth) the extension of a predicate
at a world is restricted to the domain of the world.  As in Kripke
models, the domain of a “world” can be empty, with the
exception of the actual world, and quantified sentences are evaluated
at a world relative to the domain of that world.  Obviously, at any
such world w, ∀x~E!x (as well as any
other universally quantified sentence) will be vacuously true.
Equally obviously, ~E!a will be true, no matter the value of
‘a’.  Thus, the principle of universal
instantiation UI is not necessary.  It is therefore important
for the model-theoretic actualist to use the “free“
quantification axiom FUI of Adams' logic.  Also, as in both
Prior's Q and Adams' logic, it is assumed that all terms
denote actually existing things; this is reflected model theoretically
in the condition that terms are assigned denotations in the domain of
the actual world.  Hence the principle E! is valid as well.
Given this, the model-theoretic actualists adopt the free
quantification theory of Adams' logic, which, as noted, in the
presence of E! yields a classical quantification theory in
nonmodal contexts.  Both E! and UI is therefore
logically valid but contingent for the model-theoretic actualist.  To
avoid their derivation, as in Adams' logic, the rule of necessitation
is restricted to theorems that are provable without any instance
of E!.
Model-theoretic actualists differ dramatically with Adams on the
underlying propositional base of modal logic.  However, this is not the
result of any philosophical or theoretical differences between these two
types of actualism.  As noted
above, Adams takes any modal statement containing a name as, in
effect, an atomic statement that predicates a modal property of the
referent of the name.  This leads him to reject the characteristic axiom
schemas of both S4 and S5.  For model-theoretic actualists
— those on which the present account is based, at any rate —
this is a move that Adams did not have to make.  Specifically,
model-theoretic actualists reject the principle MSA that treats
de re sentences as, in effect, predications.  Rather, a
consistent application of the intuition underlying the truth-in/truth-at
distinction suggests that the truth conditions for modal propositions at
other worlds — their “modal facts” — are
determined from the perspective of the actual world.  More carefully put
in terms of model-theoretic actualism, the truth value of a de re
sentence at a Tarski model within an intended* Kripke model
M is evaluated from the perspective of the
“actual” world @ of M.  Notably,
suppose M is a Tarski model in M representing
things as they might have been if Socrates hadn't existed.  For the
model-theoretic actualist, the statement that it is possible that Socrates
exists, ◇E!s, is evaluated straightaway as true at M
just in case there is a Tarski model M in M at
which E!s is true — the “actual” model
M@ indexed by @, for instance.  Thus, informally
speaking once again, it is from “our” perspective in the
actual world that we see that Socrates exists and hence deem it as
possible with respect to any other world, Socrates-less or not.  Hence,
◇E!s → □◇E!s — and indeed, by
similar reasoning, any instance of the S4 and S5 schemas
— is valid for the model-theoretic actualist.
By removing MSA and restoring S5 to the reconstruction of
Adams' above, the model-theoretic actualist arrives at a much more
standard first-order modal logic without, it would appear, any commitment
to possibilia or possible worlds.  The resulting logic is proved
complete in Menzel [1991].
Objections to model-theoretic actualism are addressed in the document
 Problems with the Actualist Accounts.