In the later Middle Ages Albert of Saxony (Albertus de
Saxonia) was sometimes called Albertucius (Little
Albert), to distinguish him from the thirteenth-century theologian
Albert the Great. He is however a master of great importance in his own right. He was born at Rickensdorf, in the region of
Helmstedt (Lower Saxony) in present-day Germany, around 1316. After
initial schooling in his native area, and possibly a sojourn at Erfurt,
he made his way to Prague and then on to Paris. He was member of the
English-German Nation and became a master of arts in 1351. He was
Rector of the University of Paris in 1353. He remained in Paris until
1362, during which time he taught arts and studied theology at the
Sorbonne, apparently without obtaining a degree in the latter
discipline. His logical and philosophical works were composed during
this period. After two years of carrying out diplomatic missions
between the Pope and the Duke of Austria, he was charged with founding
the University of Vienna, of which he became the first Rector in 1365.
Appointed canon of Hildesheim in 1366, he was also named Bishop of
Halberstadt the same year, serving in that office until his death on
July 8, 1390. 
Not having left any theological writings or a commentary on
Aristotle’s Metaphysics (at least none that we know of),
Albert is primarily known for his works on logic and natural
philosophy, though he also wrote commentaries on Aristotle’s
Nicomachean Ethics and Economics, as well as several
short mathematical texts (the Treatise on Proportions,
Question on the Squaring of the Circle, Question on the
minimum and maximum).
Albert’s masterwork in logic is a summa entitled the
Perutilis logica (Very Useful Logic). He also composed a
voluminous collection of Sophismata, which examines numerous
sentences that raise difficulties of interpretation due to the presence
of syncategorematic words — i.e., terms such as quantifiers and
certain prepositions, which, according to medieval logicians, do not
have a proper and determinate signification but rather modify the
signification of the other terms in the propositions in which they
occur. He also wrote several question commentaries:
Quaestiones on the Ars Vetus or Old Logic (i.e., the
Isagoge of Porphyry and Aristotle’s Categories and
De Interpretatione), Quaestiones on the Posterior
Analytics, and a series of 25 Quaestiones logicales
(Logical Questions), addressed to semantic problems and the status of
logic. Of dubious authenticity are the treatises De
consequentiis (On Consequences) and De locis dialecticis
(On Dialectical Topics), which have been attributed to him in a
Parisian manuscript.
The most renowned philosopher when Albert studied and taught in the
Faculty of Arts at Paris was John Buridan. Albert was one of several masters contemporary with or immediately following Buridan whose work transformed logic and natural
philosophy in the later Middle Ages. For a long time he was thought to
have been a pupil or follower of Buridan, but this idea is now widely questioned. Some of his works on logic and physics were composed before Buridan had lectured on these subjects for the last time, and Buridan clearly takes notice of them, whether for criticizing or for adopting Albert’s views. In logic, he seems to have been influenced by certain ideas
and methods imported from England. His logic depends very much on
Ockham’s, but the influence of William Heytesbury is also evident in
his
Sophismata.
Walter Burley was another important influence on Albert, though this is
somewhat puzzling in view of the fact that they had opposing views on
the nature of universals. In any case, Burley seems to have been on
Albert’s mind when he wrote his commentary on the Nicomachean
Ethics as well as when he was developing his theory of
consequences.
These different influences have sometimes made Albert seem no more
than an eclectic compiler of the views of others. But, in addition to
providing the context for some of his own contributions, Albert’s
fluency with the views of his contemporaries gives him a unique place
in the development of logic and philosophy at the University of Paris
in the fourteenth century.
On most topics the Perutilis logica (a text based on lectures first given before 1356 and finally revised for publication before 1360) is influenced by Ockham’s
Summa logicae, though it offers an independent approach in the
treatises on obligations, insolubles, and consequences, which had
assumed greater importance during this period. As has been known for
some time, this work is a remarkable handbook organized into six
treatises: the first defines the elements of propositions; the second
treats of the properties of terms; the third of the truth conditions of
different types of proposition; the fourth of consequences (including
syllogisms, and in fact adding to it the theory of topics); the fifth
of fallacies; and the sixth of insolubles and obligations. 
In the first part of the Perutilis logica, which sets out the
terminology of the entire text, Albert returns to the Ockhamist
conception of the sign and in so doing distances himself from the
position defended by Buridan. After clearly including the term (an
element of the proposition) in the genus of signs — by which he
provides, in the tradition of Ockham, a semiotic approach to
logico-linguistic analysis — he establishes signification
through a referential relation to a singular thing, defining the
relation of spoken to conceptual signs as a relation of
subordination. He is also an Ockhamist in his conception of universals,
which he regards as spoken or conceptual signs, and in his theory of
supposition, which essentially restates the Ockhamist divisions of
supposition, despite of some refinements as descensus
copulatim, perhaps influenced by Heytesbury. In particular, he
restores the notion of simple supposition — i.e., the reference
of a term to the concept to which it is subordinated, when it
signifies an extra-mental thing — which had been criticized and
rejected by Buridan. Finally, Albert is close to the Venerabilis
Inceptor in his theory of the categories, where he refuses to consider quantity as something absolutely real,
reducing it instead to a disposition of substance and quality. Albert
in fact contributed as much as Ockham to the spread of this conception
of the relation between substance and quantity in natural philosophy
in Paris and Italy.
Albert’s treatment of relations is, on the other hand, highly
original. Although (like Ockham) he refuses to make relations into
things distinct from absolute entities, he clearly ascribes them to an
act of the soul by which absolute entities are compared and placed in
relation to each other, an “act of the referring soul [actus animae
referentis]”. This leads him to reject completely certain
propositions Ockham had admitted as reasonable, even if he did not
construe them in quite the same way, e.g., ‘Socrates is a
relation’. Both Ockham and Buridan had allowed that the term
‘relation’ could refer to the things signified or connoted
by concrete relative terms (whether collectively or not).
So Albert was not content with merely repeating Ockhamist arguments.
More often than not, he developed and deepened them, e.g., in
connection with the notion of the appellation of form. This property of
predicates, which had previously been used by the Venerabilis
Inceptor, was employed by Albert in an original manner when he
adopted it instead of Buridan’s appellation of reason (appellatio
rationis) to analyze verbs expressing propositional attitudes.
Every proposition following a verb such as ‘believe’ or
‘know’ appellates its form. In other words, it must be
possible to designate the object of the belief via the expression
understood as identical to itself in its material signification and
without reformulation. Another area in which Albert deviates from
Ockham is his rejection of the idea that any distinction with multiple
senses must have an equivocal proposition as its object. According to
Albert, equivocal propositions can only be conceded, rejected, or left
in doubt.
He adopts the same position as Burley about the issue of the complex subject-term (including an oblique case) in a categorical proposition, as in ‘Any man’s donkey is running [Cuiuslibet hominis asinus currit]’. He supports a logico-semantical model in which ‘man [homo]’ is the logical subject while ‘a man’s donkey [hominis asinus]’ is the grammatical one. He will be criticized on that point by Buridan, for whom the logical subject is always the grammatical subject.
Albert’s semantics becomes innovative when he admits that
propositions have their own proper significate, which is not identical
to that of their terms (see especially his Questions on the
Posterior Analytics I, qq. 2, 7, 33). Like syncategorematic terms
(see his Questions on the Categories, qu. 1 ‘On
Names’), propositions signify the “mode of a thing
[modus rei]”. This position is not repeated in the
Logical Questions. In any case, Albert avoids hypostatizing
these modes by explaining them as relations between the things to which
the terms refer. It cannot be said here that Albert is moving towards
the “complexly signifiable [complexe
significabile]” of Gregory of Rimini, although his remarks
are reminiscent of the latter theory. Still, he uses the idea of the
signification of a proposition to define truth and to explain
‘insolubles’, i.e., propositions expressing paradoxes of
self-reference. On Albert’s view, every proposition signifies that it
is true by virtue of its form. Thus, an insoluble proposition is always
false because it signifies at the same time that it is true and that it
is false.
The Questiones circa logicam (Questions on Logic)
were written at roughly the same time as the Perutilis logica
and the Questiones circa artem veterem, that is to say about
1356. They explore in a series of disputed questions the status of
logic and semantics on topics such as the relation of words to
concepts, the difference between natural and conventional
signification, etc., as well as the theory of reference and truth.
Albert defines signification by representation. He
distinguishes two ways of understanding suppositio, the first
as the act of the mind itself; the second as an operation constituting one
of the properties of terms.
In his Sophismata, Albert usually follows Heytesbury. The
distinction between compounded and divided senses, which is presented
in a highly systematic way in Heytesbury’s Tractatus de sensu
composito et diviso, is the primary instrument (besides the
appellation of form) for resolving difficulties connected with
epistemic verbs and with propositional attitudes more generally. This
is abundantly clear in his discussion of infinity. Rather than
appealing to the increasingly common distinction between the
categorematic and syncategorematic uses of the term
‘infinite’ and then indicating the different senses it can
have depending on where it occurs in a proposition, he treats the
infinite itself as a term. Albert’s approach involves analyzing the
logical and linguistic conditions of every proposition involving the
term ‘infinite’ that is significant and capable of being
true. This leads him to sketch a certain number of possible
definitions (where he appears to take into account the teachings of
Gregory of Rimini), as well as to raise other questions, e.g., on the
relation between finite and infinite beings (in propositions such as
‘Infinite things are finite [infinita sunt
finita]’), on the divisibility of the continuum, and on
qualitative infinity. There are echoes in Albert not only of the
approach Buridan had systematically implemented in his
Physics, but also of the analyses of English authors —
again, especially Heytesbury. As is often the case, the treatment
proposed by Albert in the Sophismata provides good evidence
of the extent to which philosophers were gripped by questions about
infinity at that time.
Finally, one of the fields in which Albert is considered a major
contributor is the theory of consequences. In the treatise of the
Perutilis Logica devoted to consequences, Albert often seems
to follow Buridan. But whereas Buridan maintained the central role of
Aristotelian syllogistic, Albert, like Burley, integrated syllogistic
and the study of conversions into the theory of consequences.
Consequence is defined as the impossibility of the antecedent’s being
true without the consequent’s also being true — truth itself being
such that howsoever the proposition signifies things to be, so they
are. The primary division is between formal and material consequences,
the latter being subdivided into consequences simpliciter and
ut nunc. A syllogistic consequence is a formal consequence
whose antecedent is a conjunction of two quantified propositions and
whose consequent is a third quantified proposition. Albert is thus led
to present a highly systematic theory of the forms of inference,
which represents a major step forward in the medieval theory of logical
deduction.
It is this analysis of language together with a particularist ontology
that places Albert in the tradition of nominalism. This is combined
with an epistemological realism that emerges, e.g., in his analysis of
the vacuum. In certain respects, Albert’s work is an extension of
physical analysis to imaginary cases. Distinguishing, as Buridan did,
between what is absolutely impossible or contradictory and what is
impossible “in the common course of nature” (Questions
on De Caelo I, qu. 15), he considers hypotheses under
circumstances that are not naturally possible but imaginable given
God’s absolute power (e.g., the existence of a vacuum and the plurality
of worlds). However, even if we can imagine a vacuum existing by divine
omnipotence, no vacuum can occur naturally (Questions on the
Physics IV, qu. 8). Albert refuses to extend the reference of
physical terms to supernatural, purely imaginary possibilities. In the
same way, one can certainly use the concept of a point, although this
would only be an abbreviation of a connotative and negative expression.
There is no simple concept of a point, a vacuum, or the infinite, and
although imaginary hypotheses provide an interesting detour, physics
must in the end provide an account of the natural order of things. 
Historically, Albert’s reputation in natural philosophy is at least as
high as the one he had in logic. His commentaries on the
Physics and De caelo are close to Buridan’s, but in some questions on De generatione et corruptione he rather follows Oresme. He
appeals to the authority of his “revered masters from the
Faculty of Arts at Paris” at the beginning of his questions
on De caelo. Even so, it should be noted that
his Physics was composed soon after 1351, before the final
version of Buridan’s Questions on the Physics (between 1355
and 1358). On some points we see that Buridan modifies his positions
between the third and the final versions of his commentary,
and we can presume that this is in response to Albert’s ideas.
On some other issues, the oppositions remain strong between the two
masters. We have already seen that on the question of the status of
the category of quantity, then at the border of logic and physics,
Albert followed Ockham and distanced himself from Buridan by reducing
quantity to a disposition of substance or quality. This move becomes
evident in certain physical questions, e.g., in the study of
condensation and rarefaction, where Albert openly disagrees with
Buridan by arguing that condensation and rarefaction are possible only
through the local motion of the parts of a body, and without needing
to assume some quantity that would have a distinct reality on its
own. Nevertheless, he defines the concept of a “lump of matter
[materie massa]” without giving it any autonomous
reality, although it does help fill out the idea of a ‘quantity
of matter’, which Giles of Rome had already distinguished from
simple extension.
Similarly, Albert is sometimes seen as standing alongside Ockham on
the nature of motion, rejecting the idea of motion as a flux
(fluxus), which is the position Buridan had adopted. In
contrast to Buridan, Albert treats locomotion in the same way as
alteration (movement according to quality): in neither case is it
necessary to imagine local motion as a res successiva distinct
from permanent things, at least if the common course of nature holds
and one does not take into account the possibility of divine
intervention.
Concerning the motion of projectiles, gravitational acceleration,
and the motion of celestial bodies, Albert adopts Buridan’s major
innovation, i.e., the theory of impetus, a quality acquired by
a moving body (see Buridan’s Questions on the Physics VIII,
qu. 13, on projectile motion). Like Buridan, he extends this approach
to celestial bodies in his commentary on De caelo, clearly
following its consequences in rejecting intelligences as agents of
motion and in treating celestial and terrestrial bodies using the same
principles. Nevertheless, he formulates the idea of impetus in
more classical terms as a virtus impressa (impressed force)
and virtus motiva (motive force). Albert makes no
pronouncements about the nature of this force, claiming that this is a
question for the metaphysician. His work also mentions the mean speed
theorem, a method of finding the total velocity of a uniformly
accelerated (or decelerated) body, which had been stated (though
without being demonstrated) in Heytesbury’s Tractatus de motu,
and also adopted by Nicole Oresme. Albert was part of a general
scientific trend which sought the first formulations of the principles
of dynamics. He explained a number of curious natural phenomena, taking
particular interest in earthquakes, tidal phenomena, and geology.
Albert wrote a treatise on proportions dedicated to the analysis of
motion, highly influenced by the treatise De proportionibus
velocitatum in motibus of Thomas Bradwardine. He explains in a
synthetic way the elements of the theory of proportions, applying this
theory to different motions (local motion, alteration, augmentation,
and diminution). Motion is to be studied “from the point of view
of the cause” and “from the point of view of the
effect”. Like Oresme, Albert adopts the idea that motion varies
according to a geometrical progression when the relation of motive
force to resistance varies arithmetically. His treatise is less
innovative than Oresme’s, but it is a clear exposition that was very
widely read.
Albert was interested in certain
mathematical problems. To this end, he wrote a question on the squaring
of the circle as well as questions on John of Sacrobosco’s Treatise
on the Sphere. In addition to authoritative arguments and purely
empirical justifications, his question on the squaring of the circle
uses properly mathematical arguments appealing to both Euclid (in the
version of Campanus of Novarra) and Archimedes (translated by Gerard of
Cremona). His most original contribution is a proposal to dispense with
Euclid’s proposition X.1, replacing it with a postulate stating that if
A is less than B, then there exists a quantity C such that
A<C<B.
Finally, a treatise De maximo et minimo, considering the
limits of active and passive potencies, written in the tradition
of the Oxford Calculators, at the frontiers of logic and natural
philosophy.
Albert of Saxony’s teachings on logic and metaphysics were extremely
influential. Although Buridan remained the predominant figure in
logic, Albert’s Perutilis logica was destined to serve as a
popular text because of its systematic nature and also because it
takes up and develops essential aspects of the Ockhamist position. But
it was his commentary on Aristotle’s Physics that was
especially widely read. Many manuscripts of it can be found in France
and Italy, in Erfurt and Prague. Thanks to Albert of Saxony, many new
ideas raised in Parisian physics and cosmology in the later Middle
Ages became widespread in Central Europe. Albert’s Physics,
much more than Oresme’s and even Buridan’s, basically guaranteed the
transmission of the Parisian tradition also in Italy, where it was
authoritative along with the works of Heytesbury and John
Dumbleton. His commentary on Aristotle’s
De caelo was also influential, eclipsing Buridan’s commentary
on this text. Blasius of Parma read it in Bologna between 1379 and
1382. A little later, it enjoyed a wide audience at Vienna.
His Treatise on Proportions was often quoted in Italy where,
in addition to the texts of Bradwardine and Oresme, it influenced the
application of the theory of proportions to motion. 
Albert played an essential role in the diffusion throughout Italy
and central Europe of Parisian ideas which bore the mark of Buridan’s
teachings, but which were also clearly shaped by Albert’s own grasp of
English innovations. At the same time, Albert was not merely a compiler
of the work of others. He manifests an undeniable
originality on many topics in logic and physics.