Meinong’s father was an Austrian Major General whose ancestors
came from southwestern Germany. Meinong repeatedly stressed that he was
German, and he also joined political organizations of German
nationalists. On the other hand, he was a loyal Austrian and emphasized
his distance from extreme, Pan-Germanist groups like those that had
taken up the ideas of Georg von Schönerer.
Meinong showed a strong inclination to music, practically as well as
theoretically. He performed chamber music in a proficient way (the
piano and especially the violin), was an amateur composer (mainly of
Lieder) and took an interest in theoretical questions
concerning music (for example, he was engaged in discussions with Guido
Adler, Christian von Ehrenfels, Stephan Witasek, and Joseph Marx, and
he wrote reviews of Carl Stumpf’s Tonpsychologie, Vol. I
and II).
Meinong suffered from an inherited semi-blindness, a handicap that
he always tried to conceal, but which was already a hindrance in his
early years and deteriorated to almost complete blindness in the course
of his life. Eventually, he needed people like his wife to read to him.
So it was rather difficult for him to become acquainted with the
literature of his time. In spite of such unfavorable circumstances and
although Meinong rather shunned social, political and cultural exposure
(including the giving of public lectures and participation in
conferences), he was still able to exert considerable influence on the
academic community of his time. Meinong’s great achievements were
due in part to his ambition and perseverance, combined with diligence
and a disciplined way of working. To a considerable extent
Meinong’s accomplishments were facilitated by a well-organized
family life for which his wife Doris bears much of the responsibility
and credit. Meinong is a paradigm example of a bourgeois academic
scholar — of an “Ordinarius” — around the turn
of the century.
Life-time friendships begun in Meinong’s Viennese academic
period included those with the musicologist Guido Adler and the
philosophers (also his pupils) Christian von Ehrenfels, Alois
Höfler, and Anton von Oelzelt-Newin. During the time of his
professorship in Graz he also became the teacher of, among others,
Eduard Martinak, Stephan Witasek, Rudolf Ameseder, Vittorio Benussi,
Ernst Mally, Joseph Marx, Franz Weber, Ferdinand Weinhandl, and Fritz
Heider.
Although Meinong was a Roman Catholic, his early work already showed
a critical and distanced attitude towards the Catholic Church. Like
Arnold of Brescia, Meinong advocated the separation of religious and
secular affairs as well as the idea of the political equality of all
denominations. Furthermore, Meinong criticized the religious education
in Austria’s “Mittelschulen” [high
schools] as inadequate, since he considered it to be a
restriction on freedom of opinion. Meinong suggested that historians
(and not priests) should instead teach the history of the development
of religions and the various ways of satisfying religious needs.
His early essays, the “Hume Studies”, I (1877) and II
(1882) — his only investigations with an explicit historical
orientation — are, as the subtitles foreshadow, nonetheless
critical and systematic treatises. Written under the influence of his
Viennese mentor Franz Brentano, they show Meinong’s tendency
towards British Empiricism (rather than Kantianism and German Idealism)
and became relevant in the development of his object theory.
Meinong’s first book On Philosophical Science and its
Propaedeutics (1885) plays a pivotal role for the understanding of
Meinong’s research as well as his teaching activities.
Originally, this book was written with the intention to criticize
instructions issued by the Ministry of Culture and Instruction to cut
down the hours of high school teaching in Philosophical Propaedeutics
[philosophisch-propädeutischer Unterricht],
i.e., psychology, logic and philosophy. But the book can also be read
as a programmatic essay on Meinong’s own views on philosophy and
psychology. He makes it clear that philosophy can be done in a
scientific rather than in a speculative manner, and he considers
psychology as a fundamental subdiscipline of philosophy. Teaching
psychology and philosophy cannot consist in the attempt to present
finished results or accepted theories; it has to be done by performing
experiments and engaging in discussion, respectively. Uncertainty in
the domain of knowledge is not to be considered as an obstacle, but
rather as a didactically fertile challenge and an opportunity for
making progress. Because of this practically-oriented view of
philosophy and science, Meinong proposed the establishment of both a
Psychological Laboratory and a Philosophical Seminar as university
institutions in Graz. As an academic philosopher he made it his duty to
find extra time to discuss philosophical matters with his students,
friends, and colleagues.
In his Psychological-Ethical Investigations in Value
Theory (1894), Meinong discussed the subjectivist economic value
theories of the Austrian economists Carl Menger and Friedrich von
Wieser. He took over, in principle, their subjectivist approach, but he criticized and
modified their theory of marginal utility in certain ways. On the one hand, he extended it to values in general, over
and above mere economic values, on the other hand, he applied it to other axiological domains, especially to ethics. He also developed in detail
his idea that ethics was entirely determined by the
value–disvalue [Wert–Unwert]
distinction. In On Emotional Presentation (1917) and other
later works on value theory (1912; 1923), Meinong took an objectivist
point of view and combined the psychological analysis of values with
his theory of objects. Values and norms (“oughts”,
[Sollen]) are to be seen as special kinds of objects,
and there are not only personal values but also impersonal ones.
Meinong’s psychological works are more concerned with the
methodology of psychology and with what Brentano called
“descriptive psychology” — a kind of classification
or taking of an inventory of the mental furniture — than with
“genetic psychology”, i.e., the experiment-based, causal
theory of mental (and physiological) occurrences (cf. Antonelli 2018: 3–100). Stimulated by
Twardowski (1894) but also in critical distance to this treatise,
Meinong combined descriptive-psychological matters with epistemological
and ontological themes in his essay “On Objects of Higher Order
and Their Relationship to Internal Perception” (1899).
Meinong’s mature epistemological views, which are both anti-skeptical and fallibilistic, are to be found in his 1906, 1910, and 1915. He propagated a theory of evidence as the
basis of justification partly similar to Brentano’s (as far as
the “direct–indirect” and “a priori–a
posteriori” distinctions are concerned), partly in sharp contrast
to it, because already in 1886 Meinong added the “evidence for presumption”
[Vermutungsevidenz] to the “evidence for
certainty”, something of which Brentano strongly disapproved.
In his later works (1902; 1904b; 1906; 1907; 1910; 1915; 1918) the
various aforementioned philosophical disciplines are intertwined, only
the emphasis of the subject matters differs. Although the topics of the
monographs seem to be narrowly demarcated (On Assumptions
(1902, 1910); On Possibility and Probability (1915); On
Emotional Presentation (1917)), Meinong deals with a broad range
of subjects so that one can make out the development of a complete
system of philosophy. A work of a more general character is “The
Theory of Objects” (1904b), a kind of manifesto, which was
continued by the apologetic and also programmatic book On the Place
of the Theory of Objects in the System of Sciences (1907).
In 1918, Meinong published his last major work — an attempt at proving the law of universal causation, i.e. the principle that assures the unexceptional causal determination of all occurrences (states, events). He provides two arguments in favor of this principle. First, he argues, following Hobbes and Brentano, that uncaused events turn out to be infinitely improbable. Second, Meinong uses an a priori proof of his own which claims that exceptionless determinacy is necessary as no occurrence can be without a state of affairs that Meinong calls its “implicans” (1918: 45–66; cf. Hartmann 1920). Meinong not only supports determinism, he also defends compatibilism because determinism, and not indeterminism, allows us to ascribe responsibility (for being guilty, or meritorious etc.) to persons (1894, §68; 1918: 92: “Freedom is not indeterminacy, and determinacy is not compulsion or coercion”).
 Near the end of his life he wrote the short and yet comprehensive intellectual autobiography
“A. Meinong” (1921a). Further biographical information is provided in Dölling 1999,
the first biographical monograph on Meinong, and in Dölling 2001,
Eder 1995, Kindinger 1965, Lindenfeld 1980 (Chapt. III), Raspa 2016.
Meinong was neither a speculative philosopher nor a so-called
philosophical system thinker. Nevertheless he gradually developed a
philosophical system which included the main disciplines and had his
theory of objects at its center. Meinong’s terminology constantly
increased, and the number of his ideas and alleged objects grew
steadily — although with significant revisions of some of his
older views.
Meinong’s metaphilosophical reflections do not yield something like a definition of what philosophy is, and
in his autobiography he concedes that he has not yet found a
conceptually exact formula for it. Philosophy is
supposed to be not a single sharply delineated science but an
assemblage of sciences which are held together by the fact that they
have to do with mental phenomena (1921a: 101; 1885: 5). There are no specifically
philosophical objects, but everything that can be experienced
“may be handled philosophically if treated from the point of
view of its relation to the human thinking subject” (Hicks 1922:
5). Because of this, psychology becomes a fundamental discipline of
this philosophical congeries. Another even more basic philosophical discipline is the theory of objects as it is
the most general, comprehensive and fundamental science.  According to Meinong, its
range is wider than metaphysics because metaphysics deals only with
existing things, i.e. with the entirety of the real. As
metaphysics is determined by “the prejudice in favor of the
actual”, it can only be seen as a universal science a posteriori. However, the theory of objects goes beyond that. It is an a priori science as it has to do with whatever can be known a priori about objects. It deals essentially with objects as such, or in Meinongian words, it “has to do with the given taken in its entirety” (1904b, §§2, 11).
Meinong saw himself neither in the camp of the empiricists nor in the
camp of the rationalists; instead he claimed to be an empirical
although not a psychologistic thinker (1907, §§25–6).
Although Meinong’s theory of objects is an a priori
science, its method can be characterized as a philosophy from
below, a working method that follows the precepts of a kind of
bottom-up thinking. There is an important analogy between the
empirical (a posteriori) sciences and the theory of objects
as a paradigmatic a priori science: both start from given
data. In the case of the empirical sciences these data are
experiences, while the data of the theory of objects usually are
things that are not existent but only subsistent [bestehend]
or even merely outside of being [außerseiend] (1917,
§11: 103 [92]; 1921a, Sect. 2.F: 130). This
“empirical manner of investigating” was appreciated by
Russell (1904: 205), for instance. Moreover, our general as well as
our particular knowledge of language facts is able to supply us with
additional data as basis of further theorizing. Meinong (1904b,
§10: 33 [103]) thus says “that the general theory
of objects has to learn from grammar just as the specialized theory of
objects can and must learn from mathematics” (cf. also 1904b: 15
[88]; 1907: 109). He also told his students that it is best
to begin one’s investigations with linguistic data (Nachlass,
Karton IV/b), and — because of this — that the answer to
the question what the common man thinks of this or that situation or
of this or that word is an indispensable presupposition of all other
inquiry (Nachlass, Karton XI/e; cf. Manotta 2005: 65–68).
Meinong considers ethics, aesthetics and logic to be the primary
disciplines of practical philosophy. It is worth noting that he
contrasts his customary use of “logic” as a practical
discipline, which was adopted from Brentano and is comparable
to Port-Royal Logic, with Kant’s and, especially,
Husserl’s conception of a “formal” or
“pure” logic and also with symbolic logic,
“Logistik”, and algebra of logic, which all can be seen as
parts of his theory of objects.  He puts the distinction between
theoretical and practical disciplines primarily down to the difference
between theoretical and practical interests and not to the difference
between the subject matters of the sciences. In contrast to the
disciplines of theoretical philosophy — metaphysics, object
theory, and theory of knowledge, for example —, which are
determined by cognitive aims, the practical disciplines set themselves
practical goals. They can be seen as something like applied sciences
or branches of engineering [Kunstlehren], quite comparable to
architecture, and nautical or military sciences. (1885: 96–98;
1904b, §§7–8; 1907, §20: 114–30; 1921a: 103,
130.)
Epistemology has a double fact as its object: the known fact and the
fact of knowing. Knowing is judging an objective (state of affairs, see
below 4.3.1) with entitlement [Berechtigung] – both external
and internal (1915, Chapt. IV). The external entitlement is
provided by the truth or truth-conduciveness of the judged objective,
the internal by evidence [Evidenz]. Evidence is not just a
subjective feeling of conviction; it is an objective feature of the
mental act of judging (with or without certainty) and not of its
mental content. Following Brentano, Meinong stands up for a concept of
evidence as a basis for the theory of knowledge. Meinong, for instance,
accepts Brentano’s views on evidence about the distinctions
“direct–indirect” and “a priori–a
posteriori”. Direct evidence may be given as a borderline case
in inner perception, which is also evidence a posteriori (1906,
§§9–13), and in knowledge of axiomatic truths, which
is evidence a priori (1906, §1; 1915, §55). Like
Brentano, Meinong also thinks that perceiving and remembering are
always cases of judging and not just representing (1915: 606–7,
613) and that a judgement is indirectly evident if it is concluded from
directly evident judgements. On the other hand, Meinong deviates in
certain respects from Brentano’s theory of evidence. Already in
1886, Meinong adds “evidence for presumption”
[Vermutungsevidenz] to “evidence for
certainty”. He realizes that we trust in memory, outer
perception, and induction not blindly and by chance, although our trust
in these abilities does not derive from anything else. This
confidence, Meinong concludes, can be counted as a further source of
knowledge. It manifests itself as direct evidence, but evidence for
something that may be erroneous, not certain, and he therefore calls
it “direct conjectural evidence” ([unmittelbare
Vermutungsevidenz], 1886: 30–34). Brentano, who only
accepted “evidence for certainty”, strongly disapproved of
Meinong’s conception. He considered Meinong’s
introduction of a new special mode of cognition rather as a cutting
than an unravelling of the Gordian knot (Kindinger 1965, 22–3).
– Actually this disagreement was the beginning of the estrangement
between them.
As Meinong takes objectives as ideal objects, he gives up
Brentano’s definition of truth by means of evidence. Brentano
rejects the correspondence theory of truth, on the grounds that (among
other things) he does not see anything in reality that would correspond
to true negative judgements such as “there are no
unicorns” and defines truth of judgements by their evidence
(Brentano 1930: 139 [82]); see entries on Brentano
and Brentano’s Theory of Judgement). Meinong adopts a
kind of identity theory of truth, which can be seen as a borderline
case of a correspondence theory (Meinong 1915, §7; 1910,
§13; see below 5.6). According to Meinong, the true negative
judgement “there are no unicorns” has a subsistent
objective as its corresponding object (the fact of the non-being of
unicorns). If the objective in question does not subsist (has
non-being) the judgement is false. However, though Meinong does not use
the notion of evidence for a definition of truth, he holds it still
relevant for a truth criterion because truth is a
“proprium” of evidence (1915: 463), and evidence for
certainty (and for presumption, respectively) makes truth (and
probability, respectively) accessible to us. (A classical criticism of
Meinong’s theory of evidence is Nelson 1908: 479–485.)
Meinong’s epistemology turned out to be relevant to analytic
theory of knowledge. Some of Chisholm’s (1966: 38–55) rules
of evidence, for example, are a kind of application of Meinong’s
conception of direct evidence for conjecture. Further, Meinong’s
treatment of epistemic concepts like truth or
entitlement as value concepts anticipates the epistemic
normativity of some internalist positions. It is also worth
mentioning, that Meinong (1915, §54) linked the
“principle of the self-validity of all knowing”
(Selbstgültigkeitprinzip), a kind of prima facie
justification principle, with the fallibilistic
methodological-epistemological “principle of the critical
openness of all knowing” (Unabgeschlossenheitsprinzip),
which says that critical examination is always possible, since there is
always an unverified judgement left at the end of a justification
process.
In his treatise “On Objects of Higher Order and Their
Relationship to Internal Perception” (1899) Meinong explicitly
introduces the distinction between the psychological (mental)
content [psychologischer Inhalt] and the object
of a representation [Gegenstand einer Vorstellung]
— a fundamentally important distinction to him that he keeps on refining and extending (subsequently
applying it to all kinds of mental acts).
Meinong’s view on non-existent and impossible objects was
sharpened by Twardowski 1894. Twardowski’s work can be seen as
the occasion for Meinong to begin thinking more deeply about the
content/object distinction, and indeed Meinong took over some of
Twardowski’s arguments. However, Meinong never thought that
Twardowski’s distinction and conception of the content of a
representation could be understood as a precise conceptual
clarification that should be adopted unquestioningly. Meinong stated
that there was a great deal of interesting and useful information in
Twardowski’s 1894 study, but he said this with respect to
“the whole difficult and important problem of objects” and
not exactly in relation to the difference between content and object
(1899, §2: 185 [141]). Meinong, for example, accepts
Twardowski’s critical attitude to the view that there are
objectless, empty representations, a thesis Bolzano put forward
“with special emphasis” (see the entry on 
on Bernard Bolzano, Section 3.5). After
1894, Meinong took psychological contents as something purely mental
and concrete. Such contents are therefore always something
real. Twardowski, however, says that the content is a mental picture,
but he also identifies the mental content with the meaning of a name
and with Bolzano’s objective representation (idea), i.e., the
representation (idea) in itself, or as such, [Vorstellung an
sich]. For that reason Twardowski (1894: 31 [29]) takes
the content — in contrast to the (real) act — as something
that “always lacks reality”. Meinong, however, became more
and more aware of the purely mental nature of the psychological
content. He realized that the psychological content was not something
abstract or conceptual in the sense of something intensional, that it
was not some sort of meaning at all.
According to Meinong, all experiences
[Erlebnisse], even the most elementary ones, are
complex mental phenomena, because they contain at least three
constituents: (1) the act, (2) the (psychological) content, and (3) the
object of the experience. The first two components are intrinsically mental and, therefore, must exist if the
experience exists, whereas the third one need not exist, and it is usually extrinsic to the mental. If somebody
entertains a strong hope for universal peace, for instance, then (1)
the act of hope (and not of hate) exists, (2) the psychological content
exists, but (3) no universal peace may occur (there is only the
non-existent object the universal peace). Meinong believes
that experiences can have different objects
[Gegenstände] for two reasons: (i) Different
kinds of acts correspond to different kinds of objects (for example,
“objecta” correspond to representations, and
“objectives” to thoughts; see below 4.3.1). (ii) But inside
an act, so to speak, any variation on the side of the objects is
correlated with a variation of some mental component which is the
psychological content of the experience. (See the supplement on
  Presentation of Objects via Psychological Content.)
What is often called “content”, especially
“conceptual content”, is not a Meinongian psychological
content. Meinong distinguishes between psychological and logical (=
conceptual) content in his later work, but he stresses the point that
so-called “logical content” is “not [psychological]
content but object or, more exactly, it is the proximate object”
a psychological content is related to (1915: 163n). The psychological
content of a presentation is not something abstract or intensional,
whereas the conceptual content is identified with the auxiliary
object, which is an incomplete object and which seems in a way akin to
a universal (1915, §23: 163, §28: 206; 1978: 368, 400; see
also Section 6 below). However, the connection to meaning, reference,
and so-called “logical content” is guaranteed by
Meinong’s ideal relation of adequateness, mentioned in the
supplement below.  Perhaps this is one reason why quite a number of
Meinong’s interpreters seem to bring Meinong’s
psychological content too close to the sphere of
intensions. Nevertheless, Meinong thinks that the introduced
distinction between psychological content and logical content allows him to avoid psychologism.
Meinong’s so-called self-presentation
[Selbstpräsentation] usually counts as a mark of
consciousness, of the manifest mental. Experiences, i.e., conscious
mental occurrences, are able to present themselves to a self. This kind
of self-presentation is not yet presentation of the
self or the ego, which was not an issue for Meinong. It should also be set apart from self-evidence in the sense of infallibility, and from inner perception, self-observation, and higher-order thinking. The whole manifest
mental life is self-presenting, that is, all the experiences of a
subject are self-presenting to the experiencing subject. If you are
happy that it is raining, you can grasp your happiness
in inner perception, but not by means of a separate
mental content. That your mental experiences present themselves to you
means you refer to your instantaneous experiences without the
intermediary of a further representation of them. You are able to
reflect upon your momentary anger or upon your feeling of shame without
needing a kind of mental symbol of your anger or your feeling of
shame.
Usually, the objects of experiences are not constituted by their
experiences: they are something mind independent and not immanent to
consciousness. What is immanent to the mind (consciousness) are the
experiences themselves. When you have a representation of red, for
example, you are conscious of the object red. In such a
representation of red, the red-content serves as a kind of
sign of something, i.e., red, and is itself a mental piece of
the whole representation. In order to present the red-content as object
of an inner reflective experience, you do not need a further, separate
representation with an additional mental content to which the red-content
corresponds as object. The red-content has the capacity to present
itself to your mind. In general, the reference to one’s own
experiences does not require the intervention of an additional content.
Meinong thinks that all inner experiences and all
parts of them are able to be apprehended through self-presentation.
Meinong (1910, §20: 138 [103], §43: 264
[190–1]; 1915, §33; 1917, §1) calls
it the self-presentation of inner experiences in opposition to
the other-presentation
[Fremdpräsentation], where the content functions
as sign for something else. Since experiences do not need to be brought
within the range of apprehension by presentations (and contents) of
their own, Meinong calls the self-presenting parts of an experience
(act component and content component) and the whole self-presenting
experience quasi-contents. The quasi-content coincides with
the object that is to be apprehended or intended. When you desire
something, it may also happen that you judge about your desire. The
whole desire, then, presents itself to your judgement without any
supplementary interfering content. It plays the role of a content, so
to speak — hence the name “quasi-content.”
Meinong (1906, §§11 and 13; 1910, §43) thinks that attention allows us 
to do two different things with one and the same experience and
content respectively: (1) If we direct our attention to our inner
experience, for instance, to the red content of a representation of
red, this very content serves for the inner perception of itself
— the red-content becomes an intended object and serves for the
apprehension (perception) of itself. He also says that in this case the
content becomes turned inwards (introversion,
[Einwärtswendung]). (2) If the content
contributes to a perception or a thought of something red, the content
concerns something external to the mind — it serves for the
apprehension of the coordinated outer objects and can therefore be
called turned outwards (extraversion,
[Auswärtswendung]).
Meinong would not accept the following highly controversial thesis
of consciousness:
This is a thesis of self-consciousness in a twofold manner: First,
s is conscious of itself in a direct (de se) manner —
therefore, the third person pronoun is used with a Castañeda
asterisk as a sign of a “quasi-indicator”, i.e., an
emphatic reflexive expressing the reference of the subject to itself
qua itself (cf. the entry on 
indexicals,
Section 5).  Secondly, s is conscious of the conscious state
it is in.  Brentano accepted (C), with some provisos in order to avoid
an infinite regress. Brentano thinks that conscious states (mental
acts) are necessarily such that if a subject s is in a
conscious state, s is also conscious of its* being in this
state. This self-consciousness is to be interpreted as inner
perception, but not as a separate higher-order perception:
Each mental act is primarily directed to an object (my hearing a sound
has the sound as its primary object), and it is incidentally
directed towards itself (my hearing a sound has itself as secondary
object). (See Brentano 1874, 2. Buch, 2. Kap., §§8–9;
Brentano 1982: 22–5).
Meinong would instead state:
Consciousness does not automatically include some kind of
self-reflection. An experience’s being conscious does not consist in
the subject’s having a higher-order thought; that is,
consciousness only allows self-reflection by
self-presentation in the sense of (C2), but does not already involve
any higher-order thoughts or inner perception in a Brentanoan
sense. Meinong’s use of “self-presentation” seems to have two readings: (1) as an ability-based term, when you say that the self-presentation of an experience consists in its ability to be apprehended directly, that is, without any supplementary psychological content; (2) as a nondispositional term that expresses a manifest self-presentation in the sense that the experience is actually self-presented. (C3) expresses the thesis that being a self-presenting state is a mark
of consciousness:  The whole of a person’s manifest mental life is self-presenting (understood as “selfpresentable”, as an ability-based term); that is, all experiences of a subject are in this sense self-presenting to the experiencing subject. (Cf. Marek 2003; 2012.) 
Although Meinong is concerned with the subject matter Brentano
called intentional inexistence of an object, he avoids using this term or something like intentionality. Meinong is
not completely sure whether “being directed to something, to an
object” is common to all experiences. But Meinong stresses the
point that experiences like representations, judgements, feelings and
desires are usually directed to an object (1904b, §1; 1899,
§2: 185 [141]), and he interprets the
intentionality of such mental occurrences in a relational rather than
in an adverbial manner (“I am sensing (something) red”
instead of “I am sensing redly”). Agreeing with Twardowski,
Meinong stresses the point that among the objects that are presented to
the subject, some may not exist and some may not even be possible, for
example the round square or the state of affairs
(“objective”) that a biangle exists.
Meinong’s philosophical psychology is influenced by
Brentano’s descriptive psychology, but Meinong modified it in
several ways. There are at least four main modifications involving
Brentano’s view of mental phenomena, especially Brentano’s
tripartite classification of such phenomena into representations,
judgements, and phenomena of love and hate (or emotions
[Gemütsbewegungen]): (1) Meinong’s first
deviation consists in dividing up the class of emotions into the
classes of feelings [Gefühle] and of
desires [Begehrungen]. (2) His second modification
consists in introducing the differentiation between serious
[ernstartige] and fantasy [phantasieartige]
experiences (the latter include what he called “assumptions”). (3) He distinguishes between the act, the
(psychological) content, and the object of a mental
phenomenon (see above 4.1). (4) He gives up Brentano’s thesis
that we can be intentionally directed to one and the same object in
different ways, i.e., by different kinds of mental acts, and he argues in favor of proper, nonreal (ideal) objects corresponding to judging, feeling, and desiring. (For further investigations regarding the affinities and divergences between both philosophers, see Rollinger 2005 and Marek 2017.) 
As Meinong supposes that the different kinds of acts are coordinated
with the different kinds of presented objects
[präsentierte Gegenstände], his
classification of mental elementary experiences [psychische
Elementarerlebnisse] allows a categorization of all
objects from an intentionalistic point of view:
A representation does not occur in isolation — it always comes
to mind in the context of a further, more complex mental act that
includes this very representation as a psychological presupposition,
i.e., representations are always embedded in propositional
attitudes. We do not just present the object red, we judge,
for example, that something is red, or that red is something
(1910, §§38, 45; 1915, §33; 1917, §§1, 8). On
the other hand, no mental act can take place without the occurrence of
a representation, and hence the objects of a mental act always include
an objectum; no objective, for instance, can subsist without an
objectum (even though the objectum in question may be a beingless
object) (1910, §20: 135 [101]). The judgement that red
is a color presupposes the representations of red and of color, for
example. The common linguistic expressions of represented objecta are
nouns or adjectives. Objecta can be continuants but also occurrents,
and they can be either real or
ideal.[1] 
Objectives are always ideal, they are something like states of affairs
or propositions and can be expressed (1) by an independent sentence
like “Red is a color” if they are judged or assumed, and
(2) by a “that”-clause (“that red is a color”)
or a nominal phrase (“the colorfulness of red”) if they
are judged about (1910, §10). That which is judged
[geurteilt] is always an objective whereas that which is
judged about [beurteilt] is often an objectum but can be an
objective, a dignitative, and a desiderative as well. There is no
objective which is an objectum, although objectives may be the subject
matter of further objectives as, for example, in “Meinong
believed that the round square is round”. Following his pupil
Rudolf Ameseder (1904: 54–5), Meinong stresses the point that
objectives can be characterized as those objects that not only can
have being but can also be being, whereas objecta can
have being but can never be being. This dictum is based on the
linguistic fact that the “that”-clauses “that
(object) o is” and “that (object) o is
F”, respectively, can frequently be replaced by the
nominal (gerund) phrases “the being of o” and
“the being F of o”, respectively (1910,
§11: 61–2 [50–1]; 1915, §5: 27;
Morscher & Simons 2001: 443–4).
Meinong was not completely sure whether his classification of mental
acts and its corresponding categorization of objects (taken
intentionalistically) were complete (1917, §11). A candidate for
another category would be questions. Are questions reducible to
something like a specific desire to know something, as Meinong thought
(1910, §18), or are they ultimately irreducible? And do they have
specific objects of their own, which could be coined
“quaesitives” or “rogatives” (cf. Kreibig
1914)? One might think that another candidate would be drawing
conclusions, because it is controversial whether inferences can be
understood simply as complex judgements. Meinong did not consider this
possibility; he just reduced inferences to particular (specially
“motivated”) judgements about assumptions or about
judgements (1910, §§27–32).
The distinction between fantasy (imaginary) experiences and serious
experiences concerns the act component. This distinction is a generalization of Meinong’s division of thoughts into assumption and judgements, which he introduces in On Assumptions (1902). Meinong, considering assumptions as a subclass of thoughts, places them “between representations and judgements”, as they are, like judgements, affirmative or negative; and like representations, without belief (1910; §§1, 59). Judgements are directed
to objectives and involve conviction, whereas assumptions do
not involve conviction — they merely involve entertaining the
objectives they are directed at
(1910: 376 [268]).  Meinong realized that such an entertaining
of objectives without conviction plays a central role in our
intellectual and emotional lives. Asking questions, denying,
reasoning, desiring, playing games, performing or producing artistic
works would not be possible without assuming. In judging that A or
B, for example, one does not judge A and B,
respectively — one only assumes them. Fantasy and serious cases  can also be found in the other kinds of experiences. If a representation of red has a perceptual look because a red-quale is
involved, it is of a serious
character, and if the red-representation is merely
reproductive, that is, a recollective or imaginative one, it is a fantasy experience and so only of an imaginary character.  Meinong’s application of
the fantasy/serious distinction to all kinds of mental acts
(including the affective and conative dimension) may seem
schematic and controversial, but also leads to remarkable insights into
phenomena like art and into understanding the role of emotions in writing
and reading fiction,  as empathic experiences and reception of art provide us with paradigmatic cases of fantasy representations, fantasy thoughts, and — especially — fantasy feelings. These are neither merely representations of emotions nor serious emotions but something intermediate between representations and serious emotions. In general, fantasy experiences are not
imagined experiences as they are not merely representations of
experiences. Adopting a differentiation of Mally
(1912: 61–2, fn.) Meinong later even distinguishes between (1)
serious-like and (2) shadowy fantasy experiences
[ernstartige versus schattenhafte
Phantasieerlebnisse]. A fantasy experience (e.g., an assumption)
can be understood either (1) as a pretence of experiencing seriously
(e.g., of making a judgement) or (2) as a mere entertaining of the
object (e.g., an objective without a pretence of judging) (1917,
§6: 47–53 [42–47]).
Assumptions do not imply conviction. Hence, no assumption can
exhibit any evidential advantage over another assumption or can be
challenged on evidential grounds. From the standpoint of an evidential
requirement, one cannot believe everything, but one can assume
everything, that is, one can assume any objective and one can represent
any objectum. Meinong calls this insight the principle of
unrestricted freedom of assumption [Prinzip der
unbeschränkten Annahmefreiheit] (1910, §60)
and contrasts it with the principle of relatively constrained
assumptions, which postulates a quite unmistakable logical constraint when one
regards one or more assumptions as already given and then logically relates
further assumptions to them: “It is true that assumptions are
without exception free, absolutely regarded; but for all that, they can
be constrained relatively.” (1910, §60: 346
[246–7]) Over the years, Meinong maintained
that there were limitations of his principle of unrestricted freedom of
assumption. He speaks of such a limitation explicitly in connection
with the modal moment (1915, §37: 282; see below 5.4.3), and his
discussion whether some defective objects fail outside-being and were
therefore no loyal objects can be interpreted as limiting this freedom
principle. (Cf. 1917, §2; 1978: 377–8; see below 5.3.1.)
Assembling objects to a more complex object is an important activity of the mind, but it does not form a separate species of experience beyond the four aforementioned types of mental acts. According to Meinong (1902, §2; 1910, §2) two or more
representations of objecta can be used to produce a new representation
of a complex objectum. The objects of the more simple representations
can be seen as the foundation of the complex object, which is always an
object of higher order, a superius, because it is founded by
the founding objects (inferiora). (See below Section 5.5.) The
diversity of red and green has red and green, the
checkered pattern has squares of different colors, and a red square has
red and square as its inferiora. In order to get a
representation of objects of higher order, of a Gestalt, a melody, for
example, you have to have representations of the more elementary
objects on which you build the complex representation. This operation
of the mind is called “production of representations”
[“Vorstellungsproduktion”] because the mind is
able to produce complex representations and not already their
corresponding complex objects. This conception became an important and
fruitful, although controversial, notion in Gestalt psychology, as
Meinong still acknowledges the primacy of the elementary
representations. The underlying elements of objects of higher order,
for example, are not to be seen as “only abstractly
distinguishable parts” which was assumed by the Berlin Gestalt
school. (Cf. Smith 1994, Chapt. 8: 272.)
Whatever can be experienced in some way, i.e., be the target of a
mental act, Meinong calls an object [Gegenstand
or Objekt]. The term “object” is a
“relation term” in the sense that “you shall not
speak of an object without considering a mental activity”
(1888–1903: 47). Meinong does not see an ontological but only a
conceptual dependence expressed by the term “object”, and
he does not determine an object intentionally as something that is
grasped but only as something that can be grasped by mental
acts (it can be represented, judged etc.). He is neither a
constructivist nor a subjective idealist as he admits that the mental
acts are not already to be thought of as something that create
objects. He (1904b, §4; 1921a: 110) also acknowledges the following
connection between “(every) thing” and
“object”: Everything is an object, but everything is
logically prior to its apprehending and pre-given
[vorgegeben] to the mind.
  Not
only existing things but also all kinds of non-beings (nonentities,
Routley 1980: 7) find their place in Meinong’s all-embracing
theory of objects — among them even impossible objects, like the
round square, as well as paradoxical, “defective” objects,
like some forms of the liar or special cases of purely
self-referential thinking (the thought about itself, for
example).[2] 
Similar to Twardowski, Meinong maintains that talking about non-beings
is not just speaking of nothing, i.e. there can be no objectless representations and
thoughts. He clears up the apparently paradoxical
sentence “There are objects of which it is true that there are
no such objects” (1904b, §3) by introducing two meanings of
“there are”: first as outside-being
(pre-giveness), second as being, and he tries to give a
rational account of the paradoxical sentence by referring to two
closely related principles: (1) the “principle of the
independence of so-being from being” [“Prinzip der
Unabhängigkeit des Soseins vom Sein”], and (2) the
“principle of the indifference of the pure object to
being” (“principle of the outside-being of the pure
object” [“Satz vom Außersein des reinen
Gegenstandes”]) (1904b, §3–4).
The independence principle, first formulated by Ernst Mally
in 1903, states that “the so-being of an object is not affected
by its non-being” (1904b: 8 [82]), that is to say, an object’s having
properties is independent of whether it has being or not.
Meinong’s comments on this principle show that it combines
several claims; in particular, (1) the characterization
principle, which postulates that any object has those properties
that it is characterized as having (e.g., “The AB is
A and B, respectively”), and (2) the denial
of the ontological assumption, which denies that there are no true
propositions about what does not have being (cf. Routley 1980).
The indifference principle says: “The object is by
nature indifferent to being, although in any case one of the
object’s two objectives of being, its being or its non-being,
subsists” (1904b: 13 [86]). This formulation is
supposed to be less misleading than the claim that “the pure
object stands ‘beyond being and non-being’ ”
[“der reine Gegenstand stehe ‘jenseits von Sein und
Nichtsein’ ”]. The latter catchphrase means
that neither being nor non-being belongs to the make-up of an
object’s nature (its so-being [Sosein]), but it should
not be taken to mean that an object is beyond being and non-being in
the sense that it neither has being nor does not have being —
the second clause of the indifference principle makes this
clear. Although the non-being of an object may be guaranteed by the
object’s nature — as in the case of the round square, for
example —, the non-being does not belong to its nature. In other
words: Being (or non-being) is not part of an object’s nature,
but nevertheless “the law of excluded middle lays it down that
every object necessarily stands in a fact of being or in a fact of
non-being” (Findlay 1963: 49). It is worth noticing that there
are two interpretations of negation (narrower, internal, predicate, or
ontological negation versus wider, external, sentence,
logical negation), and accordingly there are two versions of the law
of excluded middle. Meinong seems to accept the law of excluded middle
only with respect to sentence negation.
In his 1915, §25, Meinong introduces in more detail the notion
of incompletely determined objects, i.e., objects that are
undetermined with respect to at least one property. Pure things like
the triangle as such are incomplete objects. The triangle as such has
three angles (a constitutive property), it has three sides (a
consecutive property, one that is somehow included in the
object’s constitutive properties), but it is neither scalene nor
non-scalene, neither green nor non-green etc. In such cases denying
that a is F does not imply affirming that a
is not F, because the denial that a is F may
also be correct when a is not determined with respect to
F. Incomplete objects infringe the law of excluded middle (and
impossible objects infringe the law of noncontradiction) with respect
to internal negation only (predicate negation: “~”) and not
with respect to external negation (sentence negation:
“¬”). Meinong would have acknowledged the validity
of
and
but he would also have admitted the theses:
More recent philosophical work shows that characterizing
determinations can be constructed which go against any classical
logical law. The object the square such that it is not the case
that it is square is characterized as being square and also being
such that it is not the case that it is square. These two
determinations, however, lead to a contradiction involving external
negation. (See Routley 1980; Simons 1992: 185; Thrush 2001b.)
With respect to being, Meinong states that all complete objects have
either being or non-being, and all incomplete objects lack being.
Meinong’s indifference principle accommodates the law of excluded
middle in the external but not in the internal version. From the fact
that incomplete objects do not have being, it does not follow that they
have non-being as well. Some of them, for example, incomplete objects
that are also contradictorily determined, have non-being; others, like
the triangle as such, are not determined with respect to being at
all.
Using “B!” as an abbreviation for Meinong’s
“has being”, this can be summed up as follows:
This “indeterminacy with respect to being”
[Seinsunbestimmtheit] must not mixed up with the indifference
to being (or outside-being [Außersein]), because every
object has outside-being whereas only some of them — the square (as such), for example — are not determined
with respect to being (1915, §25).
Incomplete objects play an important role in Meinong’s late
philosophy, for instance as “auxiliary objects” to indicate
the (usually complete) target objects of our intending (see below
Section 6), and as the basis of ascribing possibility and degrees of
possibility to objectives. Some objectives are factual, some nonfactual
[untatsächlich], and some are neither (i.e.
“subfactual” [untertatsächlich]).
The subfactual objectives, which concern incomplete objects, constitute
the proper territory “where possibility is at home” (1915,
§24: 167). Incomplete objects that are not determined with respect
to being serve as the foundation of possibility insofar as neither the
factuality nor the nonfactuality of their being and their so-being
(except their constitutive properties) is specified. For instance, the
objective expressed by the sentence “The [incomplete] object
the (fair) die will show a three with the next throw”
has neither factuality nor nonfactuality, but it is subfactual to the
degree of 1/6. The borderline cases are degree 1 (factuality) and
degree 0 (nonfactuality). Meinong states that incomplete objects can
somehow be embedded or involved in complete objects, not like a part in
a whole, but rather in the sense that for certain incomplete objects
there are (more) complete ones which have at least all the
determinations that the incomplete objects in question have. Such an
incomplete object, the die, for instance, can be said to be
implected [implektiert] in a (more) complete object: this white ivory die, for
instance (1915, §29; see also Section 6 below). One may apply the possibility ascription of
incomplete objects to the corresponding complete objects in an indirect
way. If the throw of a concrete die actually shows a three, the
objective “This die shows a three” is factual (degree of
possibility = 1) and we cannot say that it really has the possibility
degree of 1/6. This degree of possibility can be attributed to this
throw in a derivative way only; its possibility is 1/6 in so far as the
throw is treated merely as a throw of a fair die.
Meinong repeatedly ponders the question of whether outside-being is
a further mode of being or just a lack of being (1904b, §4; 1910,
§12; 1917, §2; 1978: 153–4, 261, 358–9, 377). He
finally interprets outside-being as a borderline case of a kind of
being (1910: 80 [62]). Every object is prior to its apprehension, i.e., objects are
pre-given [vorgegeben] to the mind, and this
pre-givenness is due do the (ontological) status of outside-being. According to Meinong’s distinction between judgements that state that something is so and so [Soseinsurteile] and judgements about the mode of being of an object [Seinsurteile], the most general determination of so-being is being an
object, and the most general determination of being is
outside-being. The concept of an object cannot be defined in
terms of a qualified genus and differentia. It does not have a negative
counterpart, and correlatively outside-being does not seem to have a
negation either (1921a, Section 2 B: 102–7).
But this claim is challenged in lecture notes from 1917/18 (1978:
377–8), where Meinong discusses cases of negative outside-being,
for example so-called defective objects — objects that
involve paradoxes like the liar or the apprehension of inapprehensible
objects. (See also 1917, §2: 22–4 [20–1])
where he states that there is a typical case of something that lacks
outside-being, namely a round square concretely presented.) In
lecture notes from 1910 (1978: 227), Meinong also mentions
absurdities, examples of nonsense [Unsinn], and tries to
contrast them with cases of a kind of inconsistency
[Widersinn] like the round square. Meinong tentatively
defines such an inconsistency as something that involves incompatible
determinations [Unverträgliches] but is still
understandable, whereas nonsense would be something that cannot be
understood at all. “A blot of ink fiddled down on a
piano”, “green virtue”, and “an automobile
paved with therefore” seem to be examples of incomprehensible
nonsense. In the end, however, Meinong gives up the attempt to
distinguish nonsense from mere inconsistency. Meinong’s point, rather,
is that although the first two examples mix determinations of
different groups, his theory of objects can describe them as based on
incompatibility, and it gives an account of this kind of
incompatibility, whereas the last example has only linguistic but no
object theoretical relevance (cf. also 1978: 385–6).
If one puts the paradoxical and nonsensical cases aside,
Meinong’s table of categories according to the modes of being
looks as follows:
Being has two modes, to wit existence, which is linked with
time, and mere subsistence, which is timeless (1910: 64 [52]). Nevertheless
Meinong states that existence implies subsistence, and non-subsistence
implies non-existence (1896: 250; 1910: 74 [58]; 1915, §11: 63). All objects that subsist
(and a fortiori all objects that exist) are completely
determined, but not all complete objects exist or have being (1915,
§§25–7: 169–202).
The ideal–real distinction is to be explained by the terms
“existence”, “subsistence”, and “mere
subsistence”. In 1978, (252–3, 366–7), Meinong calls
those objects real (1) which exist (= “externally
real” [äußerlich real]), my chair or my desiring, for
example, or (2) which could exist by their nature (= internal reality
[innere Realität], ibid.) as, for example, my
golden chair. Physical and psychological things are real.  If an
object that subsists also exists, it is a real object, but if
an object that subsists cannot exist (i.e., can merely subsist), it is
an ideal object. Hence, ideal objects can never correctly be said to
exist. There are also ideal objects that do not subsist, for example
the being of a biangle or the non-identity between the morning star
and the evening star. Absences, limits, the number (of some existent
or non-existent) chairs, similarities, and objectives are further
examples of ideal objects (1899, §6; 1910, §12).
Russell (especially 1905a; see also 1905b and 1907) chiefly objects
to Meinong’s theory as inconsistent because of the following: (1)
Some propositions about impossible objects (e.g., “The round
square is round and not round”) are contradictory. (2) Although
it is a fact that the existent present King of France/the round square
does not exist, one also has to conclude (using the characterization
principle; see Section 5.1 above) that he/it does exist. Russell thinks
he can provide a radical cure for Meinong’s inconsistencies by
applying his theory of descriptions, which treat definite (and
indefinite) descriptions as incomplete symbols that are to be
eliminated in favor of existential quantification and predicates.
According to Russell, the problems involved stem from the mistaken view
that the grammatical form of language always shows its logical
form, and that if an expression means something, there must always be
some thing that it means. But while denoting phrases such as “The
so-and-so” look like referring expressions they are, in
fact, nothing of the sort. It is because Meinong wrongly assumes that
such expressions are referring expressions whose meaning is what they
refer to that his theory is apt to infringe logical laws.
Meinong answered objection (1) by denying that beingless objects must
obey the law of noncontradiction — only actual and possible
objects do (1907, §3: 16). On the contrary, thinking about
impossibilia makes the suspension of the law of noncontradiction
indispensable. Meinong’s later appeal to the above-mentioned
distinction between negation in a wider and narrower sense (5.2.1)
shows that he meant only the law of noncontradiction in its
traditional, ontological and not in its logical, propositional form.
According to Meinong’s characterization principle, the round
square is both round and non-round, but it is not the case that (i) the
round square is round and (ii) the round square is not round (i.e., it is not the case that the round square
is round). The triangle is neither
green nor non-green, but nevertheless it is the case that the triangle
is either green or not green. In such cases, Meinong does not accept
that the predicate negation “A is non-B”
is equivalent to the sentence-negation “Not (A is
B)”. The equivalence of both kinds of negation
“(~F)x ↔ ¬(Fx)” does
not hold for impossibilia and incomplete objects but only for actual
and possible objects where “possible” seems to be taken in
a strong sense that relates possibility with completeness: “Only
complete objects are possible” Meinong says in a lecture note
dating from 1910 (1978: 228). (To see that there is still a problem
left, see 5.2.1 above; cf. also Swanson 2011 which criticizes
Meinong’s distinction between narrow and wide negation and argues that
Russell’s account is to be preferred to a (Neo-)Meinongian view.)
Meinong’s reply to objection (2) consists in stressing the
distinction between “being existing”
[Existierend-Sein] as a determination of so-being and
“existence” (“to exist”
[Existieren]) as a determination of being.
Meinong’s distinction between judgements of so-being and judgements
of being, combined with the indifference principle that being does not
belong to the object’s nature (so-being), reminds one of
Kant’s dictum that being is not a real predicate. Meinong did not
accept the ontological argument either, and argued that “being
existing” is a determination of so-being and can in a certain
sense be properly accepted even of the object “existing golden
mountain,” and, say, even of the object “existing round
square,” whereas “existence”, which is a
determination of being, will no more belong to the one than it does to the
other (1907, §3; 1910, §20: 141 [105]). In
other words, according to the characterization principle both the
existing round square and the existing golden mountain (Russell 1907
uses “existent”) are existing (existent), but nevertheless
they do not exist. Russell (1907, 439) could not see any difference between
“being existent” and “to exist” and had
“no more to say on this head.” With that, the published
debate on nonentities came to an end.
That there is indeed a difference between “being existing
(existent)” and “to exist” can also be made clear by a
distinction Meinong took over from Mally, the distinction between two
kinds of properties (determinations), nuclear versus
extra-nuclear properties [konstitutorische versus
außerkonstitutorische Bestimmungen] (1915,
§25). The nuclear properties of an object are the properties
characterizing the nature of a presented object — what we might
call its “ordinary” (constitutive and consecutive)
properties —, and the extra-nuclear properties of an object are
those properties that are neither a constitutive nor a consecutive
part of its nature. Some of the extra-nuclear properties may supervene
on the nature of the object, some may not. According to the
characterization principle, the round square, for instance, is round
and a square, i.e., it is determined by the nuclear properties being
round and being a square. Being thought of by someone, on the other hand, can be seen as an extra-nuclear property of the round square which does not supervene on it. Nevertheless, the
round square has as its supervening extra-nuclear determinations such
properties as being determined by the (nuclear) property
round, being determined by two (nuclear) properties,
being undetermined by the property red, being
incomplete, being contradictorily determined, and
having non-being. Similarly, the object a red
(thing) [ein Rotes] is just red, has
only red as its nuclear determination, and can, therefore, be
called a “simple object”, with simplicity being one of its
supervening extra-nuclear determinations (another is
being-incomplete).
If an extra-nuclear property like simplicity were treated as a
further “ordinary”, characterizing property, one would be
caught up in a contradiction: As the object a red thing is a
simple object, it has two properties, redness and simplicity, and is,
therefore, not simple but complex. The introduction of the
nuclear/extra-nuclear distinction allows us to avoid this
contradiction. Without it Meinong would also have had problems holding
the principle that every particular triangle has all the properties
that belong to the (incomplete) object the triangle in the
abstract. Particular triangles are triangles, have three sides
etc., and they are complete, but according to the mentioned principle,
they would also be incomplete.
Furthermore, Meinong states that one can treat [behandeln] such
determinations like complete in two ways: as an extra-nuclear
determination but also as a nuclear one. If one considers an object
through its three nuclear determinations complete,
brown, and quadrangle one has not yet decided the
question whether one intends the object to have the extra-nuclear
determination of completeness. But one can do this simply by
attributing the extra-nuclear version of the determination
complete. Meinong just trusts in the ability of the
extra-nuclear function of the determination complete to ensure
that one intends a complete object, and he only wonders about the
reason that makes a determination nuclear or extra-nuclear (1915,
§26: 189–90). Our mental powers are limited as our human mind
cannot take in the infinity of the determinations of complete objects.
Despite this limitation we can think and speak about the world and hit
[treffen] an existing and, therefore, complete object
because we consider an object that is incomplete to be complete in its
extra-nuclear version. The object hit by the incomplete object that is
present to the mind (and functions as an “auxiliary
object”) is called the “target object” (more about
this in 6 below). Nevertheless, our thinking of things in the world
with the aid of auxiliary objects and the extra-nuclear determinations
may fail. If you think “the golden mountain” in this way
there is no corresponding target object that exists; there is only the
incomplete object that does not exist (cf. 1915: 740). It is worth
noting that you can also hit incomplete objects by this method. You
succeed in hitting the incomplete object the triangle as such
when you simply think the object the triangle with the
extra-nuclear determination of incompleteness (1915, §26:
191–2).
Meinong does not explicitly apply the nuclear/extra-nuclear
distinction to the being existent/to exist case. This is done in some
logical reconstructions of Meinong’s object theory which favor a
dual property approach (for example, Parsons 1980; Routley 1980;
Jacquette 1996; see below 5.4.4 and  the entry on nonexistent objects).
In order to explain his view, Meinong resorts to the notions of the
modal moment and watered-down factuality
[depotenzierte Tatsächlichkeit] (1915,
§§37–38). Objectives can be assumed to be subsistent
(factual), although they do not subsist (are nonfactual). For instance,
we can imagine that it is a fact that squares are round. This
assumption has as its object the fact that squares are round;
nevertheless this assumption is directed to a non-subsistent
(nonfactual) objective. On the one hand (according to the
characterization principle), the objective the fact that squares
are round is a fact; on the other hand (as the objective in
question cannot subsist), it is not a fact. Meinong explains away the
discrepancy with the introduction of two readings of
“fact”. The second reading, as Findlay (1963: 103–4)
puts it, concerns factuality in a “full-strength” sense,
whereas the first reading is about factuality in a
“watered-down” sense. The watered-down version fails a feature that the full-strength version has: Meinong calls it “the
modal moment”. In pure, counterfactual imagination we can
correctly assume the watered-down version of factuality but we
cannot correctly assume the full-strength version of it — there
seems to be a lack of freedom of assumption, Meinong thinks (1915,
§37: 282).
Meinong thinks that one cannot unrestrictedly apply analytic
sentences to the sphere of being. Analytically true sentences like
“A (The) BA is B” do not imply the full
factuality of the being of the objects involved. The factuality of the
being of a B, the being of an A, and the being of a
BA, respectively, is “watered down” in such a
sentence — it lacks the modal moment. According to this view,
“The sun is the sun” or “The eclipsed sun is
eclipsed” has more than one reading. On the interpretation of
these sentences as purely analytic, no claim as to the existence of the
sun or an eclipsed object is made. However, if an existential claim is
implied, the sentences could be false; they are not purely analytic
anymore. The terms “the sun” and “the eclipsed
sun” may express the pure objects (without any existential
commitment), or they may express the actual (eclipsed) sun that exists.
But this existence claim is an extra claim and cannot be gained through
an analytic formula.
Because of this, only “The existent B is
existent”, where no existential claim is made, can be
analytic. In thinking “The existent B is
existent”, one can apprehend the existence of B, but
one cannot grasp the genuine factuality of B’s existence. In
order to do so, one would also have to encounter the factually
existing object and thereby
learn this fact of being (= the objective of being with the
modal moment). One may even assert “The B which exists
exists”, but if this sentence is to be understood as analytic, it
can only be interpreted as a variant of “The existent B
is existent”. In short, it is in no way within one’s mental
power to determine objectively which objectives have the modal moment.
The principle of unrestricted freedom of assumption thus finds a limit
with respect to the modal moment. Concerning the sentence “The
existent round square exists”, Meinong thinks that it is either
analytically true (and no existential claim is made) or it is the
expression of an evidentially false judgement because there exists no
round square. It follows that for Meinong it is not possible to apply
the characterization principle to cases where the existence of the
objects is presupposed to be a fact (cf. Jorgensen 2002b).
Meinong’s conception of beingless objects has proved to have
useful application in intentional contexts where simple applications of
Russell’s theory of descriptions do not work. Consider the
following:
This is true, but Russell’s theory of definite descriptions
implies that it is false. Depending on whether the scope of the
description is wide or narrow, this sentence permits two possible
analyses:
There exists exactly one round square, and Meinong believed that
 it is round.
Meinong believed that there exists exactly one round square, and
that it is round.
 

The first analysis is false, because no round square exists. The
second is false, because Meinong did not believe in the existence of
the round square (Routley 1980: 118–9; Simons 1992:
184–5; Priest 2005: 109–10; cf. Castañeda 1974:
6–10).
It is controversial whether Russell’s interpretation was naïve or
whether there was indeed a naïve Meinong whom Russell rightly
criticized. In fact, many modern logico-semantical
“re-constructions” and philosophical interpretations show
a Meinongian object theory that is not naïve but tenable and
fruitful. Russell’s claim that Meinong’s theory is internally
inconsistent can be refuted. There are at least three main accounts
that overcome the naïvety (cf. the entries on 
nonexistent objects,
Sections 4 & 5, and on existence, section 2): (1) The first consists in the elaboration of
Mally’s nuclear/extra-nuclear distinction, which Meinong
adopted. Routley and (in particular) Parsons (in addition to authors
like Jacquette) are in accord with this dual-property approach. (2)
Another strategy is the dual-copula approach which has its origin in
Mally’s distinction between an object’s being determined
[determiniert sein] by a property and an object’s satisfying
[erfüllen] a property (Mally 1912; see entry on Ernst Mally). On this approach, Mally’s distinction is interpreted as a
distinction between two modes of predication of properties, namely, in
Zalta’s terms, between “encoding” and
“exemplifying” a property. Sympathetic to the dual-copula
approach are, for instance, Castañeda, Rapaport, Zalta,
Pasniczek, and Reicher. (3) Adopting a paraconsistent logic, that is,
a logic in which inconsistencies do not imply everything, is a further
attempt to confine the infringement of fundamental logical principles
(Routley, Priest). One version of such an approach is Berto and Priest’s Modal Meinongianism, so-named because  “characterization is understood with reference to worlds other than the actual”, including impossible worlds. (Berto & Priest 2014: 184).
Some objects are, in a way, founded on other objects. A founding
object is an inferius, as it is in some way inferior and also
prior to the founded object, that is, an inferius is of lower order
with respect to its superior object. Such a superius is,
therefore, coined an object of higher order (1899,
§§2–7). Objects of higher order presuppose founding
objects; you can also say that the superius supervenes on its
inferiora. In the case of four nuts that form a plane square one can
state “There are four nuts on the floor”, but one can also
state that there is a square of nuts over there, i.e., the nuts form a
square. The nuts are the founding objects, the inferiora, and the
founded higher object (the superius) is the square of nuts (1910,
§§4, 6). Another example is given by the combination of the
following tokens “:–)” or by a
circle with three points and a round line — they make a face
picture, a smiley. Meinong is a kind of ontological atomist as he
thinks that there are objects of lowest order — objects which
cannot be objects of higher order. These genuinely simple objects are
called infima (1921a, Sect. 2B: 105). Although objects of
higher order are based on infima they are not reducible to them;
properties of superiora supervene on properties of their inferiora.
Infima can be presented only by the mental act of an elementary
representation, while objects of higher order can be presented by
representations (gained by the production of representation; see above
4.3.3) and by other mental acts as well. In Meinong’s later work,
objects of higher order are complexes (comprising mere collections as a
borderline case), relations, and the aforementioned objects of mental
acts, namely objectives, dignitatives and desideratives (1917,
§11). Every object of higher order includes its constituents and a
relation which combines them in a specific way. Not all objects of
higher order have mereological parts. The objective “The round
square does not exist” has being (subsists), although its
constituent “the round square” is a beingless object.
According to Meinong’s examples of existing things, real objects
of higher order may also exist (an experience or a house, for example),
but the number of stones and the (dis-)similarities between the stones
of an existing house do not exist; they only subsist and are of ideal
character (1899, §6; 1978: 252).
Meinong’s conception of objects of higher order was strongly
influenced by Christian von Ehrenfels’ Gestalt theory (Ehrenfels
1890). Despite some differences, there are significant similarities
between Meinong’s objects of higher order and Ehrenfels’ Gestalt
qualities (1891; 1899; cf. Smith 1994, Chapt. 8).
Objectives are ideal, not real objects. They may have being or not,
but they cannot exist at all. Like all other (possible) ideal objects,
they can merely subsist. An objective which subsists can be called
factual — it is a fact [Tatsache]. Nonfactual objectives
(nonfacts, [Untatsachen]) do not subsist and are thus objects
beyond being. “True” in its subjective sense is a
relative predicate as it can be attributed only to subsistent
objectives in so far as they are apprehended by thoughts (judgements or
assumptions). In an analogous way one can also attribute truth to
thoughts in so far as they present subsistent objectives
(facts). “Truth” in its objective sense, however, simply
means a subsistent objective, a fact. Hence Meinong’s truth theory is
a borderline case of a correspondence theory; it is an identity theory
of truth (1915, §7; 1910, §13). The relation of possibility
to probability corresponds to the relation of factuality to
truth. Possibility is objective and absolute, whereas probability is
in a way subjective and relative. What is nowadays called
“objective probability”, Meinong calls
“possibility” (“degrees of possibility”).
Meinong did not develop a comprehensive philosophy of language; his
remarks on language are rather fragmentary and embedded as digressions
in his object-theoretical works. In 1910, §4: 28
[27], he summarizes his views this way: “a word
means something so far as it expresses a presenting experience, and the
object thereby presented is the meaning
[Bedeutung].” This statement can be generalized
to all linguistic items: If someone judges “The golden mountain
does not exist” she expresses a judgement and its presupposed
representations, and she means the objective that the golden mountain
does not exist, and all the other presupposed objecta such as something
golden and a mountain.
In the above quotation “means” and “meaning”
have two uses: (1) Meaning as a relation between signs and experiences
(acts), i.e., the relation of expressing experiences; and (2) meaning as
a relation between signs and the objects that are presented by the
expressed experiences (more exactly: by the corresponding psychological
contents), that is, the relation of expressing the objects of
experiences. Referring to Martinak 1901, Meinong states that signs are
objects which let someone know the existence of (usually other)
objects. A is a sign for someone if it constitutes the
epistemic ground to an epistemic consequent B: If you can
infer the presence of B from the presence of A, then
A is a sign of B for you, and the being of B
is the meaning of the sign A. Sign and meaning in this sense
cover a broad range of cases, including natural, “real”
signs like dark clouds for thunderstorm or tears for sorrow, and
artificial, “final” signs as, for example, (groups of)
words express mental acts. An experience (like happiness, sorrow,
conviction) can be expressed by an object (a smiling face, tears, and a
group of words respectively). This object (more exactly: the fact that
there is such an object) lets you know the expressed act (experience,
mental phenomenon) and, therefore, functions as a sign which has the
act behind it as its meaning1. If A is the sign that has
the experience B as its meaning1, and if the object
C is presented by the expressed experience B, then
the sign A is connected not only with B but, in a new
way, also with C, which is the meaning2. The utterance
“It is raining in Graz” means1 a judgement, and it
means2 the object of the judgement, i.e., the objective that it is
raining in Graz. In other words, you can say the utterance expresses
the judgement in one way, and it expresses the object presented by the
judgement in another way. Meinong observes that the meaning of a word is
usually an actual meaning for someone, but he also mentions in contrast
to such a speaker’s meaning the potential, linguistic meaning of
a word.
Meinong’s account from 1910 is represented in the schematic
diagram below (cf. Simons 1992, 163):
When someone utters in a sentence “something that is
black” and “something that is light”, respectively,
two different sorts of things can be meant by those expressions: (1)
the meant object is closed to further possible determination;
(2) the meant object is open to further possible
determination. If “something that is black” is used in the
open way, we think of the object as something that can have other
properties besides blackness; it may be identical with the object that
is meant by “something that is light”. If we use the
expressions “something that is black” and “something
that is light” in the closed way, the objects meant by these
expressions are necessarily distinct. In general, we speak about real,
existent things, which as completely determined objects have infinitely
many determinations. As our mind can only grasp a finite number of
aspects, we usually intend the objects as open (1910, §45).
Nevertheless a question remains: That an object appears closed or open
to us, is due to our intending (meaning). But what makes an open
attitude open?
Later, in 1915, Meinong points out that we can use incomplete objects (see
above 5.2, and 5.4.3), like a square brown thing, as a kind of
“auxiliary object” [Hilfsgegenstand] to
intend (mean) more completely determined objects, like a square brown thing in the dining room, or even complete ones
as the “target objects”
[Zielgegenstände] of our intending. In order to apprehend a target object, the auxiliary object has to have an “implexive being” [implexives Sein] in the target object, that is, it has to be in a way involved — Meinong says “implected” — in the more complete object. An incomplete object A is implected in a more complete object T if and only if T has all the determinations A has (cf. 1915, §§27, 29; Section 5.2.3 above). In order to aim at a complete object,
it is essential “to include the moment of completeness
explicitly in the intending. If I want to intend something wholly
determined by the thought ‘a square brown thing’, without
necessarily knowing the determinations which distinguish it from
something else, I need only think of ‘a determinate square brown
thing’” (1915, §26: 189). Meinong points out that the
determinacy or completeness he hints at cannot be simply seen
as a nuclear property — it has to be of an extra-nuclear
character. (See Section 5.4.3 above.)
As auxiliary objects are incomplete and as they can be implected in
complete target objects, they bear a remarkable resemblance to things
of abstract nature like universals, concepts or types. Indeed, in the
appendix to his 1915 (p. 739–40) Meinong himself interprets such
incomplete objects as platonic universals without being (see also
1978: 368; Section 4.1 above), and he also states there: “what words mean
[bedeuten] is the auxiliary object, and what they designate
[nennen] is the target object” (1915: 741). This sounds
like Frege’s sense/reference distinction: The incomplete, auxiliary
objects’ role is akin to the role of Frege’s sense, which
functions as the mode of presentation and the determinant of its
referent. Meinong’s view of incomplete objects as auxiliary objects
has also a close affinity with the denoting concepts view of Russell
(1903).
Meinong’s early theory of value is influenced by Carl Menger’s subjectivist
interpretation of value in economics as something that is not inherent
in the goods but determined by people’s subjective
valuation. According to Menger (1871, Chapt. 3, §1), values are not independent real
things which exist outside the consciousness of men; value is rather
the importance [Bedeutung] that people attribute to something to the extent that
it satisfies their needs. Meinong criticises and modifies, generalizes
and extends that view. He is not only concerned with economic value
but with value in general, and he tries to apply general value theory
to other fields than economics, for instance to ethics and aesthetics.
Already in his early courses on practical philosophy, Meinong bases
ethics mainly on general value theory and value theory on psychology.
Meinong’s early theory of value (1894; 1895) can be dubbed a
subjectivist theory insofar as Meinong holds the thesis that value experiencies are explanatorily prior to values, that is, things have
values because of our value attitudes
[Werthaltungen], and not that we would value things
because they have a value per se. A value attitude is a value-feeling [Wertgefühl], for instance, the feeling that rescuing this person from a tricky situation is good or meritorious. Value attitudes themselves are
neither judgements about one’s value-feelings nor judgements about
the values of objects. A value-feeling is an emotional response to
believed states of affairs and presupposes, therefore, judgements and
representations (ideas) of the intended objects as so-called
“psychological presuppositions” (1894, §11). The
objects of emotions are set up before the mind by those judgements and
ideas. Genuine value errors (i.e., false
emotional responses to presented objects) are not possible. Errors can
only occur in those judgements that are psychological presuppositions of
value attitudes (that the person is in a perilous situation, for instance) and in misjudgements about one’s own (manifest and latent) value attitudes (1894: 77–81; 1895).
Meinong (1894; 1895) thinks that there are no
absolute, impersonal values, and thus values cannot be defined without
the concept of a subject being able to have value-feelings. Values can be seen as a special relation between the object that has value and the subject for whom the object has value (1894: 71–2). 
Although Meinong considers himself to be a value subjectivist at this
stage, he already includes some kind of non-subjective, namely
intersubjective and dispositional, conditions in the
definition of values. Values are conceptually determined by value-feelings, but a value cannot simply be characterized as an assemblage of value-feelings. A value judgement [Werturteil], that is, judging that something has value or disvalue, goes far beyond the actual value feeling, and therefore the decision about its truth value is primarily a matter for cognition and not for emotion (1895, §4). The verbal expression of a value judgement is neither the verbal expression of one’s actual value feeling nor the verbal judgement about one’s actual appreciation or aversion. It expresses the judgement that the thing in question has the ability to invoke appreciation or aversion by an adequately oriented subject with a normal disposition under appropriate circumstances (1894: 25; 1895: 328).
Values are always personal or interpersonal values, that is, values for an
individual or a collective of individuals. In discussing moral values,
Meinong attaches them not to an individual subject as such but to a
collective subject, to the “surrounding totality”
[umgebende Gesamtheit] to which the individuals in question
belong — in the end up to the totality of mankind — (1894: 168ff, 205, 216–7), or, in a more personified form to the representative of social interests (1894: 187). The constitutive nature of values (and
value-feelings, respectively) itself is indefinable or unanalyzable
insofar as it cannot be derived from concepts like utility, happiness,
pleasantness, biological needs or cost (1894, §§2–4; 1923, I,
§§2–5). The value properties of an object are not its intrinsic, fundamental properties like common physical or psychological properties, they are higher order properties and external to the object, something dependent upon the underlying properties of the object and the subject.
Meinong, being an ethical relativist and cognitivist, emphasizes that the presence of moral values is an empirical fact (1894: 170), and ethics, like value theory in general, is an empirical science  (1894: 225). Against the reproach for having fallen victim to a kind of naturalistic fallacy, Meinong could reply, first, the he does not confuse the intellectual, cognitive side with the emotional one, and second, that some facts are constituted by the intentional (emotional and intellectual) attitudes of an individual or the members of a community and, because of that, acquire a valuative character and a normative strength. 
Meinong bases values on feelings and not on desires, and he
critically contrasted his kind of emotivism to Ehrenfels’
voluntarism, a more conative, desire-based theory of values. For
Meinong, things have value because we value things, and we desire
things because they have value for us. (1894: 15, 25; 1895: 341, where he comes closer to Ehrenfels. Cf. Fabian & Simons 1986: 57–75; Schuhmann 2001, Reicher 2009.) 
Later on, Meinong (1912; 1917; 1923) became a value objectivist, and
value theory was taken up into his theory of objects together with his
epistemology and philosophical psychology. He does not consider value experiences as constitutive of values anymore. Value experiences make values only accessible to the subject. They have a presenting function of their own (“emotional
presentation”) and are a means of apprehending values analogous to sensations in perception. Moreover, a value experience or value attitude has to be
distinguished from the corresponding value judgement. Despite the subjectivity of
sensible qualities, one does not want to talk about a personal color
or a personal hardness, Meinong says. In a similar vein, it is not the
case that each value has to be a personal value just because it comes
to us only through the mediation of value experiences (1923,
Chapt. IV, §7: 152). Perception includes perceptual judgements on the basis of
sensations, i.e., perceptive representations
[Wahrnehmungsvorstellungen]. The value judgement completes the
valuation as the perceptual judgement completes the perception: (1)
just as one is permitted to derive the existence of colored things
from color sensations, so one is justified in deriving the realization
of value properties from value experiences; (2) just as sensations can
be illusory and even hallucinatory, so emotions may be unwarranted;
the judgement that an object has value may be false, hence, genuine
value errors (and not only errors concerning the presupposed cognitive
judgements) are possible. Because emotions are more susceptible to a
subjective bias, they are not as reliable a source of knowledge as
sensations are (1912: 13). Meinong is no longer either a value subjectivist or a
relativist. He became a realist concerning objective values as he believes
that value experiences are able to present not only subjective, personal
values but also objective, absolute, impersonal values: “An object has value in this [new] sense not just because a
subject is interested in it, but only insofar it merits this interest.” (1912, Sect. IV: 12)
Yet, Meinong does not give up the assumption of personal values. A personal value of an object is the emotional significance [emotionale Bedeutung] that a subject
is disposed to assign to that object (1923, Chapt. IV, §6: 144–5,
§7: 162), or, in other words, it is the aptitude of the object to
arouse a certain value experience in the subject (1917, §13: 151
[132], 156 [136]). Impersonal values, by contrast, are not based on value attitudes; they are independent from them, but we can give them a
subjective characterization (not a definition). As an object in its
most general sense is describable, although not definable, as
something that is able to become an object of experience, values can
also be described (but not defined) by their dispositional property of
being able to become objects of value experiences. However, value experiences
are not only a means of recognizing a dispositional value property;
they are also a means of recognizing the actual value property, that is
the underlying foundation or basis of the disposition. In accordance
with Meinong’s theory of dispositional properties (1919), a disposition has
an actual quality as its foundation. The actual feature that is the
foundation of the disposition to generate value experiences in the
subject is determined purely objectively, i.e., without any
reference to subjects. According to Meinong, there are objective
values, interpreted (1) as dispositions to produce value experiences,
and (2) as the foundations of this disposition (1923, Chapt. IV,
§7: 151).
The genuine objects of emotions are called “dignitatives”; examples are the good and the beautiful. Ought
[Sollen] and expediency [Zweckmäßigkeit]
are the paradigms of the so-called desideratives, the genuine objects
of desires (1917, §11). Like objectives, the genuine objects of
thinking, both dignitatives and desideratives can subsist or
not,[3]
and they are ideal objects and cannot be reduced to something mental
or physical. As value properties are not reducible to natural
properties, they are in some way unanalyzable. Goodness, for example
cannot be defined in terms of pleasure, and moral value judgements are
not to be reduced to psychological or sociological reports on moral
behavior. Furthermore, dignitatives and desideratives have a complex
nature because the presuppose certain things and states of affairs. A
person has an aesthetic emotion, for example, when a building is
presented to her as beautiful. The presented beauty (of the building)
is the genuine, proper object [Eigengegenstand] — the
dignitative — of the aesthetic emotion, while the building
itself is the presupposed, appropriated [angeeignete
Gegenstand] of the emotion in question. Dignitatives and
desideratives then are objects of higher order (1917: 107–8
[95–6]) — they are superiora (see above
5.5; against the view that ought is an object of higher order, see
Weber 2004: 31–3). Just as one can see four nuts as a square of
nuts, or a circle with two dots and an arc as a smiling face, so a
donation to a charitable fund can be seen (grasped) as a morally good
deed. Grasping value properties can be interpreted as a certain kind
of grasping of a Gestalt, as Ehrenfels and other Gestalt theorists
might have said. There are, we might say, good-Gestalten (the Gestalt
of the moral good, the aesthetic good, and so on). The main difference
between this sort of “value perception” and sensory
perception is that, instead of (or in addition to) sense impressions,
emotional impressions are involved. Meinong thinks that “the
indefinability of impersonal values is not to be put on a par with the
one of color or sound, but rather with the one of melody or form
[Gestalt]” (1923, Chapt. IV, §7: 161).
Meinong calls the dignitatives and the desideratives that are of impersonal nature “dignities” and “desiderata”, respectively (1917, §15). Axiological (and deontological) knowledge is possible since feelings (and desires) that present factual dignities
(and desiderata) can be justified. A feeling can be described as justified if the
corresponding judgement attributing the dignity to the presupposed
object is justified (1917, §12). Meinong sees here a kinship to Brentano’s “love with the character of rightness” or  “correct love” (Brentano 1889, §27), which can be understood as “evidence-analogue” to the evidence of judgements, but Meinong emphasizes that only the evidence of judgements itself makes such a justification possible and “an evidence-analogue for feelings and desires is therefore not required” (1917: 131 [115]). As values have to be taken as ideal things that cannot exist but only subsist, Meinong thinks that axiological (and, similarly, deontological) knowledge is a priori (1917, §12). He is convinced that “there are laws for so to speak correct desires as there are laws for the correct deriving of conclusions” (1917: 128). Already in 1912 Meinong admits  self-critically that his naturalistic, “exclusively psychological” account of value has been shown to rest on an inadmissible, faulty psychologism (see also 1917: 168 [146]). 