The son of an Anglican clergyman, Whitehead graduated from Cambridge
in 1884 and was elected a Fellow of Trinity College that same year.
His marriage to Evelyn Wade six years later was largely a happy one
and together they had a daughter (Jessie) and two sons (North and
Eric). After moving to London, Whitehead served as president of the
Aristotelian Society from 1922 to 1923. After moving to Harvard, he
was elected to the British Academy in 1931. His moves to both London
and Harvard were prompted in part by institutional regulations
requiring mandatory retirement, although his resignation from
Cambridge was also done partly in protest over how the University had
chosen to discipline Andrew Forsyth, a friend and colleague whose
affair with a married woman had become something of a local
scandal.
In addition to Russell, Whitehead influenced many other students who
became equally or more famous than their teacher, examiner or
supervisor himself. For example: mathematicians G. H. Hardy and J. E.
Littlewood; mathematical physicists Edmund Whittaker, Arthur
Eddington, and James Jeans; economist J. M. Keynes; and philosophers
Susanne Langer, Nelson Goodman, and Willard van Orman Quine. Whitehead
did not, however, inspire any school of thought during his lifetime,
and most of his students distanced themselves from parts of his
teachings that they considered anachronistic. For example:
Whitehead’s conviction that pure mathematics and applied
mathematics should not be separated, but cross-fertilize each other,
was not shared by Hardy, but seen as a remnant of the fading mixed
mathematics tradition; after the birth of the theories of relativity
and quantum physics, Whitehead’s method of abstracting some of
the basic concepts of mathematical physics from common experiences
seemed antiquated compared to Eddington’s method of world
building, which aimed at constructing an experiment matching world
from mathematical building blocks; when, due to Whitehead’s
judgment as one of the examiners, Keynes had to rewrite his fellowship
dissertation, Keynes raged against Whitehead, claiming that Whitehead
had not bothered to try to understand Keynes’ novel approach to
probability; and Whitehead’s main philosophical
doctrine—that the world is composed of deeply interdependent
processes and events, rather than mostly independent material things
or objects—turned out to be largely the opposite of
Russell’s doctrine of logical atomism, and his metaphysics was
dispelled by the logical positivists from their dream land of pure
scientific philosophy.
A short chronology of the major events in Whitehead’s life is
below.
More detailed information about Whitehead’s life can be found in
the comprehensive two-volume biography A.N. Whitehead: The Man and
His Work (1985, 1990) by Victor Lowe and J.B. Schneewind. Paul
Schilpp’s The Philosophy of Alfred North Whitehead
(1941) also includes a short autobiographical essay, in addition to
providing a comprehensive critical overview of Whitehead’s
thought and a detailed bibliography of his writings.
Other helpful introductions to Whitehead’s work include Victor
Lowe’s Understanding Whitehead (1962), Stephen
Franklin’s Speaking from the Depths (1990), Thomas
Hosinski’s Stubborn Fact and Creative Advance (1993),
Elizabeth Kraus’ The Metaphysics of Experience (1998),
Robert Mesle’s Process-Relational Philosophy (2008),
and John Cobb’s Whitehead Word Book (2015).
Recommendable for the more advanced Whitehead student are Ivor
Leclerc’s Whitehead’s Metaphysics (1958), Wolfe
Mays’ The Philosophy of Whitehead (1959), Donald
Sherburne’s A Whiteheadian Aesthetics (1961), Charles
Hartshorne’s Whitehead’s Philosophy (1972),
George Lucas’ The Rehabilitation of Whitehead (1989),
David Griffin’s Whitehead’s Radically Different
Postmodern Philosophy (2007), and Steven Shaviro’s
Without Criteria (2009). For a chronology of
Whitehead’s major publications, readers are encouraged to
consult the Primary Literature section of the Bibliography below.
Attempts to sum up Whitehead’s life and influence are
complicated by the fact that in accordance with his instructions, all
his papers were destroyed following his death. As a result, there is
no nachlass, except for papers retained by his colleagues and
correspondents. Even so, it is instructive to recall the words of the
late Associate Justice of the United States Supreme Court, Felix
Frankfurter: 
From knowledge gained through the years of the personalities who in
our day have affected American university life, I have for some time
been convinced that no single figure has had such a pervasive
influence as the late Professor Alfred North Whitehead. (New York Times, January 8, 1948)
Today Whitehead’s ideas continue to be felt and are revalued in
varying degrees in all of the main areas in which he worked. A
critical edition of his work is currently in the process of being
prepared. A first volume, containing student notes of lectures given
by Whitehead at Harvard in the academic year 1924–1925, has
already been published by Edinburgh University Press in 2017, and more
volumes are on their way.
Whitehead began his academic career at Trinity College, Cambridge
where, starting in 1884, he taught for a quarter of a century. In
1890, Russell arrived as a student and during the 1890s the two men
came into regular contact with one another. According to Russell, 
Whitehead was extraordinarily perfect as a teacher. He took a personal
interest in those with whom he had to deal and knew both their strong
and their weak points. He would elicit from a pupil the best of which
a pupil was capable. He was never repressive, or sarcastic, or
superior, or any of the things that inferior teachers like to be. I
think that in all the abler young men with whom he came in contact he
inspired, as he did in me, a very real and lasting affection. (1956:
104)
By the early 1900s, both Whitehead and Russell had completed books on
the foundations of mathematics. Whitehead’s 1898 A Treatise
on Universal Algebra had resulted in his election to the Royal
Society. Russell’s 1903 The Principles of Mathematics
had expanded on several themes initially developed by Whitehead.
Russell’s book also represented a decisive break from the
neo-Kantian approach to mathematics Russell had developed six years
earlier in his Essay on the Foundations of Geometry. Since
the research for a proposed second volume of Russell’s
Principles overlapped considerably with Whitehead’s own
research for a planned second volume of his Universal
Algebra, the two men began collaboration on what eventually would
become Principia Mathematica (1910, 1912, 1913). According to
Whitehead, they initially expected the research to take about a year
to complete. In the end, they worked together on the project for a
decade.
According to Whitehead—inspired by Hermann
Grassmann—mathematics is the study of pattern: 
mathematics is concerned with the investigation of patterns of
connectedness, in abstraction from the particular relata and the
particular modes of connection. (1933 [1967: 153]) 
In his Treatise on Universal Algebra, Whitehead took a
generalized algebra—called ‘universal
algebra’—to be the most appropriate tool for this study or
investigation, but after meeting Giuseppe Peano during the section
devoted to logic at the First International Congress of Philosophy in
1900, Whitehead and Russell became aware of the potential of symbolic
logic to become the most appropriate tool to rigorously study
mathematical patterns.
With the help of Whitehead, Russell extended Peano’s symbolic
logic in order to be able to deal with all types of relations and,
consequently, with all the patterns of relatedness that mathematicians
study. In his Principles of Mathematics, Russell gave an
account of the resulting new symbolic logic of classes and
relations—called ‘mathematical logic’—as well
as an outline of how to reconstruct all existing mathematics by means
of this logic. After that, instead of only being a driving force
behind the scenes, Whitehead became the public co-author of Russell of
the actual and rigorous reconstruction of mathematics from logic.
Russell often presented this reconstruction—giving rise to the
publication of the three Principia Mathematica
volumes—as the reduction of mathematics to logic, both
qua definitions and qua proofs. And since the 1920s,
following Rudolf Carnap, Whitehead and Russell’s project as
well as similar reduction-to-logic projects, including the earlier
project of Gottlob Frege, are classified under the header of
‘logicism’.
However, Sébastian Gandon has highlighted in his 2012 study
Russell’s Unknown Logicism that Russell and
Whitehead’s logicism project differed in at least one important
respect from Frege’s logicism project. Frege adhered to a
radical universalism, and wanted the mathematical content to be
entirely determined from within the logical system. Russell and
Whitehead, however, took into account the consensus, or took a stance
in the ongoing discussions among mathematicians, with respect to the
constitutive features of the already existing,
‘pre-logicized’ branches of mathematics, and then
evaluated for each branch which of several possible types of relations
were best suited to logically reconstruct it, while safeguarding its
topic-specific features. Contrary to Frege, Whitehead and Russell
tempered their urge for universalism to take into account the
topic-specificity of the various mathematical branches, and as a
working mathematician, Whitehead was well positioned to compare the
pre-logicized mathematics with its reconstruction in the logical
system.
For Russell, the logicism project originated from the dream of a
rock-solid mathematics, no longer governed by Kantian intuition, but
by logical rigor. Hence, the discovery of a devastating
paradox—later called ‘Russell’s
paradox’—at the heart of mathematical logic was a serious
blow for Russell, and kicked off his search for a theory to prevent
paradox. He actually came up with several theories, but retained the
ramified theory of types in Principia Mathematica. Moreover,
the ‘logicizing’ of arithmetic required extra-logical
patchwork: the axioms of reducibility, infinity, and choice. None of
this patchwork could ultimately satisfy Russell. His original dream
evaporated and, looking back later in life, he wrote: “The
splendid certainty which I had always hoped to find in mathematics was
lost in a bewildering maze” (1959: 157).
Whitehead originally conceived of the logicism project as an
improvement upon his algebraic project. Indeed, Whitehead’s
transition from the solitary Universal Algebra project to the
joint Principia Mathematica project was a transition from
universal algebra to mathematical logic as the most appropriate
symbolic language to embody mathematical patterns. It entailed a
generalization from the embodiment of absolutely abstract patterns by
means of algebraic forms of variables to their embodiment by means of
propositional functions of real variables. Hardy was quite right in
his review of the first volume of Principia Mathematica when
he wrote: “mathematics, one may say, is the science of
propositional functions” (quoted by Grattan-Guinness 1991:
173).
Whitehead saw mathematical logic as a tool to guide the
mathematician’s essential activities of intuiting, articulating,
and applying patterns, and he did not aim at replacing mathematical
intuition (pattern recognition) with logical rigor. In the latter
respect, Whitehead, from the start, was more like Henri
Poincaré than Russell (cf. Desmet 2016a). Consequently, the
discovery of paradox at the heart of mathematical logic was less of a
blow to Whitehead than to Russell and, later in life, now and again,
Whitehead simply reversed the Russellian order of generality and
importance, writing that “symbolic logic” only represents
“a minute fragment” of the possibilities of “the
algebraic method” (1947 [1968: 129]).
For a more detailed account of the genesis of Principia
Mathematica and Whitehead’s place in the philosophy of
mathematics, cf. Smith 1953, Code 1985, Grattan-Guinness 2000 and
2002, Irvine 2009, Bostock 2010, Desmet 2010, N. Griffin et al. 2011,
N. Griffin & Linsky 2013.
Following the completion of Principia, Whitehead and Russell
began to go their separate ways (cf. Ramsden Eames 1989, Desmet &
Weber 2010, Desmet & Rusu 2012). Perhaps inevitably,
Russell’s anti-war activities and Whitehead’s loss of his
youngest son during World War I led to something of a split between
the two men. Nevertheless, the two remained on relatively good terms
for the rest of their lives. To his credit, Russell comments in his
Autobiography that when it came to their political
differences, Whitehead 
was more tolerant than I was, and it was much more my fault than his
that these differences caused a diminution in the closeness of our
friendship. (1956: 100)
Even with the publication of its three volumes, Principia
Mathematica was incomplete. For example, the logical
reconstruction of the various branches of geometry still needed to be
completed and published. In fact, it was Whitehead’s task to do
so by producing a fourth Principia Mathematica volume.
However, this volume never saw the light of day. What Whitehead did
publish were his repeated attempts to logically reconstruct the
geometry of space and time, hence extending the logicism project from
pure mathematics to applied mathematics or, put differently, from
mathematics to physics—an extension which Russell greeted with
enthusiasm and saw as an important step in the deployment of his new
philosophical method of logical analysis.
At first, Whitehead focused on the geometry of space.
When Whitehead and Russell logicized the concept of number, their
starting point was our intuition of equinumerous classes of
individuals—for example, our recognition that the class of
dwarfs in the fairy tale of Snow White (Doc, Grumpy, Happy, Sleepy,
Bashful, Sneezy, Dopey) and the class of days in a week (from Monday
to Sunday) have ‘something’ in common, namely, the
something we call ‘seven.’ Then they logically defined (i)
classes C and C′ to be equinumerous when there is a one-to-one
relation that correlates each of the members of C with one member of
C′, and (ii) the number of a class C as the class of all the
classes that are equinumerous with C.
When Whitehead logicized the space of physics, his starting point was
our intuition of spatial volumes and of how one volume may contain (or
extend over) another, giving rise to the (mereo)logical relation of
containment (or extension) in the class of volumes, and to the concept
of converging series of volumes—think, for example, of a series
of Russian dolls, one contained in the other, but idealized to ever
smaller dolls. Whitehead made all this rigorous and then, crudely put,
defined the points from which to further construct the geometry of
space.
There is a striking resemblance between Whitehead’s construction
of points and the construction of real numbers by Georg Cantor, who
had been one of Whitehead and Russell’s main sources of
inspiration next to Peano. Indeed, Whitehead defined points as
equivalence classes of converging series of volumes, and Cantor
defined real numbers as equivalence classes of converging series of
rational numbers. Moreover, because Whitehead’s basic
geometrical entities of geometry are not (as in Euclid) extensionless
points but volumes, Whitehead can be seen as one of the fathers of
point-free geometry; and because Whitehead’s basic geometrical
relation is the mereological (or part-whole) relation of extension, he
can also be seen as one of the founders of mereology (and even, when
we take into account his later work on this topic in part IV of
Process and Reality, of mereotopology).
“Last night”, Whitehead wrote to Russell on 3 September
1911, 
the idea suddenly flashed on me that time could be treated in exactly
the same way as I have now got space (which is a picture of beauty, by
the bye). (Unpublished letter kept in The Bertrand Russell Archives at McMaster University)
Shortly after, Whitehead must have learned about Einstein’s
Special Theory of Relativity (STR) because in a letter to Wildon Carr
on 10 July 1912, Russell suggested to the Honorary Secretary of the
Aristotelian Society that Whitehead possibly might deliver a paper on
the principle of relativity, and added: “I know he has been
going into the subject”. Anyhow, in the early years of the
second decade of the twentieth century, Whitehead’s interest
shifted from the logical reconstruction of the Euclidean space of
classical physics to the logical reconstruction of the Minkowskian
space-time of the STR.
A first step to go from space to space-time was the replacement of
(our intuition of) spatial volumes with (our intuition of)
spatio-temporal regions (or events) as the basis of the construction
(so that, for example, a point of space-time could be defined as an
equivalence class of converging spatio-temporal regions). However,
whereas Whitehead had constructed the Euclidean distance based on our
intuition of cases of spatial congruence (for example, of two parallel
straight line segments being equally long), he now struggled to
construct the Minkowskian metric in terms of a concept of
spatio-temporal congruence, based on a kind of merger of our intuition
of cases of spatial congruence and our intuition of cases of temporal
congruence (for example, of two candles taking equally long to burn
out).
So, as a second step, Whitehead introduced a second relation in the
class of spatio-temporal regions next to the relation of extension,
namely, the relation of cogredience, based on our intuition of rest or
motion. Whitehead’s use of this relation gave rise to a constant
k, which allowed him to merge spatial and temporal congruence,
and which appeared in his formula for the metric of space-time. When
Whitehead equated k with c2 (the square of
the speed of light) his metric became equal to the Minkowskian
metric.
Whitehead’s most detailed account of this reconstruction of the
Minkowskian space-time of the STR was given in his 1919 book, An
Enquiry concerning the Principles of Natural Knowledge, but he
also offered a less technical account in his 1920 book, The
Concept of Nature.
Whitehead first learned about Einstein’s General Theory of
Relativity (GTR) in 1916. He admired Einstein’s new mathematical
theory of gravitation, but rejected Einstein’s explanation of
gravitation for not being coherent with some of our basic intuitions.
Einstein explained the gravitational motion of a free mass-particle in
the neighborhood of a heavy mass as due to the curvature of space-time
caused by this mass. According to Whitehead, the theoretical concept
of a contingently curved space-time does not cohere with our
measurement practices; they are based on the essential uniformity of
the texture of our spatial and temporal intuition.
In general, Whitehead opposed the modern scientist’s attitude of
dropping the requirement of coherence with our basic intuitions, and
he revolted against the issuing bifurcation of nature into the world
of science and that of intuition. In particular, as Einstein’s
critic, he set out to give an alternative rendering of the
GTR—an alternative that passed not only what Whitehead called
“the narrow gauge”, which tests a theory’s empirical
adequacy, but also what he called “the broad gauge”, which
tests its coherence with our basic intuitions.
In 1920, first in a newspaper article (reprinted in Essays in
Science and Philosophy), and then in a lecture (published as
Chapter VIII of Concept of Nature), Whitehead made public an
outline of his alternative to Einstein’s GTR. In 1921, Whitehead
had the opportunity to discuss matters with Einstein himself. And
finally, in 1922, Whitehead published a book with a more detailed
account of his alternative theory of gravitation (ATG)—The
Principle of Relativity.
According to Whitehead, the Maxwell-Lorentz theory of electrodynamics
(unlike Einstein’s GTR) could be conceived as coherent with our
basic intuitions—even in its four-dimensional format, namely, by
elaborating Minkowski’s electromagnetic worldview. Hence,
Whitehead developed his ATG in close analogy with the theory of
electrodynamics. He replaced Einstein’s geometric explanation
with an electrodynamics-like explanation. Whitehead explained the
gravitational motion of a free mass-particle as due to a field action
determined by retarded wave-potentials propagating in a uniform
space-time from the source masses to the free mass-particle.
It is important to stress that Whitehead had no intention of improving
the predictive content of Einstein’s GTR, only the explanatory
content. However, Whitehead’s replacement of Einstein’s
explanation with an alternative explanation entailed a replacement of
Einstein’s formulae with alternative formulae; and these
different formulae implied different predictions. So it would be
incorrect to say that Whitehead’s ATG is empirically equivalent
to Einstein’s GTR. What can be claimed, however, is that for a
long time Whitehead’s theory was experimentally
indistinguishable from Einstein’s theory.
In fact, like Einstein’s GTR, Whitehead’s ATG leads to
Newton’s theory of gravitation as a first approximation. Also
(as shown by Eddington in 1924 and J. L. Synge in 1952)
Einstein’s and Whitehead’s theories of gravitation lead to
an identical solution for the problem of determining the gravitational
field of a single, static, and spherically symmetric body—the
Schwarzschild solution. This implies, for example, that
Einstein’s GTR and Whitehead’s ATG lead to the exact same
predictions not only with respect to the precession of the perihelion
of Mercury and the bending of starlight in the gravitational field of
the sun (as already shown by Whitehead in 1922 and William Temple in
1924) but also with respect to the red-shift of the spectral lines of
light emitted by atoms in the gravitational field of the sun (contrary
to Whitehead’s own conclusion in 1922, which was based on a
highly schematized and soon outdated model of the molecule). Moreover
(as shown by R. J. Russell and Christoph Wassermann in 1986 and published in 2004) Einstein’s and
Whitehead’s theories of gravitation also lead to an identical
solution for the problem of determining the gravitational field of a
single, rotating, and axially symmetric body—the Kerr
solution.
Einstein’s and Whitehead’s predictions become different,
however, when considering more than one body. Indeed, Einstein’s
equation of gravitation is non-linear while Whitehead’s is
linear; and this divergence qua mathematics implies a
divergence qua predictions in the case of two or more bodies.
For example (as shown by G. L. Clark in 1954) the two theories lead to
different predictions with respect to the motion of double stars. The
predictive divergence in the case of two bodies, however, is quite
small, and until recently experimental techniques were not
sufficiently refined to confirm either Einstein’s predictions or
Whitehead’s, for example, with respect to double stars. In
2008, based on a precise timing of the pulsar B1913+16 in the
Hulse-Taylor binary system, Einstein’s predictions with respect
to the motion of double stars were confirmed, and Whitehead’s
refuted (by Gary Gibbons and Clifford Will). The important fact from
the viewpoint of the philosophy of science is not that, since the
1970s, now and again, a physicist rose to claim the experimental
refutation of Whitehead’s ATG, but that for decades it was
experimentally indistinguishable from Einstein’s GTR, hence
refuting two modern dogmas. First, that theory choice is solely based
on empirical facts. Clearly, next to facts, values—especially
aesthetic values—are at play as well. Second, that the history
of science is a succession of victories over the army of our
misleading intuitions, each success of science must be interpreted as
a defeat of intuition, and a truth cannot be scientific unless it
hurts human intuition. Surely, we can be scientific without taming the
authority of our intuition and without engaging in the disastrous race
to disenchant nature and humankind.
For a more detailed account of Whitehead’s involvement with
Einstein’s STR and GTR, cf. Palter 1960, Von Ranke 1997,
Herstein 2006 and Desmet 2011, 2016b, and 2016c.
Whitehead’s reconstruction of the space-time of the STR and his
ATG make clear (i) that his main methodological requirement in the
philosophy of science is that physical theories should cohere with our
intuitions of the relatedness of nature (of the relations of
extension, congruence, cogredience, causality, etc.), and (ii) that
his paradigm of what a theory of physics should be like is the
Maxwell-Lorentz theory of electrodynamics. And indeed, in his
philosophy of science, Whitehead rejects David Hume’s
“sensationalist empiricism” (1929c [1985: 57]) and Isaac
Newton’s “scientific materialism” (1926a [1967:
17]). Instead Whitehead promotes (i) a radical empiricist methodology,
which relies on our perception, not only of sense data (colors,
sounds, smells, etc.) but also of a manifold of natural relations, and
(ii) an electrodynamics-like worldview, in which the fundamental
concepts are no longer simply located substances or bits of matter,
but internally related processes and events.
“Modern physical science”, Whitehead wrote, 
is the issue of a coordinated effort, sustained for more than three
centuries, to understand those activities of Nature by reason of which
the transitions of sense-perception occur. (1934 [2011: 65]) 
But according to Whitehead, Hume’s sensationalist empiricism has
undermined the idea that our perception can reveal those activities,
and Newton’s scientific materialism has failed to render his
formulae of motion and gravitation intelligible.
Whitehead was dissatisfied with Hume’s reduction of perception
to sense perception because, as Hume discovered, pure sense perception
reveals a succession of spatial patterns of impressions of color,
sound, smell, etc. (a procession of forms of sense data), but it does
not reveal any causal relatedness to interpret it (any form of process
to render it intelligible). In fact, all “relatedness of
nature”, and not only its causal relatedness, was
“demolished by Hume’s youthful skepticism” (1922
[2004: 13]) and conceived as the outcome of mere psychological
association. Whitehead wrote: 
Sense-perception, for all its practical importance, is very
superficial in its disclosure of the nature of things. … My
quarrel with [Hume] concerns [his] exclusive stress upon
sense-perception for the provision of data respecting Nature.
Sense-perception does not provide the data in terms of which we
interpret it. (1934 [2011: 21])
Whitehead was also dissatisfied with Newton’s scientific
materialism, 
which presupposes the ultimate fact of an irreducible brute matter, or
material, spread through space in a flux of configurations. In itself
such a material is senseless, valueless, purposeless. It just does
what it does do, following a fixed routine imposed by external
relations which do not spring from the nature of its being. (1926a
[1967: 17])
Whitehead rejected Newton’s conception of nature as the
succession of instants of spatial distribution of bits of matter for
two reasons. First: the concept of a “durationless”
instant, “without reference to any other instant”, renders
unintelligible the concepts of “velocity at an instant”
and “momentum at an instant” as well as the equations of
motion involving these concepts (1934 [2011: 47]). Second: the concept
of self-sufficient and isolated bits of matter, having “the
property of simple location in space and time” (1926a [1967:
49]), cannot “give the slightest warrant for the law of
gravitation” that Newton postulated (1934 [2011: 34]). Whitehead
wrote: 
Newton’s methodology for physics was an overwhelming success.
But the forces which he introduced left Nature still without meaning
or value. In the essence of a material body—in its mass, motion,
and shape—there was no reason for the law of gravitation. (1934
[2011: 23]) 
There is merely a formula for succession. But there is an absence of
understandable causation for that formula for that succession. (1934
[2011: 53–54])
“Combining Newton and Hume”, Whitehead summarized, 
we obtain a barren concept, namely, a field of perception devoid of
any data for its own interpretation, and a system of interpretation
devoid of any reason for the concurrence of its factors. (1934 [2011:
25]) 
“Two conclusions”, Whitehead wrote, 
are now abundantly clear. One is that sense-perception omits any
discrimination of the fundamental activities within Nature. …
The second conclusion is the failure of science to endow its formulae
for activity with any meaning. (1934 [2011: 65]) 
The views of Newton and Hume, Whitehead continued, are “gravely
defective. They are right as far as they go. But they omit …
our intuitive modes of understanding” (1934 [2011: 26]).
In Whitehead’s eyes, however, the development of Maxwell’s
theory of electromagnetism constituted an antidote to Newton’s
scientific materialism, for it led him to conceive the whole universe
as “a field of force—or, in other words, a field of
incessant activity” (1934 [2011: 27]). The theory of
electromagnetism served Whitehead to overcome Newton’s
“fallacy of simple location” (1926a [1967: 49]), that is,
the conception of nature as a universe of self-sufficient isolated
bits of matter. Indeed, we cannot say of an electromagnetic event that
it is 
here in space, and here in time, or here in space-time, in a perfectly
definite sense which does not require for its explanation any
reference to other regions of space-time. (1926a [1967: 49]) 
The theory of electromagnetism “involves the entire abandonment
of the notion that simple location is the primary way in which things
are involved in space-time” because it reveals that, “in a
certain sense, everything is everywhere at all times” (1926a
[1967: 91]). “Long ago”, Whitehead wrote, Faraday already
remarked “that in a sense an electric charge is
everywhere”, and: 
the modification of the electromagnetic field at every point of space
at each instant owing to the past history of each electron is another
way of stating the same fact. (1920 [1986: 148])
The lesson that Whitehead learned from the theory of electromagnetism
is unambiguous:
The fundamental concepts are activity and process. … The notion
of self-sufficient isolation is not exemplified in modern physics.
There are no essentially self-contained activities within limited
regions. … Nature is a theatre for the interrelations of
activities. All things change, the activities and their
interrelations. … In the place of the procession of [spatial]
forms (of externally related bits of matter, modern physics) has
substituted the notion of the forms of process. It has thus swept away
space and matter, and has substituted the study of the internal
relations within a complex state of activity. (1934 [2011:
35–36])
But overcoming Newton was insufficient for Whitehead because Hume
“has even robbed us of reason for believing that the past gives
any ground for expectation of the future” (1934 [2011: 65]).
According to Whitehead, 
science conceived as resting on mere sense-perception, with no other
sources of observation, is bankrupt, so far as concerns its claims to
self-sufficiency. (1934 [2011: 66]) 
In fact, science conceived as restricting itself to the sensationalist
methodology can find neither efficient nor final causality. It
“can find no creativity in Nature; it finds mere rules of
succession” (1934 [2011: 66]). “The reason for this
blindness”, according to Whitehead, “lies in the fact that
such science only deals with half of the evidence provided by human
experience” (1934 [2011: 66]).
Contrary to Hume, Whitehead held that it is untrue to state that our
perception, in which sense perception is only one factor, discloses no
causal relatedness. Inspired by the radical empiricism of William
James and Henri Bergson, Whitehead gave a new analysis of perception.
According to Whitehead, our perception is a symbolic interplay of two
pure modes of perception, pure sense perception (which Whitehead
ultimately called “perception in the mode of presentational
immediacy”), and a more basic perception of causal relatedness
(which he called “perception in the mode of causal
efficacy”). According to Whitehead, taking into account the
whole of our perception instead of only pure sense perception, that
is, all perceptual data instead of only Hume’s sense data,
implies also taking into account the other half of the evidence,
namely, our intuitions of the relatedness of nature, of “the
togetherness of things”. He added: 
the togetherness of things involves some doctrine of mutual immanence.
In some sense or other … each happening is a factor in the
nature of every other happening. (1934 [2011: 87]) 
Hume demolished the relatedness of nature; Whitehead restored it,
founded the “doctrine of causation … on the doctrine of
immanence”, and wrote: “Each occasion presupposes the
antecedent world as active in its own nature. … This is the
doctrine of causation” (1934 [2011: 88–89]).
Whitehead also noticed that, in a sense, physicists are even more
reductionist than Hume. In practice they rely on sense data, but in
theory they abstract from most of the data of our five senses (sight,
hearing, smell, taste, and touch) to focus on the colorless,
soundless, odorless, and tasteless mathematical aspects of nature.
Consequently, in a worldview inspired not by the actual practices of
physicists, but by their theoretical speculations,
nature—methodologically stripped from its ‘tertiary’
qualities (esthetical, ethical, and religious values)—is further
reduced to the scientific world of ‘primary’ qualities
(mathematical quantities and interconnections such as the amplitude,
length, and frequency of mathematical waves), and this scientific
world is bifurcated from the world of ‘secondary’
qualities (colors, sounds, smells, etc.). Moreover, the former world
is supposed, ultimately, to fully explain the latter world (so that,
for example, colors end up as being nothing more than electromagnetic
wave-frequencies).
Whitehead spoke of the “bifurcation of nature into two systems
of reality” (1920 [1986: 30]) to denote the
strategy—originating with Galileo, Descartes, Boyle and
Locke—of bifurcating nature into the essential reality of
primary qualities and the non-essential reality of “psychic
additions” or secondary qualities, ultimately to be explained
away in terms of primary qualities. Whitehead sided with Berkeley in
arguing that the primary/secondary distinction is not tenable (1920
[1986: 43–44]), that all qualities are “in the same boat,
to sink or swim together” (1920 [1986: 148]), and that, for
example, 
the red glow of the sunset should be as much part of nature as are the
molecules and electric waves by which men of science would explain the
phenomenon. (1920 [1986: 29])
Whitehead described the philosophical outcome of the bifurcation of
nature as follows:
The primary qualities are the essential qualities of substances whose
spatio-temporal relationships constitute nature. … The
occurrences of nature are in some way apprehended by minds …
But the mind in apprehending also experiences sensations which,
properly speaking, are qualities of the mind alone. These sensations
are projected by the mind so as to clothe appropriate bodies in
external nature. Thus the bodies are perceived as with qualities which
in reality do not belong to them, qualities which in fact are purely
the offspring of the mind. Thus nature gets credit which should in
truth be reserved for ourselves: the rose for its scent: the
nightingale for his song: and the sun for his radiance. The poets are
entirely mistaken. They should address their lyrics to themselves, and
should turn them into odes of self-congratulation on the excellency of
the human mind. Nature is a dull affair, soundless, scentless,
colourless; merely the hurrying of material, endlessly, meaninglessly.
(1926a [1967: 54])
“The enormous success of the scientific abstractions”,
Whitehead wrote, “has foisted onto philosophy the task of
accepting them as the most concrete rendering of fact” and, he
added:
Thereby, modern philosophy has been ruined. It has oscillated in a
complex manner between three extremes. There are the dualists, who
accept matter and mind as on an equal basis, and the two varieties of
monists, those who put mind inside matter, and those who put matter
inside mind. But this juggling with abstractions can never overcome
the inherent confusion introduced by the ascription of misplaced
concreteness to the scientific scheme. (1926a [1967: 55])
Whitehead’s alternative is fighting “the Fallacy of
Misplaced Concreteness”—the “error of mistaking the
abstract for the concrete”—because “this fallacy is
the occasion of great confusion in philosophy” (1926a [1967:
51]). The fallacy of misplaced concreteness is committed each time
abstractions are taken as concrete facts, and “more concrete
facts” are expressed “under the guise of very abstract
logical constructions” (1926a [1967: 50–51]). This fallacy
lies at the root of the modern philosophical confusions of scientific
materialism and progressive bifurcation of nature. Indeed, the notion
of simple location in Newton’s scientific materialism is an
instance of the fallacy of misplaced concreteness—it mistakes
the abstraction of in essence unrelated bits of matter as the most
concrete reality from which to explain the relatedness of nature. And
the bifurcating idea that secondary qualities should be explained in
terms of primary qualities is also an instance of this
fallacy—it mistakes the mathematical abstractions of physics as
the most concrete and so-called primary reality from which to explain
the so-called secondary reality of colors, sounds, etc.
In light of the rise of electrodynamics, relativity, and quantum
mechanics, Whitehead challenged scientific materialism and the
bifurcation of nature “as being entirely unsuited to the
scientific situation at which we have now arrived”, and he
clearly outlined the mission of philosophy as he saw it:
I hold that philosophy is the critic of abstractions. Its function is
the double one, first of harmonising them by assigning to them their
right relative status as abstractions, and secondly of completing them
by direct comparison with more concrete intuitions of the universe,
and thereby promoting the formation of more complete schemes of
thought. It is in respect to this comparison that the testimony of
great poets is of such importance. Their survival is evidence that
they express deep intuitions of mankind penetrating into what is
universal in concrete fact. Philosophy is not one among the sciences
with its own little scheme of abstractions which it works away at
perfecting and improving. It is the survey of the sciences, with the
special object of their harmony, and of their completion. It brings to
this task, not only the evidence of the separate sciences, but also
its own appeal to concrete experience. (1926a [1967: 87])
Clearly Whitehead’s philosophy was influenced by electrodynamics
and relativity, but is it correct to claim that it was influenced by
quantum mechanics? Charles Hartshorne writes:
When Whitehead came to Harvard in 1924 he felt obliged to spend his
time reading and teaching philosophy, rather than the theoretical
physics he had been teaching in London, after teaching mathematics at
Cambridge. Consequently his knowledge of physics began to be out of
date. Although he had seen Heisenberg’s famous article of 1927
on the Uncertainty Principle (I know because … I showed it
… to Whitehead), there is no evidence that he seriously reacted
to the controversy about the “Copenhagen interpretation”
… (2010: 28)
Even though Whitehead did not react in his writings to the Copenhagen
interpretation, he was up to date with respect to the older quantum
mechanics (of Planck, Einstein and Bohr), and his philosophy
foreshadows some of its present day interpretations. Whitehead was as
familiar with Jeans’ Report on Radiation and the
Quantum-Theory (1914) as with Eddington’s Report on the
Relativity Theory of Gravitation (1918), and prior to his
departure to Harvard, on 12 July 1924, Whitehead chaired a
symposium—“The Quantum Theory: How far does it modify the
mathematical, the physical, and the psychological concepts of
continuity?”—which was part of a joint session of the
Aristotelian Society and the Mind Society. Today, for example, Carlo
Rovelli’s relational interpretation of the theory of quantum
mechanics is strikingly Whiteheadian:
In the world described by quantum mechanics there is no reality except
in the relations between physical systems. It isn’t things that
enter into relations but, rather, relations that ground the notion of
“thing”. The world of quantum mechanics is not a world of
objects: it is a world of events. Things are built by the happenings
of elementary events: as the philosopher Nelson Goodman wrote in the
1950s, in a beautiful phrase, “An object is a monotonous
process.” A stone is a vibration of quanta that maintains its
structure for a while, just as a marine wave maintains its identity
for a while before melting again into the sea. … We, like waves
and like all objects, are a flux of events; we are processes, for a
brief time monotonous … (2017: 115–116)
And Rovelli adds that in the speculative world of quantum gravity:
There is no longer space which contains the world, and no
longer time during the course of which events occur. There
are elementary processes … continuously interact[ing] with each
other. Just as a calm and clear Alpine lake is made up of a rapid
dance of a myriad of minuscule water molecules, the illusion of being
surrounded by continuous space and time is the product of a
long-sighted vision of a dense swarming of elementary processes.
(2017: 158)
For more details on Whitehead’s philosophy of science, cf.
Hammerschmidt 1947, Lawrence 1956, Bright 1958, Palter 1960, Mays
1977, Fitzgerald 1979, Plamondon 1979, Eastman & Keeton (eds)
2004, Bostock 2010, Athern 2011, Deroo & Leclercq (eds) 2011,
Henning et al. (eds) 2013, Segall 2013, McHenry 2015, Desmet 2016d, Eastman & Epperson & Griffin (eds) 2016.
While in London, Whitehead became involved in many practical aspects
of tertiary education, serving as President of the Mathematical
Association, Dean of the Faculty of Science and Chairman of the
Academic Council of the Senate at the University of London, Chairman
of the Delegacy for Goldsmiths’ College, and several other
administrative posts. Many of his essays about education date from
this time and appear in his book, The Aims of Education and Other
Essays (1929a).
At its core, Whitehead’s philosophy of education emphasizes the
idea that a good life is most profitably thought of as an educated or
civilized life, two terms which Whitehead often uses interchangeably.
As we think, we live. Thus it is only as we improve our thoughts that
we improve our lives. The result, says Whitehead, is that “There
is only one subject matter for education, and that is Life in all its
manifestations” (1929a: 10). This view in turn has corollaries
for both the content of education and its method of delivery.
(a) With regard to delivery, Whitehead emphasizes the importance of
remembering that a “pupil’s mind is a growing organism
… it is not a box to be ruthlessly packed with alien
ideas” (1929a: 47). Instead, it is the purpose of education to
stimulate and guide each student’s self-development. It is not
the job of the educator simply to insert into his students’
minds little chunks of knowledge.
Whitehead conceives of the student’s educational process of
self-development as an organic and cyclic process in which each cycle
consists of three stages: first the stage of romance, then the stage
of precision, and finally, the stage of generalization. The first
stage is all about “free exploration, initiated by
wonder”, the second about the disciplined “acquirement of
technique and detailed knowledge”, and the third about
“the free application of what has been learned” (Lowe
1990: 61). These stages, continually recurring in cycles, determine
what Whitehead calls “The Rhythm of Education” (cf. 1929a:
24–44). In the context of mathematics, Whitehead’s three
stages can be conceived of as the stage of undisciplined intuition,
the stage of logical reasoning, and the stage of logically guided
intuition. By skipping stage one, and never arriving at stage three,
bad math teachers deny students the major motivation to love
mathematics: the joy of pattern recognition.
That education does not involve inserting into the student’s
mind little chunks of knowledge is clear from the description of
culture that Whitehead offers as the opening of the first and title
essay of The Aims of Education: 
Culture is activity of thought, and receptiveness of beauty and humane
feeling. Scraps of information have nothing to do with it. (1929a: 1)
On the contrary, Whitehead writes, 
we must beware of what I call ‘inert ideas’—that is
to say, ideas that are merely received into the mind without being
utilized, or tested, or thrown into fresh combinations, (1929a:
1–2) 
and he holds that “education is the acquisition of the art of
the [interconnection and] utilization of knowledge” (1929a: 6),
and that ideas remain disconnected and non-utilized unless they are
related 
to that stream, compounded of sense perceptions, feelings, hopes,
desires, and of mental activities adjusting thought to thought, which
forms our life. (1929a: 4) 
This point—the point where Whitehead links the art of education
to the stream of experience that forms our life—is the meeting
point of Whitehead’s philosophy of education with his philosophy
of experience, which is also called: ‘process
philosophy.’
According to Whitehead’s process philosophy, the stream of
experience that forms our life consists of occasions of experience,
each of which is a synthesis of many feelings having objective content
(what is felt) and subjective form (how it is felt); also, the
synthesis of feelings is not primarily controlled by their objective
content, but by their subjective form. According to Whitehead’s
philosophy of education, the attempt to educate a person by merely
focusing on objective content—on inert ideas, scraps of
information, bare knowledge—while disregarding the subjective
form or emotional pattern of that person’s experience can never
be successful. The art of education has to take into account the
subjective receptiveness and appreciation of beauty and human
greatness, the subjective emotions of interest, joy and adventure, and
“the ultimate motive power” (1929a: 62), that is, the
sense of importance, values and possibilities (cf.1929a:
45–65).
(b) With regard to content, Whitehead holds that any adequate
education must include a literary component, a scientific component,
and a technical component.
According to Whitehead: 
Any serious fundamental change in the intellectual outlook of human
society must necessarily be followed by an educational revolution.
(1929a: 116) 
In particular, the scientific revolution and the fundamental changes
it entailed in the seventeenth and subsequent centuries have been
followed by an educational revolution that was still ongoing in the
twentieth century. In 1912, Whitehead wrote:
We are, in fact, in the midst of an educational revolution caused by
the dying away of the classical impulse which has dominated European
thought since the time of the Renaissance. … What I mean is the
loss of that sustained reference to classical literature for the sake
of finding in it the expression of our best thoughts on all subjects.
… There are three fundamental changes … Science now
enters into the very texture of our thoughts … Again,
mechanical inventions, which are the product of science, by altering
the material possibilities of life, have transformed our industrial
system, and thus have changed the very structure of Society. Finally,
the idea of the World now means to us the whole round world of human
affairs, from the revolutions of China to those of Peru. … The
total result of these changes is that the supreme merit of immediate
relevance to the full compass of modern life has been lost to
classical literature. (1947 [1968: 175–176])
Whitehead listed the scientific and industrial revolutions as well as
globalization as the major causes for the educational reforms of the
nineteenth and twentieth century. These fundamental changes indeed
implied new standards for what counts as genuine knowledge. However,
together with these new standards emerged a romantic anxiety—the
anxiety that the new standards of genuine knowledge, education, and
living might impoverish human experience and damage both individual
and social wellbeing. Hence arose the bifurcation of culture into the
culture of “natural scientists” and the culture of
“literary intellectuals” (cf. Snow 1959), and the many
associated debates in the context of various educational
reforms—for example, the 1880s debate in Victorian England, when
Whitehead was a Cambridge student, between T. H. Huxley, an outspoken
champion of science, defending the claims of modern scientific
education, and Matthew Arnold, a leading man of letters, defending the
claims of classical literary education.
As for Whitehead, in whom the scientific and the romantic spirit
merged, one cannot say that he sided with either Huxley or Arnold. He
took his distance from those who, motivated by the idea that the
sciences embody the ultimate modes of thought, sided with Huxley, but
also from those who, motivated by conservatism, that is, by an
anachronistic longing for a highly educated upper class and an elitist
horror of educational democratization, sided with Arnold (cf. 1947
[1968: 23–24]). Next to not taking a stance in the debate on
which is the ultimate mode of thought, the scientific or the literary,
hence rejecting the antithesis between scientific and literary
education, Whitehead also rejected the antithesis between thought and
action (cf. 1947 [1968: 172]) and hence, between a liberal, that is,
mainly intellectual and theoretical, education, and a technical, that
is, mainly manual and practical, education (cf. 1929a: 66–92).
In other words, according to Whitehead, we can identify three instead
of two cultures but, moreover, we must refrain from promoting any one
of these three at the expense of the other two. He writes:
My point is, that no course of study can claim any position of ideal
completeness. Nor are the omitted factors of subordinate importance.
The insistence in the Platonic culture on disinterested intellectual
appreciation is a psychological error. Action and our implication in
the transition of events amid the inevitable bond of cause to effect
are fundamental. An education which strives to divorce intellectual or
aesthetic life from these fundamental facts carries with it the
decadence of civilisation. (1929a: 73)
Disinterested scientific curiosity is a passion for an ordered
intellectual vision of the connection of events. But the …
intervention of action even in abstract science is often overlooked.
No man of science wants merely to know. He acquires knowledge to
appease his passion for discovery. He does not discover in order to
know, he knows in order to discover. The pleasure which art and
sciences can give to toil is the enjoyment which arises from
successfully directed intention. (1929a: 74)
The antithesis between a technical and a liberal education is
fallacious. There can be no technical education which is not liberal,
and no liberal education which is not technical: that is, no education
which does not import both technique and intellectual vision. (1929a:
74)
There are three main methods which are required in a national system
of education, namely, the literary curriculum, the scientific
curriculum, the technical curriculum. But each of these curricula
should include the other two … each of these sides …
should be illuminated by the others. (1929a: 75)
For more details and an extensive bibliography on Whitehead’s
philosophy of education, cf. Part VI of Volume 1 of the Handbook
of Whiteheadian Process Thought (Weber & Desmond 2008:
185–214).
Facing mandatory retirement in London, and upon being offered an
appointment at Harvard, Whitehead moved to the United States in 1924.
Given his prior training in mathematics, it was sometimes joked that
the first philosophy lectures he ever attended were those he himself
delivered in his new role as Professor of Philosophy. As Russell
comments, “In England, Whitehead was regarded only as a
mathematician, and it was left to America to discover him as a
philosopher” (1956: 100).
A year after his arrival, he delivered Harvard’s prestigious
Lowell Lectures. The lectures formed the basis for Science and the
Modern World (1926). The 1927/28 Gifford Lectures at the
University of Edinburgh followed shortly afterwards and resulted in
the publication of Whitehead’s most comprehensive (but difficult
to penetrate) metaphysical work, Process and Reality (1929c).
And in the Preface of the third major work composing his mature
metaphysical system, Adventures of Ideas (1933), Whitehead
stated:
The three books—Science and The Modern World, Process and
Reality, Adventures of Ideas—are an endeavor to express a
way of understanding the nature of things, and to point out how that
way of understanding is illustrated by … human experience. Each
book can be read separately; but they supplement each other’s
omissions or compressions. (1933 [1967: vii])
Whitehead’s philosophy of science “has nothing to do with
ethics or theology or the theory of aesthetics” (1922 [2004:
4]). Whitehead in his London writings was “excluding any
reference to moral or aesthetic values”, even though he was
already aware that “the values of nature are perhaps the key to
the metaphysical synthesis of existence” (1920 [1986: 5]).
Whitehead’s metaphysics, on the contrary, not only take into
account science, but also art, morals and religion. Whitehead in his
Harvard writings did not exclude anything, but aimed at a
“synoptic vision” (1929c [1985: 5]) to which values are
indeed the key.
In his earlier philosophy of science, Whitehead revolted against the
bifurcation of nature into the worlds of primary and secondary
qualities, and he promoted the harmonization of the abstractions of
mathematical physics with those of Hume’s sensationalist
empiricism, as well as the inclusion of more concrete intuitions
offered by our perception—our intuitions of causality,
extension, cogredience, congruence, color, sound, smell, etc. Closely
linked to this completion of the scientific scheme of thought,
Whitehead developed a new scientific ontology and a new theory of
perception. His scientific ontology is one of internally related
events (instead of merely externally related bits of matter). His
theory of perception (cf. Symbolism: its Meaning and Effect)
holds that our perception is always perception in the mixed mode of
symbolic reference, which usually involves a symbolic reference of
what is given in the pure mode of presentational immediacy to what is
given in the pure mode of causal efficacy: 
symbolic reference, though in complex human experience it works both
ways, is chiefly to be thought of as the elucidation of percepta in
the mode of causal efficacy by … percepta in the mode of
presentational immediacy. (1929c [1985: 178]) 
According to Whitehead, the failure to lay due emphasis on the
perceptual mode of causal efficacy implies the danger of reducing the
scientific method to Hume’s sensationalist empiricism, and
ultimately lies at the basis of the Humean failure to acknowledge the
relatedness of nature, especially the causal relatedness of nature.
Indeed, “the notion of causation arose because mankind lives
amid experiences in the mode of causal efficacy” (1929c [1985:
175]). According to Whitehead, “symbolic reference is the
interpretative element in human experience” (1929c [1985: 173]),
and “the failure to lay due emphasis on symbolic reference
… has reduced the notion of ‘meaning’ to a
mystery” (1929c [1985: 168]), and ultimately lies at the basis
of Newton’s failure to give meaning to his formulae of motion
and gravitation.
In his later metaphysics, Whitehead revolted against the bifurcation
of the world into the objective world of facts (as studied by science,
even a completed science, and one not limited to physics, but
stretching from physics to biology to psychology) and the subjective
world of values (aesthetic, ethic, and religious), and he promoted the
harmonization of the abstractions of science with those of art,
morals, and religion, as well as the inclusion of more concrete
intuitions offered by our experience—stretching from our
mathematical and physical intuitions to our poetic and mystic
intuitions. Closely linked to this completion of the metaphysical
scheme of thought (cf. Part I of Process and Reality),
Whitehead refined his earlier ontology, and generalized his earlier
theory of perception into a theory of feelings. Whitehead’s
ultimate ontology—the ontology of ‘the philosophy of
organism’ or ‘process philosophy’—is one of
internally related organism-like elementary processes (called
‘actual occasions’ or ‘actual entities’) in
terms of which he could understand both lifeless nature and nature
alive, both matter and mind, both science and
religion—“Philosophy”, Whitehead even writes,
“attains its chief importance by fusing the two, namely,
religion and science, into one rational scheme of thought”
(1929c [1985: 15]). His theory of feelings (cf. part III of
Process and Reality) claims that not only our perception, but
our experience in general is a stream of elementary processes of
concrescence (growing together) of many feelings into
one—“the many become one, and are increased with
one” (1929c [1985: 21])—and that the process of
concrescence is not primarily driven by the objective content of the
feelings involved (their factuality), but by their subjective form
(their valuation, cf. 1929c [1985: 240]).
Whitehead’s ontology cannot be disjoined from his theory of
feelings. The actual occasions ontologically constituting our
experience are the elementary processes of concrescence of
feelings constituting the stream of our experience, and they throw
light on the what and the how of all actual
occasions, including those that constitute lifeless material things.
This amounts to the panexperientialist claim that the intrinsically
related elementary constituents of all things in the universe, from
stones to human beings, are experiential. Whitehead writes:
“each actual entity is a throb of experience” (1929c
[1985: 190]) and “apart from the experiences of subjects there
is nothing, nothing, nothing, bare nothingness” (1929c [1985:
167])—an outrageous claim according to some, even when it is
made clear that panexperientialism is not the same as panpsychism,
because “consciousness presupposes experience, and not
experience consciousness” (1929c [1985: 53]).
The relational event ontology that Whitehead developed in his London
period might serve to develop a relational interpretation of quantum
mechanics, such as Rovelli’s (cf. supra) or one of the many
proposed by Whitehead scholars (cf. Stapp 1993 and 2007, Malin 2001,
Hättich 2004, Epperson 2004, Epperson & Zafiris 2013). But
then this ontology has to take into account the fact that quantum
mechanics suggests that reality is not only relational, but also
granular (the results of measuring its changes do not form continuous
spectra, but spectra of discrete quanta) and indeterminist (physicists
cannot predetermine the result of a measurement; they can only
calculate for each of the relevant discrete quanta, that is, for each
of the possible results of the measurement, the probability that it
becomes the actual result).
In Whitehead’s London writings, the granular or atomic nature of
the events underlying the abstractions of continuous space-time and
continuous electromagnetic and gravitational fields is not made
explicit. In his Harvard writings, however, “the mysterious
quanta of energy have made their appearance” (1929c [1985: 78]),
“the ultimate metaphysical truth is atomism” (1929c [1985:
35]), and events are seen as networks (or ‘societies’) of
elementary and atomic events, called ‘actual occasions’ or
‘actual entities.’ Whitehead writes: 
I shall use the term ‘event’ in the more general sense of
a nexus of actual occasions … An actual occasion is the
limiting type of an event with only one member. (1929c [1985: 73])
Each actual occasion determines a quantum of
extension—“the atomized quantum of extension correlative
to the actual entity” (1929c [1985: 73])—and it is by
means of the relation of extensive connection in the class of the
regions constituted by these quanta that Whitehead attempted to
improve upon his earlier construction of space-time (cf. Part IV of
Process and Reality).
The atomicity of events in quantum mechanics dovetails with the
atomicity of the stream of experience as conceived by William James,
hence reinforcing Whitehead’s claim that each actual entity is
an elementary process of experience. Whitehead writes:
The authority of William James can be quoted in support of this
conclusion. He writes: “Either your experience is of no content,
of no change, or it is of a perceptible amount of content or change.
Your acquaintance with reality grows literally by buds or drops of
perception. Intellectually and on reflection you can divide these into
components, but as immediately given, they come totally or not at
all”. (1929c [1985: 68])
Whitehead’s conclusion reads: “actual entities are drops
of experience, complex and interdependent” (1929c [1985: 18]),
and he expresses that reality grows by drops, which together form the
extensive continuum, by writing: “extensiveness becomes, but
‘becoming is not itself extensive”, and “there is a
becoming of continuity, but no continuity of becoming” (1929c
[1985: 35]).
In Whitehead’s London writings, he aims at logically
reconstructing Einstein’s STR and GTR, which are both
deterministic theories of physics, and his notion of causality (that
each occasion presupposes the antecedent world as active in its own
nature) does not seem to leave much room for any creative
self-determination. In his Harvard writings, however, Whitehead
considers deterministic interaction as an abstract limit in
some circumstances of the creative interaction that governs
the becoming of actual entities in all circumstances, and he
makes clear that his notion of causality includes both determination
by the antecedent world (efficient causation of past actual occasions)
and self-determination (final causation by the actual occasion in the
process of becoming). Whitehead writes: 
An actual entity is at once the product of the efficient past, and is
also, in Spinoza’s phrase, causa sui. Every philosophy
recognizes, in some form or other, this factor of self-causation.
(1929a: 150) 
Again: “Self-realization is the ultimate fact of facts. An
actuality is self-realizing, and whatever is self-realizing is an
actuality” (1929a: 222).
Introducing indeterminism also means introducing potentiality next to
actuality, and indeed, Whitehead introduces pure potentials, also
called ‘eternal objects,’ next to actual occasions: 
The eternal objects are the pure potentials of the universe, and the
actual entities differ from each other in their realization of
potentials. (1929c [1985: 149]) 
Eternal objects can qualify (characterize) the objective content and
the subjective form of the feelings that constitute actual entities.
Eternal objects of the objective species are pure
mathematical patterns: “Eternal objects of the objective species
are the mathematical Platonic forms” (1929c [1985: 291]). An
eternal object of the objective species can only qualify the objective
content of a feeling, and “never be an element in the
definiteness of a subjective form” (idem). Eternal objects of
the subjective species, on the other hand, include sense data
and values. 
A member of the subjective species is, in its primary character, an
element in the definiteness of the subjective form of a feeling. It is
a determinate way in which a feeling can feel. (idem) 
But it can also become an eternal object contributing to the
definiteness of the objective content of a feeling, for example, when
a smelly feeling gives rise to a feeling of that smell, or when an
emotionally red feeling is felt by another feeling, and red, an
element of the subjective form of the first feeling, becomes an
element of the objective content of the second feeling.
Whitehead’s concept of self-determination cannot be disjoined
from his idea that each actual entity is an elementary process of
experience, and hence, according to Whitehead, it is relevant both at
the lower level of indeterminist physical interactions and at the
higher level of free human interactions. Indeed, each actual entity is
a concrescence of feelings of the antecedent world, which do not only
have objective content, but also subjective form, and as this
concrescence is not only determined by the objective content (by
what is felt), but also by the subjective form (by
how it is felt), it is not only determined by the antecedent
world that is felt, but also by how it is felt. In other
words, each actual entity has to take into account its past, but that
past only conditions and does not completely determine how
the actual entity will take it into account, and “how
an actual entity becomes constitutes what that
actual entity is” (1929c [1985: 23]).
How does this relate to eternal objects? How an actual entity
takes into account its antecedent world involves “the
realization of eternal objects [or pure potentials] in the
constitution of the actual entity in question” (1929c [1985:
149]), and this is partly decided by the actual entity itself. In
fact, “actuality is the decision amid
potentiality” (1929c [1985: 43]). Another way of
stating the same is that “the subjective form … has the
character of a valuation” and 
according as the valuation is a ‘valuation up’ or ‘a
valuation down,’ the importance of the eternal object [or pure
potentials] is enhanced, or attenuated. (1929c [1985:
240–241])
According to Whitehead, self-determination gives rise to the
probabilistic laws of science as well as human freedom. We cannot
decide what the causes are of our present moment of experience,
but—to a certain extent—we can decide how we take them
into account. In other words, we cannot change what happens to us, but
we can choose how we take it. Because our inner life is constituted
not only by what we feel, but also by how we feel what we feel, not
only by objective content, but also by subjective form, Whitehead
argues that outer compulsion and efficient causation do not have the
last word in our becoming; inner self-determination and final
causation do.
Whitehead completes his metaphysics by introducing God (cf. Part V of
Process and Reality) as one of the elements to further
understand self-determination (and that it does not result in chaos or
mere repetition, but promotes order and novelty) and final causation
(and that it ultimately aims at “intensity of feeling”
(1929c [1985: 27]) or “depth of satisfaction” (1929c
[1985: 105])). According to Whitehead: “God is the organ of
novelty” and order (1929c [1985: 67]); 
Apart from the intervention of God, there could be nothing new in the
world, and no order in the world. The course of creation would be a
dead level of ineffectiveness, with all balance and intensity
progressively excluded by the cross currents of incompatibility;
(1929c [1985: 247]) 
and “God’s purpose in the creative advance is the
evocation of intensities” (1929c [1985: 105]). Actually, this
last quote from Process and Reality is the equivalent of an
earlier quote from Religion in the Making—“The
purpose of God is the attainment of value in the world” (1926b
[1996: 100])—and a later quote from Adventures of
Ideas—“The teleology of the Universe is directed to
the production of Beauty” (1933 [1967: 265]). Each actual
occasion does not only feel its antecedent world (its past), but God
as well, and it is the feeling of God which constitutes the initial
aim for the actual occasion’s becoming—“His
[God’s] tenderness is directed towards each actual occasion, as
it arises” (1929c [1985: 105]). Again, however, the actual
occasion is “finally responsible for the decision by which any
lure for feeling is admitted to efficiency” (1929c [1985: 88]),
even if that lure is divine. In other words, each actual occasion is
“conditioned, though not determined, by an initial subjective
aim supplied by the ground of all order and originality” (1929c
[1985: 108]).
For more details on Whitehead’s metaphysics, cf. the books
listed in section 1 as well as Emmet 1932, Johnson 1952, Eisendrath
1971, Lango 1972, Connelly 1981, Ross 1983, Ford 1984, Nobo 1986,
McHenry 1992, Jones 1998, and Basile 2009.
As Whitehead’s process philosophy gave rise to the movement of
process theology, most philosophers think that his take on religion
was merely positive. This commonplace is wrong. Whitehead wrote: 
Religion is by no means necessarily good. It may be very evil. (1926b
[1996: 17]) 
In considering religion, we should not be obsessed by the idea of its
necessary goodness. This is a dangerous delusion. (1926b [1996: 18])
Indeed history, down to the present day, is a melancholy record of the
horrors which can attend religion: human sacrifice, and in particular,
the slaughter of children, cannibalism, sensual orgies, abject
superstition, hatred as between races, the maintenance of degrading
customs, hysteria, bigotry, can all be laid at its charge. Religion is
the last refuge of human savagery. The uncritical association of
religion with goodness is directly negatived by plain facts. (1926b
[1996: 37])
This being said, Whitehead didn’t hold that religion is
merely negative. To him, religion can be “positive or
negative, good or bad” (1926b [1996: 17]). So after highlighting
that the necessary goodness of religion is a dangerous delusion in
Religion in the Making, Whitehead abruptly adds: “The
point to notice is its transcendent importance” (1926b [1996:
18]). In Science and the Modern World, Whitehead expresses
this transcendent importance of religion as follows:
Religion is the vision of something which stands beyond, behind, and
within, the passing flux of immediate things; something which is real,
and yet waiting to be realized; something which is a remote
possibility, and yet the greatest of present facts; something that
gives meaning to all that passes, and yet eludes all apprehension;
something whose possession is the final good, and yet is beyond all
reach; something which is the ultimate ideal, and the hopeless quest.
(1926a [1967: 191–192])
And after pointing out that religion is the last refuge of human
savagery in Religion in the Making, Whitehead abruptly adds:
“Religion can be, and has been, the main instrument for
progress” (1926b [1996: 37–38]). In Science and the
Modern World this message reads:
Religion has emerged into human experience mixed with the crudest
fantasies of barbaric imagination. Gradually, slowly, steadily the
vision recurs in history under nobler form and with clearer
expression. It is the one element in human experience which
persistently shows an upward trend. It fades and then recurs. But when
it renews its force, it recurs with an added richness and purity of
content. The fact of the religious vision, and its history of
persistent expansion, is our one ground for optimism. (1926a [1967:
192])
With respect to the relationship between science and religion,
Whitehead’s view clearly differs from Stephen Jay Gould’s
view that religion and science do not overlap. Gould wrote: 
The lack of conflict between science and religion arises from a lack
of overlap between their respective domains of professional
expertise—science in the empirical constitution of the universe,
and religion in the search for proper ethical values and the spiritual
meaning of our lives. (1997) 
Whitehead, on the contrary, wrote: “You cannot shelter theology
from science, or science from theology” (1926b [1996: 79]). And:
“The conflict between science and religion is what
naturally occurs in our minds when we think of this subject”
(1926a [1967: 181]).
However, Whitehead did not agree with those who hold that the ideal
solution of the science-religion conflict is the complete annihilation
of religion. Whitehead, on the contrary, held that we should aim at
the integration of science and religion, and turn the impoverishing
opposition between the two into an enriching contrast. According to
Whitehead, both religion and science are important, and he wrote: 
When we consider what religion is for mankind, and what science is, it
is no exaggeration to say that the future course of history depends
upon the decision of this generation as to the relation between them.
(1926a [1967: 181])
Whitehead never sided with those who, in the name of science, oppose
religion with a misplaced and dehumanizing rhetoric of disenchantment,
nor with those who, in the name of religion, oppose science with a
misplaced and dehumanizing exaltation of existent religious dogmas,
codes of behavior, institutions, rituals, etc. As Whitehead wrote:
“There is the hysteria of depreciation, and there is the
opposite hysteria which dehumanizes in order to exalt” (1927
[1985: 91]). Whitehead, on the contrary, urged both scientific and
religious leaders to observe “the utmost toleration of variety
of opinion” (1926a [1967: 187]) as well as the following
advice:
Every age produces people with clear logical intellects, and with the
most praiseworthy grip of the importance of some sphere of human
experience, who have elaborated, or inherited, a scheme of thought
which exactly fits those experiences which claim their interest. Such
people are apt resolutely to ignore, or to explain away, all evidence
which confuses their scheme with contradictory instances. What they
cannot fit in is for them nonsense. An unflinching determination to
take the whole evidence into account is the only method of
preservation against the fluctuating extremes of fashionable opinion.
This advice seems so easy, and is in fact so difficult to follow
(1926a [1967: 187]).
Whitehead’s advice of taking the whole evidence into account
implies taking the inner life of religion into account and not only
its external life:
Life is an internal fact for its own sake, before it is an external
fact relating itself to others. The conduct of external life is
conditioned by environment, but it receives its final quality, on
which its worth depends, from the internal life which is the
self-realization of existence. Religion is the art and the theory of
the internal life of man, so far as it depends on the man himself and
on what is permanent in the nature of things.
This doctrine is the direct negation of the theory that religion is
primarily a social fact. Social facts are of great importance to
religion, because there is no such thing as absolutely independent
existence. You cannot abstract society from man; most psychology is
herd-psychology. But all collective emotions leave untouched the awful
ultimate fact, which is the human being, consciously alone with
itself, for its own sake.
Religion is what the individual does with his own solitariness. (1926b
[1996: 15–16])
Whitehead’s advice also implies the challenge to continually
reshape the outer life of religion in accord with the scientific
developments, while remaining faithful to its inner life. When taking
into account science, religion runs the risk of collapsing. Indeed,
while reshaping its outer life, religion can only avoid implosion by
remaining faithful to its inner life. “Religions commit
suicide”, according to Whitehead, when do they not find
“their inspirations … in the primary expressions of the
intuitions of the finest types of religious lives” (1926b [1996:
144]). And he writes: 
Religion, therefore, while in the framing of dogmas it must admit
modifications from the complete circle of our knowledge, still brings
its own contribution of immediate experience. (1926b [1996:
79–80]) 
On the other hand, when religion shelters itself from the complete
circle of knowledge, it also faces “decay” and, Whitehead
adds, “the Church will perish unless it opens its window”
(1926b [1996: 146]). So there really is no alternative. But that does
not render the task at hand any easier.
Whitehead lists two necessary, but not sufficient, requirements for
religious leaders to reshape, again and again, the outer expressions
of their inner experiences: First, they should stop exaggerating the
importance of the outer life of religion. Whitehead writes: 
Collective enthusiasms, revivals, institutions, churches, rituals,
bibles, codes of behavior, are the trappings of religion, its passing
forms. They may be useful, or harmful; they may be authoritatively
ordained, or merely temporary expedients. But the end of religion is
beyond all this. (1926b [1996: 17]) 
Secondly, they should learn from scientists how to deal with continual
revision. Whitehead writes:
When Darwin or Einstein proclaim theories which modify our ideas, it
is a triumph for science. We do not go about saying that there is
another defeat for science, because its old ideas have been abandoned.
We know that another step of scientific insight has been gained.
Religion will not regain its old power until it can face change in the
same spirit as does science. Its principles may be eternal, but the
expression of those principles requires continual development. This
evolution of religion is in the main a disengagement of its own proper
ideas in terms of the imaginative picture of the world entertained in
previous ages. Such a release from the bonds of imperfect science is
all to the good. (1926a [1967: 188–189])
In this respect, Whitehead offers the following example: 
The clash between religion and science, which has relegated the earth
to the position of a second-rate planet attached to a second-rate sun,
has been greatly to the benefit of the spirituality of religion by
dispersing [a number of] medieval fancies. (1926a [1967: 190]) 
On the other hand, Whitehead is well aware that religion more often
fails than succeeds in this respect, and he writes, for example, that
both 
Christianity and Buddhism … have suffered from the rise of
… science, because neither of them had … the requisite
flexibility of adaptation. (1926b [1996: 146])
If the condition of mutual tolerance is satisfied, then, according to
Whitehead: “A clash of doctrines is not a disaster—it is
an opportunity” (1926a [1967: 186]). In other words, if this
condition is satisfied, then the clash between religion and science is
an opportunity on the path toward their integration or, as Whitehead
puts it: 
The clash is a sign that there are wider truths and finer perspectives
within which a reconciliation of a deeper religion and a more subtle
science will be found. (1926a [1967: 185])
According to Whitehead, the task of philosophy is “to absorb
into one system all sources of experience” (1926b [1996: 149]),
including the intuitions at the basis of both science and religion,
and in Religion in the Making, he expresses the basic
religious intuition as follows:
There is a quality of life which lies always beyond the mere fact of
life; and when we include the quality in the fact, there is still
omitted the quality of the quality. It is not true that the finer
quality is the direct associate of obvious happiness or obvious
pleasure. Religion is the direct apprehension that, beyond such
happiness and such pleasure remains the function of what is actual and
passing, that it contributes its quality as an immortal fact to the
order which informs the world. (1926b [1996: 80])
The first aspect of this dual intuition that “our existence is
more than a succession of bare facts” (idem) is that the quality
or value of each of the successive occasions of life derives from a
finer quality or value, which lies beyond the mere facts of life, and
even beyond obvious happiness and pleasure, namely, the finer quality
or value of which life is informed by God. The second aspect is that
each of the successive occasions of life contributes its quality or
value as an immortal fact to God.
In Process and Reality, Whitehead absorbed this dual
religious intuition in terms of the bipolar—primordial and
consequent—nature of God.
God viewed as primordial does not determine the becoming of each
actual occasion, but conditions it (cf. supra—the initial
subjective aim). He does not force, but tenderly persuades each actual
occasion to actualize—from “the absolute wealth of
potentiality” (1929: 343)—value-potentials relevant for
that particular becoming. “God”, according to Whitehead,
“is the poet of the world, with tender patience leading it by
his vision of truth, beauty, and goodness” (1929c [1985:
346]).
“The ultimate evil in the temporal world”, Whitehead
writes, 
lies in the fact that the past fades, that time is a “perpetual
perishing.” … In the temporal world, it is the empirical
fact that process entails loss. (1929c [1985: 340]) 
In other words, from a merely factual point of view, “human life
is a flash of occasional enjoyments lighting up a mass of pain and
misery, a bagatelle of transient experience” (1926a [1967:
192]). According to Whitehead, however, this is not the whole story.
On 8 April 1928, while preparing the Gifford Lectures that became
Process and Reality, Whitehead wrote to Rosalind Greene:
I am working at my Giffords. The problem of problems which bothers me,
is the real transitoriness of things—and yet!!—I am
equally convinced that the great side of things is weaving something
ageless and immortal: something in which personalities retain the
wonder of their radiance—and the fluff sinks into utter
triviality. But I cannot express it at all—no system of words
seems up to the job. (Unpublished letter archived by the Whitehead Research Project)
Whitehead’s attempt to express it in Process and
Reality reads:
There is another side to the nature of God which cannot be omitted.
… God, as well as being primordial, is also consequent …
God is dipolar. (1929c [1985: 345])
The consequent nature of God is his judgment on the world. He saves
the world as it passes into the immediacy of his own life. It is the
judgment of a tenderness which loses nothing that can be saved. (1929c
[1985: 346])
The consequent nature of God is the fluent world become
‘everlasting’ … in God. (1929c [1985: 347])
Whitehead’s dual description of God as tender persuader
and tender savior reveals his affinity with “the
Galilean origin of Christianity” (1929c [1985: 343]). Indeed,
his 
theistic philosophy … does not emphasize the ruling Caesar, or
the ruthless moralist, or the unmoved mover. It dwells upon the tender
elements in the world, which slowly and in quietness operate by love.
(idem)
One of the major reasons why Whitehead’s process philosophy is
popular among theologians, and gave rise to process theology, is the
fact that it helps to overcome the doctrine of an omnipotent God
creating everything out of nothing. This creatio ex nihilo
doctrine implies God’s responsibility for everything that is
evil, and also that God is the only ultimate reality. In other words,
it prevents the reconciliation of divine love and human suffering as
well as the reconciliation of the various religious traditions, for
example, theistic Christianity and nontheistic Buddhism. In yet other
words, the creatio ex nihilo doctrine is a stumbling block
for theologians involved in theodicy or interreligious dialogue.
Contrary to it, Whitehead’s process philosophy holds that there
are three ultimate (but inseparable) aspects of total reality: God
(the divine actual entity), the world (the universe of all finite
actual occasions), and the creativity (the twofold power to exert
efficient and final causation) that God and all finite actual
occasions embody. The distinction between God and creativity (that God
is not the only instance of creativity) implies that there is no God
with the power completely to determine the becoming of all actual
occasions in the world—they are instances of creativity too. In
this sense, God is not omnipotent, but can be conceived as “the
fellow-sufferer who understands” (1929c [1985: 351]). Moreover,
the Whiteheadian doctrine of three ultimates—the one supreme
being or God, the many finite beings or the cosmos, and being itself
or creativity—also implies a religious pluralism that holds that
the different kinds of religious experience are (not experiences of
the same ultimate reality, but) diverse modes of experiencing diverse
ultimate aspects of the totality of reality. For example:
One of these [three ultimates], corresponding with what Whitehead
calls “creativity”, has been called
“Emptiness” (“Sunyata”) or
“Dharmakaya” by Buddhists, “Nirguna Brahman”
by Advaita Vedantists, “the Godhead” by Meister Eckhart,
and “Being Itself” by Heidegger and Tillich (among
others). It is the formless ultimate reality. The other
ultimate, corresponding with what Whitehead calls “God”,
is not Being Itself but the Supreme Being. It is in-formed
and the source of forms (such as truth, beauty, and justice). It has
been called “Amida Buddha”, “Sambhogakaya”,
“Saguna Brahman”, “Ishvara”,
“Yaweh”, “Christ”, and “Allah”.
(D. Griffin 2005: 47)
[Some] forms of Taoism and many primal religions, including Native
American religions […] regard the cosmos as sacred. By
recognizing the cosmos as a third ultimate, we are able to see that
these cosmic religions are also oriented toward something truly
ultimate in the nature of things. (D. Griffin 2005: 49)
The religious pluralism implication of Whitehead’s doctrine of
three ultimates has been drawn most clearly by John Cobb. In
“John Cobb’s Whiteheadian Complementary Pluralism”,
David Griffin writes:
Cobb’s view that the totality of reality contains three
ultimates, along with the recognition that a particular tradition
could concentrate on one, two, or even all three of them, gives us a
basis for understanding a wide variety of religious experiences as
genuine responses to something that is really there to be experienced.
“When we understand global religious experience and thought in
this way”, Cobb emphasizes, “it is easier to view the
contributions of diverse traditions as complementary”. (D.
Griffin 2005: 51)
Whitehead’s key philosophical concept—the internal
relatedness of occasions of experience—distanced him from the
idols of logical positivism. Indeed, his reliance on our intuition of
the extensive relatedness of events (and hence, of the space-time
metric) was at variance with both Poincaré’s
conventionalism and Einstein’s interpretation of relativity: his
reliance on our intuition of the causal relatedness of events, and of
both the efficient and the final aspects of causation, was an insult
to the anti-metaphysical dogmas of Hume and Russell; his method of
causal explanation was also an antipode of Ernst Mach’s method
of economic description; his philosophical affinity with James and
Bergson as well as his endeavor to harmonize science and religion made
him liable to the Russellian charge of anti-intellectualism; and his
genuine modesty and aversion to public controversy made him invisible
at the philosophical firmament dominated by the brilliance of Ludwig
Wittgenstein.
At first—because of Whitehead’s Principia
Mathematica collaboration with Russell as well as his application
of mathematical logic to abstract the basic concepts of
physics—logical positivists and analytic philosophers admired
Whitehead. But when Whitehead published Science and the Modern
World, the difference between Whitehead’s thought and
theirs became obvious, and they grew progressively more dissatisfied
over the direction in which Whitehead was moving. Susan Stebbing of
the Cambridge school of analysis is only one of many examples that
could be evoked here (cf. Chapman 2013: 43–49), and in order to
find a more positive reception of Whitehead’s philosophical
work, one has to turn to opponents of analytic philosophy such as
Robin George Collingwood (for example, Collingwood 1945). The
differences with logical positivism and analytic philosophy, however,
should not lead philosophers to neglect the affinities of
Whitehead’s thought with these philosophical currents (cf.
Shields 2003, Desmet & Weber 2010, Desmet & Rusu 2012, Riffert
2012).
Despite signs of interest in Whitehead by a number of famous
philosophers—for example, Hannah Arendt, Maurice Merleau-Ponty
and Gilles Deleuze—it is fair to say that Whitehead’s
process philosophy would most likely have entered oblivion if the
Chicago Divinity School and the Claremont School of Theology had not
shown a major interest in it. In other words, not philosophers but
theologians saved Whitehead’s process philosophy from oblivion.
For example, Charles Hartshorne, who taught at the University of
Chicago from 1928 to 1955, where he was a dominant intellectual force
in the Divinity School, has been instrumental in highlighting the
importance of Whitehead’s process philosophy, which dovetailed
with his own, largely independently developed thought. Hartshorne
wrote:
The century which produced some terrible things produced a scientist
scarcely second in genius and character to any that ever lived,
Einstein, and a philosopher who, I incline to say, is similarly second
to none, unless it be Plato. To make no use of genius of this order is
hardly wise; for it is indeed a rarity. A mathematician sensitive to
so many of the values in our culture, so imaginative and inventive in
his thinking, so eager to learn from the great minds of the past and
the present, so free from any narrow partisanship, religious or
irreligious, is one person in hundreds of millions. He can be
mistaken, but even his mistakes may be more instructive than most
other writers’ truth. (2010: 30)
After mentioning a number of other theologians next to Hartshorne as
part of “the first wave of … impressive
Whitehead-inspired scholars”, Michel Weber—in his
Introduction to the two-volume Handbook of Whiteheadian Process
Thought—writes:
In the sixties emerged John B. Cobb, Jr. and Shubert M. Ogden.
Cobb’s Christian Natural Theology remains a landmark in
the field. The journal Process Studies was created in 1971 by
Cobb and Lewis S. Ford; the Center for Process Studies was
established in 1973 by Cobb and David Ray Griffin in Claremont. The
result of these developments was that Whiteheadian process scholarship
has acquired, and kept, a fair visibility … (Weber &
Desmond 2008: 25)
Indeed, inspired mainly by Cobb and Griffin, many other centers,
societies, associations, projects and conferences of Whiteheadian
process scholarship have seen the light of day all over the
world—nowadays most prominently in the People’s Republic
of China (cf. Weber & Desmond 2008: 26–30). In fact, Weber
himself has created in 2001 the Whitehead Psychology Nexus
and the Chromatiques whiteheadiennes scholarly societies, and
he has been the driving force behind several book series, one of
which—the Process Thought Series—includes the
already mentioned Handbook of Whiteheadian Process Thought,
in which 101 internationally renowned Whitehead scholars give an
impressive overview of the 2008 status of their research findings in
an enormous variety of domains (cf. The Centre for Philosophical
Practice
 [Other Internet Resources, OIR]
 and Armour 2010). Missing in the Handbook, however, are most
Whitehead scholars reading Whitehead through Deleuzian
glasses—especially Isabelle Stengers, whose 2011 book,
Thinking with Whitehead, cannot be ignored. The Lure of
Whitehead, edited by Nicholas Gaskill and A. J. Nocek in 2014,
can largely remedy that shortcoming. Important for Whitehead
scholarship, next to the many book series initiated by Weber, are the
older SUNY Series in Constructive Postmodern Thought, the
recent Contemporary Whitehead Studies and the Critical
Edition of Whitehead (cf. Whitehead Research Project
 [OIR])
 as well as the new Toward Ecological Civilization Series
(cf. Process Century Press
 [OIR]).
 In the Series Preface of the latter series, John Cobb writes:
We live in the ending of an age. But the ending of the modern period
differs from the ending of previous periods, such as the classical or
the medieval. The amazing achievements of modernity make it possible,
even likely, that its end will also be the end of civilization, of
many species, or even of the human species. At the same time, we are
living in an age of new beginnings that give promise of an ecological
civilization. Its emergence is marked by a growing sense of urgency
and deepening awareness that the changes must go to the roots of what
has led to the current threat of catastrophe.
In June 2015, the 10th Whitehead International Conference was held in
Claremont, CA. Called “Seizing an Alternative: Toward an
Ecological Civilization”, it claimed an organic, relational,
integrated, nondual, and processive conceptuality is needed, and that
Alfred North Whitehead provides this in a remarkably comprehensive and
rigorous way. We proposed that he could be “the philosopher of
ecological civilization”. With the help of those who have come
to an ecological vision in other ways, the conference explored this
Whiteheadian alternative, showing how it can provide the shared vision
so urgently needed.
Cobb refers to the tenth of the bi-annual International Whitehead
Conferences, which are sponsored by the International Process
Network. The International Whitehead Conference has been held at
locations around the globe since 1981. This is an important venture in
global Whiteheadian thought, as key Whiteheadian scholars from a
variety of disciplines and countries come together for the continued
pursuit of critically engaging a process worldview.