There are limits to what can usefully be said about the concept of
alienation in general; that is, what can usefully be said without
getting involved in the complexities of particular accounts, advanced
by particular authors or associated with particular intellectual
traditions. However, there is a basic idea here which seems to capture
most authors and traditions, and which is not unduly elusive or
difficult to understand.
This basic idea of alienation picks out a range of social and
psychological ills involving a self and other. More precisely, it
understands alienation as consisting in the problematic separation of
a subject and object that properly belong together.
That formulation of the basic idea is perhaps too abbreviated to be
easily intelligible, and certainly benefits from a little elaboration.
The characterisation of alienation offered here—as a social or
psychological ill involving the problematic separation of a subject
and object that properly belong together—involves three
constituent elements: a subject, an object, and the relation between
them. It will be helpful to say a little more about each of these in
turn.
First, the subject here is a self; typically, but not
necessarily, a person, an individual agent. ‘Not
necessarily’ because the subject could also be, for instance, a
group of some kind. There seems to be no good reason to deny that a
collective as well as an individual agent might be alienated from some
object. For instance, as well as Anna being alienated from her
government, it might be that women or citizens find themselves
alienated from their government.
Second, the relevant object can take a variety of forms.
These include: entities which are not a subject; another subject or
subjects; and oneself. The object here might be an entity which is not
a subject; for example, Beatrice might be alienated from the natural
world, from a social practice, from an institution, or from social
norms, where none of those entities are understood as agents of any
kind. In addition, the object might be an entity which is another
subject, another person or group; for example, Beatrice might be
alienated from her childhood friend Cecile, and Beatrice might also be
alienated from her own family. Lastly, the object here might be the
original subject; that is, there might be reflexive variants of the
relation, for example, in which Beatrice is alienated from
herself.
Third, the relation is one of problematic separation between
a subject and object that properly belong together. On the present
account, all of these elements are required: there has to be a
separation; the separation has to be problematic; and it has to obtain
between a  subject and object that properly belong together.
The idea of separation is important. Not all problematic
relations between relevant entities involve alienation. For instance,
being overly integrated into some other object might also be a
problematic or dysfunctional relation but it is not what is typically
thought of as alienation. Imagine, for instance, that Cecile has no
life, no identity, finds no meaning, outside of her family membership.
It is tempting, at least for modern individuals, to say that she has
an ‘unhealthy’ relationship with her family, but it would
seem odd to say that she was alienated from it. Alienation is
typically a problematic separation from something.
What I am calling problematic separations might be indicated by a wide
variety of words and phrases. No particular vocabulary seems to be
required by the basic idea. The linguistic variety here might include
words suggesting: breaks (‘splits’,
‘ruptures’, ‘bifurcations’,
‘divisions’, and so on); isolation
(‘indifference’, ‘meaninglessness’,
‘powerlessness’, ‘disconnection’, and so on);
and hostility (‘conflicts’, ‘antagonism’,
‘domination’, and so on). All these, and more, might be
ways of indicating problematic separations of the relevant kind. Of
course, particular authors may use language more systematically, but
there seems little reason to insist that a specific vocabulary is
required by the basic idea.
The idea of the relevant separation having to be, in some way,
problematic, is also important. Separations between a subject
and object do not appear necessarily problematic. Relations of
indifference, for example, might or might not be problematic. For an
unproblematic instance, consider Daniela, a distinguished Spanish
architect, who—when it is brought to her
attention—discovers that she is unconcerned with, and apathetic
towards, the complex constitutional relationship between the Pacific
islands of Niue and New Zealand. Her indifference in this case looks
unproblematic. Less obviously perhaps, the same might be true of
relations of hostility; that is, that hostility also might or might
not be problematic. For an unproblematic instance, consider Enid and
Francesca, two highly competitive middleweight boxers competing in the
Olympics for the first time. It may well be that a certain amount of
antagonism and rancour between these two individual sportswomen is
entirely appropriate; after all, if Enid identifies too closely with
Francesca—imagine her experiencing every blow to
Francesca’s desires and interests as a defeat for her
own—she is not only unlikely to make it to the podium, but is
also, in some way, failing qua boxer.
The suggestion here is that to be appropriately
problematic—appropriate, that is, to constitute examples of
alienation—the separations have to obtain between a subject and
object that properly belong together (Wood 2004: 3). More
precisely, that the candidate separations have to frustrate or
conflict with the proper harmony or connectedness between that subject
and object. Imagine, for instance, that both the indifference of
Daniela, and the hostility of Enid, also takes appropriately
problematic forms. Perhaps we discover that Daniela has become
increasingly indifferent to her lifelong vocation, that she no longer
cares about the design and construction issues over which she had
previously always enthused and obsessed; whilst Enid has started
bullying her domestic partner, not only behaving in an aggressive and
intolerant way, but on occasion even threatening physical
violence. What makes these examples of separation (indifference and
hostility) appear appropriately problematic is that they violate
some baseline condition of harmony or connectedness between the
relevant entities. (A baseline condition that does not seem to obtain
in the earlier examples of unproblematic separation.)
Alienation obtains when a separation between a subject and object that
properly belong together, frustrates or conflicts with that baseline
connectedness or harmony. To say that they properly belong together is
to suggest that the harmonious or connected relation between the
subject and object is rational, natural, or good. And, in turn, that
the separations frustrating or conflicting with that baseline
condition, are correspondingly irrational, unnatural, or bad. Of
course, that is not yet to identify what might establish this baseline
harmony as, say, rational, natural, or good. Nor is it to claim that
the disruption of the baseline harmony is all-things-considered bad,
that alienation could never be a justified or positive step. (These
issues are discussed further in sections 5.1 and 6.2,
respectively.)
This basic idea of alienation appears to give us a diverse but
distinct set of social and psychological phenomena; picking out a
class of entities which might have little in common other than this
problematic separation of subject and object. The problematic
separations here are between the self (including individual and
collective agents) and other (including other selves, one’s own self, and entities which are not subjects). So understood, the
basic idea seems to play largely a diagnostic role; that is, the
problematic separations might indicate that something is awry with
self or social world, but do not, in themselves, offer an explanation
of, or suggest a solution to, those ills.
On this account, the basic idea of alienation looks conceptually
rather modest. In particular, this idea is not necessarily committed
to certain stronger claims that might sometimes be found in the
literature. That all these social and psychological ills are
characterised by a problematic separation, for example, does not make
alienation a natural kind, anymore than—to borrow an example
associated with John Stuart Mill—the class of white objects is a
natural kind (Wood 2004: 4). Nor, for instance, need there be any
suggestion that the various forms of alienation identified by this
account are necessarily related to each other; that, for example, they
are all explained by the same underlying factor. Of course, particular
theorists may have constructed—more or less
plausible—accounts of alienation that do advance those, or
similar, stronger claims. For instance, the young Karl Marx
(1818–1883) is often understood to have suggested that one of the
systematic forms of alienation somehow explains all the other ones
(Wood 2004: 4). The claim here is simply that these, and other,
stronger claims are not required by the basic idea.
That said, the basic idea appears to require only a few additions in
order to extend its critical reach significantly. Consider two further
suggestions often made in this context: that alienation picks out an
array of non-trivial social and psychological ills that are prevalent
in modern liberal societies; and that the idea of
‘alienation’ is distinct from that of
‘injustice’ on which much modern liberal political
philosophy is focused. These familiar claims are not extravagant, but,
so understood, the concept of alienation would appear to have some
critical purchase on both contemporary liberal societies (for
containing alienation) and contemporary liberal political philosophy
(for neglecting alienation). The implied critical
suggestion—that the concept of alienation reveals that something
significant is awry with both liberal society and liberal
understandings—looks far from trivial. (Of course, establishing
that those purported failings reveal fundamental flaws in either
liberal society, or liberal political philosophy, is rather harder to
accomplish.)
Particular theories of alienation typically restrict the range of
problematic separations that they are interested in, and introduce
more explanatory accounts of the extent and prognosis of alienation so
characterised. They might, for instance, focus on social rather than
psychological ills, and maintain that these are caused by certain
structural features—particular aspects of its economic
arrangements, for instance—of the relevant society. Such
explanatory claims are of considerable interest. After all,
understanding the cause of a problem looks like a helpful step towards
working out whether, and how, it might be alleviated or overcome.
However, these explanatory claims are not readily open to general
discussion, given the significant disagreements between particular
thinkers and traditions that exist in this context. Note also that
introducing these various restrictions of scope, and various competing
explanatory claims, increases the complexity of the relevant account.
However, these complexities alone scarcely explain the—somewhat
undeserved—reputation that the concept of alienation has for
being unduly difficult or elusive. It might be that their impact is
compounded—at least in the intellectual traditions with which
the concept of alienation is most often associated (Hegelianism and
Marxism)—by language and argumentative structures that are
unfamiliar to some readers.
At this point, two related, and broadly methodological,
disclaimers—acknowledging the limitations of this
entry—may be appropriate. They concern intellectual history and
textual exegesis.
Although reference is made to past authors and traditions, very little
is said here about the historical development of the concept of
alienation. The term is usually thought to have comparatively modern
European origins. In English, the term had emerged by the early
fifteenth century, already possessing an interesting cluster of
associations. ‘Alienation’, and its cognates, could
variously refer: to an individual’s estrangement from God (it
appears thus in the Wycliffe Bible); to legal transfers of ownership
rights (initially, especially in land); and to mental derangement (a
historical connection that survived into the nineteenth-century usage
of the term ‘alienist’ for a psychiatric doctor). It is
sometimes said that ‘alienation’ entered the German
language via English legal usage, although G.W.F. Hegel
(1770–1831), for one, typically uses
‘Entäusserung’, and not
‘Entfremdung’ to refer to property transfer
(Hegel 1991a: §65). (It is, of course, the latter term which has
an etymological link to ‘fremd’ or
‘alien’.) Moreover, perhaps the first philosophical
discussion of alienation, at least of any sophistication, was in
French. In the Second Discourse, Jean-Jacques Rousseau
(1712–1778) diagnoses ‘inflamed’ forms of amour
propre—a love of self (which is sometimes rendered as
‘pride’ or ‘vanity’ in older English
translations)—whose toxicity is amplified by certain social and
historical developments, as manifesting themselves in alienated forms
of self; that is, in the actions and lives of individuals who have
somehow become divided from their own nature (Rousseau 1997).
Similarly, despite reference here to various texts, the exegetical
dimensions of the present discussion are also limited, and might be
treated with a certain caution. Not least, the descriptions of the
views of particular authors and traditions function, at least in part,
as somewhat schematic place holders for particular views about
alienation. Exegetical accuracy is not abandoned lightly, but the messy
reality of inconsistency, chronology, textual detail, and contested
interpretation, is not the focus. Those interested in more accurate and
sophisticated accounts of the authors and traditions mentioned here
might usefully consult, in the first instance, the appropriate entries
elsewhere in this Encyclopaedia.
It may be helpful to say something about the relation of alienation to
what can be called ‘adjacent’ concepts. The two examples
discussed here are both drawn from Hegelian and Marxist traditions;
namely, the concepts of fetishism and objectification. Disambiguating
the relationship between these various concepts can help clarify the
general shape of alienation. However, they are also discussed because
particular accounts of alienation, both within and beyond those two
traditions, are sometimes said—more or less plausibly—to
conflate alienation either with fetishism, or with objectification.
On the present account, even if some particular treatments of
alienation do equate the relevant concepts with each other, alienation
is better understood as not synonymous with either fetishism or
objectification.
The first of the adjacent ideas discussed here is fetishism.
‘Fetishism’ refers here to the idea of human creations
which have somehow escaped (inappropriately separated out from) human
control, achieved the appearance of independence, and come to enslave
and oppress their creators. (The parenthesis in the previous sentence
is intended to help identify a suggestive connection with the concept
of alienation.)
Within Hegelian and Marxist traditions, a surprisingly wide range of
social phenomena—including religion, the state, and private
property—have been characterised as having the character of a
fetish. Indeed, Marx sometimes treats the phenomenon of fetishism as a
distinguishing feature of modernity; where previous historical epochs
were characterised by the rule of persons over persons, capitalist
society is characterised by the rule of things over persons.
‘Capital’, we might say, has come to replace the feudal
lord. Consider, for instance, the frequency with which ‘market
forces’ are understood and represented within modern culture as
something outside of human control, as akin to natural forces which
decide our fate. In a famous image—from the
Communist Manifesto—Marx portrays modern bourgeois
society as ‘like the sorcerer, who is no longer able to control
the powers of the nether world whom he has called up by his
spells’ (Marx and Engels 1976: 489).
In order to elaborate this idea of fetishism, consider the example
of Christian religious consciousness, as broadly understood in the
writings of Ludwig Feuerbach (1804–1872). (Feuerbach was a contemporary
of, and important influence on, the young Marx, amongst others.) The
famous, and disarmingly simple, conclusion of Feuerbach’s
philosophical analysis of religious consciousness is that, in
Christianity, individuals are worshipping the predicates of human
nature, freed of their individual limitations and projected onto an
ideal entity. For Feuerbach, however, this is no purely intellectual
error, but is rather ripe with social, political, and psychological
consequences, as this ‘deity’ now comes to oppress and
enslave us. Not least, the Christian God demands real world sacrifices
from individuals, typically in the form of a denial or repression of
their essential human needs. For instance, the Christian idea of
marriage is portrayed as operating in a way that represses and
punishes, rather than hallows and satisfies, the flesh of humankind
(Leopold 2007: 207–210).
Religious consciousness, on this Feuerbachian account, looks to be a
case where alienation takes the form of fetishism. That is, there is
both a problematic separation here between subject and object
(individuals and their own human nature), and it takes the form of a
human creation (the idea of the species embodied in God) escaping our
control, achieving the appearance of independence, and coming to
enslave and oppress us. The same looks to be true, on Marx’s
account, of production in contemporary capitalist societies. Capital
takes on the appearance of an independent social power which determines
what is produced, how it is produced, and the economic (and other)
relations between producers. Marx himself was struck by the parallel,
and in the first volume of Capital, offers the following
analogy: ‘As, in religion, man is governed by the products of
his own brain, so in capitalistic production, he is governed by the
products of his own hand’ (Marx 1996: 616). However, rather than
equating alienation and fetishism, fetishism is better thought of as a
particular form that alienation might take. (To be clear, there looks
to be no reason to think that Marx would, or should, disagree with this
claim.)
Note, in particular, that although Marx’s discussions of
alienation often utilise the language of fetishism, not all of them
take that form. Consider, for instance, the problematic separation
sometimes said to exist between modern individuals and the natural
world, as the former think of themselves and behave as if they were
isolated, or cut off, or estranged, from the latter. The idea here is
reflected in the less ‘Promethean’ moments of Marx’s
work, for example, in the suggestion that the appropriate relation
between humankind and nature would involve not our instrumental
domination of ‘the other’, but rather a sympathetic
appreciation of our complex interdependence with the natural world of
which we are, in reality, a part. Those moments are perhaps most
evident in Marx’s discussion of contemporary
‘ecological’ threats—including deforestation,
pollution, and population growth—and typically involve his
‘metabolic’ account of the appropriate relation between
humankind and nature (Foster 1999). The inappropriate modern relation
between humankind and nature here looks like an example of
alienation—there is a problematic separation of self and
other—but certain central characteristics of fetishism would
appear to be absent. Most obviously, the natural world is not a human
creation which has escaped our control; not least, because it is not a
human creation. Moreover, the impact on humankind of this particular
separation does not suit very comfortably the language of enslavement
and oppression. Indeed, if anything, our inappropriate separation from
the natural world seems to find expression in our ruthlessly
instrumental treatment of nature, rather than in nature’s
tyranny over us.
The second of the adjacent ideas discussed here is objectification.
Some preliminary disambiguation may be helpful here. In particular,
the concept in question is not the idea of
objectification—familiar from certain feminist and Kantian
traditions—which concerns the moral impropriety of
systematically treating a human being as if she were an object, thing,
or commodity (Nussbaum 1995). That is a distinct and important
phenomenon, but it is not the one that is relevant here. In the
present context, objectification refers rather to the role of
productive activity in mediating the evolving relationship between
humankind and the natural world. This association is most familiar
from certain Hegelian and Marxist traditions, with Marx sometimes
using the German term ‘Vergegenständlichung’
to capture it (e.g., 1975: 272).
Humankind is seen as being part of, and dependent upon, the natural
world. However, nature is initially somewhat stingy with its
blessings; as a result, human beings confront the natural world from
an original position of scarcity, struggling through productive
activity of various kinds, to change the material form of
nature—typically through making things—in ways that make
it better reflect and satisfy their own needs and interests. In that
evolving process, both the natural world and humankind come to be
transformed. Through this collective shaping of their material
surroundings, and their increasing productivity, the natural world is
made to be, and seem, less ‘other’, and human beings
thereby come to objectify themselves, to express their essential
powers in concrete form. These world transforming productive
activities, we might say, embody the progressive self-realisation of
humankind.
On this account, all productive activity would seem to involve
objectification. However, Marx insists that not all productive
activity involves alienation. Moreover, some other forms of
alienation—unrelated to productive activity—have no
obvious connection with objectification.
Marx maintains that productive activity might or might not take an
alienated form. For instance, productive activity in capitalist
societies is typically said to take an alienated form; whereas
productive activity in communist societies is typically predicted to
take an unalienated or meaningful form. Schematically, we might (a)
characterise alienated labour as: being forced; not involving
self-realisation (not developing and deploying essential human
powers); not intended to satisfy the needs of others; and not
appropriately appreciated by those others, while (b) unalienated or
meaningful work might be characterised as: being freely chosen;
involving self-realisation (the development and deployment of
essential human powers); being intended to satisfy the needs of
others; and being appropriately appreciated by those others. Productive activity mediates the relationship
between humankind and the natural world in both of these societies,
but alienation is found only in the capitalist case.
For an example of a view which might be said to equate objectification
with alienation, consider what is sometimes called the
‘Christian’ view of work. On this account, work is seen as
a necessary evil, an unpleasant activity unfortunately required for
our survival. It owes its name to its embrace of the claim that it was
only after the Fall that human beings were required to work by the
sweat of their brows (see Genesis 31:9). On Marx’s account, or
something like it, one might characterise this Christian view as
mistakenly equating objectification and alienation, confusing
productive activity as such with its stunted and inhuman
forms. Indeed, one might go further and suggest that this kind of
confusion reflects the alienated social condition of humankind,
embodying an emblematic failure to understand that material production
is a central realm in which human beings can express, in free and
creative ways, the kind of creatures that they are.
In addition, according to the basic idea defended here, equating
alienation and objectification fails to appreciate that certain forms
of alienation might have nothing at all to do with productive activity.
Their mutual hostility and undisguised contempt confirm that Gillian
and her sister Hanna are alienated from each other, but there seems
little reason to assume that their estrangement is necessarily related
to the world of work or their respective place in it. The
sisters’ engagement in productive activity and the forms that it
takes, might well have nothing to do with the problematic separation
here. Imagine that the latter arose from a combination of sibling
rivalry, stubbornness, and a chance misunderstanding at a time of
family crisis involving the death of a parent. This possibility gives
us another reason not to equate alienation and objectification. (Again,
for clarity, there seems to be no obvious reason why Marx would, or
should, deny the intelligibility or utility of this suggestion.)
In short, on the present account, neither fetishism, nor
objectification, are identical with alienation. Rather than being
synonymous, these concepts only partially overlap. Fetishism can be
understood as picking out only a subset—on some accounts perhaps
a large subset—of cases of alienation. And there are forms of
objectification which do not involve alienation (the meaningful work
in communist societies, for instance), as well as forms of
alienation—outside of productive activity—with no obvious
connection to objectification.
The concept of alienation may not be unduly elusive or difficult to
understand, but it obviously doesn’t follow that there are no
complexities or slippery issues here. Perhaps especially once we get
beyond the basic idea, or venture further into the relevant
literature.
Three interesting complexities are introduced here. Respectively,
they concern: the distinction between subjective and objective
alienation; the need for a criterion identifying candidate separations
as problematic; and the relationship between alienation and value.
This section provides an introduction to, and some initial
reflections on, the first of these interesting complexities; namely,
the division of alienation into subjective and objective varieties
(Hardimon 1994: 119–122). Not all theorists or traditions operate with
this distinction, but it can be a great help in understanding the
diagnosis of particular authors and particular cases.
First, alienation is sometimes characterised in terms of how
subjects feel, or think about, or otherwise experience, the problematic
separation here. This can be called subjective alienation. For
instance, Ingrid might be said to be alienated because she feels
estranged from the world, because she experiences her life as lacking
meaning, because she does not feel ‘at home [zu
Hause]’ in it—to adopt the evocative shorthand
sometimes used by Hegel—and so on (e.g. 1991a: §4A,
§187A, and §258A).
Second, alienation is sometimes characterised in terms which make no
reference to the feelings, thoughts, or experience, of subjects. This
can be called objective alienation. For instance, Julieta
might be said to be alienated because some separation prevents her from
developing and deploying her essential human characteristics, prevents
her from engaging in self-realising activities, and so on. Such claims
are controversial in a variety of ways, but they assume alienation is
about the frustration of that potential, and they make no reference to
whether Julieta herself experiences that lack as a loss. Maybe Julieta
genuinely enjoys her self-realisation lacking life, and even
consciously rejects the goal of self-realisation as involving an overly
demanding and unattractive ideal.
Subjective alienation is sometimes disparaged; treated, for example,
as concerning ‘merely’ how an individual
‘feels’ about ‘real’ alienation. On the present
account, that is a mistake. Subjective alienation is better understood
as a full-blown, meaningful, variety of alienation, albeit not the only
one. If you genuinely feel alienated, then you really are
(subjectively) alienated. (‘[G]enuinely’ in order to
disallow, not least, certain situations in which individuals might
simply be mistaken about what it is that they feel; for example,
perhaps until very recently Ingrid systematically confused estrangement
with indigestion, leading her to misidentify instances of both.)
This distinction between subjective and objective alienation can give
us a useful diagnostic schema. Let us assume—no doubt
controversially—that all combinations of these two forms of
alienation are possible. That gives us four social outcomes to
discuss:
Where: ◻ = Absent and ◼ = Present
These various alternative combinations—numbered (i) to (iv)
above—correspond, very roughly, to the ways in which particular
authors have characterised particular kinds of social arrangement or
types of society. Consider, for example, the different views of modern
class-divided society taken by Hegel and Marx.
Marx can be characterised as diagnosing contemporary capitalist
society as corresponding to situation (i); that is, as being a social
world which contains both objective and subjective alienation. On what
we might call his standard view, Marx allows that objective and
subjective alienation are conceptually distinct, but assumes that in
capitalist societies they are typically found together sociologically
(perhaps with the subjective forms tending to track the objective
ones). However, there are passages where he deviates from that
standard view, and—without abandoning the thought that objective
alienation is, in some sense, more fundamental—appears to allow
that, on occasion, subjective and objective alienation can also come
apart sociologically. At least, that is one way of reading a
well-known passage in The Holy Family which suggests that
capitalists might be objectively but not subjectively alienated. In
these remarks, Marx recognises that capitalists do not get to engage
in self-realising activities of the right kind (hence their objective
alienation), but observes that—unlike the proletariat—the
capitalists are content in their estrangement; they feel
‘at ease’ in, and even feel ‘strengthened’ by,
it (Marx and Engels 1975: 36).
In contrast, Hegel maintains that the modern social world
approximates to something more like situation (iii); that is, as being
a social world not containing objective alienation, but still
containing its subjective form. That is, for Hegel, the social and
political structures of the modern social world do constitute a home,
because they enable individuals to realise themselves, variously as
family members, economic agents, and citizens. However, those same
individuals fail to understand or appreciate that this is the case, and
rather feel estranged from, and perhaps even consciously reject, the
institutions of the modern social world. The resulting situation has
been characterised as one of ‘pure subjective alienation’
(Hardimon 1994: 121).
That Hegel and Marx diagnose modern society in these different ways
helps to explain their differing strategic political commitments. They
both aim to bring society closer to situation (iv)—that is, a
social world lacking systematic forms of both objective and subjective
alienation—but, since they disagree about where we are starting
from, they propose different routes to that shared goal. For Marx,
since we start from situation (i), this requires that the existing
world be overturned; that is, that both institutions and attitudes need
to be revolutionised (overcoming objective and subjective alienation).
For Hegel, since we start from situation (iii), this requires only
attitudinal change; that is, that we come to recognise that the
existing world is already objectively ‘a home’, and in this
way ‘reconcile’ ourselves to that world, overcoming pure
subjective alienation in the process.
Situation (ii) consists of a social world containing objective, but
not subjective, alienation; a situation that can be characterised as
one of ‘pure objective alienation’. (Hardimon 1994, 120.)
It is perhaps not too much of a stretch to think of this situation as
corresponding, very roughly, to one of the Frankfurt School’s
more nightmarish visions of contemporary capitalist society. (The
Frankfurt School is the colloquial label given to several generations
of philosophers and social theorists, in the Western Marxist tradition,
associated—more or less closely—with the Institute
for Social Research founded in 1929–1930.) For example, in the
pessimistic diagnosis of Herbert Marcuse (1898–1979), articulated in
One-Dimensional Man (1964), individuals in advanced
capitalist societies appear happy in their dysfunctional
relationships—they ‘identify themselves’ with their
estranged circumstances and gain ‘satisfaction’ from them
(2002: 13). Objective alienation still obtains, but no longer
generates social conflict, since the latter is assumed—not
implausibly—to require agents who feel, or experience, some form
of hostility or rebelliousness towards existing social
arrangements.
That latter assumption raises the wider issue of the relation between
alienation and, what might be called ‘revolutionary
motivation’. Let us assume that radical social change requires,
amongst other conditions, an agent—perhaps a collective
agent—with both the strength and the desire to bring that change
about. The role of alienation in helping to form that latter
psychological prerequisite—the desire to bring about change on
the part of the putative revolutionary agent—looks
complicated. First, it would seem that objective alienation, as such,
cannot play the motivating role, since it does not involve any
feeling, or thinking about, or otherwise experiencing, the problematic
separation here. (‘[A]s such’ in order to allow the
possibility that a subject’s knowledge of that alienation
might—depending, not least, on one’s views on the
connections between reasons and motivations—provide an
appropriately psychological incentive to revolt.) Second, the relation
between subjective alienation and motivation looks more complex than
it might initially seem. Note, in particular, that some of the
experiential dimensions of subjective alienation look less likely than
others to generate the psychological prerequisites of action
here. Feelings of ‘powerlessness’ and
‘isolation’, for instance, might well generate social
withdrawal and individual atomism, rather than radical social
engagement and cooperative endeavour, on the part of the relevant
agents. In short, whether subjective alienation is a friend or an
enemy of revolutionary motivation would seem to depend on the precise
form that it takes.
Interestingly, situation (ii)—that is, the case of
‘pure objective alienation’—might also be thought
to approximate to the social goal of certain thinkers in the tradition
of existentialism (the tradition of Jean-Paul Sartre (1905–1980),
Albert Camus (1913–1960), and others). Some interpretative generosity
may be needed here, but I take it that existentialists think of
(something like) objective alienation as a permanent feature of all
human societies. Rejecting both substantive accounts of essential human
nature, and the ethical embrace of social relations that facilitate the
development and deployment of those human characteristics, they rather
maintain that the social world will always remain ‘other’,
can never be a ‘home’. However, although this
‘otherness’ can never be overcome, there do look to be
better and worse ways of dealing with it. What is essential to each
individual is what they make of themselves, the ways in which they
chose to engage with that other. The preferred outcome here seeming to
involve individuals embodying a norm of ‘authenticity’,
which amongst other conditions—such as choosing, or committing,
to their own projects—may require that they have the
‘courage’ to ‘grasp, accept, and, perhaps even
affirm’ the fact that the social world is not a home for them
(Hardimon 1994: 121).
This also clarifies that situation (iv)—which contains
systematic forms of neither objective or subjective
alienation—is the social goal of some but not all of these
authors (of Hegel and Marx, for instance, but not the
existentialists). Of course, (iv) might also be a characterisation of
the extant social world according to a hypothetical, and
over-optimistic, apologist for the present.
The second of the interesting complexities broached here concerns what
we can call the need for a criterion of ‘impropriety’;
that is, a criterion by which candidate separations might be assessed
as problematic or not. Recall the earlier suggestion that accounts of
alienation require some benchmark condition of harmony or
connectedness against which separations might be assessed as
problematic or not.
Historically, this role—identifying whether candidate
separations are problematic—has often been played by
accounts of our essential human nature. However, motivated by suspicion
of that latter idea, theorists of alienation have sometimes sought
alternatives to fulfil that role.
To see how the appeal to human nature works, imagine two hypothetical
theorists—Katerina and Laura—seeking to assess whether
alienation exists in a particular society. We can stipulate that the
institutions and culture of this particular society are
individualistic—in the sense that they systematically frustrate
cooperation and sociability—and that the two theorists share
many, but not all, of the same views. In particular, assume that our
two theorists agree: that alienation is a coherent and useful
concept; that the account of alienation given here is, broadly
speaking, plausible; that the only serious candidate for a problematic
separation in this particular society are those arising from its
individualism; and that our essential human nature provides the
benchmark of ‘propriety’ for assessing separations.
Simply put, separations are problematic if they frustrate, and
unproblematic if they facilitate, ‘self-realisation’.
Self-realisation being understood here as a central part of the good
life, and as consisting in the development and deployment of an
individual’s essential human characteristics. However, assume
also that Katerina and Laura disagree about what comprises
human nature. In particular, they disagree about whether cooperation
and sociability are essential human characteristics; with Katerina
insisting that they are, and Laura maintaining that they are not. It
seems to follow that Katerina will conclude, and Laura will deny, that
this society is one containing alienation. For Katerina, the
widespread lack of cooperation and sociability confirm that the basic
social institutions here frustrate our
self-realisation. Whereas, for Laura, the very same widespread lack of
cooperation and sociability confirm that the basic social
institutions facilitate, or at least do not
frustrate, our self-realisation.
(Note that in sub-section 1.2, where the basic idea of alienation
was elaborated, various relations between subject and object were
distinguished, only one of which was characterised as reflexive.
However, in the light of the present discussion, we might now think it
more accurate to say that—on this kind of account, using
essential human nature to identify alienation—only one of
them was directly reflexive, because there is some sense in
which all of those dimensions of alienation involve a separation from
some aspect of our own human nature. After all, this is precisely what
picks out the relevant separation as problematic. For example, the
separation of individuals from each other is, for Katerina, indirectly
also a separation from human nature, from the cooperation and
sociability that characterises our essential humanity.)
As already noted, this benchmark—by which candidate separations
are assessed as problematic or not—is often, but not always,
played by accounts of our essential human nature. Given the widespread
contemporary suspicion of such accounts—not least, by those
opposed to what is sometimes called ‘essentialism’ about
human nature—it might be helpful to sketch an account of
alienation which is not dependent on such assumptions (or, at least,
consciously strives to avoid them). There is also a potential benefit
here for those of us who are less suspicious; namely, that such an
example might also provide a better sense of the diversity of
available theories of alienation.
Rahel Jaeggi offers an account of alienation of this kind, and
situates it explicitly in the tradition of Critical Theory; that is,
the kind of emancipatory theory associated with the Frankfurt School.
On this account, the idea of alienation has the potential to help us
understand and change the world, but only if it receives some
significant conceptual reconstruction. Alienation is still associated
with the frustration of freedom, with disruptions to something like
‘self-realisation’. However, this account—unlike its
forerunners and associates—is said not to be fatally compromised
by a commitment to either ‘strongly objectivistic’
theories of the good life, or ‘essentialist’ conceptions
of the self (Jaeggi 2014: 40).
The crucial term of art here is ‘appropriation’, which
Jaeggi uses to refer to the capacity for, and process of, relating to
our own actions and projects in ways which engage ‘something
like self-determination and being the author of one’s own
life’  (2014: 39). Appropriation is successful—and
alienation is absent—when ‘one is present in one’s
actions, steers one’s life instead of being driven by it,
independently appropriates social roles and is able to identify with
one’s desires, and is involved in the world’ (Jaeggi 2014:
155). In contrast, appropriation is unsuccessful—and alienation
is present—when there is ‘an inadequate power and a lack
of presence in what one does, a failure to identify with one’s
own actions and desires and to take part in one’s own
life’ (Jaeggi 2014: 155). Alienation is thus identified with
systematic disruptions of the process of appropriation; in particular,
in those systematic disruptions which lead us to fail to experience
our actions and projects as our own. These disruptions are said
typically to take one of four forms: ‘powerlessness’ or
the experience of losing control over one’s own life;
‘loss of authenticity’ especially when one is unable to
identify with one’s own social roles; ‘internal
division’ where one experiences some of one’s own desires
and impulses as alien; and ‘indifference’ or a detachment
from one’s own previous projects and self-understandings.
This model fits happily enough with our basic idea of alienation as
consisting in a  problematic separation between self and other
that properly belong together. However, the conditions for identifying
the relevant dysfunctional relation here are intended to be less
demanding and controversial than those involving claims about our
essential human nature. There is a kindred notion of freedom as
self-realisation, but it is said to be the realisation of a thin kind
of self-determining agency, and not the actualisation of some thick
‘pre-given’ identity of an essentialist sort. A normative
dimension remains, but it is presented as expansive and broadly
procedural. It is expansive in that a wide range of actions and
projects might be included within its remit. And it is procedural in
that the benchmark for judging the success of these various actions and
projects is that they were brought about in the right kind of
self-determination delivering way, and not that their content reflects
a narrow and controversial account of what human beings are ‘in
essence’.
Modern culture is said to recognise and value the kind of freedom at
the heart of this picture of appropriation. As a result, this account
of alienation can be presented as a form of immanent critique;
that is, as utilising a standpoint which judges individuals and forms
of life according to standards that those individuals have themselves
propounded, or which those forms of life presuppose. At the individual
level, this critique might involve identifying potential tensions
between the conditions for treating people as responsible agents, and
the obstructions to such agency that characterise alienated selves; for
instance, the feelings of powerlessness that prevent individuals from
directing and embracing their own lives. And at the social level, this
critique might involve identifying potential discrepancies between
modern ideals of freedom and their actual realisation in the
contemporary world; for instance, the existence of social or political
roles that an individual can never make their own (Jaeggi 2014:
41–42).
Of course, difficult questions remain. Questions not only about
whether the notion of appropriation successfully avoids the perceived
spectre of perfectionism, but also about the ground of the normativity
here. That the kind of subjectivity or self-determination which
appropriation embodies is recognised and valued in modern culture, does
not in itself establish its ethical worth. It is perhaps easier to
dismiss Hegelian teleology, or Marxist perfectionism, than it is to
find satisfactory replacements.
The third of these interesting complexities concerns the ethical
dimension of alienation. The connections between alienation and ethics
are many and diverse, and there is no attempt here to sketch that
wider landscape in its entirety. Instead, attention is drawn to two
topographical features: the claim that alienation is necessarily a
negative, but not a wholly negative, phenomenon, is elaborated and
defended; and the suggestion that morality itself might encourage or
embody alienation is briefly outlined.
The claim that alienation is necessarily a negative, but not a wholly
negative, phenomenon, can be addressed in two parts. Defending the
first part of that claim looks straightforward enough. Alienation, on
the present account, consists in the separation of certain entities
– a subject and some object—that properly belong
together. As a result, alienation always involves a loss or lack of
something of value; namely, the loss or lack of the
‘proper’—rational, natural, or good—harmony or
connectedness between the relevant subject and object. (The slightly
clunky formulation ‘loss or lack’ is required since these
terms are not synonymous, and alienation can be elaborated in either
way. One central difference is that having once possessed the proper
connectedness seems to be a necessary condition for losing it, but
not, of course, for lacking it.)
It is the second part of the claim which looks less obvious. Namely,
that alienation is not a wholly negative phenomena; that is, that the
loss or lack here may not always be the whole story, ethically
speaking. Note, in particular, that some well-known accounts also
locate an achievement of value in the moment of alienation. (No
suggestion is made here about whether, and how, the resulting ethical
‘gains’ and ‘losses’ might be weighed and
judged overall.)
In order to illustrate this possibility—that alienation can
involve the achievement of something of value—consider the
nuanced and critical celebration of capitalism found, but not always
recognised, in Marx’s writings. One pertinent way of introducing
this account involves locating the moment of alienation within a
pattern of development that we might call ‘dialectical’ in
one sense of that slippery term.
The dialectical pattern here concerns the developing relationship
between a particular subject and object; the individual, on the one
hand, and their social role and community, on the other. By a
dialectical progression is meant only a movement from a stage
characterised by a relationship of ‘undifferentiated
unity’, through a stage characterised by a relationship of
‘differentiated disunity’, to a stage characterised by a
relationship of ‘differentiated unity’.
‘[O]nly’ in order to clarify that there are no further
claims made here about the necessity, the naturalness, or the
prevalence, of such progressions (Cohen 1974: 237).
The dialectical progression here involves three historical
stages:
First, past pre-capitalist societies are said to embody the
stage of undifferentiated unity. Here individuals are buried in their
social role and community, scarcely conceptualising, still less
promoting, their own identity and interests as distinguishable from
those of the wider community.
Second, present capitalist societies are said to embody the
stage of differentiated disunity. Here independence and separation
predominate, and individuals care only for themselves, scarcely
thinking of the identity and interests of the wider community. Indeed,
they are typically isolated from, and indifferent or hostile towards,
the latter.
Third, future communist societies are said to embody the
stage of differentiated unity. Here desirable versions of community and
individuality flourish together. Indeed, in their new forms, communal
and individual identities, and communal and individual interests,
presuppose and reinforce each other. It is sometimes said that the
contents of the first two stages (community and individuality,
respectively) have thereby been ‘sublated’—that is,
elevated, cancelled, and preserved—in this third stage.
‘Sublated’ being an attempted English translation of the
German verb ‘aufheben’, and its cognates, which
Hegel occasionally uses to suggest this elusive combination of ideas
(e.g. Hegel 1991b: §24A3, §81A1).
In the present context, the crucial stage is the second one. This is
the stage of alienation, the stage of disunion which emerges from a
simple unity before reconciliation in a higher (differentiated) unity
(Inwood 1992: 36). This is the stage of present capitalist societies
involving the problematic separation of individuals from their social
role and community. In the first stage (of past pre-capitalist
societies) there is a problematic relation, but no separation. And in
the third stage (of future communist societies) there is a separation
but it is a healthy rather than problematic one. In this
second stage of alienation, there is a loss, or lack, of something of
value; roughly speaking, the loss or lack of the individuals’
attachment to their social role and community. (More precisely, we
might say that they have lost a sense of, and connection to, the
community, and that they lack a healthy sense of, and connection to,
the community.)
However, this disvalue is not the whole of the story, ethically
speaking. In comparison with the first stage, the second stage also
involves a liberation of sorts from the object in which subjects were
previously ‘engulfed’ (Cohen 1974: 239). The ‘of
sorts’ is a way of acknowledging that this is a rather
distinctive kind of liberation. The individual here is not necessarily
rid of the constraints of the other (of their social position and
community), but they do now at least identify and experience them as
such—that is, as constraints on the individual—whereas
previously the individual was engulfed by them, and failed to think of
themselves as having any identity and interests outside of their social
position. In short, the loss or lack of something of value is not the
only feature of the second stage of alienation. There is also an
important gain here; namely, the achievement of what we can call
‘individuality’. This significant good was missing in the
first pre-capitalist stage, and—freed from its distorting
capitalist form—it will be preserved and developed in the
communist future of the third stage.
This claim goes beyond the familiar suggestion that alienation forms
a necessary stage in certain Hegelian and Marxist developmental
narratives. The suggestion here is that internal to the second stage,
the stage of alienation, there is both a problematic separation from
community and a positive liberation from engulfment. Those who see only
the negative thread in alienation, and fail to see ‘what is being
achieved within in and distorted by it’, will miss an important,
albeit subtle, thread in Marx’s account of the progressive
character of capitalism (Cohen 1974: 253).
There is a lot going on in this schematic discussion of historical
stages. The point emphasised here is that theorists—even
critics—of alienation need not assume that it is a wholly
negative phenomena, ethically speaking. Marx, for example, recognises
that the moment of alienation, for all its negative features, also
involves the emergence of a good (individuality) which, in due course
(and freed from the limitations of its historical origins), will be
central to human flourishing in communist society.
This claim—that alienation might not be a wholly negative
phenomenon—concerns the normative dimensions of
alienation. However, it is sometimes suggested that the concept of
alienation might provide a standpoint from which morality itself, or
at least some part of it, can be criticised. This looks to be a very
different kind of thought.
The broad suggestion is that certain conceptions of morality might
embody, or encourage, alienation. More precisely, that certain
conceptions of morality might embody or encourage a problematic
division of self, and a problematic separation from much that is
valuable in our lives. Consider, for example, accounts of the moral
standpoint as requiring universalisation and equal consideration of
all persons (Railton 1984: 138). It could seem that adopting such a
standpoint requires individuals to disown or downplay the relevance of
their more personal or partial beliefs and feelings. The picture of
persons divided into cognitive and affective parts, with the partial
and personal relegated to the downgraded sphere of the latter (perhaps
conceptualised as something closer to mere sentiment than reason) is a
familiar one. In addition to that problematic bifurcation of the self,
such accounts might seem to cut us off from much that is valuable in
our lives. If these impersonal kinds of moral consideration are to
dominate our practical reasoning, then it seems likely that an
individual’s particular attachments, loyalties, and commitments,
will have, at best, a marginal place (Railton 1984: 139). In aspiring
to adopt ‘the point of view of the universe’—to use
the well-known phrase of the utilitarian Henry Sidgwick (1838–1900)
– there can sometimes seem to be precious little security or
space remaining for, say, friendship, love, and family (Sidgwick 1907:
382). Morality, so understood, is charged with embodying and
encouraging alienation, in the form of both a divided self, and the
separation of self and world.
The weight and scope of these kinds of concerns about alienation can
obviously vary; that is, they might be thought to have more or less
critical purchase on a wider or narrower range of targets. First, they
might be viewed variously as weaknesses that can be overcome by more
adequate formulation of the theories in question, or as foundational
objections that help render the relevant theories unattractive and
implausible. Second, that varied critical weight might be thought to
count against a wide range of potential targets, as varied, for
example, as—in order of expanding scope—act
utilitarianism, certain forms of consequentialism, all impartial moral
theories, or ‘the peculiar institution’ of morality itself
(Williams 1985: 174). Given both that variety, and the subject matter
of this entry, it may not be helpful to generalise much more here.
However, the point is hopefully made that the ethical dimensions of the
topic extend beyond the normative assessment of the relevant
separations. Indeed, taking alienation seriously might lead us to think
more critically about some familiar moral standpoints and theories.
The above discussion of the concept of alienation—clarifying its
basic shape, sketching some of its theoretical forms, and introducing
a few complexities—still leaves many issues unresolved. Those
issues include many of the empirical dimensions of the topic. Note
that the present section is not directly concerned with the extensive
social scientific literature on alienation. That literature is
typically interested in ‘operationalising’ the
concept—for instance, treating job satisfaction or absenteeism
as proxies of alienated work—in order to engineer predictive
models in disciplines (including education, psychology, sociology, and
management studies) dealing with a variety of real world contexts
(e.g. Chiaburu et al 2014). This section is rather concerned
with the various empirical, and quasi-empirical, assumptions and
claims that appear in broadly philosophical accounts of alienation of
the kind discussed above.
Consider, for example, Marx’s characterisation of alienation
in terms of separations which frustrate self-realisation, especially
self-realisation in work. To come to a considered judgement about the
plausibility of his views on this topic, one would have to be in a
position to assess, amongst other issues, whether work in capitalist
societies is necessarily alienated. One would need to judge, not only
whether existing work is rightly characterised as alienated (as forced,
frustrating self-realisation, not intended to satisfy the needs of
others, and not appropriately appreciated by those others), but also,
if so, whether it could be made meaningful and unalienated without
undermining the very features which made the relevant society a
capitalist one. (There are also, of course, many more normative-looking
issues here regarding that account of human flourishing; whether, for
example, it overemphasises creative and fulfilling work, and
underestimates the importance of, say, leisure and intellectual
excellence.) Reaching anything like a considered judgment on these
empirical and quasi-empirical issues would clearly require some
complicated factual assessments of, amongst other issues, the
composition and functioning of human nature and the extant social
world.
A range of complex empirical and quasi-empirical issues also look to
be woven into Marx’s views about the extent of alienation.
Consider the various unsystematic claims about the historical location
and comparative intensity of alienation that can be found in his
writings (and, less ambiguously, in certain secondary interpretations
of those writings). These various claims include: first, that certain
systematic forms of alienation—including alienation in
work—are not a universal feature of human society (not least,
they will not be a feature of a future communist order); second, that
at least some systematic forms of alienation—presumably
including religious alienation—are widespread in pre-capitalist
societies; and third, that systematic forms of alienation are greater
in contemporary capitalist societies than in pre-capitalist
societies.
Take the last of these assorted claims; that is, the comparative
verdict about the extent or intensity of alienation in capitalist
societies. Its plausibility is scarcely incontrovertible, given the
amount of sheer productive drudgery, and worse, in pre-capitalist
societies. Nor is it obvious how one might attempt to substantiate the
empirical dimensions of the claim. The empirical difficulties of
measuring subjective alienation look considerable enough (especially
given the limitations of historical data), but alienation for Marx is
fundamentally about the frustration of objective human potentials,
those separations that prevent self-realisation, perhaps especially
self-realisation in work. One suggestion, made in this context, is
that the scale of alienation in a particular society might be
indicated by the gap between the liberating potential of human
productive powers, on the one hand, and the extent to which that
potential is reflected in the lives actually lived by producers, on
the other (Wood 2004: 44–48). The appeal of this proposed
measure—not least in the potential support it offers to
Marx’s comparison between capitalist and pre-capitalist
societies—is clear enough, but the social scientific details of
how one might actually apply that kind of measure in particular
historical cases remain obscure.
Related worries might also apply to claims about the prognosis for
alienation, in particular, about whether and how alienation might be
overcome. Consider, for instance, Marx’s view that communist
society will be free of certain systematic forms of alienation, such
as alienation in work. (The reference to ‘systematic’ is
included because there seems no good textual or theoretical reason to
lumber Marx with the view that the alienation of Gillian from her
sister Hanna—whose hypothetical estrangement, you will recall,
arose from sibling rivalry, stubbornness, and a chance
misunderstanding at a time of family crisis—could never exist
under communism.) Marx’s view about communism rests crucially on
the judgement that it is the social relations of capitalist society,
and not its material or technical arrangements, which are the cause of
systematic forms of alienation. For instance, he holds that it is not
the existence of science, technology, and industrialisation, as such,
which are at the root of the social and psychological ills of
alienation, but rather how those factors tend to be organised and
operated in a capitalist society; that is, a society based on a
particular class division – in which producers can only access
means of production by selling their labour power—and in which
production, and much else, is driven by a remorseless search for
profit. In volume one of Capital, Marx writes approvingly of
workers who, through time and experience, had learnt ‘to
distinguish between machinery and its employment by capital, and to
direct their attacks, not against the material instruments of
production, but against the mode in which they are used’ (1996:
432). If this had not been his view, Marx could not have,
consistently, also suggested that communist society – which, on
his account, is similarly technologically advanced and
industrial—could avoid this kind of alienation. This suggestion
is strikingly sanguine. Marx is confident, for instance, that the
considerable gulf between the gloomy results of adopting machinery in
the capitalist present (where it increases the repetitiveness of
tasks, narrows talents, promotes ‘deskilling’, and so on)
and the bright promise of its adoption in the communist future (where
it will liberate us from uncreative tasks, create greater wealth,
develop all-round abilities, and so on) is easily bridged. However,
Marx’s ‘utopophobia’—his reluctance to say
very much, in any serious detail, about the future shape of socialist
society – prevents him from offering any serious discussion
about how precisely this might be done (Leopold 2016). As a result,
even the mildest of sceptics could reasonably worry that a range of
difficult empirical, and other, questions, are evaded rather than
answered here.
(This issue—whether, and to what extent, alienation can be
overcome—is sometimes conflated with the issue of whether, and
to what extent, alienation is a historically universal phenomena. To
see that they are distinct questions, imagine that alienation only
emerges in economically developed societies, that it is a necessary
feature of economically developed societies, and that economically
developed societies never revert voluntarily to economically
undeveloped ones. These are not implausible claims, but together they
seem to entail that, although only a subset of historical societies are
scarred by alienation,  if you happen to live in an economically
developed society, then—involuntary Armageddon apart –
alienation will be the continuing fate of you and your successors.)
My aim here is not to make significant progress in resolving any of
these empirical issues, but rather to mark their existence and extent.
Since the concept of alienation diagnoses a complex range of social
ills involving self and other, it is perhaps not surprising that a
variety of empirical issues are implicated in these various accounts of
its proper characterisation, its historical scope, and the
possibilities for overcoming it. Nonetheless, it remains important to
acknowledge the existence and complexity of these empirical threads, in
addition to those conceptual and normative ones discussed above.