Analytic philosophy was introduced in Latin America in the
mid-twentieth century, though it did not spread easily throughout the
region. This entry gives an historical overview of analytic philosophy
produced in Latin America, and not about Latin
America; it encompasses philosophical developments concerning the most
diverse and universal problems that are at the heart of Western
philosophy. Given the vast number of individuals, institutions,
journals and issues that coexist in this geographical area of the
analytic tradition, we must begin by specifying some of the boundaries
of this work.
First, the entry focuses on the ideas of philosophers who have
developed their research and teaching practice for most of their lives
in a Latin American country (instead of taking the country of origin as
a criterion). One feature of Latin American intellectuals is that many
have had to emigrate to other countries within or outside of the
region, in many cases due to political reasons, in other cases for
economic reasons, and in a few cases for personal reasons. For reasons
of space those philosophers with Latin American roots who developed
their philosophical work outside this area will be
 excluded.[1]
Second, this entry will not discuss the contemporary history of the
topic, as it is still evolving. As mentioned above, analytic philosophy
was introduced in the mid-twentieth century, initially in Argentina and
Mexico, then to a lesser extent in Brazil. The first analytic
philosophers in the region carried out extensive didactic work that has
left generations of professional philosophers working within the
tradition. As the research is ongoing, it is impossible to mention all
the people currently working within this tradition in Latin America.
See the Other Internet Resources for links to relevant
Associations.
Finally, it is important to delineate what will be considered within
the scope of analytic philosophy for the present work. Our
consideration of analytic philosophy is not limited to work involving
conceptual analysis. Indeed, as Ezcurdia (2015) maintains, not all
philosophers who consider themselves analytic adopt this method, and
those who do disagree about the way in which it should be understood.
Rabossi (1975) defends the idea that analytic philosophy can be
identified by considering certain family resemblances. He suggests the
following family traits: a positive attitude toward scientific
knowledge; a cautious attitude toward metaphysics; a conception of
philosophy as a conceptual task, which takes conceptual analysis as a
method; a close relationship between language and philosophy; a concern
with seeking argumentative answers to philosophical problems; search
for conceptual clarity. In the case of analytic philosophy in Latin
America, we must add two other family traits to the above list; these
traits distinguish the ways in which philosophy is practiced in Latin
America from how it is practiced in other parts of the world. First,
since analytic philosophy was introduced when other philosophical
traditions were dominant, philosophical reflections in the analytic
tradition frequently go hand in hand with metaphilosophical issues
(e.g. the nature of philosophy, its role in society, its specific way
of teaching, the relationships amongst various philosophical
traditions, etc.). Second, since the introduction of analytic
philosophy in Latin American countries was related to a quest to change
conservative intellectual institutions, social and political
structures, and their forms of management, the critical and
constructive spirit of analytic philosophy led many of its
practitioners in Latin America to engage politically in a variety of
ways in their home countries.
Even this expanded list of family traits is not sufficient to
characterize analytic philosophy in Latin America. Many non-analytic
philosophers exhibit these same traits. Glock (2008) suggests that the
right way to understand analytic philosophy is to add a historical
dimension to these traits and understand analytic philosophy as an
intellectual tradition. In a similar vein, Gracia (2010) argues that
sociological considerations play an important role in distinguishing
analytic philosophy from other methods of philosophy:
What we have then is a family structure not based on a genetic but
on an intellectual lineage, an intellectual pedigree, which in turn is
based on practices that have been passed and amended within a family
context. In fact, we continue to organize in families and tribes and
there are exclusions and fiefdoms. Mankind is primarily composed of
communities, and philosophy does not differ from other human endeavors.
This explains why cultural, political and ethnically considerations,
play a role in human projects, including the academic ones. (Gracia
2010: 29)
The analytic tradition not only has a history, but is made up of
several generations of people who are linked in particular ways (e.g.
advisor-student and colleague-colleague relationships). These people
participate in shared activities in which they recognize each other as
members of the same community, discuss and research similar topics
using a similar approach, and operate with a shared theoretical
background. This does not mean that analytic philosophers from Latin
America do not share links to the wider community of European and
Anglo-Saxon analytic philosophers. On the contrary, many of them have
been educated outside of Latin America, engage in work that goes beyond
the Latin American context and forge important ties with Anglo-Saxon
and European academic communities.
This entry presents the community of analytic philosophers that
exists today in Latin America, describing the way in which this
philosophical tradition has developed in the region. Section 2 offers
an historical approach to the subject, while
 section 3
provides examples of the
most original lines of research developed in Latin America
within the analytic tradition.
Philosophy in Latin America, as with all other cultural enterprises,
has been closely related to European culture since
colonial
 times.[2]
It is against a
background of Thomist, Marxist, positivist, phenomenological,
existentialist and idealistic philosophy that the works of authors like
Frege, Russell, Quine, Carnap, Wittgenstein, Strawson and others were
introduced. Analytic philosophy developed heterogeneously across Latin
America. The analytic tradition appears in Argentina and Mexico in the
mid-twentieth century, and to a lesser extent in Brazil, Peru, Colombia
and Uruguay in the same period. The development in Argentina and Mexico
was much faster, and analytic philosophy had matured in the two
countries by the 1980s. Strong institutions there, created by early
analytic philosophers (e.g., the Instituto de Investigaciones
filosóficas at the Universidad Nacional Autónoma
de México (IIF-UNAM) and the Sociedad Argentina de
Análisis Filosófico (SADAF)), played an important
role. The development of analytic philosophy was more limited in other
countries where there were only isolated figures who, in many cases,
left no students.
Analytic philosophy appeared in Argentina in the mid-twentieth
century in two very different areas: (1) philosophy of math and science
and (2) philosophy of law.
A number of mathematicians and physicists interested in the
foundations of mathematics and the natural sciences introduced the
logical developments of the early twentieth century and the ideas of
the logical positivists of the Vienna Circle. Mario Bunge, who in 1944
founded Minerva, the first philosophy journal in the country,
played an important role. Bunge was also the author of the first
analytic book written in Latin America, Causality: The Place of the
Causal Principle in Modern Science, published by Harvard in 1959,
which was subsequently translated into Spanish. The next year he
published Antología Semántica, the first Spanish
translations of Russell, Carnap, Hempel, Tarski, Quine and Goodman.
However, Bunge moved to Canada shortly afterwards and left no students
in Argentina. Contemporaneous with Bunge, Julio Rey Pastor and Gregorio
Klimovsky introduced issues in logic and the foundations of mathematics
at the Faculty of Exact Sciences of the University of Buenos Aires.
Though he published few papers, Gregorio Klimovsky fostered the
development of analytic philosophy in Argentina. His deep knowledge and
enthusiasm for the foundations of mathematics, methodology of natural
sciences, the foundations of psychoanalysis and the history of science
left a deep impression on his students. Klimovsky taught
logic and philosophy of science at the University of Buenos Aires from
1957 to 1966, introducing contemporary logic and analytic authors to
philosophy students, some of whom became the first generation of
Argentine analytic philosophers.
Philosophy of language was introduced as a discipline in Argentina
by Thomas Moro Simpson who published Formas lógicas,
realidad y significado in 1964, a book of Latin American analytic
literature, influential not only in Argentina and Mexico (where he
traveled in 1967 to teach on these topics), but also in other Latin
American countries. Simpson also published Semántica
Filosófica in 1973, a book which includes translations
of some of the most foundational works in analytic
philosophy—such as Russell’s “On Denoting”
and Frege’s “Sense and Reference”—in addition
to discussions related to quantification, existence and
belief
 attribution.[3]
His students,
Raúl Orayen and Alberto Moretti, worked specifically on logic,
the philosophy of logic and philosophy of language. Moretti specialized
in Frege and also studied Davidson’s philosophy of language and
Tarski’s theory of truth. Some of his most significant
contributions have recently been compiled in Interpretar y referir.
Ejercicios de análisis filosófico (2008). Orayen
worked in Argentina until the 1970s when he emigrated to Mexico, where
he joined the IIF-UNAM. There he fostered several generations of
analytic philosophers and made his most substantive contributions
including one of his most significant works, Lógica,
significado y ontología. His
 research[4]
focused on the philosophy of logic and language,
including the work of Russell, Frege, Quine, Kripke,
and
 others.[5]
Felix Schuster focused his work on the philosophy of social
sciences. His book, Explicación y predicción: La
validez del conocimiento en ciencias sociales, published in 1982,
is a classic that has been reprinted numerous times. In this work he
was concerned with the methodology and validity of sociology, history,
economics, anthropology, psychology and psychoanalysis, as well as the
structure and predictive possibilities of the various
 theories.[6]
A number of lawyers and experts in the foundations of law
introduced formal developments as well as analytic tools developed
within ordinary language philosophy to study of the language of law.
Regarding analytic tools, it is necessary to mention Carlos Cossio and
Ambrosio Gioja from the Faculty of Law at the University of Buenos
Aires. While neither of them is strictly speaking an analytic
philosopher (both were trained within the phenomenological tradition)
they introduced their students to new analytic readings in their
seminars. Gioja introduced classical analytic texts in legal philosophy
and ethics to young students participating in a reading group with him.
Some of these young philosophers of law went on to become founders of
the analytic tradition in the
 country.[7]
Many philosophers were interested in the analysis of
ordinary language, especially Genaro
 Carrió[8]
and Eduardo Rabossi. Rabossi wrote on many
issues. His most influential piece in ethics was the book La
justificación moral del castigo (1976), and he also
published Análisis filosófico, lenguaje y
metafísica (1975), a book which introduced basic ideas
 from the analytic tradition for the first time in Spanish.
Posthumously, one of the most
important works of his career was published, En el comienzo Dios
creó el canon (2008; see below in
 §3.3).[9]
Among the first analytic philosophers trained in law school, there
was also a line of thought that departs from ordinary language and
seeks to apply formal tools to studying the language of law. Especially
noteworthy in this area is Alchourrón and Bulygin’s
Normative Systems (1971), on the logic of norms and
normative propositions. This work presents legal systems as deductive
systems and aims to study the logical asymmetries between the processes
of promulgation and the abolition of
 laws.[10]
Alchourrón was concerned with changes in
the legal systems produced by the promulgation and abolition of laws,
seeking to produce a formal system that would give substance to the
legal bodies; the parallel with systems of belief induced him to focus
on belief change, producing the first formal paper on the dynamics of
belief (Alchourrón et al. 1985); the theory, known as AGM (by
the initials of the last names of its creators: Carlos
Alchourrón, Peter Gärdenfors and David Makinson), have had
a major impact worldwide.
Carlos Nino is one of the youngest members of the Law School
tradition, and he played an influential role in both practical
philosophy and the institutional history of Argentina. He made
important theoretical contributions in ethics, philosophy of law and
constitutional theory, among others in Etica y derechos
 humanos.[11]
Nino is also
remembered for his political commitment to the recovery of democracy in
Argentina in the 1980s. He was an assessor of President
Alfonsín, and one of the designers (together with Eduardo
Rabossi) of Alfonsín’s human rights policy, a policy which
included, among other measures, historical judgment of the leaders of
the military government in 1985, allowing the imprisonment of the
leaders of state terrorism in Argentina. Nino died very young
in
 1993.[12]
While all the patriarchs of analytic philosophy in Argentina were
formed by, began working, and convened at the University of Buenos
Aires, the institutional history of the country forced them early on to
leave the university and take refuge in an institution created to
strengthen the development of analytic philosophy in the region.
Indeed, in 1966 the coup d’état drove many
intellectuals to abandon the public university, forcing them to leave
their jobs and intellectual development. Shortly after, various
philosophers begin to gather outside official circles in order to
continue their philosophical work, founding SADAF in
 1972.[13]
Many women philosophers also participated in this enterprise such as Cecilia Hidalgo, Cristina Gonzalez, Diana Maffia, Gladys Palau and Nora Stigol. The founding of this
institution converged philosophers from the two lines mentioned above,
creating thereafter a unified community of analytic philosophers in the
country. In addition to maintaining the spirit and practice of analytic
philosophy during the years in which it was excluded from the public
sphere (1966–1983), SADAF and its members carried out three major
tasks: (1) continuing the training of young generations within the
analytic tradition; (2) strengthening connections with analytic
communities from other countries, especially with the analytic
community in the IIF-UNAM Mexico and the Centro de lógica,
epistemología e história da ciência
(henceforth: CLE) in Brazil; and (3) creating, in 1981, the first
analytic journal in Spanish in Argentina and the second in Latin
America: Análisis Filosófico.
As mentioned above, the rapid development of analytic philosophy in
Argentina had two causes: its early institutionalization, and the
teaching legacy of many of its founders who produced new generations of
analytic philosophers whose works traveled beyond the borders of their
country of
 origin.[14]
Thomas Simpson was the intellectual mentor of generations of
philosophers of language, most significantly Alberto Moretti, who in
turn formed a new and powerful generation of
analytic
 philosophers.[15]
 Eduardo Rabossi covered wider issues of philosophy and had students
who focused on bioethics, Wittgenstein and 20th century
philosophy, although most of his students focused on philosophy of
 mind.[16]
 Carlos Alchourrón and Eugenio Bulygin left many students
working on the logic of norms, such as Hugo Zuleta and Ricardo
 Caracciolo[17]
and Alchourrón also had students focused in philosophical 
 logic.[18]
 And, despite his early death, Carlos Nino also had many 
 students.[19]
By the mid-80s, analytic philosophy was also developed beyond Buenos Aires, at the National University of Cordoba focusing on three areas: philosophy of language, under the
direction of Carolina Scotto; logic, under the direction of Horacio
Faas; and philosophy of science, under the direction of Victor
Rodriguez.
In the first half of the twentieth century, several Mexican
philosophers, themselves not analytic philosophers strictly speaking,
introduced a series of formal tools, texts, and themes of analytic
philosophy in the country. The first book of philosophy and history of
science in Spanish was published by Juan David García Bacca in
1936. More analytic works followed as a book on logical positivism and
the Vienna Circle was published in 1941 by Antonio Caso, and Ayer and
Carnap’s works were translated by his student, Nicolás
Molina Flores, who was also the first Mexican to argue in favor of
logical empiricism. Eduardo García Maynez, a philosopher of law,
introduced the tools of mathematical logic in his work. In 1953 he
published Los principios de la ontología formal del derecho
y su expresión simbólica, one of the first
philosophical works expressed in formal symbols in
 Mexico.[20]
There are, however, two notable
differences from how analytic philosophy developed in Argentina.
García Maynez only made superficial use of logical
 tools[21]
and left no
 students[22]
so his works had no echo in later
developments in Mexico and had no impact outside of the country.
However, he achieved an important institutional legacy as he and others
advocated for the creation of the Centro de Estudios
Filosóficos, which later became the IIF-UNAM. While
García Maynez was its head, the Centro incorporated
full time researchers and created the journal Dianoia in 1955.
During this period philosophical discussions and publications in
Spanish were encouraged.
In addition to García Maynez, José Gaos, a Spanish
philosopher who emigrated to Mexico because of the Spanish civil war,
was also influential in the development of analytic philosophy in
Mexico. Many important works in phenomenology, including
Heidegger’s Sein und Zeit, were translated into Spanish
by Gaos, himself a phenomenologist. It is in the group meetings
organized by Gaos where we find the three figures who drove Mexican
analytic philosophy since the 1960s: Alejandro Rossi, Luis Villoro and
Fernando Salmerón. Classical analytic readings, such as works by
Russell, Wittgenstein, and Moore, were introduced during those
seminars. Henceforth, in Mexico, analytic philosophy appears in
dialogue and conflict with phenomenology (Salmerón 2003). This
transition from phenomenology to analytic philosophy in the IIF-UNAM is
consolidated between 1966 and 1977, years in which Salmerón was
its director. In 1967 the first strictly analytic journal in Spanish is
founded: Crítica: Revista hispanoamericana de
filosofía. Mexico always welcomed political emigrants and
had a policy of inviting other Latin American colleagues who helped
strengthen ties among researchers in the region. In those years several
Argentine analytic philosophers (e.g. Rabossi, Alchourrón, and
Simpson) were invited to teach in
 Mexico.[23]
The first article in Spanish about analytic philosophy of
language—more specifically, about the private language
argument—was published by Alejandro Rossi, who is of Italian and
Venezuelan roots but developed his research in Mexico. This work and
others were later reprinted in Lenguaje y Significado (1969),
a book consisting of five papers, which clearly reflects the shift from
phenomenology to analytic philosophy, taking Wittgenstein as its
juncture. The book’s first paper is on Husserl’s
Logical Investigations, and the last three papers deal
specifically with Strawson and Russell’s disagreement about
definite descriptions, the problem of empty descriptions, and the
relationship between proper names and definite descriptions. Besides
his philosophical work within the analytic tradition and his enormous
work to strengthen the Instituto, Rossi wrote several essays
of a more literary character, compiled later in Manual del
distraído
 (1978).[24]
Analytic epistemology was introduced in Mexico by Luis Villoro, the
author of a foundational Spanish book Saber, creer, conocer
published in 1982. In this book, Villoro reviews many of the themes
developed in twentieth century epistemology, such as the distinction
between knowledge and belief, its connection with truth, the
distinction between different types of knowledge (know-that and
know-how), and ethical considerations in a theory of knowledge (e.g.
that of tolerance of the others’ unshared beliefs and the rules
of veracity, rationality and autonomy of reason governing our
knowledge). In addition, Villoro’s book is foundational in the
Latin American context because he tried to systematize a technical
vocabulary in Spanish on these topics for the first time. The question
of translation is central, as will be discussed in
 §3.3.
In English, the dominant language of analytic
philosophy, there is a single verb—“to know”—
whereas in Spanish (as in German, French, and other languages) there
are two verbs: “saber” and “conocer”; therefore
the question of the relationship between the various types of knowledge
identified by philosophers of ordinary language, such as Ryle, and its
translation into Spanish is not an insignificant philosophical issue.
In addition to these invaluable contributions to the theory of
knowledge, Villoro also made outstanding progress on issues related to
Mexico’s political history and political philosophy, as well as
discussions on the possibility of founding an American philosophy, an
issue at the core of the Hyperion group
 (1948–1952).[25]
Practical philosophy, including ethics and philosophy of education,
was introduced by Fernando Salmerón. His first clearly analytic
book is La filosofía y las actitudes morales (1971).
This book includes three essays written between 1966 and 1969 where
Salmerón seeks to: 1) highlight the argumentative and critical
nature of the philosophical activity; 2) connect this vital undertaking
(the adoption of philosophy as a profession) with a broader sense of
philosophy understood as a worldview; and 3) stress issues such as the
practical commitment of philosophers, the connection between these
practices and other social practices, the role of philosophical
research and teaching in the society in which it is immersed, the
relationship with scientific knowledge, etc. He also published with
Eduardo Rabossi a series of translations of classical works in
practical analytic philosophy, such as those of Moore, Strawson, Hare,
Stevenson, Searle, Harman, etc. Among his most outstanding works are
Ensayos filosóficos (1988) and Enseñanza y
filosofía (1991). One of his deepest concerns seems to have
been to place philosophy—understood as a critical and
argumentative practice—in a central site for the political and
intellectual development of a society. Also noteworthy is his
institutional work, the dissemination of analytic philosophy in Latin
America, and foreign presentations of analytic contributions made by
Latin American
 philosophers.[26]
The abovementioned founders of the analytic tradition in Mexico were
followed by another group of philosophers who were worked on logic and
philosophy of science. The next generation, which includes Roberto Caso
Bercht, Hugo Padilla, and Wonfilio Trejo, completely abandoned
phenomenology and could be considered the first generation of
“pure” analytic philosophers. Analytic issues and authors
were expanded throughout the country by Trejo who taught at other
universities beyond the UNAM. Significant contributions in philosophy
of language were made by Hugo Margáin and in philosophy of law
by Ulises Schmill and Javier Esquivel.
During the last two decades of the twentieth century, philosophical
production of the IIF-UNAM greatly
 increased.[27]
Among the philosophers who contributed are:
Margarita Valdés who works on applied ethics, philosophy of
language and mind, epistemology, and more recently on the history of
analytic philosophy and philosophy in general in Latin America;
Paulette Dieterlen who works on political philosophy, specifically on
poverty and distributive justice and Olbeth Hansberg working in philosophy
of mind, especially on emotions, perception, consciousness and
Davidsonian philosophy. Mark Platts, of
British origin, moved to Mexico where he published Ways of
Meaning in 1979 (second edition in 1997) and Moral Realities:
An Essay in Philosophical Psychology (1991), where he explores the
concept of desire and develops an anti-Humean theory of moral
motivation. He influenced several IIF-UNAM members, including Lourdes
Valdivia, Olbeth Hansberg, Salma Saab, Guillermo Hurtado and Maite
Ezcurdia. Carlos Pereda (originally from Uruguay) works mainly on
ethics, epistemology, and political theory, but also on speech acts and
linguistic communication. Since then, younger generations of
philosophers have diversified and deepened the
analytic
 program.[28]
Unlike what happened in Argentina, Mexico, like Brazil, had
consistent state policies that encouraged young scholars to pursue
graduate studies abroad with the commitment to return to work in their
own country. Thus, many philosophers have gotten their PhDs abroad, and
their doctoral advisors work outside of Mexico, usually in the United
Kingdom or the United States. That is why the Mexican philosophical
communities are held together by institutions such as the IIF-UNAM,
unlike in Argentina where the student-advisor relation is essential to
the consolidation of philosophical communities.
In Brazil we find several early and isolated glimpses of the
analytic tradition. Francisco Cavalcante Pontes de Miranda published
O Método de Análise
Sócio-Psicológica in 1925 and, in 1937, O
Problema Fundamental do Conhecimento, which was influenced by
Wittgenstein’s Tractatus, Ramsey and the Vienna Circle.
Vicente Ferreira da Silva published a book on the fundamentals of
mathematical logic in 1940. It is remarkable that W.V.O. Quine stayed
for some time in São Paulo, where he published in Portuguese
O sentido da nova lógica (1944). Though his work
influenced the next generation of philosophers, he did not leave any
students in the region. In contrast, the French analytic philosopher
Gilles-Gaston Granger, who taught at the University of São Paulo
from 1947 to 1953 and returned to Brazil many times afterwards, had a
more lasting influence on the likes of Newton da Costa and José
Arthur Giannotti, who worked at the intersection of phenomenology and
Marxism under Wittgenstein’s influence. Within this first
generation of Brazilian analytic philosophers, it is perhaps Newton Da
Costa—the creator of paraconsistent logic—who achieved most
prominence outside of
 Brazil.[29]
Aside from the logical tradition, the rest of Brazilian analytic
philosophy emerges not as a sequel of positivism, but as a
philosophical innovation. The first publications in the area appeared
in the 70s. In Brazil, unlike in Mexico and Argentina, early analytic
works did not come from the phenomenological tradition, but from
scholars in the history of philosophy. Indeed, there are two major
figures in this story, who worked on the history of philosophy but had
analytic students: João Paulo Monteiro (a scholar of Hume,
interested in questions of epistemology, skepticism, and philosophy of
science) and Oswaldo Porchat (a scholar of Aristotle, focused on
skepticism but also interested in logic, philosophy of language, and
sciences). In 1976, Porchat founded the Centro de lógica,
epistemología e história da ciência (CLE) at
the University of Campinas, São Paulo, and the following year he
 began to edit the journal Manuscrito, edited by M. Wrigley and later by M. 
 Ruffino.[30]
There is a large group of analytic philosophers in the area of Rio
de Janeiro, including Oswaldo Chateaubriand, who works in philosophy of
logic, metaphysics, and philosophy of language, and contributed to
topics such as logical form, syntax, grammar, logical truth, theory of
descriptions, theories of truth, modalities
and
 counterfactuals.[31]
Other
analytic philosophers working in Rio include Danilo Marcondes Filho
(philosophy of language, epistemology, skepticism), Wilson
Mendonça (philosophy of mind, ethics, and metaethics) and Maria
Clara Dias (ethics, philosophy of action and mind).
In addition, a large group of philosophers of science work at the
Federal University of Santa Catarina (Florianópolis) organized
around the Núcleo de Epistemologia e Lógica
(NEL) which edits the journal Principia. Every two years they
organize an international symposium on topics of philosophy of science,
epistemology, logic, and metaphysics. The group includes Newton da
Costa, Décio Krause, Luiz Henrique de A. Dutra, and two
Argentine emigrants, Alberto Cupani and Gustavo Caponi.
Unlike Argentina and Mexico, where much of the activity is
concentrated in the two capital cities, Brazil has a vast landscape
where we can find in different universities many philosophers within
the analytic tradition, although they work connected to each other by 
ANPOF’s “Grupos de 
 Trabalho”.[32]
It is not until 2008 that the Brazilian Society for Analytic
Philosophy (SBFA) was
 founded.[33]
In Colombia, as in other countries in the region, the first works in
analytic philosophy were produced in the second half of the twentieth
century. There are two journals—
 Ideas y valores[34]
and Cuadernos de
Filosofía y Letras—in which analytic (and
non-analytic) works are published. Rubén Sierra Mejia, in the
second half of the 1960s, introduced in Bogotá courses and
translations of some classical works within the analytic tradition, and
published his articles in a book, Apreciación de la
Filosofía Analítica (1987). At the University of
Valle (Cali), Adolfo León Lobos introduced argumentation theory
and ordinary language philosophy. In the 1980s there was much activity
in ordinary language
 philosophy.[35]
Juan José Botero is known for his work
focused on the common origins of the phenomenological and the analytic
traditions, examining the correspondence between Husserl and Frege and
publishing works on consciousness, propositional attitudes, sense and
reference. There are many other contemporary Colombian philosophers who
are making significant contributions within the
analytic
 tradition.[36]
In Peru, analytic philosophy was introduced by Francisco Miró
Quesada. In 1946 he published the first book in the area:
Lógica. He wrote many works on logic, deontic logic,
philosophy of mathematics, and also on the social and political reality
of his
 country.[37]
In the 1970s
he founded, with Alberto Cordero, a program on philosophy
of
 science.[38]
In the 1960s
Augusto Salazar Bondy translated Moore and Wittgenstein and wrote a
series of essays on evaluative language, which was eventually published
as a book in 1971 in
 Chile.[39]
Beyond these isolated figures who left no students, only in the
twenty-first century do we find two small groups in Peru working on
analytic issues. At the Pontifical Catholic University of Peru, Pablo
Quintanilla leads an interdisciplinary group dedicated to the study of
the philosophy of language and mind and its evolution (Grupo Mente
y Lenguaje). At the Universidad Nacional Mayor de San Marcos a small
group led by Oscar Garcia Zárate who founded the Centro de
estudios de filosofía analítica (CESFIA) in
2006. CESFIA publishes the journal Analítica
(though the Centro seems to function in some
isolation from the rest of the Latin American analytic
philosophers).
In Uruguay, Carlos Vaz Ferreira introduced some ideas and texts from
the analytic tradition in the first half of the twentieth century, but
died very young in 1956 without leaving students. By the late 1950s
Ezra Heymann introduced Frege and Austin, and taught logic in
Montevideo before moving to Venezuela. The most internationally
recognized Uruguayan philosopher was Mario Otero, who was educated in
the United States and exiled to the IIF-UNAM in the 1970’s. He
eventually returned to Uruguay with the return of democracy in the
1980s and worked at the University of the Republic in the history of
logic and philosophy of science. His student, Lucía Leiwowicz,
continues working on these issues. Also exiled in the 1970s, never to
return to Uruguay, were Javier Sasso and Eduardo Piacenza who went to
Venezuela and Carlos Pereda who went to the IIF-UNAM. Currently, the
most prominent philosopher in Uruguay is Carlos Enrique Caorsi who
works in philosophy of language with an emphasis on Davidson’s
philosophy.
Chile shows a certain isolation. Until the coup
d’état in 1973, developments were limited to formal
logic by Juan Rivano, Gerold Stahl, and Rolando Chuaqui. Roberto
Torretti, who was exiled to Puerto Rico, stands out. He made an early
impact with a well-regarded book on Kant published in 1967. These
historical studies led to more systematic studies in the field of
philosophy of science and history of geometry, published in the 1990s.
Alfonso Gómez Lobo took the opposite path as he first published
Siete escritos sobre lógica y semántica in 1972
before leaving analytic philosophy to engage with ancient philosophy
when he was exiled to the United States. In the 1990s there were only a
couple of figures working on philosophy of mind and language
in
 Chile.[40]
In the twenty-first
century the analytic tradition grows, mostly due to the many
philosophers who returned to their country after
studies
 abroad.[41]
The Sociedad
Chilena de Filosofía Analítica was founded around
2008.
In Venezuela, Juan David García Bacca, though not an analytic
philosopher himself, introduced authors from the analytic tradition in
the 1960s. Juan Nuño published Sentido de la
filosofía contemporánea in 1965, which included
logic and other analytic issues, and dealt with proper names and
nativism in a book of formal logic published in 1973. Adolfo
García Díaz, of Mexican origin, worked in the 1960s in
Venezuela on issues of logic, metaphysics, and history of philosophy.
In the 1970s, Venezuela, as did Mexico, welcomed political exiles such
as Ernesto Batistella, Javier Sasso, and Eduardo Piacenza from Uruguay.
There were also more Venezuelans working within the analytic tradition
at this time, including Rafael Burgos (Wittgenstein and ontology) and
Pedro Lluberes (ontology and philosophy of science). And in the 1980s,
Victor Krebs worked on Wittgenstein’s philosophy and Vicenzo Lo
Monaco on Davidson’s philosophy and interpretation theory,
semantics of proper names, and ontological commitments.
In Costa Rica, Claudio Gutierrez published papers in the area of
philosophy of logic, epistemology, philosophy of language and
philosophy of mind. Luis Camacho Naranjo makes contributions in epistemology
and philosophy of science. Max Freund works on the 
logics of sortals, modal logic, and in the logical, computational and philosophical consequences of conceptualism.
In Guatemala, Hector-Neri Castañeda (who later emigrated to
the United States) published several papers on consciousness and
normative logic in the late 1950s and on the private language argument
in the early 1960s. From his workplace in the United States (Indiana
University) he collaborated with PhD students from Costa Rica,
Guatemala, and Mexico. Similarly, other Latin American philosophers
emigrated to the United States; a paradigmatic case is Ernesto Sosa, a
Cuban-born philosopher who studied and worked all his life in the
United States who constantly sought to establish links with philosophy
in Spanish, especially the analytic philosophers of Mexico and
Argentina.
The growth of analytic philosophy in Latin America led to the
foundation in 2007 of the Asociación Latinoamericana de
Filosofía Analítica (ALFAn) which brings together
individuals and institutions working in the analytic tradition in the
region.
In this section I will mention examples of original work developed
by philosophers who have done most of their professional work in Latin
America within the analytic tradition. (For reasons of space, it is
impossible to be exhaustive).
The areas in which major original contributions have occurred are
logic, especially what might be called “philosophical
logic”, such as paraconsistent logic, belief dynamics and deontic
logic, and practical philosophy, due to the role analytic philosophy
played in strengthening democracy in the region. Also important are the
contributions made on metaphilosophical issues arising from reflecting
on what “importing” philosophy implies. However, there are
important contributions in all philosophical disciplines since Latin
American analytic philosophers have addressed most of the universal
problems posed by western philosophy.
In the case of theoretical philosophy, most research in Latin
America was not originated by local thoughts or interests, but by the
influence of philosophers abroad, i.e., by the importation of
philosophical theories and standpoints. In the majority of cases the
philosophical ideas proposed are not in dialogue exclusively with other
members of the Latin American community, but with the broader
international community. There are, however, some exceptions in the
field of philosophical logic and philosophy of logic where important
traditions were born: paraconsistent logic and the logic of belief
revision.
Paraconsistent logic is one of the autochthonous philosophical
products of Latin America. The idea behind these developments is simple
and philosophically motivated: a logic is paraconsistent if the
principle of non-contradiction is not valid in general; syntactically
speaking, “a logic is paraconsistent if it can be the basic logic
of inconsistent but non-trivial theories” (Da Costa & Bueno
2010: 221). As mentioned in the previous section, the father of these
logics is Newton da Costa who originated what has been called the
“Brazilian school of
 paraconsistency”.[42]
The other leading figure in logic who birthed a research tradition
was Carlos Alchourrón. Besides his contribution in
deontic
 logic[43],
Alchourrón was
also one of the first logicians to develop a logical system for belief
dynamics (AGM). The key notions of this theory are revision
(when we introduce a new piece of information into the current
epistemic state and readjust the background information in such a way
that the new result is consistent), and contraction (when a
piece of information is eliminated from an epistemic state)
(Arló-Costa and Fermé 2010: 483). Developments produced
by Alchourrón and collaborators (until his early death in 1996)
included issues related to non-monotonic logic and developments in
artificial
 intelligence.[44]
A lesser known philosophical issue that originated and developed in
Latin America is Orayen’s Paradox, baptized as such by
Alchourrón (1987). Orayen’s paradox is a problem that Raul
Orayen identified and originally presented at a symposium on Quine, in
Granada in 1986 (Orayen 1992). It arises when the following
propositions are asserted simultaneously:
One cannot simultaneously accept these two statements, because if we
look at (1), the set theory cannot be formalized in the sense of (2).
Orayen not only presented this paradox, but also offered two possible
solutions. The first appeals to semantics based on the adoption of
natural language predicates to interpret formal predicates, i.e. it
proposes a new way of interpreting the symbols of quantificational
language with a language that is already interpreted. The second
solution is inspired by the hierarchies developed in Russell’s
theory of types. Orayen’s Paradox produced many responses, among
others by W.V.O. Quine, Hilary Putnam, and William
 Hart[45],
as well as famous logicians of the
Latin American community, such as Atocha Aliseda, Agustin Rayo, Eduardo Barrio, Max Freund, Mario 
Gómez-Torrente, Sandra Lazzer, Adolfo Garcia de la Sienra and Axel Barceló. The
main proposals around this paradox are included in Moretti and Hurtado
(2003) and García de la Sienra (2008).
Both general and special philosophy of science, as well as the
history and sociology of science, have been extensively studied in Lain
America. The intense activity in philosophy of science is reflected in
the regional institutions that have served as an impetus for its
development. In Argentina, the Jornadas de epistemología e
historia de la ciencia has been organized every year since 1989 by
a local group led by Victor Rodriguez, Marisa Velasco and Jose Ahumada.
In Chile, the Jornadas Rolando Chuaqui Kettlunen has been
organized every year since 1999 in tribute to the distinguished
mathematician, philosopher of science and Chilean thinker, Professor
Rolando Chuaqui Kettlun, perhaps the most important leader in
developing formal sciences in the country during the twentieth century.
Among the organizers are Andrés Bobenrieth, Rolando Rebolledo, José Tomás Alvarado, Guido Vallejos, Claudia
Muñoz and Wilfredo Quezada. There is also an organization of
regional scope, the Asociación de Filosofía e
Historia de la ciencia del Cono Sur (AFHIC), which was founded in
2000 in order to promote ties among regional specialists and organize
meetings every two years in different member
 countries.[46]
See the entry on
 philosophy of science in Latin America
for a detailed revision of the main contributions to the
field.
The theory of knowledge is a popular discipline in Brazil, which is
not surprising since the origins of analytic philosophy in this country
is associated with two figures— Porchat and Monteiro—who
worked on skepticism and the foundation of science, followed by Plinio Junqueira-Smith and Paulo Faria. The main
developments in the field, not only in Brazil but also in the rest of
Latin America, can be found in the entry on
 skepticism in Latin America
and
Cresto 2010. Analytic metaphysics, on the contrary, has had little
development in the region, with only a few
 exceptions.[47]
Philosophy of language and mind have had extensive development in
the region. Philosophical reflection on language, which is at the heart
of analytic philosophy, is exhaustively spread throughout Latin
America. The first analytic publications in Latin America, by Alejandro
Rossi and Thomas Simpson, were devoted to this area, and they generated
in their respective countries a strong tradition in philosophy of
language. As in the rest of the world, many philosophers originally
concerned with issues in philosophy of language turned to philosophy of
mind in the 1980s. Thus, both philosophy of language and mind have had
a very homogeneous development throughout Latin
 America.[48]
In these topics the influence of
foreign philosophy is apparent, but though the problems and arguments
addressed were not born in Latin America, original contributions from
Latin American philosophers can be found. Most of the research in the
field assumes a naturalistic approach, connecting recent developments
in linguistics, cognitive sciences and neurosciences to deal with
philosophical issues about language and mind including theories of
reference, contexualism, psychological and phenomenal concepts, the
mind-body problem, understanding others, and theory of
 action.[49]
 The emotions, not always addressed in mainstream philosophy of mind,
have also been an object of philosophical reflection in
the
 region.[50]
Concerning the classical
developments in analytic philosophy of language, Frege’s legacy
has been deeply studied in the
 region.[51]
Many traditional questions of moral and political philosophy as well
as that of philosophy of law have been addressed by Latin
American
 philosophers.[52]
However, the
social and political peculiarities of the region have produced specific
issues which will be the topic of this section.
Political instability prevailed in Lain America for most part of the
twentieth century. Almost all the countries in the region have suffered
coup d’ états, electoral fraud, cancellation of
constitutional rights, political persecutions; in sum, democracy has
been a chimera. In most countries the political situation has changed
in the last thirty years, and to some extent this was due to moral,
political and law philosophers who produced an extensive discussion of
the foundation of democracy, human rights, and other related issues.
From the economic point of view, Latin America was, and still is, a
region where most of the population live below the poverty line, the
gap between the rich and poor is very large, health and education are
sometimes “luxury” items that many people cannot access; in
sum, economic inequalities, and therefore educational, cultural and
health inequalities, abound.
Applied ethics, especially bioethics, has seen ample and original
philosophical developments in Latin America. The political, economic,
and social situation of the region has led to focused reflections on
issues like
 abortion[53]
and
medical practice and research on vulnerable subjects (Rivera
López 2010: 365). The public commitment to ongoing debates that
matter to their local societies is an important feature of the analytic
philosophical tradition in the region. The philosophical reflections on
abortion are a paradigmatic case to consider. In most Latin American
countries, unlike Europe and the US, abortion is not legal almost
without exception, and many women have died or been imprisoned due to
this fact. Mexico has been a pioneer in the decriminalization of
abortion, but it was not until 2007—and only in Mexico City, and
not in the rest of the country—that abortion was legalized. The
Mexican philosophical community was involved in the process that led to
this change.
Margarita Valdés (1997, 2001b) has been a pioneer in this
field as her contributions aim to produce political impact (i.e.,
change existing laws), seeking to undermine the dogmatic thinking of
the vast majority of the population and legislators and emphasizing
specific issues such as child and adolescent pregnancy, pregnancy
resulting from rape,
 etc.[54]
Valdés (2001a) presents the main arguments for and against the
legalization of abortion, and distinguishes three notions of a
“person” in the arguments: the biological notion, the idea
of a “potential” person, and the metaphysical and moral
notion of person. She finally shows that the more conservative
arguments cannot be held, because they either appeal to a notion of a
person which is not relevant to the moral question, or
claim—falsely—that the moral person is present at the very
moment of conception.
Gustavo Ortiz-Millán (2009), also in Mexico, makes a
systematic and comprehensive study of the issue of abortion where he
considers the main ethical arguments for and against abortion, the
reproductive rights of women, the conflict with the rights of the
fetus, the rule of law in his country and the statistics related to the
topics under discussion, in addition to considering the pro-life
conservative proposal of adoption, paternity rights, and politics and
pervading religious arguments.
In Argentina, Florencia Luna, Eduardo Rivera López and Arleen
Salles have developed several lines of research in bioethics.
Initially, some books with Spanish translations of leading papers in
the
 field[55]
have been
published, aiming to introduce into Spanish-speaking societies
important issues such as problems raised by genetic knowledge and
genetic manipulation, euthanasia, abortion, reproductive rights, the
principle of autonomy and the patient-physician relationship, justice
and the right to health, experimentation on human subjects, organ
transplants, etc. But soon these philosophers developed their own work
in the field, shifting from translating the work of others to producing
their own original
 works[56].
Luna (2006) focuses her research on vulnerable subjects, i.e.
“people living in deprivation, oppression, and
powerlessness—conditions that are all too common for many Latin
Americans” (Luna 2006: 1). Vulnerable subjects pose urgent
questions to a moral philosopher given paternalistic attitudes based on
wide-spread illiteracy, denial of women’s reproductive rights,
extremely restrictive legal circumstances with respect to abortion, and
lack of sexual education and contraception information. Difficulties
found in biomedical research with vulnerable subjects involve a lack of
respect for research subjects, e.g. when researchers hide relevant
information from the subjects, fail to request their informed consent,
or take their case history without consent. Luna also addresses the
question of post-trial obligations with experimental subjects, patents,
and the intellectual property of biomedical
 findings.[57]
Rivera López (2011) deals with
classical ethical questions such as euthanasia, the challenges posed by
new technologies such as assisted reproduction, organ transplants and
genetic manipulation, but also addresses questions of distributive
justice on health resources and services, medical technologies, the
moral problem of selling organs for transplant, among other issues.
The unstable political situation in Latin America during the
twentieth century characterized by repeated breaches of constitutional
order led generations of philosophers to deal with issues related to
the foundations of law and human rights, including the general theory
of ethics and human rights, the theory of democracy, the theory of
punishment, and the general theory of legal norms. Garzón
Valdés (1998: 27) argues that one can genuinely speak of an
Argentinian philosophy of law, and not just a philosophy of law made in
Argentina, by virtue of its originality and impact. A central figure in
philosophy of law was Carlos Nino, not only because of the importance
of his work outside of Latin America, but also for the great political
and theoretical impact his work had in the region, including leaving a
long list of students who have strongly contributed to the development
of these
 issues[58].
One of the
most significant political event contributing to the recovery of
democracy was the 1985 trial of the military government that ruled
Argentina from 1976 to 1983.
The human rights policy carried out by President Alfonsín was
based on theoretical discussions held in SADAF, led by Carlos Nino in
the early 1980s. The moral and legal considerations on which these
policies were based are developed in Nino 1996 (posthumous). This book
includes a historical background in which Nino reviews prior solutions
to the systematic and governmental violation of human rights after a
change of government (such as the Nuremberg trial, Eichmann’s
trial, the lack of answers to previous human rights violations during
democratic transitions in Europe in the 1970s, and in Eastern Europe in
the 1980s and 1990s,) as well as the situation in Asia, Africa, South
America, and Argentina, including the historical context of the
political and legal decisions made by President Alfonsín. In the
second part of the book, Nino analyzes the political, moral and legal
problems posed by the decision to prosecute human rights violators.
Some of the main problems are: how to justify the retroactive
application of criminal justice, the diffusion of responsibility (since
for a massive violation of human rights, many people in different
positions in the chain of command must be involved), under which laws
the accused should be judged, in which jurisdiction they should be
judged, who is legally responsible for a violation of human rights (the
person who gave the order or the one who executed it) and whether the
international community should intervene, among many other
questions.
It is natural that analytic philosophy, a tradition with roots
outside Latin America, generated a philosophical revolution when it
arrived in the region. It is no wonder, then, that many Latin American
analytic philosophers have devoted their efforts to thinking about
metaphilosophical issues such as the methods and nature of philosophy,
the social role of philosophy, teaching methodologies, etc. The
founders of analytic philosophy in the region addressed these issues;
Rossi, Salmerón, Villoro, Miró Quesada, and Salazar Bondy
sought for a scientific philosophy, first drawing on phenomenology and
later on analytic philosophy and logic as tools. Three recent
discussions in this area are fundamental.
There has been significant contributions regarding the nature and
practice of philosophy when a tradition is introduced and
institutionalized in a given region, several public and private
institutions founded to guide philosophical practice, and
professionalism developed. Salmerón (1971) holds that philosophy
in Latin America should maintain philosophical normality and
professionalization, connect with science, and avoid metaphysical
speculation and literary style. Later he argues that there are two
aspects of philosophy: a critical one linked with science, and another
one concerned with the conception of the world, e.g. philosophy of
education and ethics. He seeks to reconcile these two aspects of
philosophy (Salmerón 1991). 
Meanwhile, Hurtado (2007) distinguishes between theoretical
metaphilosophy and practical metaphilosophy (i.e. philosophical
reflection on the conditions and problems posed by the concrete
practice of philosophy in a given place and time) and argues that the
latter depends on theoretical metaphilosophy (i.e. the general
conception of philosophy).
Rabossi’s posthumous book is a paradigmatic example of
metaphilosophical thinking in the region. Rabossi (2008) presents a
very original hypothesis about why philosophical practice has its
current characteristics based on a careful historical analysis of the
institutionalization of philosophy resulting from the split between
philosophy and other theoretical disciplines in idealist German thought
in the nineteenth century. The three provocative
“conjectures” he develops in the book are: (1) Philosophy,
i.e., what we conceive, practice and value as philosophy nowadays, is a
young discipline only two hundred years old; (2) The long life usually
attributed to philosophy is the result of a historical narrative also
conceived two hundred years ago; and (3) Philosophy is an anomalous
discipline (Rabossi 2008: 13). The history he reconstructs regarding
the split between philosophy and theology in the nineteenth century
allows him to present the “philosophical canon” explicit or
implicit in philosophical practices, a decalogue of maxims guiding all
philosophical research across philosophical traditions. In the book, he
also engages in academic geopolitical issues, including the tension
between a growing globalization of philosophy and the consolidation of
“national philosophies” (such as French Philosophy, Latin
American Philosophy, etc.), and the relationship between the central
and peripheral producers of
 philosophy.[59]
A second issue that has been widely discussed is the teaching of
philosophy, both at the university and the secondary school level. The
issue of teaching philosophy is entrenched with the conception of
philosophizing itself. For centuries, since colonial times, Latin
America was merely a receptor of philosophy produced in other regions.
In the second half of the twentieth century, however, the debate around
the idea of an authentic Latin American philosophy was
clearly
 settled[60],
and both these
political and academic movements, together with analytic philosophy
(which usually focuses on problems and arguments rather than on figures
and theories), helped question the traditional academic practices in
the region. The claim defended by many analytic philosophers in the
region was that teaching philosophy should promote original
philosophical thinking rather than merely reproducing the philosophical
developments of others. For instance, Gaos (1956) insisted on changing
the university curricula of philosophy, seeking to transform
educational institutions in order to create philosophers able to
produce their own philosophies. Another powerful idea, proposed by
Rabossi and his research group, was to take seriously Kant’s
claim that philosophy cannot be taught but philosophizing can, and to
develop a series of teaching strategies in order to instill in
philosophy students the relevant “know-how” proper to
philosophical practice (Rabossi 1987; González and Stigol 1993).
Teaching philosophy is no longer considered merely a way of
transmitting information to students about historical figures and
theories (to give them propositional knowledge about philosophy);
instead, under a “critical model” of teaching philosophy
(opposed to the traditional “dogmatic” model), teaching is
seen as a way of promoting philosophical
 thinking.[61]
Finally, the last notable metaphilosophical question regards the
language of philosophy. The fact that most analytic works are published
in English and the current globalization of the profession push Latin
American analytic philosophers to produce philosophy in English
(despite the fact that they work in countries whose native language is
Spanish or Portuguese). This has generated much controversy concerning
whether or not to leave the native language while doing philosophy.
Some opening lines of the controversy are presented in an issue of the
journal Crítica (vol 54, no.133) with
contributions by Gonzalo Rodriguez-Pereyra, Marco Ruffino, Diana
Pérez, and Guillermo Hurtado. In 2014, a discussion on the
subject was held at the Cervantes Institute of
Harvard
 University[62].
On the one side,
Rodriguez-Pereyra, Ruffino and Toribio argue that English should be
considered the new Latin in the sense that English should be widely
adopted as the proper language to write philosophy in given pragmatic
professional reasons and ideal reasons of having a common language to
communicate within the analytic community. On the other hand,
Pérez, Hurtado, and Gracia, among others, defend the idea that
practicality is not the only relevant factor to consider when deciding
which language is chosen for communication as there are also political,
cultural, linguistic, contextual, and experiential reasons to take into
account. Moreover, the shared experience has been that choosing what
language to communicate one’s ideas in is not a neutral process
because (1) there are issues concerning translation that are important
to philosophy and using a plurality of languages often helps the author
improve her ideas; and (2) language is not only a means to communicate
ideas which are already established in our minds, but a vehicle which
contributes to the shaping of our ideas.
The development of analytic philosophy in Latin America since its
introduction over the past sixty years has been impressive not only in
the originality of many of the contributions, but also in the
international impact that philosophers who live and work in the region
have achieved. Thus, Latin America today is not only an importer of
analytic philosophy, but also a producer of analytic philosophy. More
and more resources are becoming available in the region, which
foretells a prolific future for the analytic tradition in Latin
America. Globalization and technological resources that allow faster
communication have contributed to this development. The more stable
democratic political regimes of the past thirty years have also
promoted research, freedom of expression, and critical thought in the
region.
Moreover, globalization and increased resources of the area have
enabled Latin American philosophers to be more closely connected to
each other, which favors the development of a Latin American
philosophical
 community.[63]
Indeed, there are lines of inquiry arising from the political, social,
and cultural needs of the region that have enabled the development of
original philosophical production in the past. These developments will
surely establish themselves and multiply in the years to come.