We find the etymological origins of two key terms in the title of this
article, “political” and “philosophy”, in
ancient Greek: the former originally pertaining to the polis
or city-state; the latter being the practice of a particular kind of
inquiry conceived literally as the “love of wisdom”
(philosophia). These ideas were transmitted beyond the
confines of the classical polis as the Greek city-states came
under the suzerainty of larger kingdoms after an initial Macedonian
conquest at the end of the fourth century B.C; those kingdoms in turn
were eventually conquered and significantly assimilated by the Roman
republic, later transmuted into an empire. Philosophers writing in
Latin engaged self-consciously with the earlier and continuing
traditions of writing about philosophy in Greek. Already from its
origins, Greek political philosophy put the question of the forms of
regimes or “constitutions” (politeia, singular)
at the center of its concerns. The classification of types of
constitutions already found in Herodotus, fleshed out by Plato, and
further adapted by Aristotle— in Aristotle’s version, there were
three “good” good regimes:monarchy, aristocracy, and a
moderate form of democracy; and their three “perversions”:
tyranny, oligarchy, and a bad form of democracy—would continue
to inform the discussion of politics into the context of the
“mixed regime” of the Roman republic, held to combine
elements of all three of the good regimes. These discussions were
indexed to the particular historical setting under consideration while
also offering general principles that remain relevant in many ways,
even as the questions and contexts for political philosophy have
changed.
Because the field of political philosophy so delineated has had a long
history since then, long past the time when the ancient models were
accepted as defining the field and determining the
“problems” to be considered, it is a mistake to approach
their thought with a modern menu of expectations of what the subject
will contain. At the same time, because the Greeks also developed
other genres widely recognized today—among them, history,
tragedy, comedy, and rhetoric—no understanding of their thought
about politics can restrict itself to the genre of political
philosophy alone. Some argue, for example, that Thucydides’
elaboration of the nature of the political through his
History of the fifth-century Peloponnesian War between
leagues led by Athens and Sparta is more important and instructive
than that issuing from Plato’s philosophical dialogues (Geuss 2005).
While that argument is contentious, it rests on an important broader
point. “Politics” and what is “political”
emerged as part of a widespread set of sociolinguistic practices, most
notably and best documented in Athens, while “philosophy”
was invented by a relatively small number of self-professed
“philosophical” thinkers. Thus the invention of
“political philosophy” as a genre can be understood as a
deliberate challenge to existing practices, and conceptions, of
“the political.” The challenge was directed in particular,
though not exclusively, to democratic practices in mid to late fifth
century Athens, which was the polis both intellectually
dominant and in many ways politically exemplary at the time, as well
as bequeathing the lion’s share of our surviving evidence from ancient
Greece (Meier 1990, Ober 2008; on the surviving evidence for ancient
Greek philosophy in general, see the entry on
 doxography for ancient philosophy).
This article therefore begins by surveying political practices and the
reflective accounts to which they gave rise in the classical Greek
period of the independent polis. It then turns to the
thinkers who invented “political philosophy” par
excellence: Socrates, Plato and Aristotle. It continues to Hellenistic
Greek thinkers before considering the main currents and roles of
political philosophy in the Roman republic. While offering a survey of
certain developments in the Roman empire, it leaves aside the
distinctive contributions made by Jewish and Christian thinkers in
that period, and in particular the great upheaval of thought effected
by Augustine, who was deeply engaged with classical authors such as
Plato and Cicero, but who is one starting point for
 medieval political philosophy.
 The article concludes with some reflections on how the nature of
“ancient political philosophy” should, and should not, be
understood.
The distinctive understanding of “politics” forged in
Greece was marked by the historical emergence of the independent
 city-state[1]
 and the variety of regimes which it could harbor. Notwithstanding
fantasies of a pre-political “Age of Kronos”, the
polis was widely understood as the acme of human civilization
and the principal domain in which human fulfillment could be sought.
The city was the domain of potential collaboration in leading the good
life, though it was by the same token the domain of potential
contestation should that pursuit come to be understood as pitting some
against others. Political theorizing began in arguments about what
politics was good for, who could participate in politics, and why,
arguments which were tools in civic battles for ideological and
material control as well as attempts to provide logical or
architectonic frameworks for those battles.
Such conflicts were addressed by the idea of justice, which was
fundamental to the city as it emerged from the archaic age into the
classical period. Justice was conceived by poets, lawgivers, and
philosophers alike as the structure of civic bonds which were
beneficial to all (rich and poor, powerful and weak alike) rather than
an exploitation of some by others. Hesiod’s late eighth-century epic
poem Works and Days, for example, contrasts the brute
strength with which a hawk can dominate a nightingale (“You are
being held by one who is much stronger… I will make a meal of
you, if I want, or let you go,” lines 206–208), with the
peace and plenty which flourishes wherever justice, such as rendering
fair verdicts to foreigners, is preserved (lines 225–230).
So understood, justice defined the basis of equal citizenship and was
said to be the requirement for human regimes to be acceptable to the
gods. The ideal was that, with justice as a foundation, political life
would enable its participants to flourish and to achieve the
overarching human end of happiness (eudaimonia), expressing a
civic form of virtue and pursuing happiness and success through the
competitive forums of the city. Whether justice applied to the city’s
relation with other cities was a further and highly contested point,
memorably explored in Thucydides’ recounting of the “Melian
Dialogue” in 416 BCE, in which emissaries of the Athenians
debated the meaning of justice with the leaders of the island-city of
Melos, a city they were threatening with death and disaster should
they fail to submit to Athenian imperial demands (Thuc. V.
84–114).
Justice, then, depended on treating equals equally, and distributing
citizenship and the privileges of officeholding accordingly. Yet how
should “the equal” be understood? This became the major
political faultline of the Greek fifth century BCE. Oligarchical
regimes might consider only the
 kalokagathoi[2]
 —the elite and well-born, usually also wealthy landowners
—to be full equals; democratic regimes, by contrast, tended to
treat the “many” (or some large proportion of them) as
political equals of the elite “few,” in the fullest
democracies enfranchising all free- and native-born
 men.[3]
 Sparta, a unique political entity, still exemplified the same broad
pattern in naming its citizens “the equals” or (more
literally) “the peers” (hoi
 homoioi).[4]
 The absence of slave status made one free but not necessarily a
citizen. Slavery for its part was very little debated as a political
question, serving to demarcate the domain of “politics” by
contrast with it rather than being considered as a topic within it
(see Garnsey 1996 for a full account including exceptions to that
generalization). The exclusion of women from active citizenship in
Athens was more consciously felt, giving rise to fantasies of
female-dominated politics in Aristophanic comedy (Lysistrata,
Assemblywomen) and to tortured reflection in many tragedies
(consider the titles of Medea and Trojan Women, both
Athenian works setting their explorations of women’s roles in the
dramatic contexts of archaic foreign polities).
Among equals, however defined, the space of the political was the
space of participation in decision-making concerning public affairs
and actions. That invention of the political (what Meier 1990 calls
The Greek Discovery of Politics) was the hallmark of the
classical Greek world. Citizens, whether the few (usually the rich) or
the many (including the poorer and perhaps the poorest free adult
men), gathered together to conduct public affairs, sharing either by
custom, by election, or by lot—the latter seen in Athens as the
most democratic, though it was never the sole mechanism used in any
Greek democracy—in holding, or holding accountable, the offices
for carrying them out. Rhetoric played an important role in shaping
those decisions, especially, though not only, in democracies, where
discursive norms shaped by the poor majority were hegemonic in public
even over the rich (Ober 1989).
At the same time, politics was shaped by the legacy of archaic poetry
and its heroic ethos and by the religious cults which included,
alongside pan-Hellenic and familial rites, important practices
distinct to each city-state. This was a polytheistic, rather than
monotheistic, setting, in which religion was at least in large part a
function of civic identity. It was a world innocent of modern
bureaucracy and of the modern move to intellectual abstraction in
defining the state: the entity we would call “Athens” in
the abstract was called in its own day by the collective noun for its
living and breathing citizens, “the Athenians.” So if
ancient political philosophy left out much that modern political
philosophy would include (e.g., for the most part, the question of the
justness of slavery), it also included much that the latter would tend
to exclude. Not only the civic religious cult, but also the patterns
of child-rearing, cultural stories expressed in music, epic, and
drama, gender roles and sexual practices, military participation, and
so on, were features of the “way of life” which
constituted the politeia or “constitution” in its
broadest sense (Lane 2014a, 59–62). This broadest sense was
initially most evident to the Athenians when they looked at the
peculiar customs of Sparta, but Plato taught them to recognize that
democratic Athens was as distinctive a regime (Schofield 2006:
31–43), one embodying a particular set of ethical goals and
practices in its political arrangements.
Most of those generally recognized as “wise men” (sophoi) and
“students of nature” (physikoi) who appeared in this milieu,
thought within the same broad terms as the poets and orators. Justice
was widely, if not universally, treated as a fundamental constituent
of cosmic order. Some of the physikoi influenced political
life, notably a number of the Pythagoreans in southern Italy. Others
held themselves aloof from political action while still identifying
commonalities or consonances between nature and politics, for example,
Democritus of Abdera, whose atomist philosophy comported with a
defense of political life, and so of the justice that it required
individuals to enact, as being necessary for individual flourishing
(see e.g. Democritus’ fragment DK B252 = Taylor D116). However, these
portraits of broad consonance between nature and politics were
challenged in the mid to late fifth century BCE by some among a new
breed of thinker and actor, the professional teachers
(“sophists”), who began to ask whether the laws and
customs (nomos, singular; nomoi, plural) embodying
political justice were truly a reflection of justice in nature
(phusis), or merely an imposition of arbitrary human norms.
Most of the sophists argued the latter, though they did so along a
spectrum of interpretation (for which our evidence rests heavily on
Plato, who portrays Socrates arguing with a considerable number of
sophists): for Protagoras (an itinerant teacher from Abdera who is
depicted in Plato’s Protagoras and Theaetetus), the
human creation of political life was a cause of celebrating human
virtues and practical abilities; for Thrasymachus (an ambassador to
Athens from Chalcedon, a city in Asia Minor near modern Istanbul, who is
depicted in Plato’s Republic), it was a cause of
condemnation, the powerful in any city imposing laws to serve their
own advantage. This nomos-phusis debate raised a
fundamental challenge to the governing intellectual assumptions of the
polis, even though the sophists advertised themselves as
teaching skills for success within it, a number of them being employed
as diplomats by cities eager to exploit their rhetorical abilities.
Socrates and Plato would respond to this challenge in shaping a new
genre of “philosophy” which broke the mould of their
predecessors (on the genre of philosophy, see Nightingale 1993a).
While it is broadly true to say that Greek political thinkers
generally presupposed the importance of justice, in the fifth and
fourth centuries BCE many of them also increasingly problematized
it.
In giving birth to philosophy, the polis also gave birth to a
tension between what Aristotle would describe as two lives: the life
of politics and the life of philosophy. A faultline between ethics and
politics, so closely connected in an ancient culture preoccupied with
flourishing (eudaimonia) and virtue (aretê),
opened here. Should philosophers act politically (and if so,
should they engage in ordinary politics in existing regimes, or work
to establish new ones), or should they abstain from politics in order
to live a life of pure contemplation? There was likewise a question as
to whether philosophers should think politically: were human
affairs worth thinking about in the broadest perspective opened by the
study of nature and of the gods? In engaging with questions of
rhetoric, virtue, knowledge, and justice, Socrates’ philosophical life
was engaged with the political even before his death (his trial and
execution at the hands of the Athenian democratic regime) embattled
him with it. But for his student Plato and Plato’s student Aristotle,
the practice and even the study of human affairs such as politics were
less divine, and so less admirable, than the broader study of truth
about the natural and the divine realms. Philosophy might have to
address the political but its highest calling soared above it. If
Socrates’ political fate was part of the stimulus for Plato to invent
a new metaphysics and epistemology in order to articulate an
alternative realm of political possibility, Plato’s dialogues show
Socrates simultaneously asserting an independence for those
disciplines from the bonds of the political
 alone.[5]
This distinctive Greek—and particularly Platonic – outlook
must condition any historical understanding of the development of
ancient political philosophy. While one influential approach to the
history of political thought takes its bearings from what a thinker
was trying to do in and by what he or she said or wrote, it is
important to recognize that the founders of ancient political
philosophy were in part trying to define a new space of doing as
philosophizing, independent of ordinary political action. This is not
to say that they did not also have ordinary political intentions, but
rather to stress that the invention of political philosophy was also
intended as a mode of reflection upon the value of ordinary political
life.
According to Cicero, Socrates (469–399 BCE) was the first to
bring philosophy down from heaven, locating it in cities and even in
people’s kitchens (Tusc.V.10). A humbly born man who
refused the lucrative mantle of the sophistic professional teacher,
yet attracted many of the most ambitious and aristocratic youth of
Athens to accompany him in his questioning of them and their elders as
to the nature of the virtues they claimed to possess or understand, he
left no philosophical writings. We know him only through the surviving
testimony of others, first the lampoons in Aristophanes’ comic plays,
and above all the “Socratic” dialogues written by his student Plato
and his associate Xenophon (dialogues by others are known only by
titles or fragments), and the remarks of Plato’s student Aristotle, as
well as other sources from after or even long after his death (for a
collection, see Giannantoni 1990, and see the entry on
 Socrates).
Socrates seems to have been the first philosopher to treat ethics
– as opposed to cosmology and physics—as a distinct area
of inquiry. Asserting in Plato’s Apology (38a) that
“the unexamined life is not worth living,” he pressed for
definitions of the virtues or excellences which were widely recognized
and claimed by his fellows, but which they found difficult to explain.
As depicted by Plato, the search for such definitions led invariably
to a concern with knowledge of how best to live, as not only one of
the conventional virtues (in the form of wisdom) but also as
underpinning, even constituting, them all. That elevation of knowledge
in turn led Socrates to militate against the practices of rhetoric and
judgment which animated the political institutions of Athens—the
law-courts, Assembly and Council. Instead he posited the existence, or
at least the possibility, of political expertise, claiming (in Plato’s
Gorgias) to be the one person in Athens who at least tried to
pursue such a true politikê technê, a complex
notion that can be understood as meaning politics as a kind of
professional expertise (Grg. 521d). The notion of political
knowledge limited to one or a few experts, as opposed to the embedded
and networked knowledge produced and exercised by the whole
dêmos of Athens in their judgments and political roles
(Ober 2008), struck at the central premises of Athenian democracy and
those of Greek politics more generally (in oligarchies, wealth rather
than knowledge was the relevant criterion for rule; in tyrannies,
sheer power). Thus the nature of Socrates’ concern with ethics led him
directly into a form of political philosophizing. The relation between
politics and knowledge, the meaning of justice as a virtue, the value
of the military courage which all Greek cities prized in their
citizens, all seem to have been central topics of Socratic
conversation.
That engagement with political philosophy was dramatically intensified
when Socrates was, at the age of seventy, arraigned, tried, and
sentenced to death by an Athenian popular jury. In a prosecution
brought by a group of his fellow citizens who claimed to be
shouldering that burden for the sake of the city (the usual way in
which prosecutions were brought in Athens), the charges laid were
against him were three-fold: not acknowledging the city’s gods;
introducing new gods; and corrupting the young (Apol. 24b).
Each of these had a political dimension, given the civic control of
central religious cults mentioned earlier, and the broad political
importance of educating the young to take their place in the civic
order. Timed a few years after the overthrow of a short-lived
oligarchic regime (known as that of “The Thirty”) which
had been led by several of Socrates’ sometime associates (Critias,
Charmides), itself following the ignominious Athenian defeat in the
war with Sparta which had earlier seen another associate of Socrates
(Alcibiades) turn traitor to Athens, the trial must be suspected of
having served as a substitute for the prohibited political trials of
the oligarchic partisans (such trials having been generally barred by
an amnesty passed in 403 BCE by the restored democracy; see Cartledge
2009, Ch.7, Carawan 2013, Shear 2011).
Socrates’ speeches in the court trial—literary versions of which
were produced by Plato, Xenophon, and a number of other
followers—forced him to confront directly the question of his
role in an Athens defined by its democratic institutions and norms.
Socrates had played his part as an ordinary citizen, allowing his name
to go forward for selection by lot to serve on the Council, and
serving in the army when required. But he had not engaged actively in
“public affairs” (ta pragmata, Apol.
32e): he had not spoken in the Assembly (31c), nor, so far as we know,
brought any prosecutions in the law-courts. In Plato’s account, after
countering the religious accusations, Socrates acknowledged this
abstention from public affairs but claimed to have had a more
significant mission laid on him by the god Apollo when his oracle at
Delphi declared that no man was wiser than Socrates: his mission was
to stir up the city like a gadfly (30e), discussing virtue and related
matters (38a), and benefiting each person by “trying to persuade
him” to care for virtue rather than wealth for himself and for
the city (36c–d). He went so far as to claim that as a civic
benefactor, he deserved not death but the lifelong publicly provided
meals commonly awarded to an Olympic champion (36e–37a). Socrates here
depicts himself as a new kind of citizen, conceptualizing the public
good in a new way and so serving it best through unprecedented
actions, in contrast to the conventionally defined paths of political
contest and success (Villa 2001).
While depicting himself in his defense speeches in Plato’s
Apology as a new kind of virtuous citizen, Socrates makes
three remarks which have in modern times been seized upon as
indications of the principled limits which he might have put on the
requirement to obey the law. The first two recalled political
incidents: while serving on the Council, he had voted against an
illegal proposal (32b–c); and under the brief oligarchical domination
of “The Thirty”, he had disobeyed an order of the ruling
body to arrest a democratic partisan for execution (32c–d). The third
is a hypothetical remark. If, he imagines, the jurors were to say to
him, “we acquit you, but only on condition that you spend no
more time on this investigation and do not practice philosophy, and if
you are caught doing so you will die,” his reply would be:
“I will obey the god rather than you, and as long as I draw
breath and am able, I shall not cease to practice philosophy”
(both quotations excerpted from longer sentences, 29c–d). Particularly
in twentieth-century Anglophone scholarship, these remarks have
engendered a view of Socrates as endorsing civil disobedience in
certain circumstances, and so have framed the question of civil
disobedience and the grounds for political obligation as arising in
Plato. A significant debate on these matters took shape in the United
States in the 1960s and 1970s at the time of widespread civil
disobedience relating to civil rights and the Vietnam War: see for
example Konvitz 1964, Woozley 1972.
That debate has had to confront the fact that Socrates did not
actually disobey his own death sentence with which his trial
concluded: when the time came, he drank the poisonous hemlock as
prescribed by the jury. Before that moment, Plato imagines Socrates
being visited in prison by his friend Crito (in a dialogue which bears
the latter’s name), and urged to escape for the sake of his friends
and family, a practice which was frequently tolerated in Athens so
long as the escapee fled into exile. Socrates is not persuaded by
Crito’s arguments. He begins his examination of them by recalling
principles to which he and Crito had in the past agreed, including the
principle that it is better to suffer injustice than to commit it
(Cri. 47a–50a). He then goes on to ventriloquize a series of
speeches against escape, which he ascribes to the “Laws of
 Athens”.[6]
 These speeches articulate a set of special connections between
Socrates and the Laws of Athens which, depending on one’s reading,
either flesh out the principle that it is better to suffer injustice
than to do it (by dramatizing reasons for which it would unjust for
Socrates to escape), or else stand in tension with it by invoking
absolutist grounds with implications more extensive than such a
principle would authorize (Harte 1999). On any reading, it is
important to bear in mind that Socrates is choosing to obey a jury
verdict that has commanded him to suffer what is arguably an
injustice, but not to commit one, so that one of his fundamental
ethical principles here as elsewhere in Plato (that it is better to
suffer an injustice than to commit one) is at least compatible with
his acceptance of the jury’s sentence.
The “Laws of Athens” appeal to a kind of social contract
made between themselves and Socrates. The contract is unequal: the
“Laws” compare themselves to parents and slaveowners, and
Socrates to child and slave. Obedience to them is owed, they claim,
because the “Laws” have provided the whole basis for
Socrates’ education and life in the city, a city in which he has
notably chosen to remain, never traveling abroad except on military
service. But the “Laws” also speak of the opportunity they
afford to Socrates to “persuade or obey” them (51b;
51e–52a). The meaning of this clause and its relevance to civil
disobedience is again much debated (Kraut 1984 remains a landmark).
Nevertheless, the image of Socrates tried, convicted, and made to die
(by his own hand) at the city’s command has come to be a vivid and
powerful symbol of tension in the relationship between political
philosophy and political authority.
The Crito depends upon a notion of justice and injustice
which it never defines. In the Republic, by contrast, a
dialogue in which Socrates is also the main character (and
first-person narrator) but in which the views he advances go beyond
the tight-knit pattern of debates in the dialogues discussed in
section 3.1, Plato (424/3–348/7
 BCE)[7]
 offers an account of justice linking the political to the
psychological and justice to a higher understanding of true goodness.
(See the entry on
 Plato.)
 The Republic is, with the Laws, an order of
magnitude longer than any other Platonic dialogue. Readers today are
likely to think of the Republic as the home par excellence of
political philosophy. But that view has also been challenged by
scholars who see it as primarily an ethical dialogue, driven by the
question of why the individual should be just (Annas 1999). This
section argues that the ethical and political concerns, and purposes,
of the dialogue are inextricably intertwined.
Near the beginning of the dialogue, a challenge is launched by the
character Thrasymachus, mentioned above, asserting that all actual
cities define justice so as to serve the advantage of the rulers. He
takes this to mean that the laws which their subjects are bound to
obey and the associated ethical virtue of justice which they are
enjoined to cultivate (traditionally seen as the necessary bond among
citizens and the justification for political rule), in fact amount to
a distorted sham. (See the entry on
 Callicles and Thrasymachus.)
 The question which Thrasymachus poses and which Plato’s brothers
Glaucon and Adeimantus reformulate—why should the individual be
just if he or she can get away with not being just, when elevated
above the demands of ordinary justice either by special power or good
fortune?—thus already has a political valence from the
outset.
Socrates then launches a speculation as to the origins of cities: the
city is held to have an existence independently of ethical concerns,
coming into being for economic reasons and immediately needing to
defend itself in war (and also to be able to make offensive war for
economic gain). However, this origin already gives rise to a
proto-ethical dimension, first insofar as the members of the primitive
city each do their own work (the structure of what will emerge as the
virtue of justice), which is fleshed out when political rulers are
established who are able to use their wisdom to help their subjects
maintain a psychological balance in their souls that approximates, if
it does not fully embody, the virtues of moderation and justice and so
enables them to enjoy a unified rather than a divided soul. The
question of why the individual should be just, figured at the outset
by the contrast with the putatively happy tyrant, is resolved
eventually by demonstrating that the tyrant will necessarily, in
virtue of the disorder of his soul, be at once maximally unjust and
maximally unhappy.
That resolution rests on the division of the soul into three parts by
which the Republic places moral psychology at the heart of
political philosophy. Both soul and city are posited by Socrates in
arguments in Books II–IV and VIII–IX, in particular, to have a
tripartite structure when the soul is embodied in a living person. In
the soul and city respectively, the rational part or class should
rule; the spirited part or class should act to support the rule of
that rational part; and the appetitive part of the soul and producing
class in the city should accept being governed by it. Both soul and
city are therefore in need of, and capable of exhibiting, four virtues
(427e–444a). Two of these pertain to individual parts: the rational
part being capable of wisdom, the spirited part of courage. Two
however are defined by relations between the parts: moderation as the
agreement of all three parts that reason should rule, justice as each
part doing its own (this echoes, in a radically new context, a
conservative Athenian suspicion of excessive democratic
polupragmosunê or busybody interference).
The result is that justice is defined as primarily a condition of
one’s soul or city as a whole, not as any specific just action; yet if
the soul or city is so ordered, the individual will have no cause to
engage in the paradigmatically unjust action of pleonexia or
grasping for more than one’s fair share. A just soul will indeed
reliably issue in traditionally just actions, such as refraining from
theft, murder, and sacrilege (contra Sachs 1963, who argues that Plato
has simply abandoned the usual domain of justice). But what makes its
‘justice’ count as such goes beyond these particular actions and
omissions, lying in the health and orderliness of such a soul
contrasted with the chaotic or even tyrannical character of an unjust
soul (Burnyeat 2013). To be a truly effective, because wholly unified,
agent, one must be just, moderate, courageous and wise. The just
person enjoys psychic health, which is advantageous no matter how he
is treated (fairly or unfairly) by gods and men; correspondingly, the
just society enjoys civic unity, which is advantageous in being the
fundamental way to avoid the assumed supreme evil of civil war. In
contrast, all other cities are characterized as riven by civil war
between the rich and the poor; none of them counts as a single,
unified city at all (see Rep. 422e–423a, and more generally, Book VIII
of that dialogue).
By treating these ethical and political questions as interrelated, and
then going on to depict both an ideal political regime
(“Kallipolis”, the fine or beautiful city) in which they
could be solved, and the imperfect regimes into which such an ideal
regime will decay, the Republic lays out a novel and
ambitious template for political philosophy: not only to interrogate
the meaning of virtue and citizenship, but also to develop an ideal
regime and an account of how and why such regimes may fail. That
template will be followed by Aristotle’s Politics, by
Cicero’s De re publica, and by Thomas More’s Utopia,
among other successors. In Plato’s hands, however, this template
included some specific political prescriptions to maintain the unity
of the ideal city which most of his successors abhorred. In
particular, Book V of the Republic suggests that a
sufficiently unified regime can be achieved only by depriving its
guardian-rulers of private property and of private families, instead
making them live in austere communal conditions in which they are
financially supported by their money-making subjects and allowed to
procreate only when and with whom will best serve the city. In Book II
of his Politics, Aristotle would read this prescription as
applying to all the citizens in the city envisaged in the Republic, and
both he and, later on, Cicero would deplore what they construed as
this abolition of private property. Even those following and
radicalizing Plato precisely by advocating the abolition of property
for all the citizens, rather than only deprivation of it for the
rulers, as would the sixteenth-century Sir Thomas More, were generally
opposed to if not also scandalized by the suggestion of procreative
communism.
The Republic initiates a further tradition in political
philosophy by laying out a template for the integration of ethics and
political philosophy into a comprehensive account of epistemology and
metaphysics. By making the claim of the philosophers to rule depend on
their knowledge of the good and of the other Platonic Forms (in
conjunction with their moral character and tested practical
experience), the dialogue vindicates the Socratic and Platonic thought
that ruling well—what we might call “rule” proper
– requires a rare form of expertise rather than lay judgment,
rhetorical advice, or common knowledge. In the Republic, the
knowledge required for rule is not specialized, but comprehensive: the
knowledge of the good and the Forms is somehow to translate into an
ability to make laws as well as the everyday decisions of rule. The
rulers are philosophers who take turns over their lifetime in
exercising collective political authority. They define their vocation
as that of philosophizing, engaging in rule out of some sort of
compulsion or necessity (see the entry on
 Plato’s ethics and politics in the Republic).
 To that extent the Republic presents a paradox: if it is
widely considered the first major work of political
 philosophy,[8]
 it is nevertheless a work in which there is no special content to
political knowledge nor any special vocation for politics.
In the Statesman, Plato turns his attention to precisely the
topics identified at the end of the last section above. In a
discussion led by an unnamed person, a philosopher visiting Athens
from Elea, political expertise (harking back to the politikê
technê met above with Socrates, sect. 3.1) is identified by
separating it progressively by a set of distinctions from other forms
of expertise. The discussion is interrupted but ultimately enriched by
a story or myth in which politics is shown to be a matter of humans
ruling other humans in place of living under divine guidance. That
human expertise of statecraft is ultimately distinguished by its
knowledge of the correct timing (kairos) as to when its
closest rivals should be exercised: these are three forms of expertise
that in fact corresponded to key political roles, some of them formal
offices, in Greek cities at the time, namely, rhetoric, generalship,
and judging (Lane 1998, Lane 2013c). The statesman is wholly defined
by the possession of that knowledge of when it is best to exercise
these and the other subordinate forms of expertise, and by the role of
exercising that knowledge in binding or weaving the different groups
of citizens together, a knowledge which depends on a broader
philosophical grasp but which is peculiarly political (El Murr 2014).
Here, political philosophy operates not just to assimilate politics to
a broader metaphysical horizon but also to identify its
specificity.
The Statesman also raises an important question about the
nature and value of rule by law, as opposed to rule by such expert
knowledge as embodied in a rare and likely singular individual. For
its part, the Republic had taken law in its stride as the
standard formulation to be utilized in the construction of the city in
speech by the dialogue’s principal interlocutors from Book II onward,
who constitute themselves as Kallipolis’ ‘founders’ (Annas
2017, Lane 2013a). By contrast, the Statesman analyzes law as
in principle a stubborn and imperfect substitute for the flexible
deployment of expertise (293e–303c). However, the principal
interlocutors of the latter dialogue go on to agree that if the choice
is between an ignorant imitator of the true political expert who
changes the laws on the basis of whim, and a law-bound polity, the
latter would be preferable, so bringing law back into the picture as
an alternative to the ideal after all.
The Laws, a work reported to have been still on wax tablets,
and so possibly left unfinished when Plato died (Diogenes Laertius
III. 37), treats the specificity of politics as a matter not of
distinct vocational expertise but of the requirements of a
“second-best” (739a) city, one in which private property
is allowed, as opposed to an ideal or implicitly first-best regime in
which private property would be prohibited to all (thus going beyond
even the ideal regime of Kallipolis in the Republic). In this
section, as in most scholarly discussions, I will assume that the
second-best city for which laws are laid out in the later books is the
projected Cretan colony of Magnesia, of which the Cretan (Cleinias)
among the dialogue’s three interlocutors has announced himself to be
one of the intended founders. (For an alternative argument, that the
second-best city is not meant to be Magnesia, see Bartels 2017.) In
this second-best city, the legislation for which is sketched out in
speech by the three interlocutors of the dialogue, politics still aims
at virtue, and at the virtue of all the citizens, but those citizens
all play a part in holding civic offices; the ordinary activities of
politics are shared, in what is described as a mixture of monarchy and
democracy. That description gives rise to an idea of the “mixed
regime” or “mixed constitution” which later became
influential in its own right, as we shall see below (section 6).
Another influential aspect of the Laws is its positive
evaluation of the nature of law itself as a topic proper to political
philosophy. While the Laws shares with the Statesman
the notion of law in an isolated and singular sense as being brutish
and stubborn compared to expert knowledge, it recommends a
“double” notion of law, in which each such command is
prefaced with a persuasive account of its rationale, addressed to the
citizens, who are expected to read and understand it (719b–723d, and
passim). Some scholars have found that to be a distinctively
democratic and liberal account of law (Bobonich 2002; see also the
entry on
 Plato on utopia).
 That arguably goes too far in a proceduralist direction, given that
the value of law remains its embodiment of reason or understanding
(nous), so that while adding persuasive preludes is a better
way to exercise the coercive force of law, no agreement on the basis
of persuasion could justify laws which departed from the standard of
nous (Laks 2005). Nevertheless, the emphasis on law as an
embodiment of reason, and as articulating the political ideals of the
city in a form that its citizens are to study and internalize
(Nightingale 1993b, 1999), is distinctive to this dialogue.
Also notable is that the Laws’ emphasis on all citizens as
eligible, and so presumptively capable, to hold offices, differs
significantly from the Republic, where it is not clear
whether there are to be in Kallipolis any formally constituted offices
at all, and if there are, they would seem to be monopolized by the
philosopher-rulers and the auxiliary guardians who assist
 them.[9]
 The outlook in the Laws may have somewhat more affinity with
the closing passages of the Statesman, which refer to the
offices or quasi-offices of rhetor, general and judge which at least
certain citizens will hold, those with the relevant expertise to play
each role. The Statesman however reserves a special
extraordinary role (a higher office, or perhaps not a formal office as
such) for the statesman whenever he is present in the city (Lane
2013b). The role of the Statesman’s eponymous figure must
therefore be distinguished from that of the “Nocturnal
Council” in the Laws (which is actually to meet just
before dawn), a body of citizens who are selected for wisdom and
judiciousness and whose role is to review and revise the laws rather
than (as in the Statesman, at least theoretically) to
override them when it is better to do so.
Much literature on Plato’s political philosophy has debated whether
the turn in the Laws to the “second-best”
reflects a new form of realism on Plato’s part about politics more
generally, invoking other remarks by the Visitor from Athens, one of
the three interlocutors, along with Cleinias and the Spartan Megillus,
which suggest that no one could ever be uniformly and reliably
virtuous and immune to corruption, though this is not unequivocally
stated (e.g. 874e–875d). Has Plato in the Laws given up on
his earlier idealism which rested on the possibility of the
philosopher-king, or on the idea of the perfectly knowledgeable
statesman? If so, should that be interpreted as disillusionment or
pessimism on his part, or as a more democratic or liberal turn? Or are
there more fundamental continuities that connect and underlie even
these seeming shifts? These questions structure the broad debate about
the meaning and trajectory of Platonic political philosophy (for an
overview, compare Klosko 2006 to Schofield 2006).
The two Platonic themes of superior political knowledge and, expressed
particularly in his Laws, political participation, also
structure the political thought of Aristotle (384–322 BCE), who
studied in Plato’s Academy as a youth and researched there for many
years thereafter. Living much of his life as a resident alien in
Athens, with close familial ties to the extra-polis
Macedonian court which would, near the end of his life, bring Athens
under its sway, Aristotle at once thematized the fundamental
perspective of the Greek citizenship of equals and at the same time
acknowledged the claim to rule of anyone of truly superior political
knowledge. While building on Plato’s project of demarcating political
expertise and depicting ideal as well as imperfect cities, the
advances and new directions that Aristotle pioneered in political
philosophy reflect certain disagreements with Plato in their wider
philosophies, though also with some deep commonalities.
Whereas Plato’s philosophy continually sought a single or small set of
unifying truths behind the veil of appearance, Aristotle’s
wide-ranging researches into what would now be considered the natural
sciences, as well as in logic and other areas of inquiry, manifested
respect for the opinions of “the many and the wise” as a
starting-point for philosophical understanding. His approach likewise
manifested appreciation of the multiplicity of forms of knowledge, in
particular the cleavage between theoretical understanding of the world
as it necessarily is, and practical knowledge of how to deliberate
about acting in relation to whatever “could be otherwise.”
Uniting his accounts of phenomena as different as plants, animals,
ethics and politics, was a teleological structure of explanation.
Biological creatures work to fulfill the realization of their end or
telos, a specific way of living a complete life
characteristic of the plants or animals of their own kind, which is
the distinctive purpose that defines their fundamental
nature—just as human artifacts are designed and used for
specific ends. While every human being, in acting, posits a particular
telos as the purpose making that action intelligible, this
should ideally reflect the overall natural telos of humans as
such.
Here, however, arises a problem unique to humans. Whereas other
animals have a single telos defining their nature (living the
full life of a frog, including reproduction, being the sole
telos of each frog, in the example used by Lear 1998), humans
both have a distinctive human nature—arising from the unique
capacity to use language to deliberate about how to act — and
also share in the divine nature in their ability to use reason to
understand the eternal and intelligible order of the world. Practical
reason is the domain of ethics and politics, the uniquely human
domain. Yet the political life is not necessarily the best life,
compared with that devoted to the divinely shared human capacity for
theoretical reason and philosophical thinking (compare Nicomachean
Ethics I with X.7–9).
In considering practical reason to be the domain of both ethics and
politics, Aristotle follows Plato in drawing no sharp line between
those two domains (see on this point for ancient testimonies and
modern arguments respectively, Bodéüs 1993: 22–24
and 59–63, and Vander Waerdt 1991, though for a contrary
argument, see Duvall and Dotson 1998). In fact he closes his
Nicomachean Ethics by remarking that for most people, the
practice of ethics can only be ensured by their being governed by law,
which combines necessity (compulsion) with reason. Because, for most
people, the ethical life presupposes government by law, the student of
ethics must become a student of political science, studying the
science of legislation in light of the collection of constitutions
assembled by Aristotle and his school in the Lyceum. All but part of
one of the over one hundred items in this collection reported in
antiquity have been lost: a considerable part of the analysis of the
“Constitution of Athens” was recovered from a papyrus
discovered in the nineteenth century. Aristotle’s theoretical claims
about the nature of politics in the Politics must be
understood against this backdrop. The legislator (whose standpoint is
adopted in the Politics, see the entry on
 Aristotle’s political theory)
 needs to have a grasp of the nature of politics as such (pursued
especially in Books I and III); an understanding of the major
faultlines in the interpretation and practice of politics (pursued
especially in Books II and IV–VI); and a grip on the structure and
characteristics of the specific city for which he aims to legislate
(pursued also in Book II for existing constitutions and constitutional
models; Books IV–VI for types of flawed constitutions; and Books
VII–VIII for the “best constitution” (1323a14).
At the beginning of Book IV (1288b1–39), Aristotle offers a
fourfold account of what the expertise regarding constitutions must
encompass. As glossed by Eugene Garver (2011: 107), and drawing on
standard Aristotelian terminology distinguishing formal from material
causes, these include: “The first, ‘that which is best in
the abstract’...orients politics around the end of politics, the
best life. The second, the best relative to circumstances, starts with
the material cause and organizes political inquiry around the best
that can be made out of given material. The third, the best on a
hypothesis, starts not from the true end of politics, but any posited
end, and so looks for means and devices that will preserve any given
constitution. The final inquiry, the search for ‘the form of
constitution which is best suited to states in general,’
articulates a formal cause that can organize almost any material, any
kind of people.” These four elements of expertise regarding
constitution are not tidily segregated in different parts of the text;
they are pursued variously, sometimes in combination, and draw on
wider discussions of the nature of politics and the human good that
are threaded throughout.
The Politics begins by setting the stage for the first kind
of understanding of constitutions identified above, by offering an
analysis of the teleological ends of life and the human capacity for
speech which together support its two most famous contentions: that
“it is evident that the state is a creation of nature, and that
man is by nature a political animal” (I.2, 1253a2–3).
While for some modern readers this sentence asserts that political
participation is necessary for virtuous human flourishing (as for
Irwin 1990), others contend that “the argument that man is a
political animal does not imply that man must participate in politics
to become virtuous, only that he must literally be a part of a
polis and live under its laws.” (Mulgan 1990:
 205)[10]
 In either case, as Hannah Arendt (1958) emphasizes, Aristotle’s
understanding of civic unity insists on respect for human plurality as
the condition of political action; in Book II, he criticizes Plato’s
Kallipolis for interpreting the requirement of civic unity in so
extreme a fashion as to have obliterated the properly political domain
altogether (Nussbaum 1980). Nevertheless, civic unity is still an aim
of Aristotle’s ideal virtuous regime, and a limited Platonic spirit
survives in the common meals that this regime would offer to all
citizens: VII.10.
In another famous contention of the work—that “a citizen
is one who shares in governing and being governed” (III.13,
1283b42–1284a1, also translatable as “ruling and being
ruled in turn”), the Greek dictum of citizenship among equals is
presented as an analytical truth, leaving open how such equality is to
be conceived in practice. The citizen “shares in the
administration of justice, and in offices” (III.1,
1275a23–24). In defective regimes, the good citizen and the good
man may come apart. The good citizen of a defective regime is one
whose character suits the particular regime in question (whether
oligarchic, or democratic, say) and equips him to support it loyally;
hence he may be deformed or stunted by a role of holding (or a role of
holding accountable) offices defined on incorrect terms. In “the
best state,” however, the citizen is “one who is able and
chooses to be governed and to govern with a view to the life of
excellence” (III.13, 1284a1–3). In such a state,
“the citizens must not lead the life of artisans or tradesmen,
for such a life is ignoble and inimical to excellence” (VII.9,
1328b39–41), nor that of farmers, as political participation
requires leisure. Here the limitations and exclusions among actual
humans licensed by the principled formulation of the
possibility—requiring actual realization—of human virtue
become apparent.
Aristotle recognizes that there are other possible claims, or as it
were titles, to political rule: “There is also a doubt as to
what is to be the supreme power in the state:—Is it the
multitude? Or the wealthy? Or the good? Or the one best man? Or a
tyrant?” (III.10, 1281a11–13). He develops in particular
detail the arguments that might be made on behalf of the many and the
knowledgeable one respectively. The many can judge, as they did in
Athenian dramatic audiences, juries, and the Assembly (where they
“judged”, by voting on, the merits of something advanced
for their consideration, whether a play, an indictment, or a speaker’s
proposed resolution). Aristotle uses the image of a collectively
provided feast to illustrate the potential superiority of such
collective judgement; how to interpret this image (whether as a
potluck, Waldron 1995, Wilson 2011, Ober 2013, or in a more
aggregative way, Bouchard 2011, Cammack 2013, Lane 2013a) and other
images that he uses is a matter of some renewed controversy (for a
recent review, see Bobonich 2015). But the lesson Aristotle draws from
the various images is clearly limited to vindicating a role of the
many in electing and holding accountable incumbents of the highest
offices rather than in holding such offices themselves (III.11,
1281b31; Lane 2013a). The many can contribute to virtuous
decision-making in their collective capacity of
judgment—presumably in assemblies and juries—but not as
individual high officials (Lane 2013a, 2014b, Poddighe 2014).
In the contrasting case of the one supremely excellent person,
Aristotle argues that such a person has, strictly speaking, no equals,
and so cannot be made justly to take a turn in rule, holding office
for a time, as one citizen among others. Instead it is right that such
a person should rule without the term limits that political office
would ordinarily require:
If, however, there be some one person, or more than one, although not
enough to make up the full complement of a state, whose excellence is
so pre-eminent that the excellence or the political capacity of all
the rest admit of no comparison with his or theirs, he or they can be
no longer regarded as part of a state; for justice will not be done to
the superior, if he is reckoned only as the equal of those who are so
far inferior to him in excellence and in political capacity. Such a
man may truly be deemed a god among men ….men like him should
be kings in their state for life (III.13,
1284a3–11…1284b32–34; cf. III.17,
1288a24–29).
On one recent reading, this implies that virtuous monarchy does indeed
count as a political regime, albeit one in which only one or a few of
the citizens are eligible to hold the highest offices (Riesbeck 2014).
Yet this argument is left at the hypothetical level. In the absence of
such a superlatively virtuous, even godlike individual, the
formulation of political rule as involving some kind of turn-taking by
a large body of sufficiently virtuous citizens remains preeminent
(though even this should not be read to imply that all should in fact
alternate in office, or even that all should necessarily be eligible
for all offices).
As Aristotle turn to consideration of the best constitutions relative
to particular (and imperfect) circumstances, the major issue is
conflict between rival factions over the basis for defining equality
and so justice. In the Nicomachean Ethics, Book V, Aristotle
had identified two types of equality: geometrical, or proportional to
merit; and arithmetical, or proportional to mere numerical counting.
In Politics III.9 he picks up this distinction and aligns it
with the conflict between oligarchical and democratic justice. As he
later puts it, “Democrats say that justice is that to which the
majority agree, oligarchs that to which the wealthier class
agree…” (VI.3, 1318a18–20), while truly
aristocratic justice would enfranchise only those equal in virtue.
This attention to the actual political contentions of rival Greek
groups leads into a discussion of the relative goodness and badness of
imperfect regimes, modeled in part on Plato’s Statesman.
Whereas that Platonic text had distinguished monarchy from tyranny,
aristocracy from oligarchy, and good from bad democracy on the basis
of obedience to law (all these regimes being conceived as lacking the
genuine political knowledge of the true statesman), Aristotle instead
makes the dividing line the question of ruling for the common
advantage as opposed to ruling for the advantage of a single faction.
The “bad” democracy, for example, rules for the faction of
the many as opposed to the faction of the few, whereas the
“good” democracy—which Aristotle baptizes
“polity”, using the general word for
“constitution” (politeia) —rules for the
advantage of all citizens. Aristotle augments this analysis with
appeals to historical narrative, overlapping with the narrative of
Athenian political history offered in the
Constitution of Athens compiled by him or, more likely, by
members of his school. On his telling in the Politics,
Athenian democracy had degenerated from an aboriginal democracy of
non-meddling farmers (VI.4), through various intermediate forms, to a
democracy (seemingly that of contemporary fourth-century Athens) in
which men rule, not laws. Yet this trajectory does not prevent him
from asserting that in general democracy is “most
tolerable” of the three perversions (IV.2, 1289b4–5) and
noting that it at least involves the characteristic political liberty
of ruling and being ruled in turn (VI.2).
A further major turn in the analysis comes when the question of some
single “best” regime is replaced by a question about not
what is “best” in the “ideal” sense, but the
good constitution “that is easily attainable by all”
(IV.1, 1288a37–39) and in practice best for most cities (IV.11).
This Aristotle calls the middling regime: a political, because
sociological, mean between oligarchy and democracy, in which the
middle classes hold the preponderance of both wealth distribution and
political power. Thus it is attainable through reform of either an
oligarchy or a democracy, the most prevalent constitutions among the
Greeks. Strikingly, his example of such a regime is Sparta: presented
as a case of a characteristically democratic distribution of education
(among citizens only, of course) coupled with the characteristically
aristocratic principle of election to offices rather than selection by
lot (IV.9) (though to be sure, democracies such as Athens made use of
election for certain of the highest offices as well).
“All modern discussions of citizenship as a noninstrumental
good-in-itself are indebted, if only indirectly, to him [sc.
Aristotle]” (Ober 1998: 290). The Politics emphasizes
that “a state is not a mere society, having a common place,
established for the prevention of mutual crime and for the sake of
exchange” but is rather “a community of families and
aggregations of families [sc. united] in well-being, for the sake of a
perfect and self-sufficing life” (III.9, 1280b30–34, with square
brackets added). It has been suggested in this article that the final
clause of that sentence is important: Aristotelian citizenship counts
as a noninstrumental good-in-itself only so long as it does indeed aim
at the telos of a perfect life. That is, while Aristotle
indeed valued the possibility of political participation in
officeholding and the control of officeholding as part of the best
constitution, he saw it as an intrinsic good only insofar as it was an
expression of virtue, as it would be in that best constitution
(whether governed by a collectivity of virtuous citizens as in the
regime described in Books VII and VIII, or in the rare and perhaps
purely hypothetical case of a superlatively virtuous monarch). Without
virtue, political participation in officeholding and the control of
officeholding was rather to be valued on the basis of expedience,
though even then, membership in the political community of the
polis remains essential to full human flourishing.
Nevertheless, Ober’s observation rings true more broadly for the
historical significance of Aristotle’s political thought. The medieval
rediscovery in the West of the full Greek texts of Aristotle’s
Ethics and Politics and their translation into Latin
in the thirteenth century served as a basis for reconceiving civic
life as valuable on the basis of reason independent of revelation.
Thus 1260 – the date of William of Moerbeke’s complete Latin
translation of the Politics—symbolizes a fundamental
turning point in political philosophy, one in which Aristotelian
philosophy would be widely deployed within certain strands of thought
of the Catholic Church, while also inspiring a wide range of
philosophical movements and later becoming the target of others.
Indeed, modern debates over the meaning of Aristotle find him a
precursor of or inspiration for a range of intellectual and political
positions: Aristotle as a communitarian (MacIntyre 1984) vs. Aristotle
as an exponent of class conflict (Yack 1993); Aristotle as a democrat,
or at least as providing the basis for democracy (Frank 2005), vs.
Aristotle in opposition to Athenian democracy in his day (Ober 1998).
One interesting development has been the use of Aristotle to
articulate an ethics of capability (Nussbaum 1993). In evaluating
Aristotle’s political thought, it is important to distinguish between
modern democratic assumptions and his own starting points, many of
which were in tension with the democracies of his own time.
Important developments in political thinking and practice took place
under the Hellenistic kingdoms that supplanted Macedon in its
suzerainty over the formerly independent Greek city-states. These
included, for example, a genre of rhetorical letters addressed to
rulers, and the important analysis of Greek and Roman constitutional
change by the second-century Greek historian Polybius (Hahm 2000). As
kingships flourished among the Hellenistic kingdoms until they in turn
came under Roman rule, not only the value of political participation,
but also the proper domains of politics, were widely debated.
Different authors would orient themselves respectively to
still-surviving polis communities and the various leagues which united
many of them in the Hellenistic period; to the kingdoms mentioned
above; to the Roman constitution, and eventually to the special forms
of imperial power which eventually arose therein; and in more
philosophical terms, to the cosmos as a whole and all rational beings
within it.
In addition to the major movements of Epicureanism and Stoicism
treated separately below, other schools also persisted and arose in
this period. Those persisting included the Platonic Academy
(transformed in a skeptical direction) and the Aristotelian Lyceum
(the Peripatetic School). Newcomers, albeit tracing themselves to
their own understanding of the figure of Socrates, included the Cynics
and the Pyrrhonist skeptics, and we focus on these latter two
here.
The Cynics took their name from the Greek for “dog,”
referring to the animal-like life indifferent to social conventions
which they pursued, carrying out all their bodily functions in full
public view. While this generally led them to advocate what might be
considered more an anti-politics than a politics, a provocative
statement by their founder Diogenes of Sinope (c.404–323 BCE)
– answering a query about his birthplace by asserting himself to
be a “citizen of the world” (Diogenes Laertius, VI. 63)
– would resonate with later Stoics and others developing a
political philosophy that has become known as cosmopolitanism (see the
entry on
 cosmopolitanism).
 Diogenes’ indifference to political power was also reflected in his
reported reply to the visiting world-conqueror Alexander the Great,
asking him to request a boon: all the Cynic wanted was for the emperor
to step out of his light (Diogenes Laertius, VI. 38). In a lineage
stretching from Diogenes to his follower Crates, who became the
teacher of Zeno, the founder of Stoicism, we can see the Cynic-Stoic
kinship especially in the early Stoics’ rejection of many conventional
political and moral opinions. Yet the Cynics also manifested some
parallels with the Epicureans and even with the skeptics.
One branch of ancient skepticism had its roots in Plato’s Academy,
which from the time of Arcesilaus’ headship in the mid-260s BCE turned
in a skeptical direction, arguing that there was no clear criterion of
truth and so philosophers can only suspend judgment. While that was an
“Academic” position within philosophical debate, a
possible forebear (Pyrrho) had in the fourth century BCE putatively
demonstrated the tranquility of mind which such a position could
bring, by living a life seemingly without any investment in the truth
of his beliefs (though the question of how, and how far, Pyrrho was
guided by appearances would perplex later followers). (See the entry
on
 Pyrrho.)
 From the first century BCE, a radical movement of
“Pyrrhonist” skepticism was developed outside the Academy
by Aenesidemus, followed about a century later by Agrippa, in a
movement summed up for posterity in the second-century CE work of
Sextus Empiricius (Outlines of Pyrrhonism) which would have a
considerable influence on early modern philosophy. Meanwhile the
milder “Academic” skepticism, allowing the inquirer to
incline to one side or another though not to invest in full belief,
had significant influence on first-century BCE figures such as Cicero.
(See the entry on
 ancient skepticism.)
Founded by Epicurus in his “Garden” in Athens in the early
third century BCE, and elaborated by, among others, the remarkable
Latin poet Lucretius in the mid first century BCE, the various members
of the Epicurean school did not see politics as a straightforward part
of the good life or a fulfillment of the flourishing of human nature,
though their views of its origins, nature, and largely instrumental
value were complex (for an overview, see Robitzsch 2017). For his
part, Epicurus himself (see the entry on
 Epicurus)
 is reported in his “Key Doctrines” to have held a
contractarian view of justice for mutual protection from harm
(reminiscent of Glaucon’s initial proposal about justice in
Republic Book II, which itself seems to echo the
nomos-phusis debate among the 5th c. BCE sophists). Justice
serves utility (Alberti 1995): as Epicurus wrote, “If someone
makes a law and it does not happen to accord with the utility of
social relationships, it no longer has the nature of justice”
(KD 36, LS 22B). The greatest utility is that of tranquility
or security, which is the naturally desired end or goal. While, as
Annas 1993: 298 argues, the individual Epicurean agent will be
disposed to justice as part of the path to tranquility properly
understood (“The just <life> is most free from
disturbance…”, KD 36, LS 22B), nevertheless laws
will be necessary to enforce obedience to the contract by most people,
and indeed one should obey the laws in order to attain peace of mind
(KD 34–35, LS 22A4–5).
For Epicureans, the city serves a legitimate and necessary function in
ensuring security. But this does not mean that an active public life
is also normally the most rational path to security. On the contrary,
while many people will be attracted to the possible fortune and glory
of such a life, and while cities need such people, the Epicurean sage
will on the whole refrain from active political participation (for
discussion of texts, including some exceptions, both in Lucretius and
other evidence, see Fowler 2007). Instead the insecurities of life are
best met by the formation of a community of friends living together
and sharing their lives. Friendships both secure us against risks and
anxieties (more reliably than the hazards of a political career) and
also provide pleasures and indeed joy: to quote Epicurus once again,
“The man of noble character is chiefly concerned with wisdom and
friendship. Of these the former is a mortal good, but the latter is
immortal” (Vatican Sayings 78, LS 22F (7)).
A potential sticking point for Epicurean ethics and politics is the
justification for a still further dimension of communal life: the
willingness to sacrifice oneself for a friend, or to risk breaking the
law for the greater good of one’s fellow citizens (Sharples 1996:
122). It would seem difficult to construct a compelling theoretical
justification for such actions from Epicurean premises, which
privilege obedience to law in order to avoid civic strife (as seen for
example in key moments in Lucretius’ poem De Rerum Natura,
V.925–1157; see Campbell 2003, especially on lines 1011–1027),
though Cicero has Torquatus report in De Finibus (I.69) that
at least some Epicureans believed that friendly relationships could
mature into love of a friend for their own sake. Whatever the
theoretical conundrum, it did not prevent a number of Epicureans from
undertaking such risky public service, among them more than one of the
assassins of Julius Caesar (Sedley 1997; Fowler 1989 discusses a wide
range of Roman Epicurean attitudes). A more modest but still striking
example of Epicurean public service is the huge portico inscribed with
Epicurean sayings and exegesis in second-century Oenoanda (in
modern-day Turkey) by one Diogenes of that city (Smith 1992, 2003).
Whether or not his fellow citizens appreciated the instruction, modern
archaeologists and philosophers are grateful for this unparalleled
source of knowledge of Epicurean philosophy.
While Epicurus held that the sage would not engage in politics except
in “some special circumstance,” Zeno, the founder of the
Stoic school (see the entry on
 Stoicism),
 held rather that a true sage “will engage in politics unless
something prevents it” (Seneca, De Otio 3.2, as
translated and quoted in Sharples 1996: 124; SVF 1.271). As
we shall see, a Stoic commitment to politics generally took it to be
part of nature’s rational plan for human happiness, though this was
not incompatible with a Cynic tincture of questioning whether existing
laws are truly in accordance with the natural law (Vogt 2008). The
question however of the nature of the polity in which politics was to
be exercised remains contested as a matter of the interpretation of
various Stoic figures, who across the lifetime of the school
encompassed both the early generation of the school’s leaders (Zeno
and his successor Chrysippus) and later figures thriving in the Roman
period who wrote variously in Greek and in Latin (for an overview, see
Laurand 2005). To be sure, the polity in question was invariably
figured as a city, according to the account given in Dio Chrysostom
(36.20: “ They [the Stoics] say that a city is a group of people
living in the same place and administered by law” (SVF
3.329, as translated in LS 67J). But which people? Whether the members
of this city were to be all humans together with the gods, or only
human sages and the gods, and whether the city is to be envisaged as a
distinct foundation or as identical with the cosmos, has much
exercised both Stoic thinkers and subsequent interpreters. And which
law? How does or should the law of a particular city relate to the
natural law? These questions are canvassed further as this section
unfolds.
Both Zeno and Chrysippus wrote works in the Platonic genre entitled
Republic, neither of which survives in full. (So too,
reportedly, had Diogenes the Cynic.) Zeno’s was written as a young
man, allegedly under Cynic influence, rejecting the use of money in
the characteristic Cynic vein. His portrait of the republic combines
the Stoic idea of a natural law by which human conduct is harmonized
with cosmic order, with a classical vision of politics in which a
Platonic ideal of friendship through communist and sexual bonding
(more erotic than familial for Zeno) persists (following Schofield
1991: 22–56). He seems to have adopted Plato’s prescription for
the community of women and children, and at least some aspects of his
insistence on the potential civic equality of men and women and
political irrelevance of their anatomical differences. Humans share
many characteristics and tendencies with other animals, and their
initial impulse to form into society is a social rather than strictly
political one: they are animated by a tendency to associate with those
akin to themselves (the Stoic notion of oikeiôsis).
Such a social tendency is, according to what is reported of the
opening of Chrysippus’ lost treatise On Law, transformed into
a political relationship by means of law: “Law is king of all
things human and divine. Law must preside over what is honourable and
base, as ruler and as guide, and thus be the standard of right and
wrong, prescribing to animals whose nature is political what they
should do, and prohibiting them from what they should not do”
(SVF 3.314, as translated in LS 67R). Yet, in keeping with
some tendencies in Platonism and Cynicism, such law might have to be
radically different from existing laws if it is to be in full
conformity with nature and reason. For Chrysippus, even certain forms
of incest are said to have been “discredited without
reason” (SVF 3.753, as translated in LS 67F): a
comparison with animals would license them.
Plutarch’s characterization of Zeno’s Republic
as prescribing that “we should regard all men as our
fellow-citizens and local residents” (SVF 1.262, as
translated in LS 67A), composed around the end of the first century of the Common Era, has often been read as prescribing a kind of
cosmopolitanism that builds on Diogenes’ paradoxical Cynic version of
that stance.  However, the reliability of this text as an account of Zeno
has been questioned, and just how this fellowship of all humans
relates to the fellowship of rationally perfect sages and to the
sharing of humans and gods in the cosmos has been debated (for a
defense and interpretation of Plutarch’s claim as applying to all
humans, see Vogt 2008: 86–90, contra the views of Schofield 1991 and
Vander Waerdt
 1991).[11]
 Arguably, as in the case of Aristotle, the underlying kinship by
nature establishes a potential for a full civic membership which is to
be based solely on virtue, itself potentially available to all
rational beings but realized in practice by few or perhaps even none.
This is one interpretation of the report that Zeno presented
“only virtuous people in the Republic as citizens,
friends, relations and free” (as translated in LS 67B; this is
preserved in Diogenes Laertius 7.32–7.33, found in SVF
1.226 and 1.222 respectively).
Especially for the early Stoics, existing cities remained an accepted
arena both for political action in practice—Stoic sages and
scholars advising kings and serving in offices (SVF 3.686;
translated in LS 67W)—insofar as the notion of a distinctive
individual city remained the principal framework for defining the
nature of politics in terms of justice. Yet the role of natural law
already in the early Stoics, and certainly in later ones, came to
support an alternative horizon for politics on the scale of the cosmos
as a whole (Laurand 2005). Malcolm Schofield (1991: 103) has argued
that this development “mediates the transition from
republicanism to natural law theory,” so bequeathing a crucial
resource to early modern thinkers who sought to construct new versions
of the latter. Meanwhile, in the years of the Roman republic, certain
affinities between Stoic and republican ideas proved significant, as
we shall now see.
Roman fascination with Greek philosophy was catalyzed by the Athenian
embassy of three leading philosophers sent to Rome to plead the legal
case of their city in 156/155
 BCE;[12]
 it continued as late as the early sixth century CE, as seen
especially in the life of the eminent philosophical polymath and Roman
senator under barbarian rule, Boethius. Roman aristocrats were
especially attracted to the Stoic willingness to countenance the
kingly and political lives alongside the scholarly one as equally
preferable (SVF 3.686, translated in LS 67W). They began to
study the Stoa seriously from the late second century BCE. The
affinity between Stoicism and Roman republicanism was enhanced by the
second-century Stoic teacher Panaetius, who seems to have argued that
the Roman mos maiorum or ancient ways and customs were the
best form of government, so burnishing philosophical principle with
the ancestral piety dear to the Romans. To be sure, in the later
throes of civil war, many Stoics would have difficulty in justifying
assassination of tyrants, insofar as civil war would be worse than
even a monarchy flouting the law, as one Roman adherent to the school
would say in rebuffing Junius Brutus’ attempt to recruit him to the
conspiracy to murder Caesar (Plut. Brut. 12. 3–4).
Other Romans were strongly attracted to Epicureanism or to Cynicism,
and some of these, however paradoxically, likewise played significant
roles in political life. Thus the distinctive lineaments of the Roman
republic, now to be described, were debated and interpreted by the
philosophically minded in terms of Greek political theory.
While the founders of the city of Rome were said to be the legendary
twins Romulus and Remus, Romans would come to identify the origins of
their distinctive liberty in the killing of a tyrannical king,
generally dated in 509 BCE, by the ancestor of the Junius Brutus who
would eventually kill Julius Caesar. The position of king was replaced
by two annually elected consuls, the royal council became the Senate,
and popular assemblies were established to elect magistrates and pass
the laws they proposed. By Cicero’s time, this
regime—self-identified as the S.P.Q.R., the “Senatus
populusque Romanus” or “Senate and people of
 Rome”[13]–
 had become interpreted as a version of the “mixed
constitution” which had had a long if complicated and until then
relatively minor history as an idea in the works of Thucydides, Plato,
and Aristotle (Hahm 2009). An influential account of Rome as such a
mixed constitution, in this case combining the three classical regime
forms of monarchy, aristocracy, and democracy, had already been given
by the Greek historian Polybius, who referred to the distinction
between the characteristic powers in each kind of regime and their
mutual checking and balancing (Histories 6.11–18; see
von Fritz 1954). Whereas in Polybius the achievement of balance
between the different powers was portrayed as resulting from mutual
rivalrous self-assertion, Cicero would refer to it in more harmonious
language, a form of balancing (compensatio, De rep.
II. 57) with the ideas of mixing and tempering paramount, as observed
by E.M. Atkins (2000: 491). (For a useful overview of Roman political
thought, see J.W. Atkins 2018.)
According to Polybius, each element of the constitution exercised a
distinctive form of power. The elected consuls wielded
imperium, a form of executive command; the Senate enjoyed the
power to deliberate and consent to specific policies; and the popular
assemblies served as the source of authoritative law, also electing
the magistrates, including the popular tribunes who in turn exercised
veto powers over the Senate. An originally republican formula relating
the consuls to the people as the source of authoritative law survives
in a complete prescript of the Augustan period: “Titus Quinctius
Crispinus [consul] lawfully asked the people, and the people lawfully
resolved,” as translated in Lintott 1999: 3. The perennial Greek
contest between oligarchs and democrats had been tamed in Rome to
allow a recognized security of role for the Senate, a group drawn from
no lower than the minor ranks of aristocracy and typically rewarding
birth as well as the merit that had been gained and expressed in
election to high political offices. Yet the tumultuous personal quest
for office and influence led many aristocrats to seek support among
the people, sometimes with radical measures of land reform which
Cicero, among others, would resolutely oppose. The theorizing of the
proper role of aristocratic leadership and Senatorial independence,
together with Platonic analogies for the requisite concord and harmony
in the city, would become central themes of Cicero’s political
philosophy, as he wrote: “What the musicians call harmony with
respect to song is concord in the state, the tightest and best bond of
safety in every republic; and that concord can never exist without
justice” (De rep. II.69.)
Marcus Tullius Cicero (106–43 BCE) was the most famous
“homo novus” or new man of Roman politics, hailing from a
minor provincial landowning family rather than the great clans of
hereditary nobility. He rose to the office of consul and the lifetime
Senatorial membership it subsequently conferred by his audacious wit
as a lawyer and orator in public prosecutions. His greatest moment as
consul in 63 BCE came in exposing a conspiracy by Catiline; the brutal
suppression of the conspiracy by executing Roman citizens without
trial, however, would tar his political legacy. He became an enemy of
Julius Caesar (though accepting a pardon from him at the end of a
stretch of civil wars in 47 BCE), seeing the assertion of power first
by Caesar and then Marc Antony as fatal to the republic. Having
defended in his De officiis the kind of tyrannicide that he
took the killing of Caesar in 44 BCE to have constituted, and attacked
Antony mercilessly in his series of fourteen Philippics the
following year, Cicero was murdered in response by partisans of the
then-ruling Triumvirate to which Antony belonged.
The writings of Cicero were virtually canonized subsequent to his
death as classic models of rhetoric and philosophy; as Richard Tuck
(1990: 43) has remarked, “For fifteen hundred years, from the
fourth century to the nineteenth, schoolchildren in Europe were
exposed daily to two books. One was the Bible, and the other was the
works of Cicero.” His many speeches and letters are themselves
of considerable political and often philosophical interest, reworking
the evaluative vocabulary of Roman law and politics in ways which
suited his overarching (and changing) political purposes (for a
critical assessment, see Gildenhard 2011, which concludes that
“In his rhetoric Cicero...consistently refused to recognize the
positions of his adversaries as genuine political positions and
challenged their identities as senatorial peers, Roman citizens, or
even human beings ”(Gildenhard 2011: 390). While his
philosophical writings—composed for the most part as a student
of philosophy in Rome and Athens, and then in a brief period
(46–44 BCE) when political developments led him to retreat from
active public life — cover a wide range of topics, including for
example, among those especially relevant to politics are two works on
the political role of the orator and the nature of oratory or
rhetoric, celebrating the moral purposes of the orator as essential to
the success of republican government.
While Cicero adhered to a moderate skepticism in general philosophical
matters, he would draw on a number of Stoic ideas in formulating his
own ethical and political teachings: these were shaped by the lectures
he had attended by the Stoic Posidonius in Rhodes, the writings of
Posidonius’ teacher Panaetius and other earlier and contemporary Stoic
texts, as well as (we may speculate) conversation with the Stoic
Diodotus whom he accommodated in his household in Rome for many years.
In particular, Cicero emphasized the Stoic themes of the natural
affinity for society and the existence of natural law. At the same
time, Platonic themes and models were also important in his political
writings. The discussion below is limited to the two dialogues which
are explicitly modeled on Plato’s Republic and Laws,
titled by Cicero in Latin De re publica and De
legibus ( On the Commonwealth and On the Laws),
together with his most important work on political ethics, the De
officiis (On Duties), which exercised particular
influence on subsequent Western moral and political thought.
De re publica was composed by Cicero between 54 and 51 BCE, a
turbulent period of strife in Roman politics. Its dramatic setting is
in 129 BCE during the crisis caused by Tiberius Gracchus, a consul who
had championed a property redistribution law for the people and whom
members of the Senate had violently suppressed as a putative threat to
Roman civil order. All of it except the “Dream of Scipio”
(Book VI) was lost from the Middle Ages onward; it has been
reconstructed from references and excerpts in later authors,
supplemented by a palimpsest of much of Books I–III discovered in
1819. Framed as a dialogue between Scipio Aemilianus, a hero of the
resistance against Tiberius Gracchus and his like-minded brother, and
several others of his actual contemporaries, the dialogue has a
discernible structure identified by E.M. Atkins (2000: 490): Books
I–II treat “the best condition of the res
publica”; Books III–IV treat “justice and human
nature”, topics common to the best city and the best citizen;
and Books V–VI treat the “best citizen’ in discussing the
statesman and in the Dream of Scipio.
While justice was for Cicero, as for the Greeks, the fundamental bond
of the commonwealth, he offered distinctive and influential linked
definitions of the res publica (”commonwealth“,
or more literally the ”public thing“) as the res
populi, the ”property/thing of the people“, and of a
populus or ”people“ in turn as ”an
assemblage associated with one another by agreement on “law”
[iuris consensu] and community of interest [utilitatis
communione]“ (both, I.39). This could be interpreted either
as a strong normative claim —the people agree on ”law“
[ius], also translatable as right or justice, and share a
common interest — or alternatively in a weaker deflationary
manner, the people nominally accepting a common law and sharing a
common conception of their self-interest which may or may not be in
accord with
 justice.[14]
 Such ambiguity would be famously exploited by Augustine, who used
Cicero’s definition to argue that lacking justice, conflicted and
divided republican Rome had been no commonwealth, before offering his
own even weaker definition of a ”people“ as those united
in (any) common love (City of God, II.21). In Cicero’s own
hands, the definitions were used to stress that the commonwealth was
the property of the people, who entrusted it to the magistrates to be
used for the common good (I.51–2), and that the ”welfare
of the people is the supreme law“ (”salus populi suprema
lex“, De leg. III.8; this was a reference to a maxim in
the ancient ”Twelve Tables“ compendium of Roman law). It
followed too that just as Plato denied the title of a (single unified)
regime to the imperfect regimes torn by civil discord, so Cicero
inferred that a corrupt regime was not strictly speaking a res
publica at all (III.43–48). The role of the statesman
(rector rei publicae) is to aim at the happiness of the
citizens, defined in a laxer way than most Greek philosophers would
allow, as wealth, true glory, and virtue all combined.
The character Scipio adheres to Greek philosophical principles in
declaring that ”the commonwealth cannot possibly function
without justice“ (II.70), adhering to the standard abstract
definition in an Aristotelian vein of justice as ”giving each
their due“ (ius suum cuique tribuere). In Book III, two
other dialogue participants present respectively the famous arguments
given on one day for justice, and on the next day against justice, by
the skeptical Greek philosopher and ambassador to Rome Carneades
during the embassy in 156/155 BCE mentioned above. Cicero’s
presentation reverses the order, no doubt to give justice the last
word.
In Cicero’s hands, Carneades’ case against justice avails itself of
the nomos/phusis contrast and of the kind of ambition for
power expressed by Plato’s character Callicles in the
Gorgias. Justice is not natural, as it differs radically
among different peoples; it conflicts with wisdom, which tells us
”to rule over as many people as possible, to enjoy pleasures, to
be powerful, to rule, to be a lord“ (III.24b), and it is fatal
for states and empires, which can’t survive without injustice. In
reply, the speech for justice avails itself of Stoic themes:
”true law is right reason, consonant with nature“; there
is ”one eternal and unchangeable law“ [i.e. what has come
to be known as ”natural law“] (III.33). This includes rule
of the best over the weakest for the benefit of the latter (III.36):
as in Plato’s Republic, the justice of rulership is not
exploitation but paternalistic benefit. And as in Plato’s
Republic Book X, where the myth of Er supplies a revisionary
religious justification for justice (it will help you to choose your
next reincarnation well), so Cicero’s Republic concludes with
a dream recounted by Scipio Aemilianus about his even more eminent
Roman ancestor, Scipio Africanus. The dream describes the divine order
which not only rewards humans for just service to their city (VI.13),
but also puts human affairs in a cosmic perspective designed to
embolden them to care more for justice than for petty human
advantage:
you must always look at these heavenly bodies and scorn what is human.
What fame can you achieve in what men say, or what glory can you
achieve that is worth seeking?” (VI.20)
In a dramatic rejection even of the traditional Roman motives of honor
and glory as conventional motivations to virtue, the imagined elder
statesman asks: “…and even the people who talk about
us—how long will they do that?” (VI.21). As Jed W. Atkins
has observed (2013:76), glory is in the Dream “first devalued,
and then revalued”, in a Platonically inspired image of
“the glory of the heavenly realm to which good statesmen will
return” (2013: 77–78).
De legibus, or On the Laws, is also written as a
dialogue, but one set in Cicero’s own day with himself, his brother,
and closest friend as the interlocutors, gathered at his country
estate of Arpinum. Probably begun after De re publica, it was
likewise written in the years immediately before 51 BCE, and similarly
survives only in piecemeal and fragmentary form. Books I–II treat
natural law or ius naturae, with “Marcus” (Cicero
himself) declaring that “law is the highest reason, rooted in
nature” (I.18), and that men, bound to the gods by reason, are
“born for justice” (I.28–32). However, “the
corruption of bad habits…extinguishes…the sparks given
by nature” (I.33) and can result in the formation of bad laws.
Such iniquitous laws as those passed by tyrants are not just (I.42);
nor is the title of law to be conferred upon “what bandits have
agreed among themselves” (II.13).
In Books II–III, the speakers prescribe an ideal law code, based on
but modifying Roman law; notably, for example, the institution of the
tribunate is defended (III.16–17). As these prescriptions, and
the circumstances of their writing (a temporary retreat from active
politics), suggest, Cicero had a complex attitude to the Greek dilemma
posing the lives of philosophy and of politics as opposed
alternatives. He saw philosophy as a source of insight and perspective
relevant to politics, but after his early studies, devoted himself to
it primarily when temporarily debarred from more active pursuits. One
might say that philosophy became, beyond its intrinsic value, a form
of alternative public service when the forum was too dangerous for him
to enter (here following the reflection along these lines offered by
Baraz 2012).
“The De officiis, not the De re publica, is
Cicero’s Republic” (Long 1995: 240). This dictum of A.
A. Long holds true not only in the sense that for Cicero, as for Plato
and Aristotle, ethics was inseparable from politics. It is true also
and more profoundly insofar as the De officiis takes up the
same subject as Plato’s Republic, namely the apparent
conflict between justice and individual advantage, and proposes
broadly the same resolution, namely that the conflict is only ever
apparent: violating one’s officia or duties can never serve
one’s advantage so long as both are properly understood. Book I treats
what is virtuous, or honestas; Book II treats what is
advantageous, or utilitas; and Book III considers cases to
show that any apparent conflict is illusory.
The most difficult case to resolve according to the overall argument
of the book is that of advantage when understood as political
ambition, driven by greatness of spirit. As Cicero acknowledges, and
as was especially true in the highest echelons of Roman society,
“Men are led most of all to being overwhelmed by forgetfulness
of justice when they slip into desiring positions of command or honour
or glory” (I.26). The solution is to aim only at true glory,
such as can be gained only through the fulfillment of one’s
officia. Similar casuistry enables Cicero to resolve in
accordance with his thesis a range of common cases where advantage
might be sought at the expense of justice (in administering the estate
of an orphan, for example, a common duty of eminent Romans). Yet such
casuistry is always advanced within a context of celebration of
justice and natural law: it is not simply that in fact justice never
conflicts with advantage, but that justice properly understood is
always to one’s advantage as a human being.
As in Plato, a redefinition of the virtues plays a crucial role in the
overall argument for the benefits of justice. For Cicero, the virtues
are Romanized as officia, understood not only as duties in
the abstract but rather as obligations of role or relationship, each
attaching to someone in virtue of a distinct persona (whether
as father, consul, neighbor, and so on, or simply as a human being).
Some virtues are rooted in one’s persona as a human being
subject to natural law, others in the specific roles and customs of
one’s city. Four principal virtues are identified: wisdom; justice,
resting on fides (good faith and credit) and respect for
property; greatness of spirit; and decorum. Respect for property is a
keystone of Cicero’s political thought, here very far from the current
in Platonism which subordinated property to civic harmony.
Strikingly, whereas tyrannicide might appear to be a difficult case
for such an ethical code to confront, Cicero presents it —
writing later in the year that Caesar was assassinated—as the
straightforwardly ethically correct choice. Cicero couches his case in
Stoic terms of naturalness and fellowship (Dyck 1996, ad loc.
to Off.III.29–32). His pivotal move is to deny that tyrants
are party to the otherwise universal nature of human fellowship. Thus
he asserts that “there can be no fellowship between us and
tyrants…just as some limbs are amputated if they
are…harming other parts of the body, similarly if the wildness
and monstrousness of a beast appears in human form, it must be removed
from the common humanity…of the body”
(Off.III.32: ostensibly about the tyrant Phalaris).
Although Rome ruled over an empire long before Cicero died, and the
republican constitution that he had served would remain formally
intact in many respects long after that date as well, the imperial era of Roman
government is standardly associated with the elevation of Octavian by
the Senate in 27 BCE by according him the title of
“Augustus” (among other novel titles and combinations of
offices that he was then and later accorded). Octavian and a number of
his successors were also referred to as the princeps,
literally the first man, implicitly the first among nominal equals,
sometimes translated by the English derivation ‘prince’, and so giving
rise to the description of the period from 27 BCE–284 CE as the
Principate (to be followed in turn by the Dominate). In this period,
Stoicism continued to exercise an important hold, drawing in part on
the Hellenistic genre of advice to kings; Platonism too, and forms of
Pythagoreanism, regained much sway. Moreover, a number of Stoic-minded
writers and orators played their parts in Roman political life, some
fashioning the life of a philosopher itself into a distinctive form of
what might be called non-political politics (Trapp 2007). In this
article, I cannot explore the full ramifications of these
philosophical developments under the Empire, in writers in Greek as
well as in Latin, and influencing not only pagan but also Jewish and
Christian thinkers. The article also leaves aside the many and varied
important contributions to political thought in Rome and its
possessions made not by philosophers but by historians, including
Livy, Sallust, Diodorus Siculus, Tacitus, and Suetonius. (Again, for
an overview that seeks to integrate political and historical
developments with political theorizing, see J.W. Atkins 2018.)
If Cicero as a new man made senator had to contend with the
competitive pressures of republican politics, Seneca (c. 3
BCE–65 CE), as a new man (from Spain) made senator a century
later, had to contend with the problem of advising, and surviving, the
poisonous politics of intimacy with the princeps. For Seneca,
Stoic philosophy (of which he was an avowed exponent, though other
philosophical influences can also be found in his ideas), can be best
squared with politics if the ruler is supremely virtuous: in that
case, the Stoic wise man is the king or prince.
Like Cicero, Seneca wrote essays in natural as well as political
philosophy, including for example a significant analysis of the give
and take of benefits or reciprocal gifts and favors in political life
(De beneficiis, recently translated afresh by Griffin and
Inwood, 2011), and even a De officiis (which is lost). Like
Cicero, he wrote important collections of letters (and where Cicero
wrote poetry, Seneca also wrote plays). The letters include his
distinctive “consolations” which would inaugurate a new
philosophical and literary genre (see the entry on
 Seneca).
 
In this large corpus, arguably his most important surviving work for
political philosophy is his De clementia (“On
Mercy”), addressed to the emperor Nero whom he served as tutor
(in rhetoric, not in philosophy) and later in the capacity of
officially designated amicus or friend (Veyne 2003, vii, 19).
Presented as a “mirror” in which Nero could see himself
and the consequences of his virtue (1.1.1), this text would become a
fountainhead of the “mirror for princes” genre in
subsequent centuries. The challenge was how to reconcile the virtue of
justice with that of clementia, clemency or mercy, a
distinctively Roman virtue (not corresponding exactly to any Greek
word: Braund 2009, 33) that had been incorporated into public life as
a virtue of the Roman people (clementia populi Romani) and
attributed specifically in cultic form to Caesar Augustus (previously
Octavian) as clementia Caesaris (included as one of
“the four virtues attributed to Augustus on an honorific
shield,” as observed by Griffin 2000: 540; see more generally
Flamerie de Lachapelle 2011). Appealing to the related Stoic virtue of
philanthrôpia in Greek, humanitas in Latin, or
love of humankind, Seneca claimed that, by taking into account all the
circumstances of the affair, clemency can claim to embody, as it were,
a more perfect justice (iustissimum), than would the
observance of the strict letter of the law (2.7.3, as discussed by
Braund 2009, 66–70).
Seneca manages to defend clemency’s claim to the rank of virtue by
distinguishing it both from its opposite, crudelitas or
cruelty, and from a related disposition, misericordia, pity
or compassion, which for the Stoics counted as a vice (2.4.4). The
Stoic sage will exercise clemency by attending to the circumstances
and causes of the criminal’s act, but also by seeking in various ways
to improve the latter’s character (1.14.1–3, 1.16.1–3), an approach
that goes back at least to Plato (Prt. 324a–c,
Grg.469a–b), doing so with parsimony and discernment
between those who are curable and those who are not (again with Plato,
Grg.525a–526b). Indeed, Seneca asserts that those who
are curable will generally strive subsequently to become worthy of the
clemency shown to them by the prince (2.2.1), a principle illustrated
by the story of Augustus’ clemency toward the conspirator Cnaeus
Cornelius Cinna, who would become his lifelong friend (1.9). In good
Stoic fashion, Seneca finally shows that the virtue of clemency is
both valuable in itself and also beneficial. It sustains the rule of a
prince by inspiring love in his subjects (1.19.6), whereas cruelty
augments the number of his enemies (1.8.7). And conversely, whereas
misericordia wallows in a wrongful and inefficient emotional
pity for the treatment that justice would prescribe of the criminal
(2.6.1), clemency improves the criminal more efficiently than cruelty
would do (1.22.1), and for this and other reasons better aims at the
good of mankind. It is worth noting finally that, while Seneca
specifies that clemency should also extend to slaves, his
cosmopolitanism stopped short of advocating their manumission or the
abolition of slavery (Griffin 1992:
 256–85).[15]
Seneca did not limit himself to the political function of advising
rulers. Instead, he conceived the role of philosophy as benefiting
people generally, in the widest sense of a cosmopolitan ethics and
even politics. His De otio (“On Leisure”)
contrasts the single commonwealth embracing gods and men in a cosmic
citizenship, with the ordinary multiple commonwealths to which the
accidents of birth assign us (though these also rightly command
allegiance) (4.1). Should such an ordinary regime turn lethal, the
philosopher remains a citizen of the cosmic commonwealth, and so his
serenity can and should remain intact. That fate befell Seneca himself
in 65 CE, when Nero accused him of conspiring in a planned
assassination of the emperor and ordered him to commit suicide. To be
sure, however, Seneca’s suicide reflected not only political
obedience, but also, and perhaps more fundamentally, the belief,
previously expressed in his writings (in particular De
providentia and De ira, as well as his letters) that
suicide is a supreme mark of freedom. No tyranny can so enslave us as
to take away this freedom: a freedom to act based on the inner
liberation of realizing that death and other worldly losses are in
fact indifferent and irrelevant to happiness (Inwood 2005:
307–9).
Seneca was far from the only Stoic politically active in his day or in
successive generations. Others like Thrasea Paetus and Barea Soranus
under Nero, Helvidius Priscus under Vespasian, and Paconius Agrippinus
under Tiberius, chose to defy those whom they saw as tyrannical
rulers, becoming known as the so-called ‘Stoic martyrs’. (On the
varieties of Stoicism under the principate, see the classic study of
Brunt 2013, originally published in 1975.) Some Stoics spoke out
against a wider range of customs that they took to be cruel or
unfounded or otherwise irrational, most notably Musonius Rufus against
such practices as the Athenians’ holding of gladiatorial games in the
same theatre of Dionysus where they celebrated religious festivals
(assuming that it is indeed he who is described in Dio Chrysostom’s
Orationes XXXI, 122), and against the social convention of
excluding women from philosophizing (for his fragments, see King
2011). Yet these later Stoics made rather few detailed contributions
to political philosophy, even if their fundamental analysis of living
according to nature and reason, as further developed by figures
ranging from the once-enslaved Epictetus to the emperor Marcus
Aurelius, remained an important touchstone for thinking about
politics.
While the men of affairs in the Roman Senate and imperial court turned
often (though not exclusively) to Stoicism, in the Greek centers of
philosophy and among provincial Greek men of affairs Platonism
remained an important framework for thinking about both ethics and
politics, as did a related if somewhat shadowy form of
 Pythagoreanism
 which can be seen as a continuation of the genre of Hellenistic
kingship treatises (Centrone 2000). The most important contributions
made to political thought by the Platonist philosopher of the
second-century AD, Plutarch (c.46–c.120 CE), are his paired
biographical lives of Greek and Roman statesmen, each with a
comparison drawing political morals. Together with the histories of
Thucydides, Livy and Sallust, these Lives instructed
generations of students in the principles and perils of political
ethics, and instituted the distinction between statesman and demagogue
as we have come to know it today: with figures like the fifth-century
BCE Athenian “Aristides the Just” embodying the ideal
statesmen, in contrast to the Platonic view of all past and present
statesmen as fatally flawed. Plutarch also made important
contributions to political philosophy in the many essays collected in
his volumes of Moralia.
Plutarch was a committed but in some ways revisionist Platonist. His
attitude to public life was more Roman than Platonic (befitting the
role in public affairs that he played in his own city): the political
life was for him unproblematically noble, not inferior to the life of
philosophy. Similarly, he revised the strict Platonic dictum that
philosophers must rule by allowing that philosophers might rule merely
in the sense of advising rulers, not of being rulers themselves. (In
fact, this move had some Platonic pedigree in the Statesman’s
insistence that the science of statecraft is the same whether known
and exercised by an advisor or by an actual ruler (259a).) And he
considered philosophy to be more of a character-building study than a
source of knowledge of exact or politically relevant knowledge. Where
statesmen were educated in philosophy, as for example in the
Lives of Pericles, Cicero, Brutus, and Cato Minor, he treats
this as valuable mainly because of the virtue—in particular,
moderation and self-restraint—which it imparts to them (Van
Raalte 2005). The study of philosophy serves as a sort of inoculation
against greed and immoderate ambition. But it need not impart any
particular substantive knowledge to the statesman (so competing
philosophies could all be useful in shaping virtue: Anaxagaorean
influence on Pericles, an eclectic mixture of Stoicism, Academic
skepticism, and Platonism on Cicero; Stoicism on the younger Cato).
Indeed, excessively rigid adherence to a philosophy could be
deleterious, making a statesman rigid and inflexible. The younger Cato
was defeated when he stood for the consulship because, Plutarch says,
he experienced the same thing that happens to fruits that appear
“out of season” (Phoc. 3.1). Like such fruits, he
was admired, but “the weight and grandeur” of his virtue
was “out of all proportion to the immediate times”
(asummetron tois kathestōsi kairois, Phoc.
3.2–3). 
Plutarch’s political sympathies lay with monarchy. He treated the
exemplary Greek or Roman statesman as inherently and ideally a kind of
monarchical figure, even when functioning within a democratic or
republican environment. “Aristocratic and kingly” was his
praise for Pericles’ type of true statesmanship (literally, his
“politics” or “policy”, politeia),
once he has given up his initial recourse to demagogic methods
(Per.14.2). Thus for all his admiration for Greek statesmen
of the classical age, and his profound later influence on republican
sentiments in Europe, Plutarch preferred monarchy as the best
constitution and believed that he was following his master Plato in so
doing. As John Dillon puts it, he held “that the accomplished
statesman, like a first-rate musician, will be able to make the best
of any of the three basic constitutions [monarchy, aristocracy, or
democracy] that he is given to work on” (Dillon 1997). To quote
Plutarch himself on this point from his fragmentary writing “On
Monarchy, Democracy, and Oligarchy”:
…if he [the statesman] is given the choice among governments,
like so many tools, he would follow Plato’s advice and choose no other
than monarchy, the only one which is able to sustain that top note of
virtue, high in the highest sense, and never let it be tuned down
under compulsion or expediency. For the other forms of government in a
certain sense, although controlled by the statesman, control him, and
although carried along by him, carry him along, since he has no firmly
established strength to oppose those from whom his strength is
derived… (Peri mon. 827bc)
Plato’s collective virtuous aristocracy in the Republic (his
philosopher-kings and -queens, in the plural), was transmuted by
Plutarch, perhaps under the influence of the singular kingly political
expert in the Statesman, into a monarchical
 ideal.[16]
Later Platonic philosophers, known as Neoplatonists (see the entry on
 Plotinus),
 also focused primarily on ethics in the context of cosmology and
theology, stressing the ascent of the soul to a disembodied pure
understanding of the One. Yet they made room for the political virtues
of the embodied soul as a first step in this process of divinization
or “becoming like God” (O’Meara 2003). In working out the
political implications of such views, Plato’s Laws became an
important model for theocratic political reform, especially as
Neoplatonism became influential for a certain strand of Christian
thinkers, in particular those able to absorb the translation of Greek
texts into Arabic.
On a continuum of political rule stretching from the sheer domination
of some over others on one extreme, to a vision of collaborative
deliberation among equals for the sake of the good life on the other,
many ancient Greek and Roman political philosophers clearly staked out
the latter ground. The very idea of the city and the civic bond as
rooted in justice was common ground across much of the spectrum of
ancient political philosophy. Even the Epicureans saw society as
rooted in justice, although understanding justice in turn as rooted in
 utility.[17]
 Philosophers adhering to this approach were not however ignorant of
possible objections to it. The diagnosis of politics as domination has
never been more powerfully advanced than by Plato’s character
Thrasymachus, nor has the attack on justice as a good life for the
individual ever been as powerfully made as by Plato’s character
Callicles or the skeptic Carneades. The nostalgic view of ancient
political philosophy as predicated on widely shared conceptions of
human nature and the human good, before the splintering and fracturing
of modernity, is an oversimplification.
It is true that those ancient visions of politics which rooted
themselves in a commitment to ethical cultivation and the common good
did not have to contend with the absolutist claims of rival versions
of monotheistic religions. But the ancients did have to answer various
forms of relativism, immoralism, and skepticism, contending with rival
philosophical schools which disagreed profoundly with one another. If
some of them chose to see politics as a domain of common benefit and a
space for the cultivation of virtue, this was not because it had not
occurred to them that it could be thought of otherwise, but in part
because they had developed powerful philosophical systems to support
this view. The experience and practices of the Greek poleis
(the plural of polis) and the Roman res publica
played important roles in shaping these approaches.
Plato and Aristotle can in many ways be seen as defending some
fundamental tenets of Greek ethics (such as the value of justice), but
doing so by means of advancing revisionist philosophical doctrines and
distancing themselves from the ways in which those tenets were
interpreted by the democratic institutions of their day. The range of
ethical and political views which they, along with their Hellenistic
successors, laid out, continue to define many of the fundamental
choices for modern philosophy, despite the many important innovations
in institutional form and intellectual approach which have been made
since. Many of those innovations, indeed, came in response to a
revival of the ancient skeptical and relativist challenges: challenges
already known from their evolution within ancient political philosophy
itself.