The core concepts of ancient skepticism are belief, suspension of
judgment, criterion of truth, appearances, and investigation. Important
notions of modern skepticism such as knowledge, certainty, justified
belief, and doubt play no or almost no role. This is not to say that
the ancients would not engage with questions that figure in today’s
philosophical discussions. Ancient debates address questions that today
we associate with epistemology and philosophy of language, as well as
with theory of action, rather than specifically with the contemporary
topic of skepticism. They focus on the nature of belief, the way in
which belief figures in our mental lives, and the relationship of
belief to speech and action.
Pre-Socratic philosophers formulate—often in the context of
revisionist metaphysical theories, which lead into epistemological
discussions—such claims as “nothing is known” (Lee
2010). The firm assertion, as found in these philosophers’
works, that there is no knowledge can be turned against itself: does
the proponent of “nothing is known” claim to know that
nothing can be known (and if not, why assert it)? This question gives
rise to a puzzle that remains at the heart of ancient debates about
skepticism. Can the skeptics say anything meaningful about their
philosophy without asserting anything about how things are (Bett
2013)? Skeptical writings have a peculiar format, one that comes with
its own challenges: the skeptics aim to describe their philosophy
tout court, as they practice it, without laying out any
particular theories or doctrines. Skeptical ideas have been charged
with a family of objections: they might be self-refuting,
inconsistent, self-contradictory, and so on (Castagnoli 2010). Another
line of objection is associated with Hume, namely that “nature
is always too strong for principle.” As Hume puts it, “a
Pyrrhonian cannot expect that his philosophy will have any constant
influence on the mind” (part 2 of section 12, “Of the
Academical or Sceptical Philosophy,” An Enquiry Concerning
Human Understanding, London, 1748). It is one thing for
skepticism to be coherent. It is another thing for it to be likely
that anyone, no matter how much they rehearse skeptical arguments in
their mind, will succeed in adhering to it (Johnson 2001), as ancient
Pyrrhonist philosophers claimed to be able to do.
Like later epistemologists, the ancient skeptics start from
questions about knowledge. But discussion quickly turns to beliefs
(Fine 2000). The Greek term translated here as belief, doxa,
can also be translated as opinion. The root of doxa is
dokein, seeming. In a belief, something seems so-and-so to
someone. But there is also an element of judgment or acceptance. The
relevant verb, doxazein, often means ‘to judge that something
is so-and-so.’ Hellenistic discussions envisage three attitudes that
cognizers take to impressions (how things seem to them): assent,
rejection, and suspension of judgment (epochê).
Suspension is a core element of skepticism: the skeptic suspends
judgment. However, if this means that the skeptic forms no beliefs
whatsoever, then skepticism may be a kind of cognitive suicide.
Arguably, belief-formation is a basic feature of human cognitive
activity. It is not clear whether one can lead an ordinary human life
without belief, or indeed, ancient opponents of the skeptics say,
whether one can even survive. Perhaps even the simplest actions, such
as eating or leaving a room without running into a wall, involve
beliefs (on the practical side of ancient skepticism, see Annas-Barnes
1985, 7; Burnyeat 1980). It is also hard to say whether someone who
succeeded in not forming any beliefs could communicate with others,
whether they could engage in philosophical investigation, or whether they
could even think at all.
The ancient skeptics are well aware of these objections. The most
widely discussed charge is that they cannot act without belief
(Apraxia Charge). In response, the skeptics describe their actions
variously as guided by the plausible, the convincing, or by
appearances. The notion of appearances gains great importance in
Pyrrhonian skepticism, and poses difficult interpretive questions
(Barney 1992). When something appears so-and-so to someone, does this
for the skeptics involve some kind of judgment on their part?  Or do
they have in mind a purely phenomenal kind of appearing?  The
skeptical proposals (that the skeptic adheres to the plausible, the
convincing, or to appearances) have in common their appeal to
something less than full-fledged belief about how things are, while
allowing something sufficient to generate and guide action.
However, my claim that ancient skepticism is about belief, while modern
skepticism is about knowledge, needs to be qualified. Ancient
skepticism is not alone in being concerned with belief. Recall that
Descartes speaks repeatedly of demolishing his opinions (for
example, Med 2:12,
AT 7:18; cf. Broughton, 2002, 33–61).  Contemporary
epistemology often pays equal attention to the notions of both
justified belief and knowledge. The distinctive focus of ancient
skepticism on belief becomes clearer once we consider a third concept
that figures centrally in ancient discussions: criterion of truth. It
is a core ancient intuition that, if we cannot identify an impression
as true, we should hold back from taking it to be true and from
believing anything on the basis of it. The skeptics and their
opponents discuss how one recognizes a true impression as true. Is
there anything about impressions of truths that marks them as true?
Are there some evident things (some kind of impressions), which can be
used as standards or criteria, so that nothing is to be accepted as
true if it is not in agreement with these evident things? The Stoics
and Epicureans formulate theories that conceive of such criteria. The
skeptics respond critically to their proposals. Accordingly, the
conception of a criterion of truth assumes as central a role in
ancient debates as does the notion of knowledge in modern
discussions. This debate includes in-depth analysis of sense
perception and its relation to belief. According to Epicurus, all
sense perceptions are true, but judgments based on these perceptions
are true or false (Striker 1977, Vogt 2016). The Stoics explore
differences between sense perception, illusion, and hallucination
(Vasiliou forthcoming). Their account of the criterion of truth starts
from perceptual impressions that qualify, or fail to qualify, as
cognitive (Shogry forthcoming-b). The Stoics propose that we should
accept only cognitive impressions, and accordingly we should only form
beliefs based on a subset of true perceptual impressions.
Discussion of the criterion of truth arguably also covers some of
the ground that is later discussed in terms of certainty. The Stoics
say that a particular kind of impression is the criterion of truth: the
cognitive impression. Cognitive impressions make it clear through
themselves that they reveal things precisely as they are. This notion
is an ancestor to the later conception of clear and distinct
impressions, and thus, to discussions of certainty.
Consider next the notion of doubt. Doubt is often considered the
hallmark of skepticism. So how can it be that ancient skepticism is
not about doubt (Corti 2010, Vogt 2014a)? Insofar as ‘to
doubt’ means no more than ‘to call into question,’
the ancient skeptics might be described as doubting things.  However,
skeptical investigation as Sextus Empiricus describes it does not
involve doubt (I shall focus here on Pyrrhonism; on Cicero’s use
of dubitari, see Section 3.3). Skeptics find themselves struck
by the discrepancies among impressions. This experience is described
as turmoil. They aim to resolve this disturbance by settling what is
true and what is false among them. But investigation leads them to
suspension of judgment, which brings its own peace of mind
(Outlines of Skepticism [= PH] 1.25–30). Where
in this account should we locate doubt? Is the initial turmoil the
ancient skeptic experiences a kind of doubt? Are the ancient skeptic’s
investigations a kind of doubting? Should we describe suspension of
judgment as a kind of doubt?  All three stages may resemble doubt, at
least insofar as the ancient skeptics have not settled on answers to
the questions they investigate. But all three stages are also
different from doubt as it is conceived in later epistemology. The
ancient skeptics do not describe themselves as making an active effort
at doubting what ordinarily they would believe, as some philosophers
in the Cartesian tradition have it. Instead the ancient skeptics find
themselves in turmoil because of discrepancies in how things strike
them. Moreover, the progression that ancient skeptics describe differs
from the doubt-belief model that later thinkers tend to employ. The
ancient skeptics improve their psychological condition by moving from
turmoil to suspension of judgment, not by removing doubt. It seems
best, then, to refrain from invoking the modern conception of doubt as
at all fundamental in the reconstruction of ancient Greek
skepticism.
 Some of the distinctness of ancient skepticism lies in the fact
that it is developed by philosophers who genuinely think of themselves
as skeptics. In later epistemology, skepticism is largely construed
from the outside. In particular, early modern skepticism is, for the
most part, conceived by philosophers who aim to refute it. But ancient
skepticism is explored by skeptics, and that is, by philosophers who
intend their lives to be reflective of their philosophy (Cooper 2012
ch.5.5–7; Bett 2013b). Socrates raises the challenge that it
might be truly bad (for one’s life, for the state of one’s soul, and
so on) to base one’s actions on unexamined beliefs.  For all one
knows, these beliefs could be false, and without investigation, one
does not even aim to rid oneself of false belief, which is admittedly
a bad thing for one’s soul.  Only an examined life is worth living
(Cooper 2007). Once we take this challenge seriously, as the ancient
skeptics do, we embark on a kind of investigation that is seen as
directly relevant to our lives. Our beliefs are assumed, at this
pre-skeptical phase, to be guiding our actions. Confidence in
unexamined views seems misplaced. Others regularly disagree with
us. With respect to even the most basic questions, such as whether
there is movement, or whether there are good and bad things, we face
conflicting views. In favor of each view, some arguments can be
adduced, some practices invoked, some experiences cited. These
conflicting arguments, practices and experiences need to be
examined. But that just raises further views that are in conflict.  As
a consequence, suspension of judgment on every such question looks
rationally mandatory. But it is also rational to persist in
investigation. The skeptic is committed to a search for the truth, on
virtually all questions, even if this search repeatedly and
predictably leads to suspension of judgment (Cooper 2012).
The early Greek philosophers develop distinctions between reality
and appearances, knowledge and belief, and the non-evident and the
evident. These distinctions form the framework in which skepticism can
be conceived. The idea that truth is seen and knowledge gained from
some perspective outside of the ordinary ways of mortal life, and that
mortals rely on something lesser, be it the hear-say of fame, or signs,
or appearances, runs through much of early Greek thought. However, few
early Greek thinkers seem to have had skeptical or proto-skeptical
inclinations. Xenophanes and Democritus are perhaps the most prominent
apparent exceptions.
Xenophanes famously insists that all conceptions of the gods are
anthropomorphic and culturally contingent (DK 21B14, B15). The
Ethiopians pray to gods who look like Ethiopians, the Thracians to
gods who look like Thracians (B16). If horses and cows had hands, the
horses would draw pictures of gods that look like horses, and the cows
would draw gods as cows (B15). Xenophanes puts forward a number of
theological theses of his own. But he says that no man will know the
clear truth about such matters. He makes a point that has lasting
relevance in discussions of skepticism: even if someone succeeded in
saying something that actually is the case, he himself would not know
this. Thus, all is belief (120: B34) (cf. Sassi 2011 on
interpretations of Xenophanes that influence the history of
skepticism).
Atomism—a theory which thrives in Hellenistic times as the
physical theory of Epicureanism, and is thus an interlocutor of
skepticism—leads into difficult epistemological questions. The
atomist can argue that sense perceptions are explicable as complex
events, initiated by objects each one made up of a lot of atoms
floating in the void, from which atoms proceed and traverse the
intervening space, and affect the senses. It is certain objects, made
up by the atoms proceeding from the objects in question (filmy images)
that we actually perceive. We neither perceive ‘real
reality’ (atoms and void), nor even macroscopic objects and
their properties (for example, a square tower). Democritus seems to
have argued along these lines (SE M 7.135–9; cf. fr. 9,
SE M 7.136; Theophrastus, De Sensibus 2.60–1,
63–4), and accordingly his atomist view of perception can be
seen as grounding a kind of proto-skepticism.
Democritus’ student Metrodorus of Chios says at the beginning of his
book On Nature “None of us knows anything, not even
this, whether we know or we do not know; nor do we know what ‘to
not know’ or ‘to know’ are, nor on the whole,
whether anything is or is not” (Cicero, Acad. 2.73;
trans. Lee (2010) = DK 70B1; SE M 7.48, 87–8; Eusebius,
Praep. evang. 14.19.9).  This formulation reflects awareness
of the fact that a simpler statement than the one reported in Cicero,
such as “there is no knowledge,” can be turned against
itself. In particular, Metrodorus recognizes the role that
understanding concepts plays in any such statement. Does its proponent
know something, merely by virtue of understanding what the terms she
uses in her philosophizing refer to? Sextus presents Metrodorus’
pronouncement as related to an enigmatic idea that he ascribes to two
other philosophers, the Democritean Anaxarchus of Abdera and the Cynic
Monismus (SE M 7.87–88). Both are said to have likened existing things
to a stage-painting. This comparison, which Burnyeat captures in the
catch-phrase “all the world’s a stage-painting,” is
open to a range of interpretations (Burnyeat 2017). For Monismus,
Burnyeat argues, it is likely to have had a moralistic upshot, along
the lines of “all is vanity.” In Democritean philosophy,
and insofar as later skepticism recalls the saying, it is bound to be
a proposal in epistemology (or possibly epistemology and
metaphysics).
The 5th century sophists develop forms of debate which are
ancestors of skeptical argumentation. They take pride in arguing in a
persuasive fashion for both sides of an issue. Similarly, they develop
an agonistic art of refuting any claim put forward, exploiting the
premises of their interlocutors and leading them into
inconsistencies. Further, the sophists are interested in the contrast
between nature and convention. The formative roles of custom and law
were discussed by some of the earliest Greek authors (consider
Pindar’s “law is king” and its many interpretations, for
example in Herodotus). The sophists explore the idea that, if things
are different for different cultures, there may be no fact of the
matter of how those things really are. The skeptics engage with both
legs of the distinction between nature and convention. Pyrrhonian
skepticism employs an argument to the effect that, if something is by
nature F, it is F for everyone (affects everyone as
F) (see sections 4.2 and 4.4).  Pyrrhonism further associates
convention with appearances, so that the sceptic, by adhering to
appearances, can lead an ordinary life (see section 4). However, the
contrast between nature and convention does not figure importantly in
ancient skepticism, and there is no skeptical school that would
confine itself to ‘moral’ skepticism, or skepticism about
values.
Sextus Empiricus, whose writings provide the most detailed extant
account of Pyrrhonian skepticism, emphasizes how strongly the skeptics
depart from all other philosophers. As he presents it, the
Pre-Socratics who put forward some of the views cited above are what
he calls dogmatists. They make claims about nature, reality,
knowability, and so on. The second-most detailed extant account of
Pyrrhonian skepticism is offered by Diogenes Laertius, in
his Lives of Eminent Philosophers 9.61–116. It contains
a large number of references to early Greek poets and Pre-Socratic
philosophers, suggesting that these early thinkers formulate ideas
that are similar to skeptic ideas (§§61–73). It is
controversial whether the skeptics Diogenes has in mind claim this
ancestry. Alternatively, other philosophers may have charged the
skeptics with sharing ideas with non-skeptical thinkers, thereby
departing from their non-dogmatic approach (Warren 2015). Either way, two observations seem
relevant. Contrary to a classic assessment of Diogenes’ report
by Jonathan Barnes (1992), the sections of text in which connections
are made between early Greek thought and skepticism may be worth
exploring. Moreover, scholars may have paid too little attention to
skepticism’s ancestry in poetry (Clayman 2009). Pyrrho seems to
have referred to Homer as a proponent of ideas he approves of, ideas
about change, the status of human rationality and language, and
more.
The Socrates of Plato’s Apology tries to solve a
puzzle.  The Delphic oracle says that no one is wiser than
Socrates. But Socrates does not think himself wise. He calls into
question the truth of neither the oracle’s pronouncements nor
his self-perception.  Accordingly, he must figure out how both are
consistent with each other. In order to do so, Socrates talks to
various groups of experts in Athens: politicians, poets, and
craftsmen. As it turns out, all of them think that they know something
about great and important things, but in fact, it seems clear to
Socrates, they do not. When asked they cannot provide reasons for
believing the things they claim to know that are rationally
satisfactory. Socrates knows that he does not know about these most
important matters (megista; 22d); his interlocutors, it
appears, do not know that they lack this knowledge. In this respect,
Socrates is wiser than everyone else who has any general reputation
for wisdom. In the course of recounting his conversations with others,
Socrates says something enigmatic: “About myself I knew that I
know nothing” (22d; cf. Fine 2008). The context of the dialogue
allows us to read this pronouncement as unproblematical. Socrates
knows that he does not know about important things. Interpreted in
this manner, Socrates does not appear to be a skeptic in the sense
that he would profess to know nothing. Even though some readers
(ancient and modern) found such an extreme statement in the
Apology, a more plausible reading suggests that Socrates
advocates the importance of critically examining one’s own and others’
views on important matters, precisely because one does not know about
them (Vogt 2012a, ch. 1). Such examination is the only way to find
out.
Socrates’ commitment to reason—examination as the way to find
out—inspires the skepticism of the Hellenistic Academy (Cooper
2004b, Vogt 2013). One is bound to lead one’s life based on one’s beliefs, he
assumes. Therefore, one ought to examine one’s beliefs, and abandon
those that one finds to be false. One ought to do so because otherwise one might
lead a bad life. Socrates’ questioning is rooted in a concern with the
good life. Insofar as it is, one might think that the Socratic roots of
ancient skepticism lead one toward a kind of limited, wholly moral
skepticism. However, Socrates’ examinations are not confined to value
questions. While ethical questions may be the starting-point, they
immediately lead to questions about the soul, the gods, knowledge, and
so on. For Socrates and his Hellenistic followers, value questions
cannot be insulated from questions of psychology, physics, and
epistemology.
Another strand of skeptical thought begins with questions about the
nature of philosophical investigation. In the Meno, Plato
formulates a famous puzzle. How is investigation possible? We cannot
investigate either what we know or what we do not know. In the former
case, there is no need to investigate, and besides, if we really do
know we already have in mind everything that investigation could
reveal to us about the matter. In the latter case, we would not know
what to look for, and we would not recognize it if we found it
(80d-86c). So there is no room for investigating anything. Socrates
calls this an eristic argument, thus drawing attention to the fact
that this is a puzzle that sophists have put forward (cf. Plato’s
Euthydemus).
Plato’s solutions to this puzzle are difficult to assess (Fine
2014). Learning is recollection, says one proposal (this is the one
that Socrates himself immediately offers). We already know, but only
in some implicit way, what it takes investigation to come to know
explicitly.  This is the famous Anamnesis theory (81a-d). If we give
up on investigation, we shall be lazy people, says another argument
(81d-e).  A third solution of the puzzle arguably says that one of its
premises is false. It is not the case that, for everything, we either
know it or are entirely ignorant of it. Rather, there is a third
state, namely belief (83a-86a). Investigation can begin from
beliefs. The Meno explores a mix of these solutions. Plato
develops what he calls a hypothetical method (86c-100b). That is, the
interlocutors in some sense begin from their beliefs (for example,
“virtue is good”). But they do not endorse them. They set
them up as hypotheses, and employ these hypotheses in investigation
(on the relationship between Pyrrhonian skepticism and Plato’s and
Aristotle’s notions of hypothesis, cf. Corti 2011).
Plato discusses and re-formulates several of the metaphysical
considerations that back up proto-skeptical and early skeptical
intuitions. The relevant passages are spread out over a number of
dialogues, among which passages in the Phaedo,
Republic, Theaetetus and Timaeus are perhaps
most important. In these dialogues, Plato develops some of his own
metaphysical ideas. He also engages critically with metaphysical
theories that he does not ultimately adopt. However, in order to
explore these theories he formulates them in detail, often invoking a
Pre-Socratic ancestor as a proponent of a given idea. These discussions
are a great source of inspiration for Pyrrhonian skeptics, who are
interested in what may be called a metaphysics of indeterminacy (Bett
2000).
In contrasting the Forms with the perceptible realm, Plato discusses
properties. For example, for all sensible items, A is tall
relative to some B and short relative to
some C. There is no such thing as anything’s being
tall simpliciter. When we call something tall, we measure it
against something else, look at it from a particular perspective, and
so on. As we might say, “tall” and “short” are
overtly relative predicates. But perhaps many more, or indeed all,
predicates work that way, even where this is less obvious. Plato’s
arguments lead to the question of whether it is conceivable that all
our predications are, in this particular sense, relative. If this were
the case, it might quite fundamentally upset our conception of the
world as furnished with objects that have properties.  Such
considerations lead to another idea about properties in the perceptual
realm. If a fence is low and high, a cloud is bright and dark, a vase
beautiful and ugly, and so on, then it seems that, perhaps quite
generally, perceptual things are F and not-F. Only
the Form of F is F (for example, only the Beautiful
is beautiful). While the relevant passages are difficult to interpret,
it is clear enough which line of thought comes to influence later
skeptics. The skeptics engage with the idea that, if something appears
to be F and not-F, it is not really (or: by nature)
either F or not-F.
In the Timaeus, Plato argues that an account of the natural
world can only be ‘likely’: it is an eikôs
logos. Most generally speaking, the idea here is that certain
explananda are such that theorizing about them can do no more than
mirror their, comparatively speaking deficient, nature. This idea has
ancestors in Xenophanes and Parmenides, and it plays a crucial role in
the Timaeus (Bryan 2012). Academic skeptics employ various
notions of the plausible and the convincing, thus developing further
this tradition, albeit no longer with the assumption that different
domains require different kinds of theorizing.
In the Theaetetus, Plato explores the kind of cultural
relativism that is associated with some sophists. In his examination
relativism is immediately extended to a general theory, not restricted
to the domain of values. Socrates (as main speaker of the dialogue)
ascribes relativism to Protagoras, who is famous for saying that
“man is the measure.” Socrates reformulates this claim as
follows: what appears to A is true for A, and what
appears to B is true for B. On this premise,
Socrates argues, there is no rational way to prefer our perceptions
while awake to our perceptions while asleep, or similarly, to prefer
sober to intoxicated or deranged perceptions.  In each state, our
perceptions are true for us. Socrates analyzes relativism in several
steps, pointing to ever more radical implications. Along the way, he
envisages a moderate metaphysics of flux, where objects do not have
stable properties. But eventually he points out that relativism is
committed to an even starker revisionist metaphysics, radical
flux. For it to be possible that what seems to A is true for
A, and what seems to B is true for B, there
cannot be a stable world that A and B both refer
to. Rather, “everything is motion” (Tht.
179c-184b). The skeptics employ versions of some of the arguments in
the Theaetetus, without, however, arriving at relativist
conclusions. Schematically speaking, the relativist says that, if X is
F for A and F* for B, then X is F-for-A and F*-for-B. Pyrrhonian
skepticism of the variant found in Sextus reacts by continued
investigation into whether X is F or F* (or both or neither).
Aristotle engages, at several points in his works, with the
Meno Problem. For example, Aristotle points out that, for
successful investigation to proceed, one first needs a well-formulated
question. One needs to know the knot in order to untie it. In order to
know what to look for and recognize it when one finds it, one needs to
first think one’s way through the difficulties involved, and thereby
formulate a question. If one does, then one shall be able to recognize
the solution once one hits upon it (Met. 3.1, 995a24–b4).
These ideas are highly relevant to Hellenistic discussions. The
skeptic is an investigator, and one anti-skeptical charge says that,
if indeed a skeptic knew nothing, they could not even formulate the
questions they investigate. Interpreters have emphasized a contrast
between Aristotle and the skeptics. For Aristotle, formulating puzzles
and thinking one’s way through them puts one in a better
position, such that one gets clear about how matters are. This may be
different for the skeptics: engagement with different angles of
philosophical problems leads them to suspension of judgment (Long
2006, Code 2010). Other scholars argue that the skeptics’ way of
thinking through puzzles improves their cognitive condition even
though they do not settle for an answer to a given question (Vogt
2012a, ch. 5). Also, scholars point to modes of thinking in Plato and
Aristotle that are not primarily concerned with results. In
contemplation, a cognizer may think again and again through the same
kinds of matters, and yet doing so presumably improves their cognitive
condition (Olfert 2014).
In Posterior Analytics I.1,
Aristotle says that all teaching and learning comes about through
things we already know. When we phrase questions, we already have
‘That-Knowledge’ and ‘What-Knowledge.’ For
example, when we ask questions about triangles, we need to know that
there are triangles (otherwise we would not have questions about their
properties). We also need to have a notion of what triangles are (we
draw a triangle, not a square, when we phrase a question about its
properties). Another way in which Aristotle addresses
the Meno Problem conceives of particular perceptions as the
starting-points of investigation. Complex cognitive activities arise
from simpler ones. Many particular perceptions lead to memory, to
experience, and eventually to expert understanding (Met. 1.1,
An. Post. II.19). With the generalizations of memory,
experience, and expertise comes the ability to investigate. With
respect to skepticism, the important point here is that the
starting-points of investigation are not themselves in need of
justification.
Like Plato, Aristotle engages with the Protagorean claim that, as
Aristotle puts it, all seemings (dokounta) and appearances
(phainomena) are true (Met 4.5). If this were so,
Aristotle says, everything would have to be true and false at the same
time. Aristotle argues
that earlier thinkers arrived at such views because they identified
being solely with the perceptual (4.5, 1010a1–3). Caught up in this
assumption, they did not see who or what was going to judge between
conflicting sense perceptions. For example, it seemed unsatisfactory
to dismiss the views of sick and mad people simply on the grounds that
they are in the minority, thereby considering as true what appears to
the greater number of people. Similarly, Aristotle reports that these
earlier thinkers looked at the ways in which things appear differently
to different kinds of living beings, and to one person at different
times (4.5, 1099b1–11).
In Metaphysics 4.4, Aristotle notes that some people consider
it possible for the same thing to be and not to be, and for someone to
believe so (he refers to a range of positions, all of which in some
way are related to denial of the Principle of Non-Contradiction; see
Castagnoli 2010, I.5.4). Against this, Aristotle says it is the
firmest of principles that things cannot be and not be at the same
time. To deny this shows a lack of training. With adequate training,
one recognizes for which things proof should be sought, and for which
it ought not to be sought (see also An. Post. I.3).  It is
impossible that there be demonstration for everything. Otherwise
demonstration would go on ad infinitum. Scholars often refer
to this point when discussing the skeptical modes of argument. The
skeptics might be guilty of what, from Aristotle’s perspective,
would be a mistake of exactly this kind (on this theme in later
Aristotelian logic, cf. Malink forthcoming).
Aristotle continues in a way that is highly relevant to discussions
of skeptical language and action. A person who wishes to deny that
things cannot be and not be at the same time has two options. Either
they say nothing, or they talk to us. In the first case, there is no
need for us to refute them. This person is like a plant—they do
not talk. In the second case, either their utterance signifies
something, or it signifies nothing. If it signifies something, then
they say that something is so-and-so (which Aristotle takes to be
self-defeating for them). If it signifies nothing, then it does not
qualify as speech. Even though they make an utterance, the person is in
effect not speaking with us (or to themselves). Aristotle also explains
the plant-metaphor in terms of action. A person who believes nothing is
like a plant because they cannot act. Pursuit and avoidance testify to
the fact that people have beliefs. (On Aristotle and skepticism, see
the papers collected in Irwin 1995.)
With Arcesilaus (316/5–241/0 BCE) and his role as leader of the
Academy (266/268 BCE), Plato’s Academy turns
skeptical. Arcesilaus does not refer to himself as a
skeptic—this nomenclature is a later designation. However,
Arcesilaus stands at the beginning of a re-orientation in the history
of Platonically inspired philosophy. He rediscovers Socrates the
examiner. Socrates’ commitment to investigation, to the testing
and exploring of one’s own and others’ beliefs, and his
passion for weeding out falsehoods, are the starting-points of his
Academic skepticism (Cicero, Acad. 2.74, 1.46). Throughout
the history of this skeptical school, these traits, and the
corresponding commitment to a life guided by reason, remain alive
(Cooper 2004b, Vogt 2013). When, as we shall see below, Arcesilaus
defends a skeptical life without belief, this is because, as he
thinks, reason itself, if properly and faithfully followed, leads us
to live that way. To Arcesilaus, the skeptical life is a life lived
following reason, a life based on reason—just as the
competing Stoic and Epicurean lives are alleged by their proponents to
be. Arcesilaus engages with the epistemologies of these contemporaries
of his. In particular, the Academics call into question that there is
a criterion of truth, as both Epicureans and Stoics, beginning in the
generation before Arcesilaus, claim there is.
Like Socrates, Arcesilaus did not write anything. His views must be
unearthed from Sextus’ comparisons between Pyrrhonian and Academic
skepticism, from Cicero’s discussions in the Academica, and
from a range of shorter (and sometimes hostile) reports. Major themes
in Arcesilaus’ philosophy are (i) his dialectical method, (ii)
discussion of whether there is a criterion of truth, and (iii) his
defense of the skeptic’s ability to act.
(i) Method. Arcesilaus embraces what scholars call a dialectical
method (Couissin 1929 [1983], for a reading that calls the dialectical
interpretation in question, cf. Perin 2013). This method is inspired
by Socrates. It proceeds by asking one’s real or imaginary
interlocutor what they think about a given question, then plunging
into an examination of their views, employing their premises. Can they
explain their position without running into inconsistencies, and
without having to accept implications that they want to resist? As a
consequence of this method, it sometimes appears as if a skeptic,
while examining someone’s view and its consequences, makes a
positive claim: “so, such-and-such is not so-and-so.”
However, within a dialectical exchange, this should be read as
“according to your premises, such-and-such
follows.” This method remains a key ingredient of Greek
skepticism. While the different skeptical schools develop variants of
the dialectical method, skeptical argument is often characterized by
the fact that skeptics think of themselves as engaging with
“dogmatic” interlocutors. (In the skeptical tradition, as
articulated for example by Sextus Empiricus (see section 4.4.),
“dogmatists” are philosophers who put forward, and defend,
positive answers to philosophical questions about reality, knowledge,
ethical values, etc. They need not do so dogmatically or rigidly or
without consideration of alternatives in order to count, in skeptical
terms, as “dogmatists.”)
(ii) The Criterion of Truth. Zeno, the founder of Stoicism, and
roughly 20–30 years Arcesilaus’ senior, was for a time a student at the
Academy. He was still in the Academy when he formulated key Stoic
doctrines. Like Arcesilaus, he claims Socratic ancestry. Zeno is
inspired by some of the same ideas that inspire the skeptics. In
particular, he engages with the Socratic idea that knowledge is
integral to virtue. Contrary to Arcesilaus, Zeno aims to give accounts
of knowledge and virtue, and holds them up as ideals that human nature
permits us to achieve. For him, knowledge is very difficult to attain,
but ultimately within the reach of human beings. From the point of view
of Arcesilaus, Zeno’s claim to Socratic heritage is almost offensive:
Zeno seems to be too optimistic about our cognitive powers to be
following Socrates (Frede 1983). Scholars have traditionally envisaged
an exchange of arguments between Zeno and Arcesilaus, where each
modified his views in the light of the other’s criticism. However, Zeno
most likely formulated his views between 300–275, and Arcesilaus argued
against him c. 275 to 240, when Zeno (who died c. 263) was probably
already retired (Brittain 2006, xiii; Alesse 2000, 115 f.; Long 2006,
ch. 5).
The core of the dispute between Arcesilaus and the early Stoics
concerns the question of whether there is a criterion of truth. The
notion of a criterion is introduced into Hellenistic discussions by
Epicurus, who speaks about the kanôn (literally
measuring stick) and kritêrion. For Epicurus, a
criterion is that evident thing, viz., the content of a
sense-perception, against which claims about the non-evident are
tested. For example, physics advances claims about non-evident things,
such as atoms and void. These are not accessible to the senses, and
accordingly, do not count as evident. Perception rules out various
physical theories. For example, a physical or metaphysical theory
according to which there is no movement can be dismissed because it is
in disagreement with the evident.
Zeno argues that a certain kind of impression—namely a
cognitive impression (phantasia
katalêptikê)—is the criterion of truth
(cf. Shogry forthcoming-b).  Zeno’s conception of cognition
(katalêpsis, literally grasping, apprehension), which
figures in the notion of a cognitive impression, tries to resolve a
basic epistemological problem.  Belief-formation aims at the truth;
there is a norm inherent in the practice of believing that one should
only believe truths. It is not transparent to us, however, which of
our beliefs, or claims to the effect that such-and-such is true, aim
successfully at the truth. Zeno argues that some impressions are
cognitive. That is, on his account, they are stamped and reproduced
from something that is, exactly as it is; so they grasp it as it
really is. Hence, being so stamped and reproductive, they reveal
through themselves that they are cognitive. For example, when I look
at my computer screen while typing this, I may very well have a
cognitive impression that this is my computer screen. When I look up
and out of the window, I have an impression of a friend walking across
campus that is probably non-cognitive. This impression might be
true. But since I see her from such a distance, it is pretty surely
not cognitive. That is, not all true impressions are cognitive, but
all cognitive impressions are true. We should only assent to cognitive
impressions, and so in forming our beliefs, hold only those certified
beliefs (cf. Brittain 2014 on the Stoic view that assent to cognitive
impressions is not compelled).  All other beliefs—based on
assents to non-cognitive impressions—violate the norm for
believing that you should only believe truths, even if what you do
believe may be true.
Arcesilaus calls into question whether there are impressions of this
kind. His main point seems to be that there could be an impression
that is phenomenologically indistinguishable from cognitive
impressions, but nevertheless misrepresents the matters it gives an
impression about. To use an example that may derive from Carneades
(see section 3.2), there is no impression of a given egg such that no
impression of any other egg could be phenomenologically
indistinguishable from it. In response to this, the Stoics defiantly
added a clause to their definition, given above, of the cognitive
impression: “and of such a kind as
could not arise from what is not” (Long and Sedley
(1987) [= LS] 40; DL 7.46, 54; Cicero Acad. 1.40–1, 2.77–8; SE
M 7.247–52). Absent a criterion of truth, Arcesilaus’ skeptic
suspends judgment about everything (PH 1.232). Reason itself,
Arcesilaus thinks, demands such suspension.
(iii) Action. If skeptics suspend judgment, argues their dogmatic
opponent, they are not able to act. Stoic philosophy conceives of three
movements of the mind: impression, assent, and impulse (Plutarch,
Col. 1122a-d). All three figure in action. The agent assents
to the impression that A is to be done; their assent is an
impulse for the action A; if there is no external impediment, the
impulse sets off the action (Inwood 1985). It is a cornerstone of
Stoic philosophy that there can be no action without assent, and so
without the belief that the action done is to be done. The
Stoics aim to avoid the kind of determinism according to which actions
are not ‘up to’ the agent (Bobzien 1998); for them,
impressions, but not assents, are caused by external things. In
response to the Apraxia Charge, Arcesilaus seems to have argued that
the skeptic can act without having assented (Plutarch, Col.
1122A-d), and so without believing that the action done is to
be done. However, this is not his complete response. From the
point of view of the Stoics, skeptical action, if performed without
the relevant kind of assent (that is, assent that it is up to the
agent to give, and that is a rational acceptance of the impression),
is like the action of a non-rational animal, or like the automatic
movement of plants when they grow and flourish. Arcesilaus is robbing
people of their minds (Cicero
Acad. 2.37–9; Obdrzalek 2013). But Arcesilaus need not
and does not go so far as to compare human agents with non-rational
agents. As human beings, skeptics have rational impressions. They
perceive the world conceptually, and think about it. Arcesilaus does
not suggest that skeptical action is causally set off by impressions,
or in the way, whatever that is, that animal actions are set off. This
would be a problematic proposal, for it would disregard that the
skeptic has a human mind. Given the complexity of human thought, the
skeptic is likely to have several, and often competing impressions. If
all impressions triggered impulses, the skeptic would be inactive due
to a kind of paralysis. The second component of Arcesilaus’
reply, thus, is that the skeptic, in acting without assenting, adheres
to the reasonable (eulogon) (SE M 7.158; 7.150;
Striker 2010). That is, Arcesilaus aims to explain skeptic
action as rational agency (Cooper 2004b). Arcesilaus disputes the
dogmatic claim that some impressions can be identified as true, and
the related claim that one can only act on the belief that
some impression is true. But he does not argue that there are no
differences between impressions which agents could take into
account. His agents are rational: they think about their options, and go
with what looks, in one way or another, more plausible.
Arcesilaus defends skeptical action also against Epicurean critics
(Plutarch, Col. 1122A-d), again by showing on the basis of the
Epicureans’ own premises that skeptical action is possible. Can the
sceptic explain why, when leaving a room, they go through the door
rather than running into the wall? Arcesilaus seems to have exploited
the Epicurean view that, while all sense-perception is true, belief can
introduce falsehood. Like the Epicurean, the skeptic can keep apart the
perception and a view formed on its basis. By not assenting to the
perception, thus adding belief (“here is the door”), the
skeptic guards against the source of falsehood, namely belief. But a
skeptic has perception of the door available to them, which is enough
for not running into walls.
Like Arcesilaus, Carneades (214–129/8 BCE) refrains from writing
and philosophizes in a Socratic spirit. Famously, on an embassy from
Athens to Rome in 156/5 BCE, Carneades argues for justice one day, and
against justice the next. His aim is not to overthrow
justice. Carneades wants to show that the supporters of
justice—including Plato and Aristotle—do not have the
successful arguments they think they have to show what justice is and
what it requires (Lactantius,
Epitome 55.8, LS 68M). Like Arcesilaus, Carneades (i) engages with Stoic
epistemology. His account of skeptical action includes (ii) a detailed
proposal regarding the criterion. As part of his less radical
skepticism, Carneades seems (iii) to allow for a certain kind of
assent, and perhaps for belief.
(i) The Stoic-Academic Debate. Chrysippus, the third major Stoic
(after Zeno and Cleanthes), and his student Diogenes of Babylon, revise
Zeno’s epistemology, defending it against Arcesilaus’ arguments
(Brittain 2006, xiii). In response to their arguments, Carneades
continues the exchange with the Stoics that Arcesilaus began (SE
M 7.402–10). His first move addresses the link between mental
states and action. People in states of madness, he argues, act just as
easily and naturally on their impressions as other people, even those
who act on cognitive impressions (if there are any). From the point of
view of exhibited behavior, there does not seem to be a difference: any
and all impressions, even those the Stoics think clearly arise from
something that is not, are in all respects relevant to action
completely on a par. Cognitive impressions, if there are any, have no
superiority.
In a second argument, Carneades points to objects that are similar
to one another: can the wise person discern any two eggs, two grains of
sand, and so on? The Stoics have multiple replies. It is conceivable
that, in some contexts of action, the wise person assents to what is
reasonable (eulogon) (DL 1.177), without having a cognitive
impression of how things are. Or, if faced with the task to identify
grains of sand while lacking a cognitive impression, the wise person
can suspend judgment. However, the wise will train themselves so as to
be able to perceive minute differences (Cicero, Acad. 2.57),
where it might be important to do so. This point is backed up by Stoic
physics: no two items in the universe are identical, and their
differences are in principle perceptible. Carneades replies that even
if no two things were exactly alike (consistent with his general line
of argument, he does not take a stance on such questions), a very close
similarity could appear to exist for all perceivers (Cicero,
Acad. 2.83–5); that is, the impressions of two items,
though in fact these items might differ from each other, could be
indistinguishable (Shogry forthcoming-a and forthcoming-b). Discussion
continues with a move on the part of the Stoics: they add to their
definition of the cognitive impression “one that has no
impediment.” Sometimes an impression is—as it were, by
itself—cognitive, but is unconvincing due to external
circumstances (SE M 7.253). It is a difficult question
whether this addition harms the Stoics more than it helps them. If the
initial conception of a cognitive impression hangs on the idea that
something about its phenomenological nature, or something internal to
the impression, marks it as cognitive, the Stoics give up on a crucial
assumption if they grant that sometimes there are
“impediments.” If, however, cognitive impressions are
differentiated by a causal feature (the way they are caused by the
‘imprinter’ which causes the ‘imprint’), the
further addition might help (Frede 1983, Nawar 2014), since the
impediment might need to be removed before the causal connection could
be confirmed (on the Stoic-Academic exchange, cf. Hankinson 2003).
(ii) Carneades’ Criterion. Even though Carneades further pursues a
discussion begun by Arcesilaus, he does not simply continue within the
framework of Arcesilaus’ skepticism. The distinctiveness of his
position is best seen in the context of his criterion: the persuasive
(pithanon). The notion of the persuasive can be understood in
two distinctively different ways. Persuasiveness might be a causal
feature, so that a persuasive impression sets off a physiological
process of being moved in a certain way. But there may also be a
rational kind of persuasiveness. Carneades construes persuasiveness in
rational terms. For him, the persuasive is the convincing, or perhaps
even the plausible.
Carneades develops a three-stage criterion: (1) In matters of
importance, skeptics adhere to the persuasive. (2) In matters of
greater importance, they adhere to the persuasive and undiverted. A
persuasive impression is undiverted if there is no tension between it
and its surrounding impressions. (3) In matters that contribute to
happiness, skeptics adhere to persuasive, undiverted, and thoroughly
explored impressions. A persuasive impression is undiverted and
thoroughly explored when it and the surrounding impressions are closely
examined without its persuasiveness being diminished (SE M
7.166–84). Consider an example. A skeptic looks in a dark room for a
rope. Before they pick up what appears to them to be a rope, they look
closely and poke it with a stick. Coiled objects can be ropes, but they
can also be snakes. The persuasive impression that this is a rope must
be examined before the skeptic adheres to it (M 7.187).
The three-stage criterion is put forward in the context of action.
However, Sextus describes Carneades’ criterion as a criterion of truth,
not a criterion of action (M 7.173). Carneades might take
himself to offer more than a practical criterion. His discussions of
the persuasive come close to a general epistemological theory (Couissin
1929 [1983], Striker 1980, Bett 1989 and 1990, Allen 1994 and 2004
[2006], Brittain 2001). Cicero renders the Greek pithanon as
probabile (and sometimes as veri simile), which
modern editors sometimes translate in terms of what is probable or
likely to be true. Some scholars think that Carneades is an early
thinker about likelihoods, and argue that he develops a fallibilist
epistemology (Obdrzalek 2004).
(iii) Assent and Belief. Does adherence to persuasive impressions
involve belief? Carneades coins a term for the kind of adherence he
has been describing: approval (Cicero, Acad. 2.99). He
distinguishes it from assent in the sense of Stoic and other dogmatic
theories, which establishes a belief that something is in actual fact
true; but he nevertheless describes it as a kind of assent (Cicero,
Acad. 2.104). Carneades’ disciples disagree on whether
approval is any kind of genuine assent. That is, they disagree on
whether, in approval, one forms a belief. Philo and Metrodorus think
that Carneades allows for some kind of belief, close to or identical
with belief as the Stoics understand it. Clitomachus disagrees, and
Cicero follows Clitomachus (Acad. 2.78, see also 2.59, 2.67).
Scholars continue to debate these issues, and the basic problem
remains unchanged.  It is not clear whether there is a plausible
notion of belief according to which belief falls short of
‘holding to be true’ (or according to which, though some
kind of ‘holding true’ is involved, the relevant
affirmation-as-true is weaker than in beliefs as Stoics and other
dogmatist epistemologists conceive of them). In any event,
affirmations as true, at least of the full and flat-out (“in
actual fact”) sort the Stoics think of, are precisely what the
skeptic does not make.
Another approach to Carneades’ stance toward belief is to ask
whether he might invoke Platonic considerations. Consider that
Socrates, when asked in the Republic what he thinks the good
is, refuses to reply because he thinks beliefs without knowledge are
shameful (Rp.  506c). In response to this, his interlocutors
point out that there is a difference between putting forward
one’s beliefs as if one knew them to be true, and putting them
forward with the proviso that they are merely beliefs (Vogt 2012a,
ch. 2). The shamefulness of mere belief might disappear through this
proviso. A passage in Cicero’s Academica suggests that
Carneades invokes this thought. According to Carneades, the wise
person can hold beliefs if they fully understand them to be beliefs
(2.148).  Along similar lines, it has been suggested that Carneades
might conceive of a hypothetical mode of believing (Striker 1980
[1996, 112]), perhaps engaging with a move in
Plato’s Meno.  Investigation cannot get off the ground
if we do not, in some sense, begin with our beliefs about the matter
under investigation. But how can we do so without endorsing our
beliefs, not knowing whether our views are true? Plato’s answer
at this point is: by hypothesizing our beliefs. Today we would insist
that hypotheses are not beliefs.  However, it is conceivable that
Carneades argued along these lines, and that the details of his
vocabulary got lost or confused in doxography.
Carneades was an enigma to his students and immediate successors.
Clitomachus (head of the Academy from 127 to 110 BCE) seems to have
attempted the impossible: to adhere closely to Carneades’
philosophy, even though he never understood what Carneades truly meant
(Levy 2010).  The cornerstone of his adherence lies in the view that
Carneades argues for suspension of judgment and against beliefs
understood as Stoics understand them. Philo of Larissa, another
student of Carneades, interprets his teacher as allowing for tentative
beliefs in the skeptic’s life. With Philo, the skeptical era of
Plato’s Academy comes to an end. Philo’s philosophy seems
to divide into two phases. In Athens, and as head of the Academy, he
stays relatively close to Carneades. Moving to Rome later in his
career, he develops a markedly different position. He argues only
narrowly against the Stoic criterion and their conception of
cognition. One can apprehend things and so come to know
them—one just cannot apprehend them in the way in which the
Stoics construe cognition (PH 1.235). The fact that there is
no apprehension in the sense of the Stoics does not mean that there is
no knowledge (Acad. 2.14). This move shifts the discussion in
several important ways. First, Philo can be interpreted as a kind of
externalist: one can know something without knowing that one knows it.
Absent Stoic cognitive impressions, we are not able to identify which
instances of ‘holding-true’ qualify as knowledge; but we
nevertheless have some knowledge (Hankinson 2010). Second, this
proposal is a step toward modern skepticism, which is not concerned
with criteria of truth, but with knowledge.
Cicero’s skeptical philosophy in his own philosophical writings is
again distinctively different. In line with his notions of what is
probable (probabile) or likely to be true (veri
simile), Cicero often examines a range of philosophical positions,
aiming to find out which of them is most rationally defensible. He
thinks it is better for us to adopt a view that is likely to be true,
rather than remain unconvinced by either side (Thorsrud 2009, 84–101).
Cicero is of the greatest importance for the transition between ancient
and early modern skepticism. As in other fields of philosophy, Cicero’s
influence is partly the influence of the translator. In transposing
philosophical ideas into the language of a different culture, the ideas
change. Cicero sometimes speaks of doubting, dubitari (e.g.,
Acad. 2.27, 106; however, he often sticks with the earlier
language of assent and suspension). But doubt has no place in Greek
skepticism (see section 1).
When comparing Pyrrhonian and Academic skepticism, two topics stand
out: Pyrrhonism aims at tranquility; and it assigns pride of place to
appearances. Anecdotes about Pyrrho’s life (365/60–275/70
BC) convey how unaffected he was (DL 9.61–69). This kind of
ideal—a tranquil state of mind—is not part of Academic
skepticism, but is essential to Pyrrhonism (Striker 2010; for a
different view, cf.  Machuca 2006; for a general account of early
Pyrrhonism, cf. Castagnoli 2013; on Democritean influences on
tranquility in Pyrrho and Timon, cf. Svavarsson 2013; on Sextus’
take on Pyrrhonian tranquility, cf. Svavarsson 2015). Insofar as the
point of the anecdotes about Pyrrho’s life is that Pyrrho did
not avoid or pursue anything with fervor, or that he did not despair
about things that other people find terrible, they capture ideas that
remain central to Pyrrhonism. In other respects, the anecdotes may not
be trustworthy. They portray Pyrrho as a strikingly unconventional
figure, unaffected not just by emotion and belief, but also by
perception—to the extent that friends had to pull him off the
street when a wagon approached (DL 9.62). Another anecdote makes
Pyrrho appear not only unusual, but arguably a not so sympathetic
character. Passing by a drowning man, he was so unmoved that he simply
walked on (DL 9.63). This is in rather stark contrast with Stoic
notions of unaffectedness, where the idea would be that, not being
disturbed by emotions like fear and panic, the passerby is ideally
equipped to help effectively. At the same time, Pyrrho seems to have
said that the skeptic adheres to appearances (phainomena) (DL
9.106; Bett 2000, 84–93; on earlier notions of appearances
relevant to skepticism, cf. Barney 1992). This might suggest that he
would not cross the street when a wagon is approaching, and so appears
to him. The biographical details are also suspicious because they mold
Pyrrho’s life to fit the schema of the sage: a traveler to the
East (Flintoff 1980), whose insights are conveyed in brief sayings; an
enigmatic figure, exemplary and shocking at the same time.
 Even though he discussed tranquility and adherence to appearances,
Pyrrho was arguably no Pyrrhonian skeptic (Bett 2000,
14–62). That is, it is likely that he put forward a dogmatic
position, in the sense that he had positive philosophical views about
the character of reality.  Pyrrho wrote nothing. Much of what we know
about him is preserved through the writings of Timon, his adherent
(325/20–235/30 BCE) (on Timon, cf. Burnyeat 1980b and Clayman
2009). The most important piece of testimony is a passage reporting an
account by Timon:
In response to the first question, how things are in their nature,
Pyrrho makes a metaphysical claim: they are indeterminate (Bett 2000,
14–29). There are no stable items, or no items with stable properties.
Scholars sometimes hesitate to ascribe such a position to Pyrrho,
because it is undoubtedly dogmatic. Perhaps the text can be given an
epistemological reading: things are indifferentiable and unmeasurable
and undecidable, because we fail in differentiating, measuring, and
determining how they are (Thorsrud 2010, Svavarsson 2009). But Pyrrho’s
response to the second question may only follow if we adopt the
metaphysical reading (Bett 2000, 29–37). Pyrrho infers that our
perceptions and beliefs are neither true nor false. They are not
truth-evaluable, presumably because there are no facts which could be
correctly captured. Third, if we understand these things,
speechlessness (aphasia) follows, and then tranquility
(ataraxia). Pyrrho does not say that we should cease to speak.
He suggests that we adopt a complicated mode of speech, constructed
around the expression ou mallon (“no more”), which
aims to capture the indeterminate natures of things, when we attempt to
say anything about anything (Bett 2000, 37–39).
Aenesidemus (first century BCE) was discontented with the views
discussed in the Academy at his time, of which he began as an
adherent.  Philo’s proto-externalism as well as a
counterposition formulated by Antiochus both appeared to him
dogmatic. Aenesidemus aimed to revive a more radical skepticism, and
left the Academy for this purpose. Arguably, he is the first
Pyrrhonian skeptic. Aenesidemus wrote a treatise, the Pyrrhonian
Discourses, probably similar in structure to Sextus’
Outlines of Pyrrhonism: a general account of skepticism,
followed by books on particular philosophical questions (partially
preserved in a summary by Photius; Hankinson 2010). The basic elements
of Aenesidemus’ skepticism are: the skeptic puts appearances and
thoughts into opposition; this generates equipollence
(isostheneia, lit. “of equal weight”) between
several appearances and/or thoughts; suspension of judgment follows;
with it comes tranquility; and the skeptic leads a life according to
appearances (DL 9.62, 78, 106–7).  However, we do not know much
detail of his views on these matters.  Instead, Aenesidemus is famous
for having developed Ten Modes or Tropes—forms of argument by
which the sceptic puts appearances and thoughts into opposition. Key
questions about Aenesidemus’ skepticism concern (i) the
interpretation of his Modes, (ii) the relationship of his philosophy
to competing theories, (iii) the scope of the Ten Modes, and (iv) the
skeptic’s mode of speech.
(i) Conflicting Appearances or Causal Invariance. The Ten Modes are
preserved in Diogenes Laertius (9.78–88), Philo of Alexandria
(On Drunkenness 169–202), and Sextus. Diogenes’ account
of the Ten Modes may postdate Sextus’s (Sedley 2015). Sextus
gives extensive illustrations, and integrates the Ten Modes into his
general account of Pyrrhonism (PH 1.36–163;
cf. M 7.345 for ascription of the Ten Modes to Aenesidemus;
cf. Annas-Barnes 1985 and Hankinson 1995, 268; the sequence below
follows Sextus). Here is the first of the Ten Modes, interpreted in
two ways.
10-1: 
 Arguments concerning oppositions based on the
differences between kinds of animals.
Conflicting Appearances Interpretation:
X appears F to animal of kind A (e.g.,
humans) and F* to animal of kind B [where F
and F* are opposite or otherwise incompatible properties]. We
cannot judge how X really is, because we are a party to the
dispute.
Causal Invariance Interpretation: For something
to be ‘really’ F, it would have to consistently
affect different perceivers as F. But different constitutions
of different animals cause different impressions of the same
thing. For different animals, something is F and F*
(where F and F* are opposite or otherwise
incompatible properties). Therefore, things do not seem to really
be F or F*.
The Conflicting Appearances Interpretation is based on Sextus’ account
(Annas-Barnes 1985). The focus here is on the idea that every kind of
animal, perceiver, sensory faculty, thinker, or judger (depending on
which mode we consider) is only one of several animals, perceivers,
sensory faculties, thinkers, or judgers. The object is perceived or
considered from a particular point of view. Everyone is a party to the
dispute, and there is no ‘view from nowhere.’ Accordingly, the
dispute cannot be decided. The Causal Invariance Interpretation, on
the other hand, suggests that the focus on decidability is introduced
by Sextus. Aenesidemus may (implicitly or explicitly) have endorsed
the following idea: if X were F by
nature, X would affect everyone as F. If X
affects different people (living beings, sensory faculties, etc.)
as F and F*, X is by nature
neither F nor F*. For example, if X is
harmful to A and beneficial to B, it is neither
harmful nor beneficial in its nature (Woodruff 2010, Bett 2000). The
Ten Modes can generally be construed as engaging either with conflicts
between appearances or with causal invariance:
10-2:Arguments based on the differences among human
beings (differences in body and in soul).
10-3: Arguments based on the differences between the
senses and on the complexity of perceived objects.
10-4: Arguments based on states (dispositions and
conditions of a human being, such as age, motion versus rest, emotions,
etc.).
10-5: Arguments based on positions, distances, and
places.
10-6: Arguments based on mixtures (objects in
conjunction with external things like air and humidity; physical
constituents of sense organs; physiology of thought).
10-7: Arguments based on the composition of the
perceived object.
10-8: Arguments based on relativity (to the judging
subject, to circumstances, etc.). 10-8 comprises at least 10-1 to 10-7,
or all Ten Modes.
10-9: Arguments based on constancy or rarity of
occurrence.
10-10: Arguments concerned with ways of life,
customs, laws, mythical beliefs, and dogmatic assumptions, all of which
can be put into opposition to each other.
(ii) Skepticism, Relativism, Epicureanism. Consider first the
relationship between skepticism and relativism (cf. Bett 2000; Vogt
2012a, ch. 4).  Relativism, as envisaged in Plato’s
Theaetetus, looks at a similar range of phenomena. Things
appear different to different kinds of animals; to different people;
and so on. Relativism embraces the intuition that there is (as we
would say today) faultless disagreement.  That is, you and I disagree,
but neither of us is wrong. Accordingly, metaphysical relativism
claims we must give up the intuition that we both refer to the same
thing. In the Theaetetus, the world dissolves into radical
flux: there are no stable items with stable properties that we both
refer to.
The Ten Modes, according to Conflicting Appearances, differ from
relativism by turning precisely the other way (Annas-Barnes 1985, 97–8;
Pellegrin 1997, 552–3). They implicitly rely on the intuition that
there are stable items with stable properties. Of course, the skeptic
is not committed to the thesis that opposites cannot hold of the same
thing, and that therefore no two conflicting appearances can be true.
However, the modes presuppose a common sense metaphysics that does not
accommodate faultless disagreement. In all cases of disagreement, at best
one of us can be right. If we cannot figure out which view is right, we
should suspend. This does not mean that Pyrrhonians are committed to a
common-sense metaphysics. The Ten Modes are only one of several tools
that skeptics have at their disposal. They may thus imply a metaphysics
that, at other points, skeptics would call into question (cf. Fine
2003b, 352).
Causal Invariance differs from Conflicting Appearances precisely with
respect to the metaphysics that is, even if only dialectically,
invoked. Aenesidemus seems to have explored the relationship between
skepticism and flux. He remarks that skepticism leads to Heraclitean
philosophy. The idea that one thing appears to have contrary
properties (the ones it appears to different animals/persons/senses to
have) leads to the idea that one thing actually has contrary
properties (PH 1.210; cf. Schofield 2007 on the role of
Heraclitus and causal invariance). This remark can be taken as an
expression both of moderate flux and of relativism (Aenesidemus does
not seem to think of radical flux, where it is no longer even possible
to refer to anything). There is no stable reality of how things are
(moderate flux); X is F and F* insofar as,
if X seems F to A, this is true
for A, and F* to B, this is true
for B (relativism). This proposal differs from the Causal
Invariance interpretation of the Modes presented above.  There,
Aenesidemus seems to argue that things do not really have stable
properties (they are neither F nor F* by nature); he
does not say that they are F and F* (as relativism
says).
A third approach, competing with skepticism and relativism, is
Epicurean epistemology. Again, the set of phenomena to be accounted for
is the same. But it is described differently. Epicurus insists that we
should not even speak of conflicting appearances. Rather, we should
speak of different perceptions. Perceptions cannot refute each other,
because they are of the same weight (Epicurus here uses the term that
is central to Pyrrhonism: equal weight, isostheneia)
(DL.10.31–2). The fact that perceptions differ has perfectly reasonable
explanations: I look from a distance, you look from nearby; I have a
cold, you are healthy; I am a human being, another cognizer is a dog; and so on.
These facts figure in the explanations of how our perceptions are
constituted. Accordingly, Epicurus argues, all perceptions, even though
they differ, are true. They all have a causal history that physics can
explain. The precise interpretation of this proposal is controversial.
One might object that the notion of truth employed here is deeply
puzzling. It is not clear what it means to describe all perceptions as
true if they cannot be true or false.
(iii) Scope. For the greatest part, the Ten Modes seem to be
concerned with perception in a broad sense, so that it includes
pleasure and pain, harm and benefit, as well as pursuit and avoidance.
To perceive something as pleasant or beneficial is to pursue it.
Perception and evaluation are also mixed in another way: depending on
the frequency with which we perceive something, it seems more or less
amazing and precious to us. 10-10 envisages
oppositions that can be construed with the help of dogmatic theses. The
Ten Modes thus fit Sextus’ description of what skepticism is: the
ability to put appearances and thoughts (phainomena and
nooumena) into opposition (PH 1.8, 1.31–33; cf. DL
9.78).
Another issue concerning the scope of the Ten Modes is whether they
address general or particular matters. Compare the example of whether
the tower is round or square (T) to the example of whether honey is
sweet or bitter (H). (T) is a particular; the question is whether this
tower is round or square. (H) can be construed as a particular
(“is this bit of honey sweet?”), or as a general issue
(“is honey sweet?”). The Ten Modes offer strategies for
suspension of judgment on both kinds of questions.
 Scholars have asked whether it is a problem for skepticism if the
Ten Modes appear ‘systematic’ (Sedley 2015). A set
of arguments that aims to be complete, covering domains according to a
standardized pattern, may appear to be out of tune with the
skeptic’s presumed mode of investigation. Purportedly, skeptics
think through given questions as they arise, arriving at suspension of
judgment in a piecemeal fashion. If this self-description is to be
taken at face value, then modes of generating suspension of judgment
across the board may appear problematic. In this respect, Diogenes
Laertius’ report of the Ten Modes may be superior to
Sextus’ account. Diogenes begins with a remark that suggests
that skeptics pick up where other philosophers have already begun to
make an argument (9.78–9). Other philosophers have collected,
presumably, ways in which ‘we are persuaded’, say, because
things regularly appear the same way. Now the skeptics, as it were in
response to this, add a collection of further cases, where things do
not appear the same way to different cognizers. If this is the
dialectical set-up, the Ten Modes may not be ‘systematic’
in ways that harm skepticism. They may co-opt the patterns of dogmatic
reports about cases where appearances are stable (Sedley
2015).
(iv) Language. Aenesidemus contributes an interesting move to the
question of how the skeptic can speak. Consider the relationship
between a skeptic’s state of mind and their utterances. One way to
construe this relationship is that an utterance reflects a state of
mind. This is a background assumption to the idea that, if skeptics use
assertoric language, they hold beliefs. Another option is to assume
that language does not have the means to capture the skeptic’s state of
mind. On this premise, a skeptic might flag their utterances as falling
short of doing so. This is Aenesidemus’ strategy. He says that the
Pyrrhonian determines nothing, and not even this fact that he
determines nothing. The Pyrrhonian puts matters in such terms, he says,
because he has no way to express the actual thought of the sceptic in
determining nothing (Photius, Bibl. 169b40–170a14, =
71C(6)-(8) LS).
Almost nothing is known about Agrippa (1st to
2nd century CE; SE PH 1.164–177; DL 9.88–89).
However, the modes of argument that Sextus calls the Five Modes are
attributed to him. These modes are among the most famous arguments of
ancient skepticism (Barnes 1990, Hankinson 2010).
5-1 Diaphônia: The mode that
argues from disagreement. With respect to some matter that presents
itself, there is undecided (anepikriton) conflict, both among
the views of ordinary life and the views held by philosophers. Due to
this, we are unable to choose or reject one thing, and must fall back
on suspension.
5-2 Eis apeiron ekballonta:
Arguments that throw one into an infinite 
regress. That which is brought forward to make a
given matter credible needs yet something else to make it
credible, and so on ad infinitum. Since we thus have no
starting point for our argument, suspension of judgment follows.
5-3 Pros ti: Arguments
from relativity. X only ever appears such-and-such
in relation to the subject judging and to the things observed together
with it. Suspension on how X really is follows.
5-4 Hypothesis: Someone makes an assumption
without providing argument.  A dogmatist, if thrown back into an
infinite regress of arguments, just assumes something as a
starting-point, without providing an argument
(anapodeiktôs). We suspend over mere
hypotheses—they could be false, opposite hypotheses could be
formulated, and so on.
5-5 Ton diallêlon: Arguments that
disclose a circularity. This mode is used when that which
ought to confirm a given investigated matter requires confirmation
(pistis—credibility) from that matter. We are unable to
assume either in order to establish the other. We suspend judgment on
both.
It is a commonplace to say that, while the Ten Modes, as presented
in Sextus, are concerned with conflicting appearances, the Five Modes
are about argument or proof. In these modes, the skeptics develop
strategies by which to attack theories that the dogmatists defend. If
this is how we characterize the Modes, Aristotle’s objection (section
2.3) immediately comes to mind. Do the Five Modes reveal the skeptic’s
lack of understanding because they presuppose that everything is
subject to proof? (Barnes 1990; Hankinson 1995, 182–92; Long 2006, ch.3)
The three so-called formal modes—Regress, Hypothesis, and
Circularity—can be construed in this fashion: when employing
them, the skeptic can argue that every premise must be supported by
argument; if it is not so supported, the theory begins from a mere
hypothesis (on earlier uses of the term hupothesis in Plato
and in medicine, cf. Cooper 2002 [2004a]); or it is ultimately
circular.
However, the skeptic might not be vulnerable to this objection.
First, the Five Modes can be construed as dialectical, invoking
dogmatic theories of justification (Striker 2004). Second, they might
be broader in scope. 5-1 and 5-3
explore disagreement and relativity. Skeptical examination often
begins with the Mode of Disagreement: different answers to a given
question are surveyed, and the conflict between them is observed. The
interpretation of 5-1 hangs, for the most part, on
the question of whether anepikriton should be translated as
‘undecided’ or ‘undecidable’ (Barnes 1990). It
would be dogmatic to claim that matters are undecidable. The
Pyrrhonist must prefer the idea that, up to now, matters have not been
decided. This leads to the question of whether something can be found
that would decide matters, and thus to the application of further
modes. Scholars have observed that 5-3, the Mode of
Relativity, does not really fit into the Five Modes. However, the Five
Modes could be designed to supersede and include the Ten Modes,
and 5-3 might be viewed as capturing the common
thread of the Ten Modes. With the help of 5-3, the
skeptic can argue that the premises that theorists employ are
formulated from particular points of view, in particular contexts, and
so on.
Third, even the so-called formal modes (5-2,
5-4, 5-5) might not be narrowly
concerned with proof, but rather with everything that can lend
credibility to something else. Consider Regress (5-2),
the first of the formal modes. The text does not actually speak of
proof (apodeixis) (this is obscured by Bury’s Loeb
translation; 5-4 is the only place in Sextus’ report
of the Five Modes that uses a cognate of apodeixis). Sextus’
language is wider: the mode deals with everything that can make
something else credible. We might read this in the context of the
Hellenistic view that proof is a species of sign (PH 2.122). A
sign reveals something non-evident. Smoke that reveals fire has, from
this point of view, a function and structure that is similar to a
proof. The target of the Five Modes might be sign-inferences in
general. If this is so, then their target might include what we would
call inductive reasoning and causal explanations (when Sextus
introduces a further set of modes, the Causal Modes, he says that they
are not really needed, because the relevant work can be done by the
Five Modes; PH 1.180–86). Taken together, the Five Modes deny
all “proof, criterion, sign, cause, movement, learning, coming
into being, and that there is anything by nature good or bad.”
(DL 9.90). This is notably more than just proof. Indeed, it is an
excellent summary of the key topics in Sextus’ discussions of logic,
physics, and ethics.
Sextus’ (ca. 160–210 CE) epithet, Empiricus, indicates
that he—at least at some point in his life—belonged to the
empiricists, a medical school (on the relationship between medicine
and skeptical therapeutic argument, cf. Voelke 1990; cf. Svavarson
2014 for a brief conspectus of Sextus’ philosophy). The
empiricist medical school argued against rationalistic tendencies in
medicine (Frede 1990; Allen 2010). Rationalism in medicine aims to
give causal explanations as a basis for therapies. Empiricism, on the
contrary, confines itself to observation and memory. Somewhat
confusingly (considering his name), Sextus discusses differences
between Pyrrhonism and empiricism, and says that skepticism is closer
to medical methodism than to empiricism (Allen 2010). Methodism
follows appearances, and derives from them what seems beneficial. No
explanations are attempted, no underlying substances postulated, and
no regularities assumed—these are some of the rationalistic
methods that both methodism and empiricism argue against. Methodism
also makes no statements to the effect that such explanations cannot
be given, or that underlying substances and regularities do not exist,
as Sextus says empiricism does (SE PH 1.236–241).
Sextus’ writings are traditionally divided into two groups. The
Outlines of Pyrrhonism [PH] consists of three books.
PH 1 is the only general account of Pyrrhonism that survives.
PH 2 and 3 discuss questions of logic, physics, and ethics.
The other writings are summarily referred to, traditionally, as
Against the Mathematicians [M]. In fact, they oppose
not just mathematical, but also other theorists: the title really
means Against the Theoreticians, or Against the
Learned (Bett 2012). In a sense, only M 1–6 should
go by that title. It is a complete work, and M 7 does not
seem to be its continuation (Bett 2012,
“Introduction”). M 1–6 discuss grammar, rhetoric,
geometry, arithmetic, astrology, and music theory. They argue
against theoretical ‘learning’ in these fields. M
7–11 discuss core questions of the three philosophical
disciplines, logic, physics, and ethics, and could plausibly be
referred to as Against the Logicians (M 7–8),
Against the Physicists (M 9–10), and
Against the Ethicists (M 11). Scholars disagree on
whether M is earlier (Bett 1997) or later than PH
(Janacek 1948 and 1972). Scholars also disagree on whether we can
evaluate different strands of skepticism within Sextus as more or less
sophisticated. Those who consider PH as later often do so
because they think it shows greater philosophical sophistication,
either by avoiding claims that a certain matter cannot be known
(sometimes described as negative dogmatism), as found in M
1–6 and M 11, or by streamlining discussions from
M 7–10 (Bett 1997; Brunschwig 1980).
These questions are complicated further by Sextus’ attempt to
incorporate diverse material, such as different sets of Modes, into
his skepticism (for the view that the different sets of modes are part
of an integrated philosophical approach, cf. Powers 2010). Arguably,
two kinds of consistency are at work in Sextus’ writings. On the
one hand, Sextus aims at the consistency of one philosophical
outlook. On the other hand, he aims at the consistency of having a
response to every objection. These two aims overlap greatly, but they
can also come apart. A given argument might refute a particular
critic. This argument may go back to various earlier versions of
Pyrrhonism. Similarly, the critical objection that is refuted may be
traced to dogmatic theories formulated over the course of several
centuries. As a result, a given argument in Sextus may be effective
against a given objection he has in mind. It may thus preserve
consistency in the sense of leaving the skeptic unharmed by dogmatic
criticism. But at the same time, this argument may have implications
that are in tension with the way in which Sextus explains skepticism
in other passages. Such tensions are particularly important with
respect to the way in which Sextus uses core concepts. For example, it
is not clear that Sextus uses the notion of appearances
(phainomena) in a consistent fashion (PH
1.8–9; 1.15; 1.22; for the view that Sextus employs the notion
consistently throughout, see Barney 1992). At times, he draws on the
contrast between appearances and thoughts (noumena). But for
the most part, the term refers to all cases where something seems
so-and-so to the skeptic, either perceptually or in thought. In some
contexts, Sextus draws on the idea that appearances are impressions,
invoking the dogmatic assumption that impressions are passive. In
other contexts, he does not envisage appearances as entirely passively
experienced (Vogt 2012b).
It is thus no surprise that the interpretation of Sextus’ Pyrrhonism
is quite controversial. This applies in particular to the
question of whether the skeptic has any beliefs, or beliefs of any
kind. In the past 30 years, scholars have paid attention to this
question more than to any other interpretive issue. Insofar as the
texts may contain different strands of Pyrrhonian argument, exegesis is
to some extent shaped by the philosophical interests we bring to the
texts. Two ideas are particularly prominent here. First, some scholars
find in Sextus an account of action that challenges standard ancient
and modern theories of agency. These theories might portray ordinary
agents as all-too-rational, as if every action involved a belief that
such-and-such is good. Scholars explore how far we can draw on Sextus,
asking whether a life guided by appearances (as Sextus says the
skeptic’s life is) might after all be rather ordinary (Frede 1979
[1997]). Second, one might on the other hand embrace those aspects of
Sextus’ texts that make Pyrrhonism look radically different from
ordinary life. From this perspective, Sextus’ writings invite
reflection on the question of whether it would be possible to live
without belief (Burnyeat 1980 [1997]; Barnes 1982 [1997]; Burnyeat 1984
[1997]).
PH 1, which figures most prominently in scholarly
discussions, is a tour de force. Sextus gives a general
account of what skepticism is, including skeptical investigation,
suspension of judgment, the skeptic’s end, action, and language; he
gives lists and illustrations of various sets of Modes; he explains the
so-called skeptical formulae (phônai), such as “I
determine nothing,” “non-assertion,”
“maybe,” and so on; and he compares skepticism to
relevantly similar philosophies.
Sextus emphasizes that the skeptic is an investigator. Others either
arrive at theories (dogmatism) or at claims about inapprehensibility
(negative dogmatism—that the matter investigated is beyond one’s
capacity to decide, and so is unknowable). But the skeptic continues
to investigate (PH 1.1–4). Investigation is described
as setting appearances and thoughts into opposition (PH 1.8)
(Morison 2011 offers a reconstruction of skepticism that takes its
starting–point from this description), and as the application of
the various sets of Modes (PH 1.36–186).  Skepticism
does not have teachings, but it is a philosophy. Many of the thoughts
the skeptics arrive at are expressed in the skeptical formulae
(PH 1.13–15; 187–209). The starting–point
(archê) of skepticism is
divergency—anômalia. The proto-skeptics are
disturbed by the discrepancies they encounter, and begin to
investigate (PH 1.12). They hope to gain quietude by settling what is
true and what is false. But then they have a surprising
experience. Encountering disagreement where several views appear to be
of equal weight (isostheneia), they find themselves unable to
decide things, give up, and experience tranquility (ataraxia)
(Striker 1990 [1996]; Nussbaum 1994). The skeptic’s end
(telos) is tranquility in matters of belief (kata
doxan) and moderate affection (metriopatheia) in matters
that are forced upon us (PH 1.25–29). That is, skeptics
can free themselves from those kinds of turmoil that come with holding
beliefs. They cannot free themselves from freezing, thirst, or pain.
But they suffer less than others, for they do not add the belief
(prosdoxazein) that, for example, pain is bad. The skeptic
must explain how, without belief (adoxastôs), they can
be active. Sextus says that skeptics follow appearances, and that is,
that they adhere to the fourfold ways of life (PH
1.21–24).  Nature supplies them with perception and thought;
necessary affections compel them (for example, thirst guides them to
drink); they go along with traditions and customs; and they can do
technical things by having been instructed in skills. The notion of
appearances is also central to Sextus’ account of how the skeptic can
speak. Without making assertions, a skeptic reports
(apangellein) like a chronicler (historikôs)
what appears to them now (PH 1.4).
I shall discuss the following aspects of Sextus’ skepticism: (i)
investigation, (ii) concepts and inference rules, (iii) belief, (iv)
the formulae, (v) appearances, (vi) language, (vii) action, and (viii)
the so-called special arguments (that is, arguments that do not
explain the nature of Pyrrhonism, but engage with specific dogmatic
theories in logic, physics, and ethics).
(i) Investigation. Investigation must aim at discovery of the truth,
otherwise it is not genuine investigation. However, a skeptic seems to
mechanically apply the skeptical Modes, in order to generate
suspension of judgment and tranquility. It seems as if the skeptics do
not genuinely aim at the truth (Palmer 2000; Striker 2001; Perin
2006), though they claim to keep on investigating. Note that this
objection, unlike the other problems central to contemporary
engagement with ancient skepticism, was not raised in antiquity. If
ancient skepticism is approached in the context of the larger study of
ancient philosophy, we might first of all note that the skeptics in a
sense agree with Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, Epicurus, and the
Stoics. All these philosophers defend, in so many formulations, a life
of reason, of contemplation, of wisdom, or of inquiry as the best or
at least a very good human life (on affinities between the
skeptics’ commitment to inquiry and Aristotle, cf. Olfert
2015). The objection that skeptical inquiry seems insincere, then, may
not have come up in antiquity in quite the way in which it is
discussed today because a commitment to inquiry would be common ground
among most philosophers. Further, we might observe that aiming at the
truth includes two aims: to accept truths, and to avoid
falsehoods. The Modes are tailored to keep us from assenting to
something that could be false. Insofar as the skeptic’s effort
to avoid falsehoods expresses a valuation for the truth, the skeptic
might be a genuine investigator (Vogt 2012a, ch. 5; Olfert
2014).
A related objection calls into question the actual practice of
skeptical inquiry. Does Sextus rely on the assumption that, in any
given case of putting several arguments into opposition, these
arguments are equally persuasive for the skeptic? This seems
unrealistic: at least in some cases, skeptical inquirers are bound to
be more strongly attracted to one view than to another. How then do
they arrive at suspension of judgment? One skeptical strategy is to
remind oneself that additional arguments will be formulated in the
future (PH 1.33–34, 89, 96–97; 2.38–41; 3.233–34). Another
strategy is to consider that different arguments are persuasive to
different people (Svararsson 2014). Relatedly, skeptics may find
themselves in a position comparable to a student who takes a seminar
on freedom and determinism: it is possible to be more attracted to one
view rather than another, and at the same time be aware that as far as
the arguments are concerned, there is unresolved disagreement among
several views, to the effect that neither of the views seems
compelling in ways that warrant assent (cf. Vogt 2012a, ch. 5, on how
the skeptical expression “as far as the argument is
concerned” bears on this question; for general discussion of
this expression, cf. Brunschwig 1990).
(ii) Concepts and rules of inference. If skeptics do not assent,
then how can they understand the terms philosophers use
(M 8.337–332a)? Even more radically, how can they even think
(PH 2.1–12)? This objection, which Sextus says is continually
raised against the skeptics, proceeds on the assumption that possession
of concepts involves the acceptance of assumptions. For example, in
order to examine a given theory of proof, the skeptic must have a
notion of what proofs are. This involves assumptions: for example, the
assumption that a proof contains premises and a conclusion. Sextus’
response to this objection invokes the Epicurean and Stoic theories of
preconceptions. Human beings are not born with reason (Frede 1994,
1996). The acquisition of reason is a nature-guided process
of concept acquisition. At a given age, children have completed this
process. They have become rational, which means that they can
perceive and think in a conceptual way. Only now, they have rational
impressions to which they can assent. The acquisition of preconceptions
did not involve assent, simply because the child was not yet rational
(Brittain 2005).
Sextus invokes dogmatic ideas about the acquisition of reason (or: the
abilities of conceptual thought) in his response to the Apraxia Charge
(PH 1.23–4). Skeptics are, first of all, active because
nature has equipped them with perception and thought (Vogt 1998,
2010).  More generally, the skeptics’ ability to think and
investigate depends on the fact that they have acquired concepts as
part of growing up.  This process did not involve assent, and
accordingly, Sextus argues that the skeptic’s ability to think
does not violate suspension of judgment (cf. Brunschwig 1988; Vogt
2012a ch. 6; Grgic 2008; Fine 2011). It is conceivable, though, that
the skeptic’s ability to understand involves some knowledge,
namely a kind of knowledge that does not entail any belief (Corti
2009, part III; Corti 2015). This option appears counterintuitive
given today’s premises in epistemology, according to which
someone who knows that p also believes that p. The relevant notion of
belief in skeptical discussions, doxa, as well as the
relevant ancient notions of knowledge, however, may behave quite
differently (cf. Vogt 2012a and Moss and Schwab forthcoming on belief;
Burnyeat 1980c, Frede 2008 and Schwab 2016 on knowledge). Insofar as
doxa is an inherently deficient activity and attitude, and
insofar as knowledge is conceived in elevated ways, knowledge without
belief is a rather intuitive option within ancient epistemology. If
understanding concepts and arguments involves knowledge that does not
entail beliefs, the skeptics may be taken to have such
knowledge. Modern critics raise the further question of whether the
skeptic must endorse logical laws (such as the Principle of
Non-Contradiction) and rules of inference. In particular, they ask
whether a skeptic is committed to the logical validity of the
conditionals they formulate when arguing against the dogmatists
(Sorensen 2004). Sextus records no ancient version of this complaint,
and accordingly no direct response.
(iii) Belief. Bury, in his Loeb translation, translates adoxastôs as
“undogmatically,” for example, when Sextus speaks
(PH 1.15) of skeptics as saying that “nothing is
true.” This translation suggests that Sextus bans dogmatism from
the skeptic’s life, where this still leaves room for other,
non-dogmatic beliefs. But adoxastôs means
non-doxastically or ‘without belief’ (cf. Burnyeat 1980
[1997]). As noted above, the skeptic’s end is tranquility in matters
relating to belief—kata doxan. A skeptic lives
adoxastôs. And even more confusingly, the skeptics
assent adoxastôs, when they act.
Contemporary interest in Pyrrhonian skepticism was much spurred by
Michael Frede’s paper “The Sceptic’s Beliefs” (1979
[1997]). Frede argues that ancient skepticism was traditionally
dismissed too easily as vulnerable to the Apraxia Charge, the charge
that, without belief, the skeptic cannot act. The skeptics seem to be
confident that they have replies to this objection. Thus, it seems
uncharitable not to look closely at these replies. Further, insofar as
these replies respond to the charge that without belief one cannot act,
we should focus on what the skeptics say about the role of belief in
their lives. Frede cites PH 1.13, and claims that in this
passage we find a distinction between two kinds of belief:
Following Frede, several scholars focus on PH 1.13 when
discussing skeptical belief (with the notable exceptions of Barnes 1980
[1997] and Barney 1992). They take it to be obvious that, in this
paragraph, Sextus distinguishes between two kinds of belief, one which
he bans from the skeptic’s life, and one which he allows into the
skeptic’s life. Barnes (1982 [1997]) employs a distinction between
rustic and urbane skepticism. The rustic skeptic suspends on all
matters. The urbane skeptic suspends on scientific matters, but holds
ordinary beliefs. The clause “non-evident matters investigated in
the sciences” in PH 1.13 might be taken as a point of
reference for the urbane interpretation. However, Barnes points out
that this cannot be right. Everything can be considered as a
non-evident matter, even such things as whether honey is sweet.
Against Barnes, Frede argues that the relevant distinction must be
drawn between two kinds of assent, such that “having a view
involves one kind of assent, whereas taking a position, or making a
claim, involves another kind of assent, namely the kind of assent the
sceptic will withhold” (1984 [1997], 128). Sextus characterizes
skeptical assent in three ways. He speaks of forced assent (PH
1.23–24), involuntary assent (PH 1.19), and adoxastôs
assent (PH 2.102). Frede does not explore the details of how Sextus
uses these notions. The core of his proposal is that Sextus allows for
a kind of assent that does not involve a claim as to how things are in
actual fact.
 In (1979 [1997]), Frede is predominantly concerned with the
skeptic’s reply to the Apraxia Charge. In (1984 [1997]) his
focus is on skeptical pronouncements such as “nothing can be
known.” His distinction between two kinds of assent, and
accordingly two kinds of belief, is explored with respect to such
sentences. Frede writes that “[t]o be left with the impression
or thought that p […] does not involve the further thought that
it is true that p” (133). This is the sense in which, on his
interpretation, the skeptic might think “nothing is
known.” The thought counts as a belief, but not as a claim that,
in actual fact, nothing is known by anybody. Contrary to Frede’s
interpretation, one might argue that to believe simply is to hold
true, at least according to the notions of belief that the skeptics
invoke in discussions with their contemporary critics (Vogt 2012b). It
is thus not clear that Frede’s distinction is genuinely one
between two kinds of beliefs (Burnyeat 1980 [1997]). Perhaps it is a
distinction between two different propositional attitudes, only one of
which is belief. As Striker (2001) points out, there is a danger that
debates over this issue become merely terminological. We might thus
draw a distinction between two issues. It is one thing to disagree
with Frede on what should or should not be called belief, and another
to dispute whether he identifies and characterizes a phenomenon in the
skeptic’s mental life. As Frede argues, skeptics find themselves
with a rather persistent thought, without having accepted it as true
in actual fact. This appears to capture a core element of skepticism:
the way in which the skeptic thinks such thoughts as “everything
is inapprehensible.”
(iv) The Skeptical Formulae. PH 1.13, the passage in which
scholars find a distinction between two kinds of belief, occurs in a
chapter entitled “Does the Skeptic dogmatize?” One angle
from which we might disagree with Frede is to insist that PH
1.13 addresses the status of the core thoughts of skeptical philosophy,
rather than the question of skeptical belief. Consider the rest of the
chapter:
When explaining in PH 1.13 how the skeptic does not
dogmatize, Sextus may have a particular issue in mind: that some
skeptical formulae look like doctrines, and have traditionally been
turned against themselves due to their dogmatic surface-structure. For
example, “all things are indeterminate” looks like a
straightforward dogmatic statement. There is a long history of
skeptical attempts to explain the nature of such pronouncements so
that they no longer undermine themselves. Sextus arguably mentions
several solutions to this problem (PH 1.13–15 and
1.187–209; cf.  Pellegrin 2010). In
PH 1.15, Sextus identifies the following as his main point:
the skeptic merely reports what appears to them.  Along these lines,
Sextus calls indeterminacy an affection of thought (pathos
dianoias; PH 1.198), a state that the utterance
“all things are indeterminate” aims to capture.  The other
solution mentioned in PH 1.14–15 is somewhat more
problematic: the skeptical formulae cancel themselves out. That is,
one can say them and convey something through them. But then, once one
has made a point, they as it were turn back upon themselves and eat
themselves up—as fire first burns combustible materials and then
destroys itself. This idea became famous through another comparison
Sextus uses (invoked by Wittgenstein (1922) 6.54): the skeptical
pronouncements are like a ladder that one climbs up; once one is on
top, one can throw the ladder away (M 8.481). Scholars
disagree on whether Sextus in some sense admits that these statements
are self-refuting (McPherran 1987), or whether he defuses their
self-refutational structure (Castagnoli 2010, III.14).
(v) Appearances (phainomena). While it is difficult to
establish a clear distinction between two kinds of belief in Sextus,
there is a comparatively more explicit distinction between two ways of
engaging with appearances. Sextus says that, while things appear X to
the skeptic, the skeptic does not affirm that they are X. Questions
that are traditionally discussed in terms of whether the skeptic has
beliefs thus might be addressed in terms of whether the way things
appear to the skeptic has a judgment-component. Arguably,
“A appears X to me now” can be construed in different
ways. Certain examples (say, the way in which it makes sense to say
both that the moon appears small and that it appears large) may
suggest that appearance can but need not involve something like a
judgment (Barney 1992). Some formulations in Sextus seem to insist on
a significant difference between the mental activity of something
appearing to a cognizer on the one hand, and on the other hand the
mental activity that, on the level of language, is represented by
assertion. This suggests that, for Sextus, A appearing F to me now
does not entail that I hold it to be true that A is F (Vogt
2012b).
(vi) Language. Another approach to the question of whether the skeptic
has beliefs looks at skeptical language. Sextus insists that the
skeptic does not accept or reject any impression, and associates the
absence of these mental acts with the fact that the skeptic does not
affirm or deny anything (e.g., PH 1.4, 7, 10). Arguably, we
can infer from Sextus’ account of the skeptic’s utterances what Sextus
wants to say about the skeptic’s mental states and acts. That is, the
question of language immediately bears on the question of belief. The
report on Pyrrhonian skepticism in Diogenes Laertius is particularly
instructive in this respect. Contrary to scholarly focus on belief in
reconstructing skepticism, it barely mentions belief. Discussion of
the skeptics’ attitudes is almost entirely conducted in terms of
skeptical language and the skeptical formulae (for detailed discussion
of the relevant paragraphs, DL 9.74–7, cf. Corti
2015). If Sextus is read in light of the report in DL
IX, PH 1.13 may appear to be more of an isolated passage than
scholarly debates imply. Sextus too devotes much space to accounts of
skeptical expressions and language. It may thus be asked whether
scholars should reframe discussions, and pay more attention to
skeptical language then they previously have. As of now, there is one
monograph on skeptical language, Corti (2009), and one approach to
belief that focuses on language, Vogt (1998). Both scholars pursue
further ideas put forward by Barnes (1982 [1997]), who compares the
skeptic’s utterances to avowals. The skeptic lays open their state of
mind, they announce or record (apangellein) it (Fine
2003a). In order to do this, the skeptic must misuse language
(Burnyeat 1984 [1997]). Some strategies to avoid assertion are given
in the context of the skeptical formulae (“non-assertion,”
“I determine nothing,” and so on). (i) Skeptical
expressions can be used as signs, which reveal a state of mind
(PH 1.187). (ii) Expressions like “ou
mallon” (no more) and “ouden mallon”
(nowise more) can be used indifferently (in the sense of
interchangeably) (PH 1.188). (iii) As is the practice in
ordinary language, the skeptic can use expressions elliptically; for
example “no more” for “no more this-than-that”
(PH 1.188). (iv) People often use questions instead of
assertions and the other way around. Similarly, “no more”
can be construed as a question: “Why more this-than-that?”
(v) The skeptic misuses language and uses it in a loose way
(PH 1.191).
In M 1 and M 2, Sextus says that the skeptic goes
along with ordinary ways of using language (M 1.172, 193, 206, 218,
229, 233; M 2.52–3, 58–9). This seems to be a key resource
in construing skeptical ways of speaking: the skeptic exploits the
ways in which ordinary speakers can diverge from grammatically correct
speech, and still be understood. Apart from using their skeptical
formulae, and apart from conducting philosophical investigations,
which they can do in a dialectical mode, referring to theses,
arguments, and inferences, the skeptic also has to talk in everyday
contexts. It is here where we see best how skeptical utterances are
tailored to reveal a state of mind in which nothing is accepted or
rejected. Sextus takes great pains to construe his examples of
skeptical utterances according to the following schema:
“X appears F to me now.” This will
generally be understood as an elliptical version of “X
appears to be F to me now.” However, Sextus
consistently avoids “to be” (Vogt 1998; for the view that
“X appears F” avoids reference to external
objects, see Everson 1991). The peculiar form of skeptical utterances
suggests that Sextus sees a relevant difference between
“X appears to be F to me now” and
“X appears F to me now.” The former
might imply reference to a state of affairs, and an epistemic usage of
“to appear” that could be rendered as “It appears to
me, that p,” or, “I take it that p.” This, however,
would be assertoric: the skeptic would state that it appears to them
that such-and-such is the case. But the skeptic’s elliptical
utterances about what appears to them aim to be purely
phenomenological. They aim to report a condition of the
skeptic’s mind, without expressing a judgment of any kind
(Burnyeat 1984 [1997]; Annas-Barnes 1985, 23–4; for an
assessment of these strategies in terms of modern philosophy of
language, cf. Pagin forthcoming). As part of the skeptics’ way
of life, language can also be seen as an activity. That is, how the
skeptics can speak can be considered a sub–question of how the
skeptics can act. Skeptical utterances have been compared to
Wittgensteinian confessions, arguably a kind of speech act that is
consistent with the skeptics’ avoidance of belief (Corti 2009,
Parts I and II). Moreover, the skeptics not only speak. They
presumably also understand what others say. A persuasive account of
skeptical language must explain both speaking and understanding (Corti
2009, Part III).
(vii) Action. Sextus says that appearances (phainomena) are
the practical criterion of the skeptic (PH 1.23–24). By
adhering to appearances, the skeptic is prevented from inactivity
(anenergêsia). Note that Sextus does not describe the
skeptic as performing actions in the sense of dogmatic theory of
action, which involves belief and choice (cf. M 11.162–166).
Contrary to the Academic skeptic, a Sextan skeptic does not view themselves
as a rational agent, who chooses one course of action over another.
Sextus claims an active life for the skeptic, but not the life of a
rational agent, as conceived by dogmatic philosophers (Vogt 2010).
The skeptic’s forced assent is situated in the domain of action
(PH 1.13, 19, 29–30, 193, 237–8). Thirst, for example,
necessitates assent, and that means, it moves the skeptic to drink.
This kind of assent may be genuinely unrelated to belief-formation of
any kind. Rather, forced assent generates the movement of action. But
what about more complex kinds of activities, such as applying a
medication, or attending a festival? Sextus argues that the skeptic
adheres to custom, convention, and tradition, and to what they have
been trained to do. In explaining how adherence to appearances in these
domains generates activity, Sextus does not mention assent. However, he
might have to concede that, like drinking when thirsty, more complex
actions also involve some kind of assent. In PH 2.102, Sextus
says that the sceptic assents non-doxastically
(adoxastôs) to the things relied on in ordinary life. In
PH 1.19, he mentions involuntary assent. Accordingly,
non-doxastic and involuntary assent may figure in those domains of
skeptical action that do not involve necessitation by bodily
affections. Non-doxastic assent is, from the point of view of the
Stoics, a contradiction in terms, just like forced and involuntary
assent. Assent is defined as in our power, and as that by which beliefs
are formed. If Sextus intends skeptical assent to be genuinely
non-doxastic and involuntary, then it does not have the core features
of assent as defined by the dogmatists.
 (viii) Logic, Physics, Ethics, and the “disciplines.”
The special arguments of the skeptic are directed against particular
theories in the three disciplines of Hellenistic philosophy: logic,
physics, and ethics. In addition, they address the so-called
disciplines, namely grammar, rhetoric, geometry, arithmetic,
astrology, and music-theory.  Sextus’ treatments of logic divide
up into two main topics: sign and criterion (cf. Bett 2005 on
signs). This structure reflects central concerns of Hellenistic
epistemology as well as of ancient skepticism. Skepticism looks for a
‘decider’ between conflicting appearances and thoughts. A
decider could be something evident. Dogmatic philosophers associate
the evident with the criterion of truth. For something to serve the
role of criterion, it cannot be equally disputed as the matters it
helps to decide. Or something non-evident could take on the role of
decider. For that to be the case, the skeptics argue, it would have to
be conclusively revealed by a sign or proof. If there is no compelling
theory of the criterion and no compelling account of sign and proof,
then there is nothing that can decide between several conflicting
views. Sextus’ treatises on logic thus are not simply a
collection of individual arguments against various dogmatic
theories. Their main line of thought sketches a route into
skepticism.
 Sextus’ discussions of ethics also focus on issues that
plausibly lead into skepticism. Again, there are two central
questions: whether there is anything good and bad by nature; and
whether there is an art of life (Bett 2010 and 2011), as the
Epicureans and Stoics claim there is. If we could settle what is good
and what is bad, some of the most disturbing anomalies would be
resolved. If there were an art of life, there would be a teachable
body of knowledge about the good and the bad. In both cases, questions
that can cause a great deal of puzzlement would be
resolved. Sextus’ discussions of ethics are in part famous
because Sextus ascribes outlandish and shocking views to the
Stoics. As Sextus construes his arguments, the contrast between
‘ordinary life’ and philosophical views leads to
suspension of judgment (Vogt 2008a, ch.  1). In the modern tradition,
a number of philosophers including Hegel and Nietzsche have engaged
with aspects of Sextus’ outlook and in particular with the
skeptical adherence to ordinary life (Berry 2010 and forthcoming; Bett
forthcoming).
The books on physics discuss god, cause, matter, bodies, mixture,
motion, increase and decrease, subtraction and addition, whole and
part, change, becoming and perishing, rest, place, time, and
number. Notably, god is one of the topics explored in physics. This
stands in stark contrast to medieval and early modern discussions,
where the quest for knowledge of God often frames and motivates
engagement with skepticism (cf. Annas 2011 on the difference between
ancient and monotheistic conceptions of divinity and their
repercussions for skepticism). The skeptics come to suspend judgment
on all central conceptions of ancient physics (Bett 2012). This means,
they come to suspend judgment on whether, for example, there are
causes, time, place, and bodies (cf. Bobzien 2015 and Warren
2015). Their suspension does not merely mean that they have not yet
found a satisfying theory of, say, body. It means that they find
themselves unable to say whether there is body (Burnyeat 1997). (On
the cumulative force of these arguments, see section 5.4.)
The six books entitled Against those in the Disciplines
(M 1–6) have traditionally received less attention. Only in
the last few years have scholars begun to explore them with the kind
of philosophical subtlety that has been brought to bear in the study
of ancient skepticism in recent decades. M 1–6 skeptically
examine six fields of study, namely grammar, rhetoric, geometry,
arithmetic, astronomy, and music-theory. Sextus begins with an
astonishing move. Contrary to his usual strategy of emphasizing the
distance between skeptics and dogmatists, he admits that Pyrrhonians
and Epicureans share much in viewing standard disciplines as useless
(M 1.1–7). Generally speaking, increased attention
to M 1–6 may provide additional occasion to modify the
long-standing assumption that the Stoics are Sextus’ most
important dogmatic interlocutors. Throughout M 1–6,
resonances between Epicurean and Pyrrhonian philosophy are remarkably
visible (Bett 2018, “Introduction”). Engagement with
Epicurean philosophy shapes Sextus’ approach deeply, to the
extent that both schools, Stoics and Epicureans, should be considered
fundamental points of reference.
After his remarks on how Pyrrhonians and Epicureans take issue with
the presumed usefulness of the disciplines, Sextus lays out general
arguments, suitable for skeptical examination of any field. He argues
that, for there to be a discipline, there must be the matter being
taught, the teacher, the learner, and the means of learning. If,
however, neither of these things exists, then the discipline
doesn’t exist. This is how Sextus proceeds. He argues, or seems
to argue, for the non-existence of the disciplines (M
1.9). Already in the very first sentence of M 1, Sextus
describes his own approach as one of putting forward counterarguments,
a strategy that he mentions repeatedly throughout M 1–6.
These moves give rise to the most contentious question
regarding M 1–6. Are these books negatively dogmatic? Or do
they fit in with Sextus’s outlook in PH 1–3, where skeptical
arguments are described as leading up to suspension of judgment? Bett
(2018, “Introduction”) argues that, with some
qualifications, Sextus’ approach is to be explained as
follows. Sextus lays out counterarguments based on the assumption that
the arguments of the dogmatists have already been formulated. For
there to be arguments of equal weight on both sides, only the
anti-dogmatic arguments need to be adduced. The intended effect is
that jointly, these opposing sets of arguments lead us to suspend
judgment. In addition, Bett notes that the remarkable emphasis on
counterarguments, non-existence, and uselessness suggests that some of
the material in M 1–6 goes back to an earlier phase of
Pyrrhonism.
In four of the six fields, namely grammar, rhetoric, music, and
astrology, Sextus admits non-technical versions into the
skeptic’s life, while subjecting all theoretical claims to
skeptical examination. For example, he distinguishes between the
ordinary ability to read and write on the one hand and grammar as a
technical discipline on the other, or the ability to play a musical
instrument on the one hand and music theory on the other (cf. Corti
2015b on why this kind of contrast does not come up in the books on
arithmetic and geometry, and Corti 2015c on Sextus’ attack on
the Platonic-Pythagorean notion of the Two).
It is remarkable that, qua theoretical field, Sextus examines
astrology rather than astronomy. The latter would make for a more
typical sequence: apart from the fact that in Sextus, logic is
considered part of philosophy rather than a “discipline,”
the six fields otherwise correspond to the so-called trivium of
grammar, logic, and rhetoric and quadrivium of arithmetic, geometry,
astronomy, and music theory. Sextus’ attention to astrology
rather than astronomy highlights a deep feature of his philosophy
(Corti 2015, Bett 2018). Astronomy, from Sextus’ point of view,
is concerned with appearances; and hence there is a sense in which the
skeptic does not object to it. Astronomy, then, is the
“version” of astrology that skeptics can admit into their
adherence to ordinary life (M 5.1–3). Presumably, astronomy
is concerned with predicting things like droughts, floods,
earthquakes, and plagues based on appearances. Astrology, on the other
hand, is concerned with matters of great obscurity.
Historians of philosophy sometimes argue that Henri Etienne’s
rediscovery of Sextus in 1562 initiated an era of epistemology. Early
modern engagement with skepticism is here seen as a turn to arguments
found in Sextus (Annas-Barnes 1985, 5–7; Bailey 2002,
1–20). In particular the beginning of
Descartes’ Meditations may display a kind of Socratic
spirit: a commitment to calling into question all one’s
beliefs. However, early modern philosophers work within a
theologically framed tradition that importantly begins with St.
Augustine (354–430) (cf. Menn 1998 and Lagerlund 2009; on the history
of medieval skepticism cf. Lagerlund ed. 2009; cf. Carriero 2009 on
Descartes’ engagement with Aquinas; for an analysis of the
transformation of skepticism that turns immediately to Descartes,
cf. Williams 2010).
A major part of Augustine’s early education consisted in the study of
Cicero’s writings. He was thus closely acquainted with Academic
skepticism (Cicero was one kind of Academic skeptic). Augustine sees
the force of ancient skeptical strategies. Even though he does not
become a skeptic, he integrates distinctively skeptical moves into his
thought. This has a long-standing effect on the history of theology and
science. For example, Galileo Galilei is able to cite Augustine when he
defends himself against the charge that his physics is in opposition to
the Bible (Letter to the Grand Duchess, in Drake 1957).
Augustine supplies arguments to the effect that we should keep an open
mind. Both our physical theories and our interpretations of the Bible
are likely to evolve. This idea figures importantly in Pyrrhonism. Past
experience tells us that, on every given issue, someone eventually came
up with a new argument. Accordingly, even if the skeptics cannot find an
objection to a given claim right now, they expect that in the future, a
conflicting view will be formulated.
However, such traces of skepticism are integrated into an ultimately
non-skeptical philosophy. In Contra academicos, Augustine
recognizes a core feature of ancient skepticism, namely that it is a
commitment to ongoing inquiry. The question that Augustine considers
vital, then, is whether a life devoted to inquiry can be compelling,
if seemingly there is no prospect for ever attaining truth
(cf. Lagerlund 2009). It is as a philosophy of inquiry that skepticism
makes a lasting contribution to ethics, continuing, as it were, a
Socratic legacy (Vogt 2017).
Augustine creates the framework that will become characteristic of
early modern discussions. First, in his work skeptical arguments are
explored in order to be refuted. Second, the key issue is whether we
have knowledge, not whether we should hold anything to be true. In
Augustine, the background for caring so much about knowledge is the
pressing question of whether we can know God: whether we can know that
he exists and what his properties are. This might also be the reason
why knowledge of testimony gains importance (De Trinitate,
15.12; in Schoedinger 1996). The Bible, or parts of it, might be
considered testimony about God, and accordingly as one possible way of
attaining knowledge of God.
Third, in the process of asking whether we can have knowledge of God
it makes sense to distinguish between kinds of knowledge (sensory,
rational, by testimony, etc.). If we know God, then we do so via one
of the kinds of knowledge. This becomes a standard feature of
discussions of skepticism. Philosophers go through the different kinds
of knowledge that are conceivable, and examine them in turn. Fourth,
Augustine conceives of what he calls ‘inner knowledge.’ He
envisages a skeptical scenario. Suppose we have no sensory knowledge,
no rational knowledge, and no knowledge of testimony. We still know
that we think, love, judge, live, and are (De Trinitate
15.12). In the City of God 11.26, Augustine uses his
well-known phrase “si enim fallor, sum” (even if
I err, I am). That is, Augustine suggests that we have knowledge of
our mental acts. However, Augustine does not consider these pieces of
knowledge foundational. While he points to them when he discusses the
challenges of Academic skepticism, he does not systematically build
upon them in refuting skepticism about sense perception, rational
knowledge, and knowledge of testimony.  Rather, he refutes skepticism
by stating that God created us and the things that are known to us;
God wanted these things to be known to us (De Trinitate
15.12). In later epistemology, the idea of the turn into one’s mind
and an introspective access to one’s mental acts becomes a secular
idea. Augustine is a transitional figure in the philosophy of mind,
and thereby re-conceives skepticism. By focussing on a gap between
‘what is in the mind’ and the world outside, he as it were invites
external world skepticism (Vogt 2014a). But for Augustine it is part
of the path to God: the mind turns into itself and from there it moves
further, toward God (e.g., Confessions 7. 17,23).
Next to Augustine, Al-Ghazali (1085-1111) plays a major role in
re-conceiving the questions relevant to skepticism (Menn 2003,
Kukkonen 2009). In The Rescuer From Error, Al-Ghazali
literally describes God as the rescuer from error (in Khalidi
2005). Like Augustine before and Descartes after him, Al-Ghazali moves
through different cognitive faculties. Do the senses or reason allow
us to gain knowledge? These questions are framed by the quest for
knowledge of God. While Augustine thinks that knowledge of God comes
through a combination of seeking God on the one hand and God’s
grace on the other, Al-Ghazali thinks it comes through spiritual
exercises. However, once confidence in God is secured, trust in the
more familiar ways of gaining knowledge—sense perception,
rational reasoning, and so on—is restored (for a detailed
treatment of skepticism in Classical Islam, cf. Heck 2014).
One key difference between ancient skepticism on the one hand, and
medieval as well as Cartesian skepticism on the other, is that ancient
skepticism is not framed by theological concerns. Note that in
Cartesian skepticism, God is not only invoked when it comes to refuting
skepticism. More importantly, the skeptical problems arise in a way
that depends on God as creator. Our cognitive faculties are seen as
created faculties, and the world as a created world. A kind of
‘faculty-skepticism’ that asks whether our cognitive faculties are
built so as to be erroneous is formulated, and a potential gap between
our minds and the world opens up. Perhaps God made us in such a way
that we are fundamentally wrong about everything (or, as later secular
versions have it, a mad scientist experiments on a “brain in a
vat”).
These are important steps away from the non-theological ancient
construal of skepticism. The theological premises of early modern
skepticism are not only foreign to ancient debates; they would be seen
as misguided. From the Hellenistic point of view, theology is part of
physics. An account of god is part of an account of the natural world
(as such, it is unrecognizable as ‘theology’ from the
point of view of later theologies). Human beings and their cognitive
faculties are natural parts of a natural world. They are organic and
functional parts, interconnected with the other parts of the large
whole which the universe is. A mind-world-gap (of the kind envisaged
in the Cartesian tradition) is inconceivable. Each ‘mind,’
and that is, rational soul, is an integrated physical part of the
physical world. Like a part of a complex organism, it would not exist
were it not for the interrelations it has with the other parts. A
physiological account of the mind makes the stark divide between mind
and world that figures in early modern skepticism unimaginable.
Contemporary discussions inherit long-standing problems from early
modern philosophy. Among them, external world skepticism, skepticism
about other minds, and skepticism about induction are particularly
prominent. In assessing ancient skepticism, we might ask whether the
ancients saw these problems.
Among the skeptical problems of modern philosophy, skepticism about
induction stands out. Its early formulation in Hume does not depend on
the idea that our faculties are created by God, who also created the
world. Hume takes himself to engage with Pyrrhonian skepticism
(Ainslie 2003). Induction proceeds from particular observations to a
general conclusion. Skepticism about induction points out that, no
matter how many particulars were observed, the general claim
pronounces also on what has not been observed. In this respect, the
inference seems unwarranted and so we should suspend judgement on its
effectiveness. Induction can concern the ascription of properties to
some kind of entity as well as causal claims. In the latter, the
skeptic observes that what regularly precedes a type of event may not
be its cause. Perhaps we cannot infer anything from the fact that
certain properties or events regularly occur together (Vlasits
forthcoming; for a related argument in Al-Ghazali, cf. Kukkonen
2009).
Relevant ideas can be traced in various aspects of Sextus’
philosophy. First, Sextus sides with anti-rationalist tendencies in
medicine. According to these schools, a doctor remembers that, in
earlier cases, symptom A was alleviated by
medication B. They do not infer that medication B
makes symptom A disappear, or that the illness C is
the cause of symptom A. Second, the Five Modes do not
exclusively target proof. They address everything that lends
credibility to something else. They may thus also call into question
signs that are taken as indicative of their causes. Sextus’
skeptic does not accept such indicative signs. Third, Sextus discusses
the role of so-called commemorative signs in the skeptic’s life
(PH 2.100–102; Allen 2001). For example, a scar is a
commemorative sign of a wound. Both were co-observed in the past. A
skeptic will think of a wound when seeing a scar. But they do not
commit to causal or explanatory claims. Fourth, Sextus records a set
of Causal Modes (PH 1.180–86), which are specifically
targeted toward causal explanations (Corti 2014; on the relation
between the Causal Modes and Hume cf. Garrett forthcoming). He does
not ascribe the kind of relevance to them that the Ten Modes and the
Five Modes have. Indeed, he thinks the Five Modes can do the work of
Causal Modes (that is, call into question causal and explanatory
theses and theories). However, the Causal Modes go into great detail
on how the skeptic investigates any kind of causal thesis or
theory.
The distinction between subjectivity and objectivity is central to
modern discussions of skepticism. It is not envisaged in ancient
thought. However, this does not mean that ancient philosophers do not
reflect on questions relevant to this distinction. Arguably,
Pyrrhonism conceives of the affections of the mind in ways that
anticipate later thought about subjectivity (Fine 2003a and
2003b). Sextus describes the skeptic’s states of
‘being-appeared-to’ as affections of the mind. A skeptic
can report these states in their utterances. Illustrating this point,
Sextus uses expressions associated with the Cyrenaics, a Socratic
school of thought. These expressions literally mean something like
‘I am being heated’ or ‘I am being whitened.’
They aim to record affections without claiming anything about the
world. Fine argues that the skeptic’s beliefs are beliefs about
these affections (2000). With this proposal, Fine turns against two
prominent positions in scholarly debate about skeptical belief (see
section 4.4), that skeptics have no beliefs whatsoever, and that they
have beliefs that fall short of holding true. Fine envisages
reflective beliefs: beliefs about one’s states of mind (on the
role of such beliefs in contemporary epistemology, cf. Feeney and
Schellenberg forthcoming; on related contemporary debates about
perception and belief, cf. Glüer forthcoming).
Whether or not Sextus’ account of the skeptic’s mental
life includes reflective beliefs about one’s mental states, we
should note an important difference to later proposals of that
kind. Later philosophers focus on the particular kind of certainty
attached to reflective knowledge. Reflective knowledge is sometimes
seen as a stepping-stone towards greater confidence in our cognitive
powers, and our ability to also attain other kinds of knowledge. But
it may not be obvious that reflective knowledge can take on this
important role. In this respect, Augustine is still closer to ancient
than to modern intuitions. He says that such pieces of knowledge as
“I know that I think” are not what we are looking
for. Augustine envisages that reflective knowledge-claims can be
iterated, so that we would have infinitely many pieces of knowledge
(“I know that I know that I think…”). But from his
point of view, this kind of knowledge leads nowhere. When we ask
whether we can have knowledge, we are interested in knowledge of the
world and of God (De Trinitate 15.12).
Modern philosophers also pay great attention to the privileged access
cognizers have to their own cognitive activities. Augustine introduces
a distinction that paves the way for this idea. He argues that the
mind cannot know what kind of stuff it is (De Trinitate 10.10
and 15.12). The mind does not know its substance, but it knows its
activities. For Augustine, this means that the mind knows itself. The
mind is precisely what it knows itself to be: in knowing that one
thinks, judges, lives, and so on, one knows the mind (Vogt 2014a).
Note that this argument indicates that knowing that one lives and is
are not pieces of knowledge about one’s bodily existence, but about
the activities of the mind.
Finally, modern philosophers conceive of the special kind of access
to one’s own mind not only in contrast with our access to the world.
They also compare it to our access to what goes on in other minds. One
of their core problems is skepticism about other minds. If our own
minds are accessible to us in the way nothing else is, then we might
not be able to ascribe mental states to others. For example, we might
not know that someone who looks as if she is in pain really is in
pain. The ancient skeptics envisage nothing of this kind (Warren 2011). This suggests
that, insofar as they draw a distinction between affections of the mind
and the world, this distinction is construed differently than in modern
skepticism.
In its early modern versions, external world skepticism involves the
idea that there is a creator—someone who made the world and our
faculties, and the fit or misfit between them. If this assumption is
crucial to external world skepticism, then the ancients do not
conceive of this skeptical problem. From the point of view of modern
philosophy, ancient skepticism may appear limited by not addressing
some of the most radical skeptical scenarios (Burnyeat 1980 [1997] and
1982; Williams 1988; Fine 2003a and 2003b). From the point of view of
ancient skepticism, early modern skepticism and the long life that its
problems enjoy, however, would seem to originate in a flawed
theology.
Contemporary philosophers sometimes discuss external world
skepticism in terms of a paradox: one thinker finds herself torn
between the strength of skeptical arguments and her ordinary
convictions. For example, she thinks that this is her hand.
But she concedes that the skeptical hypothesis that a mad scientist
might have set things up so that she has such perceptions and thoughts
(the so-called brain in a vat scenario) is hard to refute. This way of
framing discussions of skepticism is foreign to antiquity. In
antiquity, skeptics and their opponents are different thinkers, each of
them with one set of intuitions, arguing against each other. It is also
foreign to ancient skepticism insofar as it inherits the early modern
idea that some greatly powerful agent sets things up, and in a sense
creates the thinker’s faculties and the world as it appears to them.
However, the ancient skeptics might conceive of their own kind of
external world skepticism. One way to explore this question is to turn
to the way in which Sextus describes that which is outside of the
skeptic’s mind (Fine 2003 and 2003(2)). Throughout his work, Sextus
employs the distinction between appearances and what really is the
case. Consider some of the detail of how he characterizes the latter.
One phrase in the Ten Modes is “ta ektos
hupokeimena,” the externally underlying things
(PH 1.61, 127, 128, 134, 144). Other phrases, meant to
demarcate roughly the same contrast with appearances, are how things
are in their nature (phusei) (PH 1.78, 123, 140),
“the underlying things” (hupokeimena) (PH
1.106), as well as a combination: “the nature of the underlying
external things” (PH 1.117, 163). The expressions which
contain the word “external” might read as if Sextus was
talking about the external world in a sense familiar to us from early
modern skepticism.
But what are the underlying or external objects, as Sextus conceives
of them? For example, Sextus speaks of the underlying reality of
whether honey really is sweet (PH 1.19). In such a case, it is
assumed that there are ordinary objects. But we do not have access to
the properties they really have (Fine calls this Property Skepticism,
2003b). However, external objects in Sextus’ sense also include objects
that later philosophers would not obviously see as part of the external
word. For example, an answer to the question of what kind of life
really is good would count as a claim about external or underlying
reality (cf. Pellegrin 2010).
Another approach to the question of whether Sextus envisages some
kind of external world skepticism is to turn to his discussions of
physics. Ordinarily we take ourselves to live in a world in which there
are bodies, movement, place, time, and so on. But as Sextus argues, we
do not have compelling accounts of any of these core conceptions of
physics. This leads to suspension of judgment on whether there are
bodies, movement, place, time, and so on. Sextus’ discussions of
physics might add up to a rather far-reaching skepticism about the
natural world.