There are three questions raised by the title of this entry. The first
is whether it is anachronistic. Is empiricism not a modern position?
Can we attribute it to ancient and medieval thinkers? The charge of
anachronism would, perhaps, be warranted if empiricism referred to a
single set of beliefs. As we shall see, however, the term covers a
variety of views regarding knowledge
 (sect. 2).
 Even among modern thinkers, the empiricism of John Locke
(1632–1704) is not identical with that of Francis Bacon
(1561–1626), and neither bears much resemblance to the
empiricism of Rudolf Carnap (1891–1970), A. J. Ayer
(1910–1989), or Hans Reichenbach (1891–1953). Yet all
these thinkers have an attitude in common: they share a desire to keep
factual claims (in the sense of claims regarding contingent matters)
closely related to the deliverances of the senses. That desire has
ancient roots. Modern empiricism was not a creatio e nihilo.
It represented a revival of attitudes found already in the ancient
world and the form in which it was expressed was dependent on late
medieval developments.
A second question has to do with the article’s association of
ancient and medieval views. The philosophers discussed here are
separated by a thousand years. Why bring them together? This question
is more easily answered. The intellectual renaissance of the twelfth
and thirteenth centuries involved a revival of the work of the
ancients. In the field of philosophy this took the form of a
rediscovery of the works of Aristotle (384–322 BCE), by way of
Latin translations from Arabic sources and Greek texts from the
Byzantine world. Indeed much of the philosophical writing of this
period was done by way of commentaries on Aristotle. Medieval
philosophers were also influenced by writers from a later age, such as
Plotinus (205–270 CE), Dionysius the Areopagite (5th–6th
century CE), and St Augustine (354–430 CE). But these writers
were themselves influenced by Aristotle’s predecessor, Plato
(427–347 BCE). So in this respect, too, medieval philosophy has
ancient roots.
A third question has to do with the scope of the discussion. As will
already be clear, the tradition of philosophy being discussed here is
that which began in the Greek city states of the sixth and fifth
centuries BCE. But empiricist views are found within other traditions.
The closest parallels are to be found among the Lokāyata
(Cārvāka), one of the nāstika (non-orthodox)
schools of Indian philosophy that existed in the sixth and seventh
centuries CE. These are reported to have held that sensory perception
is the only reliable means of knowledge and to have rejected the
validity of inferences to unobservable entities (Chatterjee &
Datta 2004: 54–59).
The Buddha (ca. 485–405 BCE) could be said to be an empiricist,
insofar as he based his dharma (teaching) on experience
rather than authority or reason. But the Buddhist idea of experience
is broader than that held by most empiricists (Jayatilleke 1963:
463–64 [para. 793]). The twelve āyatanas (sensory
domains) of Buddhist tradition include the mind as well as the bodily
senses and meditation is thought capable of producing higher forms of
knowledge (the abhijñās) that are independent of
sensory perception. Finally, we can find discussions of sense
perception within classical Chinese philosophy. Mozi (Mo Tzu, ca.
480–392 BCE), for instance, ranked everyday experience among the
three criteria of reliable knowledge (Mozi 35.3), while the
more sceptical Xunzi (Hsün Tzu, ca. 312–210 BCE) pointed
out how easily the senses are deceived (Xunzi 21.8). But
while it would be interesting to explore these traditions, empiricism
does not play as central a role in any of them as it does in the
history of Western philosophy. 
The question of scope also arises when it comes to the subject matter
of the article, which is empiricism as a doctrine rather than as a
practice. From the very beginning of what the Greeks called “the
investigation of nature” (hē peri phuseōs
historia), there have been those who studied the natural world by
means of careful observation. There were medical writers who observed
and recorded symptoms, astronomers who observed the movements of the
heavens, and students of music who placed their ears “close [to
their instruments] as though trying to hear what their neighbours were
saying” (Plato Rep. 531a6–7). These people were
surely empiricists in practice. But such figures will be of interest
to us only if they also reflected on what they were doing, developing
second-order beliefs about knowledge. It is these second-order beliefs
that will be the focus of the present study.
“Names of philosophical positions,” wrote W. V. O. Quine,
“are a necessary evil” (1995: 251). This is certainly the
case with the term “empiricism”: while it is difficult
simply to abandon it, it can be misleading. Among historians of
early modern philosophy, for instance, the traditional distinction
between empiricists and rationalists has fallen out of favour, on the
grounds that there are few thinkers who can be clearly assigned to
either category (Norton 1981; Loeb 1981: 25–75). The problem
here, however, is not the category of empiricism, but its use as a
“pigeon-hole” into which one tries to place individual
thinkers. Empiricism need not be a global doctrine: a thinker may be
an empiricist in one domain but not in another. It is possible, for
instance, to be an empiricist about knowledge of the natural world,
but a rationalist with regard to a particular area of mathematics
(Markie 2015: sect. 1.2). So it is not surprising that individual
thinkers are hard to categorize. But empiricism is also an umbrella
term: it covers a variety of views regarding knowledge. Even with
regard to the one domain, a thinker may be an empiricist in one sense,
but not in another. So if we are to use the category, we need to
distinguish the different forms empiricism can take. 
The first is what we may call explanatory empiricism, which
denies the validity of inferences from observable phenomena to causes
that cannot themselves be observed. Perhaps the best known modern
example is that of the physicist and philosopher Ernst Mach
(1838–1916). At least for most of his life, Mach rejected the
theory of atoms as an example of “hypothetico-fictive
physics” (Mach 1992: 136) and would respond to believers in
atoms with the words, Habn S’eins gsehn? (Have you seen
one?) (Meyer 1992: 151). (For a slightly different view of
Mach’s atomism, see Banks 2003: 12–14.) A more recent
example is the “constructive empiricism” of Bas van
Fraassen, which holds that the aim of science is to produce theories
that are empirically adequate, a theory being empirically adequate if
“what it says about the observable things and events in this
world, is true” (van Fraassen 1980: 12). This view also rules
out inferences to unobservable entities (van Fraassen 1980: 72). While
this may sound like a modern position, it was held by the first people
to call themselves “empiricists,” namely a group of
ancient medical writers, who rejected inferences based on reasoning
rather than the observed association of phenomena (sect. 3.3).
 
A second form of empiricism is summed up by the Latin slogan nihil
est in intellectu quod non prius fuerit in sensu (nothing is in
the intellect which was not first in the senses). We can think of this
as a genetic empiricism (Lowe 1995: 189), which makes claims
about the origins of our ideas. It takes two forms. The first of these
is what we may call tabula rasa (blank slate) empiricism,
which denies the existence of innate ideas or principles of reasoning,
holding that both our factual knowledge and the concepts we employ in
describing the world are drawn from experience. The locus
classicus for an empiricism of this kind is the work of John
Locke, who famously suggested that the mind is originally “white
paper, void of all characters, without any ideas” (Locke
Essay 2.1.2). But it also takes the form of what we
may describe as a cognitive empiricism. This denies that we
have intellectual powers or capacities giving access to factual
knowledge independently of experience.
Cognitive empiricism may seem implicit in the tabula rasa
principle that “nothing is in the intellect which was not first
in the senses.” But the two positions are not identical, for one
can deny that we have innate ideas or principles while also holding
that the mind shapes what the senses provide. As G. W. Leibniz
(1646–1716) would later remark, “nothing is in the
intellect which was not first in the senses, except for: the intellect
itself [nisi intellectus ipse]” (Leibniz NE
1.2). There are two contributions the intellect could make.
It could predispose us to understand what we perceive in certain ways.
(The “affordances” spoken of by James Gibson [1986:
127–43] can be thought of as dispositions of this kind.) Or it
may have the capacity to receive a belief-forming influence from an
external source, one not mediated by the senses. (For a medieval
version of this idea, see
 sect. 4.2.)
 A thorough-going cognitive empiricism would deny the existence of
either innate dispositions or non-sensory influences in the formation
of beliefs. It would hold that the mind forms its beliefs by
“selecting, combining, or otherwise manipulating simple ideas of
sensation” (Kahn 1981: 407).
A final form of empiricism is what we may call justificatory
empiricism. In its strongest form, an empiricism of this kind is
indifferent as to the origins of our ideas and can tolerate inferences
to unobservable entities. It merely insists that wherever our ideas
come from and whatever they claim, they cannot be regarded as
justified until they have been successfully tested against experience.
Within twentieth-century philosophy, this position is associated with
a sharp distinction between the “context of discovery” and
the “context of justification” (Reichenbach 1938:
6–7), with justificatory empiricists focusing on the latter. For
Karl Popper (1902–1994), for instance, the question of how a
theory is discovered is irrelevant to its epistemic status; what
matters is whether that theory has explanatory power and has withstood
severe testing (Popper 1935 [2002: 7–8]). On the face of it, this does
seem a recent position. Perhaps no philosopher before Popper would
have regarded the origins of an idea as entirely irrelevant to its
standing. But there are hints of it in the work of some ancient and
medieval thinkers, who held that factual claims arrived at by
deductive reasoning lack credibility if they have not also been tested
against experience.
The discussion that follows shall employ these categories in order to
analyse the thought of ancient and medieval philosophers. Once again,
this may be thought to run the risk of anachronism, insofar as such
categories are not themselves ancient. Although one school of ancient
thinkers did identify themselves as empiricists, no ancient or
medieval philosophers made these particular distinctions. But this is
not a fatal objection. We should not distort the thinking of ancient
or medieval philosophers by forcing it into modern categories, as into
a Procrustean bed. Nor should we write intellectual history in a
“Whiggish” fashion, interested only in those features of
ancient thought that anticipate our own. But as Allen Wood once
remarked (a little too paradoxically), “people can mean things
they can’t think, and therefore … must be able to express
thoughts they can’t have” (A. Wood 2002: 227). When it
comes to ancient and medieval philosophers, our modern categories can
help highlight aspects of their thought they themselves may have been
unaware of.
If we think of empiricism as an attitude, rather than a clearly
formulated doctrine, then it dates from the very beginnings of Western
philosophy, in the work of the Presocratics. Some care is needed
here, since we know of the Presocratics only through quotations and
reports, found in authors who in some cases lived centuries later and
who themselves had philosophical axes to grind. One of our major
sources, for instance, is Aristotle. But Aristotle was not trying to
compile an historical account; he was attempting to construct his own
system and he sometimes reshaped his predecessors’ views with this
goal in mind (Cherniss 1935: 347). Judging from the quotations and
reports we do have, it would be difficult to describe the Presocratics
as empiricists in practice. On the contrary, their claims about the
natural world are notoriously sweeping and vague: it is far from clear
how they could be tested against experience (Barnes 1982: 48). Some of
the Presocratics, however, expressed sentiments that anticipate the
doctrinal empiricisms of later times.
Of particular note are some sayings attributed to the Ionian
philosopher Heraclitus (fl. ca. 500 BCE). One fragment reads, “The things of which there is sight, hearing, experience, [these] I
prefer” (DK 22B55; Graham 2010: 149). Although
the contrast here may be between knowledge by experience and knowledge
by hearsay (Kahn 1979: 106), it does suggest a confidence in knowledge
of the former kind. It is, however, balanced by another saying, which
notes that “poor witnesses for men are the eyes and ears of
those who have barbarian souls” (DK 22B107;
Graham 2010: 149). Whereas the senses can provide knowledge, what they
offer needs to be correctly understood. Empedocles (ca. 495–435
BCE), too, while emphasizing the limits of human understanding,
encourages his hearers to “understand each thing in the way in
which it is clear [noei d’hēi dēlon
hekaston],” gleaning what knowledge they can from the
senses (DK 31B3; Graham 2010: 343).
Empedocles’s saying can be understood as a response to the work
of the Eleatic philosophers, such as Parmenides (ca. 515–445
BCE) and Melissus of Samos (fl. ca. 440 BCE). Parmenides
relied on a priori arguments to reach conclusions that flew
in the face of experience, while his follower Melissus argued for the
unreliability of sense perception on the grounds that its deliverances
were contradicted by reason (Barnes 1982: 298–302). Such
teachings offered a challenge to the early scientific tradition
established by Thales of Miletus (fl. ca. 585 BCE), for they
suggested that “the phenomena which science attempts to
understand … are figments of our deceptive senses”
(Barnes 1982: 305). If there was to be a scientific tradition, it
required a defence of sense perception over against pure reason.
Empiricist sentiments are also found in the work of some early medical
writers. These go beyond a simple defence of sense perception to
express a suspicion of theories that go beyond what can be observed.
We find, perhaps, a hint of this attitude in the work of Alcmaeon of
Croton (fl. ca. 500 BCE), to whom the following fragment is
attributed: “Concerning things unseen the gods see clearly, but
so far as men may conjecture… ” (DK
24B1; Kirk, Raven, & Schofield 1983: 339). It would be wrong to
read a body of empiricist doctrine into so cryptic a remark. But it
may indicate the beginning of a contrast, not only between what the
gods know and men may know (a commonplace of ancient Greek thought),
but between knowledge that can be obtained by observation and
knowledge of “the unseen.” The limits of human knowledge,
it suggests, are marked by the limits of what can be observed.
This contrast is certainly found in some of the works attributed to
Hippocrates (ca. 460–370 BCE). The author of one Hippocratic
treatise argues against those who practice medicine on the basis of
some general principle or postulate (hupothesis). Medicine,
he suggests, does not require a general theory “about human
nature [ho ti estin anthrōpos],” of the kind
offered by Empedocles and other philosophers (AM 20.1). Such general principles may be required when dealing with with
matters that are “obscure and dubious,” such as “the
things in the sky or under the earth” (AM 1.3).
But medicine differs from such speculative sciences, since its
conclusions can be confirmed by experience. Of particular note here is
the phrase “the things in the sky or under the earth,”
which picks out the main areas of early Ionian science (Barnes 1982:
139; cf. Plato Ap. 18b8–9).
At first sight, this looks like an early expression of explanatory
empiricism: a refusal to make inferences to things that cannot be
observed. But even leaving aside the fact that “the things in
the sky” are not strictly unobservable, the same work also also
speaks of discovering facts about what is inside the body “from
evident things outside [the body]” (AM 22.3).
In particular, it argues, we can draw conclusions about the
body’s internal organs by noting the behaviour of different
kinds of observable objects: those that are solid, stretched, spongy,
porous, and so on. (The reasoning here is by way of analogy, a common
practice among the earliest Greek thinkers [Lloyd 1992: 254–55;
Allen 2001: 10–11].) This seems inconsistent with explanatory
empiricism, since it justifies inferences from what can be observed to
what is (at least in practice) unobservable.
Talk of discovering what is unseen from what is evident calls to mind
the maxim attributed to Anaxagoras (ca. 500–428 BCE):
“Appearances are a vision of the invisible”
(DK 59B21a; Graham 2010: 309). Not only was this
principle employed in the Hippocratic writings, but it was said to
have been endorsed by Democritus (ca. 460–371 BCE) (Sextus
M VII 1.140). For all his scepticism regarding sense
perception (DK 68B6–10; Graham 2010:
592–95), Democritus seemed to think it had an evidential role
(Asmis 1984: 345). In particular, he apparently believed it could
confirm the atomist theory which Leucippus (fl. ca.
450–420 BCE) had originated and he himself had embraced. There
is, however, a difficulty here, as Democritus himself may have
realized, for in one report he has the senses utter the following:
“Wretched mind, after taking from us your evidence, do you
overthrow us? Our fall will be your defeat!”
(DK 68B125; Graham 2010: 597). The problem here is
that while one can cite observable facts (such as the fact of motion)
in support of atomism, that doctrine in turn suggests that appearances
are deceptive (Barnes 1982: 559–64). As another fragment reads,
“by convention color, by convention sweet, by convention bitter,
but in reality atoms and void” (DK 68B9, 125;
Graham 2010: 597). At first sight, anyway, the atomist doctrine seems
self-defeating.
What we find, then, in the work of some of the earliest Greek
philosophers is not only the first outline of empiricist doctrines; we
also find hints of the difficulties such doctrines would encounter.
But to find a clearer statement of empiricist ideas, we must turn to
the work of Aristotle.
Was Aristotle an empiricist? The question is not an easy one to
answer. Aristotle discussed a variety of ways in which human beings
can achieve a grasp of reality. In one place, for instance, he
outlines five ways in which “the soul possesses the truth by way
of affirmation or denial” (EN 1139b15–17). These
are art or craft (technē), scientific knowledge
(epistēmē), practical wisdom
(phronēsis), philosophical wisdom (sophia), and
intellect (nous). But he did not construct a systematic
epistemology and it is not clear we could construct a consistent one
from his surviving works.
Aristotle did, however, believe the senses to be reliable, and that we
must rely on their deliverances for our knowledge of the world. He
was, as one recent author puts it, “the great defender of the
manifest image in the classical world” (Kalderon 2015: 203; cf.
Sellars 1991: 4–5). Although Aristotle had insisted that
“not everything that appears is true” (Met.
1010b2–3), he also distinguished between appearances (ta
phainomena) and sensations (aisthēseis). Each of
the senses has its own proper objects (such as color, in the case of
sight) and our grasp of these is “is [always] true or [at least]
admits the lowest degree of falsehood” (DA
428b18–19; cf. 428a11). It is when we make judgements about
these that we can fall into error (DA 430a27–28;
Kalderon 2015: 68–70). Aristotle also insists that “no one
can learn anything at all in the absence of sense” and that even
when we are not actively perceiving, our thinking remains dependent on
sensory images (DA 432a7–9). Insofar as it insists on
both the reliability of the senses and their essential role in the
gaining of knowledge, Aristotle’s view is broadly
empiricist.
To gain a better understand of the nature and limits of
Aristotle’s empiricism, we must once again make some
distinctions. Aristotle can be classed as a tabula rasa
empiricist, for he rejects the claim that we have innate ideas or
principles of reasoning. He is also, arguably, an explanatory
empiricist, although in a different sense from that found among later
medical writers and sceptics. We can regard him as a modest kind of
justificatory empiricist, who believes that scientific
theorizing is answerable to what can be observed. But it is less clear
that he can be said to be a cognitive empiricist, given the
role of intellectual insight in his account of scientific
explanation.
With regard to tabula rasa empiricism, Aristotle rejects the
doctrine of innate ideas found in the work of Plato (427–347
BCE). He strongly denies, for instance, that we have innate knowledge
of the principles of scientific demonstration (APo.
100a; Met. 993a). This aspect of Aristotle’s empiricism
can be illustrated by his attitude to mathematics. For Plato,
mathematical objects resemble the Forms—some may in fact be
Forms (Shapiro 2000: 54–55)—which occupy a timeless realm
distinct from that of the objects of sense perception (Rep.
510c1–511b2). They are known, therefore, either by recollection
(anamnēsis) or by a kind of direct intellectual
intuition. Along with his rejection of innate ideas, Aristotle also
rejects this conception of mathematical objects. What the
mathematician grasps are real features of perceptible objects, but
regarded in a particular way (Lear 1982: 168, 184). They are regarded
merely “as” (hēi) having quantity and being
continuous or as objects of enumeration (Phys.
193b22–194a10; Met. 1061a28–1061b3,
1077b19–1078a4, 1078a22–28).
Is Aristotle an explanatory empiricist? Aristotle does accept the need
for inferences from what can be observed to facts that are not
immediately evident (Asmis 1984: 212–17). As he writes,
“to gain light on things imperceptible we must use the evidence
of perceptible things” (EN 1104a13–14). It
follows that something perceived can serve as a sign of something that
we would not otherwise know. Roughness of the tongue, for example, is
a sign (sēmeion) of fever (DS 462b26–32);
the large size of hailstones is a sign (sēmeion) they
have been formed close to the earth (Meteor.
348a33–36). But while knowledge of signs constitutes evidence,
it does not, in themselves, represent scientific knowledge. Scientific
knowledge is knowledge not just of facts, but of their causes. Even if
the association between sign and signified is without exception, so
that one can infer the latter from the former, such an inference is
not the same as offering an explanation. It may be, for instance, that
fever is a reliable sign of illness (Rhet. 1357b18–19):
all those with fever have an underlying medical condition. But this
does not yet constitute an explanation. Clearly, the fever does not
explain the illness. While a particular illness could explain the
fever, an explanatory inference of this kind would go in the other
direction: it would take us from the illness to the fever, showing the
latter to be a necessary consequence of the former. A sign, in other
words, can establish only what Aristotle calls “the fact”
(to hoti); showing a correlation between sign and signified
does not, in itself, establish the “reasoned fact” (to
dioti) (Madden 1952: 372; cf. APo. 78a23).
Note, too, that the category of explanatory empiricism suggests a
particular view of scientific explanation. It suggests that the causal
factors to which an explanation appeals will be hidden aspect of the
natural world, facts which lie “beneath,” as it were, the
observable reality of things. An explanatory empiricist denies we can
know such facts. Aristotle is cautious regarding our ability to know
about matters that cannot be directly observed. As he writes, when it
comes to “matters inaccessible to the senses,” it is
sufficient if our investigation arrives at a possible cause
(Meteor. 344a5–7). But Aristotle would also deny that
we need knowledge of what is unobservable in order to have a
satisfactory explanation. The causes invoked by an Aristotelian
science are not occult or hidden. On the contrary, the explanatory
properties of things are open to view. It follows that the arguments
that constitute a scientific explanation are not inferences from an
observable fact to an unobservable cause, such as the behavior of
Democritean atoms. They are demonstrative arguments referring to
active powers whose operations can be directly perceived. Even when a
particular event (such as the formation of hailstones) cannot be
directly perceived, a plausible explanation will be one that appeals
to observable phenomena (such as the way objects are made smooth by
friction). One apparent exception is found in Aristotle’s
explanation of the movement of the outermost heavenly sphere. This
posits a different kind of explanatory principle: a divine substance
or being (ousia) which is “eternal and unmoved and
separated from perceptible things” (Met. 1073a4–5).
For the most part, however, Aristotle’s scientific explanations
invoke perceptible realities.
What about justificatory empiricism? It seems that no ancient or
medieval thinker would have endorsed a strong form of justificatory
empiricism, which holds that the origins of a theory are irrelevant to
its epistemic status. But many did insist that all scientific
theorizing was answerable to experience. Aristotle was one of them. As
he remarks, “we should accept what is evident to the senses
rather than [mere] reasoning,” and reasoning only if it agrees
with the observed facts (GA 760b29–33). He had little
sympathy with the idea that the natural world could be explained in an
entirely a priori fashion, as Plato sometimes suggests (e.g.
Rep. 530b7–8, 531c1–5). He criticizes, for
instance, the Pythagoreans for forcing their observations of the
heavens to accord with theory, rather than seeking theories that
account for what can be seen to occur (DC 293a25–27).
Aristotle is particularly dismissive of the Eleatic philosophers, who
in their reasoning “transcended sense perception and disregarded
it on the grounds of following the argument.” He notes that
while their opinions are supported by reason, it would be
“almost madness to believe them, when one considers the
facts” (GC 325a18–20). The facts in question are
those revealed by the senses.
If there is a feature of Aristotle’s thought that casts doubt on
his empiricism, it is the account of scientific reasoning found in his
Posterior Analytics. That account is deductive: it involves a
derivation of the fact to be explained from first principles, the
latter being “true, primary, immediate, better known than and
prior to the conclusion, the latter being related to them as effect to
cause” (APo. 71b20–24). There has been much
debate regarding the role of such demonstrations. But the most
plausible view is that they are not, for Aristotle, a means of making
scientific discoveries; they are the way in which such discoveries
should be presented (Barnes 1994, xii). Indeed Aristotle expressly
denies we can discover explanatory principles by way of demonstration,
holding that such demonstrations serve merely to make them clear
(APo. 93b16–18). This view seems consistent with
Aristotle’s practice in his own scientific writings, as well as
the methodological remarks found in his biological works. He argues,
for instance, that when studying animals “we ought first to take
the phenomena that are observed in each group, and then go on to state
their causes” (PA 640a15). While we should not confuse
Aristotle’s empiricism with that of Francis Bacon (Harari 2004:
35), even his theorizing can be said to begin with what is
observed.
It remains true, however, that Aristotle’s ideal presentation of
a scientific explanation is that of a demonstration from first
principles. Only such a demonstration, he believes, would make clear
the necessary connection that constitutes a causal relation. While he
recognizes that this ideal is not always attainable, it remains a
desideratum. So how does one arrive at those principles? It
is here that Aristotle’s empiricism seems on shaky ground. The
active properties to which scientific demonstrations appeal are
universals: they are properties common to all beings of a particular
kind which constitute them as beings of that kind. Aristotle rejects
the idea that such universal properties exist extra rem,
independently of the individuals that embody them. So in order to
arrive at the principles of scientific explanation we need to
recognize the identity of kind among the forms of particular objects
and thus the universal that is embodied in each of them (Owens 1966:
168). The process by which we come to grasp the universals required
for scientific explanations is known as epagōgē
(APo. 99b15–100b15), a term commonly (but unhelpfully)
translated as “induction.”
What Aristotle means by this term is notoriously unclear; indeed there
is some debate about whether he uses it consistently (Ross 1949:
50; Harari 2004:
33–34). But it is possible to make some general comments.
Aristotle customarily distinguishes induction from syllogistic
reasoning, in the sense of demonstration. As he writes in one place,
“all our beliefs come either through demonstration [dia
sullogismou] or from induction [ex
epagōgēs]” (APr. 68b13). The general
contrast here is that while “demonstration proceeds from
universals to particulars,” induction takes one “from
particulars to universals” (Ross 1949: 47; cf. Top.
195a13–14). The latter, of course, is precisely what is required
to discover the principles of scientific explanation. What is unclear,
however, is how we can move from particulars to universals.
Aristotle denies (as we have seen) that the principles of a scientific
demonstration are themselves to be reached by way of demonstration (APo. 72b19–20; 93b16–18). But a demonstration
(sullogismos) is a strong form of argument, in which
conclusions follow necessarily from the premises (APr.
24b18–20). So some weaker form of reasoning could be involved,
such as “induction” in our modern sense: a generalization
over a collection of particulars. The latter gives rise to the
notorious “problem of induction” (sect. 4.2),
 of which Aristotle shows some awareness (Top.
131b19–36): how can any limited range of observations justify a
universal claim? But even leaving this aside, there is a serious
objection to understanding Aristotle’s
epagōgē in this way. The most such a generalization
could show that all individuals of a certain class have certain
characteristics (APo. 92a37–92b2): that all swans are
white, for instance. It could not tell us that this characteristic is
essential, one of the features that constitutes a swan as a swan.
Aristotle also suggests that each of the principles of scientific
explanation is in some sense self-evident: it “commands belief
of itself” (kath’heautēn einai pistēn)
(Top. 100b19–22). This seems to exclude the idea that
these principles are reached by any process of reasoning.
Epagōgē is, therefore, best regarded as “an
immediate apprehension of essences or forms” (Harari 2004: 34)
that occurs in the very process of perceiving particular individuals
of a given kind.
There is a problem here for anyone who wants to regard Aristotle as an
empiricist. While his epagōgē certainly draws on
the deliverances of the senses, and could not operate without them, it
seems to go beyond what the senses could reveal. For Aristotle, as we
have seen, sensation is reliable when it comes to its proper objects:
colours, sounds, tastes, smells, and tangible properties. But there is
a gap between sensing such properties and perceiving the
characteristics that are essential to objects of a particular kind
(Taylor 1990: 127–28). Even if we can reliably synthesize the
proper objects of perception into the objects of everyday experience
(tables, trees, and so on), it requires a further step to decide which
properties belong necessarily to such objects. (For a less pessimistic
view of the powers of epagōgē, see Barnes 1994: 267–71.)
If this is true, it is not clear what conclusion we should draw. One
possible conclusion is that Aristotle is not a cognitive empiricist,
since at a key point he relies on a rationalist, indeed
“super-rationalist” view of cognition, one in which the
(active) intellect “has nothing to learn from experience”
(Kahn 1981: 410–11; cf.
 sect. 4.3).
 Experience would provide merely the occasion on which the necessary
insight is gained. A second possible conclusion is that while
Aristotle’s theory of knowledge was thoroughly
empiricist, it was doomed to failure. The reliance on experience he
advocated could not lead to the kind of insights he required
(Gaukroger 1978: 124). A third possible conclusion is that his
position transcends the distinction between empiricism and
rationalism, epagōgē being “a form of
perceptive insight” that enables one to see the intelligible
aspect of what is grasped by the senses (Ziguras 2013: 96). But
however we assess Aristotle’s views, the question they raised
would return, to haunt the work of the medievals.
For further examples of ancient empiricist doctrine we can turn to the
medical writers and sceptics of the Hellenistic age (a roughly
300-year period following the death of Alexander the Great in 323 BCE)
and the teachings of Epicurus (ca. 341–270 BCE) and his
followers. The medical writers and sceptics offer a sophisticated form
of explanatory empiricism, while the Epicureans offer a strong view of
the reliability of sense perception coupled with a cautious acceptance
of inferences to what is “not evident,” such as the
existence and activity of atoms.
The first people to describe themselves as empiricists
(empeirikoi) were a group of medical writers of the
Hellenistic period. We know of these thinkers only indirectly, through
the work of other ancient writers, in particular Galen of Pergamon
(129–ca. 200 CE). As medical practitioners, their primary
concerns were practical: finding the correct method of diagnosis and
treatment. But in discussing these matters they put forward some
general epistemological claims, developing the empiricist tendencies
already found in the Hippocratic writings (sect. 3.1).
 In particular, they set themselves in opposition to those whom they
called “rationalists” (logikoi) or
“dogmatists” (dogmatikoi). What set them apart
was a refusal to posit causes beyond those that can be observed.
In spelling out their position the empiricists distinguished between
two styles of inference. What they rejected was the variety of
reasoning they called “analogism” (analogismos),
which “starts from what is apparent but ends up with what is
entirely unclear” (Galen SB ch. 5). In its place they
advocated what they called “epilogism”
(epilogimos), which deals “solely with what is
apparent,” but can be used “to discover what is currently
unseen” (Galen SB ch. 5). The idea here is that while the
cause that is inferred may be currently hidden, the inference is based
on an association that is, at other times, directly observable.
Epilogismos, the empiricists argued, is a form of reasoning
used by all human beings, which leads to a consensus, while
analogismos leads to disagreement and conclusions that can be
neither confirmed nor denied (Galen ME ch. 24).
While we know of the medical empiricists only indirectly, we do have
first-hand access to the thought of another group of explanatory
empiricists, namely the sceptics of the Pyrrhonian school as
represented by the writings of Sextus Empiricus (ca. 150–225
CE). (The empiricus title suggests that he, too, was
associated with the medical writers.) Worth noting, first of all, is
Sextus’s presentation of the problem of induction
(epagōgē). This assumes that
epagōgē is simply a process of enumerative
induction. As we have already seen
 (sect. 3.2),
 this is unlikely to be what Aristotle understood by the term, but given this understanding of induction,
Sextus is quick to point out its inadequacy. Those who follow this
procedure must survey “all the particulars or some of
them.” If they survey only some, the induction will be
insecure, since it may be that some of the omitted particulars lack
the feature in question. But if they try to survey all, “they
will labour at an impossible task, since the particulars are infinite
and indefinite” (Sextus PH 2.204). The argument is not
strictly sound, since there are cases in which we know (or believe we
know) all the instances. An example offered by John Buridan
(1295–1358) was that of a proposition regarding all the (six)
planets (SD 6.1.5). But the question would remain a
live one for any would-be empiricist.
Does this scepticism rule out any kind of general knowledge? The
sceptics, of course, are not interested in developing general laws or
principles. If they do discuss scientific matters, it is only to show
that for any one theory, a contrary but equally persuasive theory can
be developed (Sextus PH 1.18). But they do not deny that for
practical purposes we can rely on the observed association of
particular kinds of events. Of importance here is Sextus’s
distinction between two types of sign: the “commemorative”
or “recollective” (hypomynēstikon) and the
“indicative” (endeiktikon). An indicative sign is
thought to signify some reality that has not directly been observed.
It does so on account of what Sextus calls “its proper nature
and constitution” (Sextus PH 2.101). The idea here
seems to be that of a necessary connection between the sign and what
it indicates, known by reason rather than by experience. The inference
from movement to the possession of a soul, for example, makes use of
an indicative sign, for the soul can never be directly observed. In
Sextus’s view, inferences of this kind cannot be justified. Sextus
is, however, happy to endorse the use of commemorative signs, which
are based on nothing more than the past experience of the association
of two kinds of phenomena. Smoke, for instance, is a commemorative
sign of fire; a scar is a commemorative sign that the bearer has
received a wound (Sextus PH 2.102).
While we may think of these as two forms of inference, Sextus denied
that reliance on commemorative signs involves any inference at all,
since it does not involve making a judgement. He argued that if it did
involve an inference, you would expect those who had no knowledge of
logic to be less skilled in this respect. But, as he writes,
“illiterate helmsmen and farmers with no experience of
dialectical principles are expert judges of signs [akrōs
sēmeiountai]”, being able to predict (in one case) a
coming storm or calm weather and (in the other) a good or a poor
harvest (Sextus M VII 2.270). Indeed, even non-human animals
gain knowledge in this way. As Sextus writes, “the dog, when it
tracks an animal by its footprints, is actually using signs
[sēmeioutai],” but it is not making inferences. In
Sextus’s words, “it does not formulate the judgement
‘if this is a footprint, a beast is here’” (Sextus
M VII 2.271). This deflationary view may be what allows
Sextus to reconcile a reliance on commemorative signs with his
scepticism.
The aim of the ancient sceptics was not to achieve knowledge of
nature; it was to attain “tranquillity in matters of
opinion” (kata doxan ataraxia) (Sextus PH
1.15). Something similar may be said about the Epicureans. Their
movement can be regarded as a “secular religion” (Milton
2002: 182), which aimed to achieve a knowlege of nature only insofar
as this promoted peace of mind. (For a more vigorous defence of the
scientific credentials of Epicureanism, see Asmis 1984.) But even if
this is true, the writings of Epicurus and his followers do embody a
distinctive form of empiricism. It is, first of all, a tabula
rasa empiricism, holding that the evidence of the senses is
“the base and foundation” of all our knowledge (Sextus M
VII 1.216). But it differs from some other forms of empiricism
both in regarding as infallible the immediate deliverances of
perception and allowing for the mind to be affected by external
objects in ways independent of the five senses. Epicurean empiricism
is also more tolerant than that of the medical writers and sceptics,
since it accepts inferences to unobservable causes. It is not, in
other words, an explanatory empiricism. Indeed this seems to be the
reason why the more sceptical Sextus counts Epicureans among the
“dogmatists” (PH 1.3).
In a work entitled On the Criterion or The Canon (Peri
kritēriou ē kanōn), Epicurus is said to have
argued that all sensations (aisthēseis) are reliable,
there being nothing that can refute them (Diogenes Laërtius [DL]
10.31). Sextus sums up this Epicurean doctrine as the view that
“all sensed things … are true and existent” (Sextus
M VII 2.9). On the face of it, this seems an untenable
position. Do our senses not deceive us? Do we not see sticks as bent
where they enter water or a distant large object as small? There are
two responses an Epicurean would make. The first is to make a clear
distinction (comparable to that made by Aristotle
 [sect. 3.2])
 between our sensations and the opinions we form on the basis of what
we sense. When it comes to our opinions, Epicurus held that
“some them are true and others are false, since they are
judgements of ours concerning what appears, and we judge sometimes
rightly and sometimes wrongly” (Sextus M VII 1.210).
When we make mistakes, in other words, it is not the senses that are
to blame. Secondly, the senses are verdical because the impressions
they form are not “purely private mental phenomena”
(O’Keefe 2010: 100). They are brought about by the objects of
which they testify, which emit a continuous flow of images or
simulacra (eidōla) from their surfaces
(Epicurus Ep. Hdt. 46–51). On this view, the senses are
reliably informative, faithfully reflecting the objects that produced
them, even if we later attribute to them a false propositional
content.
Epicurean empiricism is, however, a relatively tolerant form of
empiricism. It is tolerant, first of all, insofar as it does not
restrict perception to what is received by way of the five senses.
Epicurus and his followers seem to have regarded the mind itself as a
kind of “supersense” (DeWitt 1954: 207–9), capable
of receiving eidōla on its own account. (This doctrine
bears some resemblance to one of the Buddhist beliefs mentioned earlier [sect. 1].)
 The Epicurean writer Lucretius (ca. 95–54 BCE), for instance,
claims that some of the simulacra thrown off by objects are
exceedingly fine, such that they can penetrate the body and affect the
mind independently of the five senses. This allows him to account for
the images we see in dreams, which accurately reflect aspects of the
world, although in a manner that deceives us (Lucretius RN
4.722–31, 5.1168–71).
Epicurean empiricism is also more tolerant insofar as it allows for
explanatory inferences to unobservable entities. More precisely,
Epicurus speaks of two kinds of inferences from what is perceived to
what is currently unobserved. The first is an inference to “that
which awaits confirmation” (to prosmenon); the second
is an inference to “that which is non-evident” (to
adēlon) (Epicurus Ep. Hdt. 38.10). Reflecting on
the views of Epicureans and other “dogmatists,” Sextus
makes a similar distinction (PH 2.97–98). He speaks,
firstly, of an inference to something that is “for the
moment” (pros kairon) non-evident, but which will
become evident in due course. His example is the city of Athens, which
(assuming I am not at Athens) will become evident to me if I travel
there. This corresponds to Epicurus’s “that which awaits
confirmation” (DL 10.34). But Sextus also speaks of entities
that are “non-evident by nature” (ta … phusei
adēla), whose existence and activity, he writes, some
“dogmatists” regard as knowable by inference. One of his
examples is the Epicurean (and Democritean) belief in atoms moving in
the void (Sextus M VII 2.319). This corresponds to
Epicurus’s “that which is non-evident.” Note that
Sextus adds to these two a third category: that of matters which are
“altogether non-evident” (ta kathapax adēla)
(PH 2.97), which even dogmatists agreed could never be known
by any kind of inference, his example being whether the number of
stars is odd or even.
What kinds of inference (on the Epicurean view) could be used to
supported belief in unobservable entities? In the case of entities
unobservable only “for the moment,” the answer is clear.
One can make a conjecture and then test it when the entity in question
becomes observable (Sextus M VII 1.212). But in the case of
things that are “non-evident by nature,” only indirect
confirmation is possible. Epicurus’s view seems to have been
that a hypothesis consistent with experience—one that is not
“witnessed against”—can and should be accepted
(Sextus M VII 1.216). But of course two or more hypotheses
may survive this test. Remarkably, Epicurus and his followers seem to
have held that in these circumstances they can all be accepted, not
just as possible, but as true, being realized at some time or in some
place (Allen 2004: 95; cf. Lucretius RN 5.526–33).
While this may have seemed plausible in a universe infinite in extent
and unlimited in time, it leaves open the question of which of these
explanations applies to the particular case we are interested in.
Epicurus seems to have held that we should not always expect to be
able to answer this question (Ep. Pyth. 86). Nor do we need
to do so; the knowledge that an event has some natural explanation is
sufficient to free us from a superstitious fear of the gods (Ep.
Pyth. 87).
It is hardly surprising, given the influence of Christianity, that
neither ancient scepticism nor Epicureanism found much of a following
among medieval thinkers. But the attitudes associated with the medical
empiricism of late antiquity did not entirely disappear: we find at
least hints of these among late medieval writers. A striking example
is the polemical work Antipocras by Nicholas of Poland
(fl. 1278). While himself an educated man, trained within the
scholastic tradition and assocated with the medical school at
Montpellier, Nicholas advocated a medical practice based on
experience, praising the knowledge of common people over against that
of the scholars. This may have been a reaction to the more theoretical
style of medicine developing at Montpellier as a result of the
discovery of works by Galen and some Arab writers (Eamon & Keil
1987: 195). But for evidence of more general empiricist doctrines, we
must turn to the followers of Aristotle.
The medieval followers of Aristotle shared his confidence in the
reliability of the senses. Thomas Aquinas (1225–1274), for
example, follows Aristotle in holding that sensation is not deceived
with regard to its proper objects, such as colours and sounds
(ST 1a 17.3), provided that the sense organs are functioning
properly and in the right circumstances (Pasnau 2002:
188–89).
Did medieval philosophers embrace a tabula rasa empiricism?
The Latin phrase characterizing an empiricism of this
kind—nihil est in intellectu quod non prius fuerit in
sensu—was something of a commonplace. It is found (in
variant forms) in the work of Bonaventure (1221–1274), where it
is attributed to Aristotle, Aquinas, Matthew of Aquasparta (ca.
1240–1302), and Duns Scotus (1266–1308) (Cranefield 1970:
78–79). Not all accepted the idea, as we shall see, but
Aristotelians generally took it for granted. Aquinas follows Aristotle
(DA 432a7–9) in holding that all the objects of our
understanding “have their being in the objects of
perception,” rather than in some separated, Platonic realm. It
follows that “without sense perception no one can either learn
anything new, nor understand matters already learned.” Even when
we are thinking about something we already know, our thought is always
accompanied by an image (a “phantasm”), which is a
likeness of something that can be perceived (Aquinas In DA
3.13 [para. 791]).
But even when they speak of the mind as a tabula rasa, we
should not attribute to medieval writers the kind of genetic
empiricism later found in the work of John Locke. The blank tablet of
which medievals speak, following Aristotle (DA 430a1), is
what they called the “passive” or “potential”
intellect, which was only one element in the process of cognition
 (sect. 4.3).
 When it comes to the larger picture, medieval philosophers will often
combine the Aristotelian idea that all knowledge comes through the
senses with Augustinian views, which speak of divine illumination
 (sect. 4.2)
 or innate knowledge. Even Aquinas held that we have a kind of innate
capacity, ultimately given by God, to grasp the first principles of
scientific knowledge (Pasnau 2002: 307–8). This is probably best
thought of as a kind of a dispositional innatism: we are
disposed to form certain ideas when presented with the right kind of
experience. At times Aquinas seems to go further. He writes, for
instance, that our knowledge arises “partly from within and
partly from without” and that there is some truth in the idea
that “we already know that which we learn” (Aquinas
DV 10.6). But what he seems to mean here is that the
principles we employ in forming our beliefs are implicit in the
structure of the mind and its operations (Allers 1942: 58) (see
 sect. 4.3).
 Other writers approach the tabula rasa idea from the other
direction, beginning with a clear commitment to innate knowledge.
Roger Bacon (1215–1292), for instance, suggests that the human
soul is created with the species (aspects or forms) of all
things within it, which seems a strongly Augustinian conception of
knowledge. But since the soul’s union with the body hinders our
access to this knowledge, the human mind (as potential intellect) can
be described as a “blank slate” (tabula nuda or
rasa) (Bacon In Phys. pp. 7, 9; R. Wood 2007: 54). A
similar view is found in the work of Robert Grosseteste (ca.
1165–1253), who also combines a modified Augustinian belief in
divine illumination
 (sect. 4.2)
 with the Aristotelian idea that we gain knowledge of scientific
principles from experience (van Dyke 2009: 688–89).
While these look like puzzling combinations of empiricist and
non-empiricist views, their rationale will become clear shortly
 (sect. 4.3).
 But alongside this qualified genetic empiricism, we also find
expressions of a justificatory empiricism. In particular, the work of
Roger Bacon sets out two forms of justificatory empiricism, both of
which fall under the heading of what he calls scientia
experimentalis. The first involves confirming well-founded
deliverances of reason by “trying them out,” as it were,
for oneself (Hackett 2015: sect. 5.4.3). Bacon’s rationale for
urging this kind of testing is that arguments alone are insufficient
to convince us of the truth of any practical matter.
“Reasoning,” he writes,
draws a conclusion and forces us to grant it, but it does not confirm
it nor remove doubt so that the mind may rest in the knowledge of the
truth, unless this is found by way of experience. … For if a
man … should prove by way of adequate arguments that fire burns
and harms and destroys things, still the mind of the hearer would not
rest on this account nor would such a person avoid fire before he had
placed his hand or some combustible material in fire, so that he might
test by experience [ut per experientiam probaret] what the
argument had taught. (Bacon OM 6.1)
It follows (in a phrase for which Bacon has become famous) that
“without experience nothing can be sufficiently known”
(sine experientia nihil sufficienter sciri potest)
(OM 6.1).
A second form of justificatory empiricism holds that some beliefs can
be defended only by reference to experience, there being no
arguments from prior principles that can be adduced in their support.
These include, first of all, matters within the domain of the other
sciences which mere reasoning could never have revealed, such as the
practical discoveries made by alchemists (Bacon OM 6, 2a
prae.). But there are also matters that fall outside the domain of any
speculative science, fields of inquiry in which scientia
experimentalis “by its own power investigates the secrets
of nature” (Bacon OM 6, 3a prae.). To appreciate what
this kind of investigation entailed, we need to understand the class
of phenomena to which it applied: that of the secrets of nature.
The domain of natural philosophy was “the common course of
nature” (Biard 2001: 79, 80): it dealt with what occurred (in
Aristotle’s phrase) “either always or for the most
part” (ē tou aei ē tou hōs epi to polu)
(Met. 1207a21–22). But there existed phenomena that
fell outside this domain, namely miracles and marvels. Miracles, in
the strict sense, were supernatural occurrences, which fell in the
domain of theology. But marvellous phenomena were often thought of as
“preternatural,” that is to say, as brought about by
occult but natural properties and powers (Daston 1991: 95–100).
Such powers included the influence exercised by the heavenly bodies on
earthly affairs, as well as mysterious properties of sublunary
entities, such as the lodestone. These powers were occult in the sense
of being hidden. But they were also mysterious in that their workings
were not explicable in terms of what Aristotelians believed to be the
four simple substances (earth, air, fire, and water) and their
associated primary qualities (the hot and the cold, the moist and the
dry) (Pasnau 2011: 44). It is for this reason that they could not be
proved to exist by demonstrative arguments, but could be known only by
experience. This gave rise to a particular form of empiricism
associated with the study of “natural magic.”
An example can be found in the work of an author already mentioned:
Nicholas of Poland, the radical medical empiricist of Montpellier. In
his Antipocras Nicholas claims that although the presence of
a divinely given power in the most humble of objects cannot be proven
by reason, it “is made evident by its effect” (hoc
patet effectu) (Nicholas of Poland Ant. ll.
202–3). In this respect Nicholas seems to have been influenced
by another work more closely associated with magic, the De
mirabilibus mundi. This states that there are “certain
effects manifest to the senses to which we can assign no
reason,” as well as effects known only by way of reason. The
marvellous powers of natural objects belong to the former category,
which are known by way of practical experience (per
experientiam) (Ps-Albertus PA-DM para. 49–50).
While this work was falsely attributed to Albert the Great (ca.
1200–1280), Albert himself adopts a similar line when defending
the mysterious powers of certain stones: these, too, are known
“most convincingly by experience,” although they lack a
scientific explanation (A-DM 2.1.1).
When medieval writers speak of knowing matters per
experientiam (by experience), they are understanding the term experientia very broadly. The same may be said of the term experimentalis, so that the phrase
scientia experimentalis should be translated as
“experiential knowledge” rather than “experimental science.”
Although Bacon’s scientia experimentalis did include
practical procedures (experimenta), as were used in alchemy,
as well as the use of instruments (as in the study of optics and
astronomy), it also included simple observation as well as reliance on
second-hand reports of dubious value. (We are still a long way from
the motto of the seventeenth-century Royal Society: nullius in
verba, “take no man’s word for it.”) Nor is
there any consistent link with quantification. In only a few fields,
such as astronomy, are the procedures employed by natural philosophers
associated with careful measurement. In the century following
Bacon’s work, we do find the development of what we may call
“quantified concepts,” particularly in the study of local
motion. We find this, in particular, in the work of the Oxford
calculatores associated with Merton College, who are perhaps best known for their formulation of the “mean speed theorem.” This was
the idea that 
a uniform acceleration produces the same … distance travelled
in a given time, as a uniform velocity equal to the instantaneous
velocity at the middle instance of the time of acceleration. (Crombie
1961: 153) 
But while such developments mark a break with the Aristotelian
tradition of a purely qualitative physics, they remain largely
theoretical. While the discussions giving rise to the mean speed
theorem emerged from everyday observations of falling bodies, the
theorem itself was proven arithmetically and geometrically (Clagett
1959: 256, 259–60). The principles developed were not
“operationalized,” that is to say, expressed in forms that
would allow for experimental testing (Clagett 1959: 206). Their
experimental testing had to await Galileo’s inclined plane
experiments (Crombie 1961: 153–54).
This broad understanding of experience is evident, too, in medieval
conceptions of the origin and scope of perceptual knowledge. With
regard to the origins of such knowledge, later empiricists would focus
almost exclusively on the five “exterior senses.” But
medieval authors, following Avicenna (Ibn Sīnā;
980–1037), commonly list up to five “interior
senses” (Bates 2010: 138–39) alongside the exterior ones.
Aquinas reduces these to four: the common sense, the imagination, the
vis aestimativa (or cogitativa), and the sense
memory (Aquinas ST 1a 78.4). The work of these interior
senses involves an active role in shaping our perceptions, even those
of our physical environment. The mind, in other words, is not entirely
passive, even at its basic levels of operation. The vis
aestimativa, for instance, refers to the power that even
non-rational creatures have of making judgements about what is
dangerous or useful: it shapes our perceptions by adding an evaluative
component. (There is something analogous here to James Gibson’s
theory of “affordances”
 [sect. 2.2].)
With regard to the scope of experience, this was generally thought to
include knowledge of our own interior acts. That we have some kind of
immediate access to such knowledge was “one of the truisms of
Augustinian thought” (Leff 1975: 28). Its mechanism was
unclear—Scotus says simply that we know these things “by
way of a certain sense, that is, an interior perception”
(quodam sensu, id est, perceptione interiore) (Scotus
Ord. IV d. 43, q. 2)—but its existence was not in
doubt. As an anonymous scribe wrote in the margin of one of
Ockham’s manuscripts, the idea that “there is nothing in
the intellect unless it was formerly in the senses” applies to
“external objects, not to its own acts” (Leff 1975: 28
n.116). In Bacon’s work, this focus on inner experience is taken
a step further, insofar as his conception of experience embraces not
only our everyday mental states, but also spiritual states up to and
including “raptures” in which people have visions of
things “of which it is not lawful for human beings to
speak” (Bacon OM 6.2). These are experiences brought
about by the grace of God, rather than any purely natural process of
cognition.
We have seen that medieval thought included a qualified form of
tabula rasa empiricism and a distinctive form of
justificatory empiricism, coupled with a broad undersanding of
“experience.” There is no need to dwell on explanatory
empiricism, for insofar as medieval natural philosophy was influenced
by Aristotle it shared his view of scientific explanations. For the
most part these did not invoke unobservable entities, such as atoms,
but manifest powers of the entities we can perceive
 (sect. 3.2).
 Medieval thinkers did not deny that we could know about unobservable
entities. God, after all, was an unobservable entity, and thinkers
such as Aquinas thought that “natural reason” could know
something about God, albeit by way of analogy. (William of Ockham [ca.
1285–1347] would later downplay the extent of such knowledge,
without dismissing it altogether [Leff 1975: 382–98].) But there
were limits to what we could know about the unobservable features of the natural world (Hutchison 1982: 235–36). Aquinas, for
instance, appears to endorse Aristotle’s view that when it comes
to matters that are “not manifest to the senses”
(immanifesta sensui) we should not demand “a certain
and necessary demonstration”; a merely possible explanation may
be the best we can achieve (Aquinas In Meteor. 1.7 [lect.
11]). One could regard this as a modest kind of explanatory
empiricism. But the focus here will be on a different question, namely
whether any medievals were cognitive empiricists, denying that we have
intellectual powers or capacities giving access to factual knowledge
independently of experience. 
Followers of St Augustine shared Plato’s doubts about the
capacity of sense perception, in particular about its ability to give
rise to scientific knowledge. Such knowledge, they held, did not arise
from sense perception alone; it required a further input, provided by
God himself: a divine illumination. This can be a difficult idea for a
modern reader to grasp, since it is easily confused with another
belief, which has to do with a supernatural source of knowledge
accessed by faith. The two are analogous, insofar as they both involve
a divine initiative. The act of faith requires a divine initiative
“on the volitional side,” to enable us to accept
propositions as divinely revealed. The doctrine of divine illumination
also speaks of a divine initiative, but that initiative is directly
cognitive rather than volitional (Pasnau 2015: sect. 1). It holds that
divine illumination is required for a number of apparently ordinary
cognitive activities, which are engaged in by believers and
non-believers alike.
While this doctrine has theological roots, it was also motivated by
two features of human knowledge. The first has to do with those
principles of thought that appear to be necessarily, not contingently,
true. These include mathematical truths and principles such as that of
non-contradiction or sufficient reason. While such principles are
essential to thought, it is difficult to see how they could be derived
from sense perception. (Aristotle had provided an empiricist account
of the origin of mathematical ideas
 [sect. 3.2],
 but this was, and remains, contested.) A second motivation was
related to the Aristotelian ideal of science. Scientia, as we
have seen, involved a grasp of the essential properties of perceived
objects. But this, too, involves a kind of insight that can seem to
lie beyond the capacity of the senses
 (sect. 3.2).
 Advocates of divine illumination argued that these kinds of knowledge
were possible only because the human mind has access to the mind of
God. More precisely, it was possible only because God bathed the human
mind in his own, uncreated light. This allowed it not only to grasp
necessary truths, but to understand the essences of created beings by
reference to their exemplars in the divine mind.
The development of medieval empiricism involved a rejection of this
doctrine. It is already opposed by Aquinas, who holds that that the
human mind requires a special divine illumination only for those
matters that entirely exceed its natural powers, which are known by
divine revelation (Aquinas ST 1a 2ae 109.1). But the most
vigorous rejection of the doctrine is to be found in the work of Duns
Scotus, who opposes the (modified) illuminationist teaching found in
the work of Henry of Ghent (ca. 1217–1293).
Henry’s version of the illuminationist doctrine was already
influenced by Aristotelian thought (Marrone 1985: 145; 2011: 24),
which in this context took the form of a desire to attribute as much
as possible to the power of the human mind. But Henry was reluctant to
attribute all we know to our unaided powers. In particular, he made a
distinction between knowing what is true (id quod verum est)
about an object and knowing its truth (eius veritatem). The
first is a very basic level of knowledge, existing even in non-human
animals. It does grasp its object as a something distinct from the
knower, but fails to grasp its essential characteristics. Such
knowledge is not sufficient for science, which requires a grasp of
what the object truly is (quid sit in rei veritate) (Henry of
Ghent Summa 1.2). The latter kind of knowledge requires
access to the exemplar of the object in the divine mind, something
only God can give.
It is this idea that Duns Scotus opposes. He would not, of course,
have opposed the idea that the human mind was created by God and thus
owes all its powers to God. (Scotus was, after all, a theologian.) But he did deny
that scientific knowledge involved a special divine illumination. His
argument proceeds in two stages. He insists, first of all, that
Henry’s restrictions on the powers of the human mind, rather
than leading to scientific certainty, lead inevitably to scepticism.
If the human mind is naturally incapable of grasping these truths,
then no amount of divine light will help it. He then argues that there
are four kinds of naturally attainable knowledge that give rise to the
certainty required for science. There is, first of all, knowledge of
“matters knowable in an unqualified sense,” such as the
fact that a triangle has three angles equal to two right angles. The
second is knowledge of “matters knowable through
experience,” such as that the moon is eclipsed. The third is
knowledge of “our own actions,” such as the fact that I am
awake. The fourth is knowledge of “matters we are currently
aware of through the senses,” such as that the object in front
of me is white (Scotus Ord. I dist. 3, pars 1, qu. 4,
adnot.).
Perhaps the most critical of these is knowledge through experience,
for it relates to the way we grasp the principles of scientific
explanation. Scotus’s suggestion is that we can know these
principles through repeated exposure to particular instances. As he
writes, 
even though a person does not experience every single individual, but
only a great many, nor does he experience them at all times, but only
frequently, still be knows infallibly that it is always this way and
holds for all instances. He knows this in virtue of this proposition
reposing in his soul: “Whatever occurs in a great many instances
by a cause that is not free, is the natural effect of that
cause.” (Scotus Ord. I dist. 3, pars 1, qu. 4)
Scotus seems to regard this proposition as self-evidently true. But as
Nicholas of Autrecourt (1299–1369) would point out, it merely
begs the question (Thijssen 1987: 249). In any case, Nicholas writes,
if Scotus means by a cause “that which brought an effect in a
great many instances in the past and will do so in the future,”
then there is a problem. For “even if something has brought
about an effect in a great many instances, it is still not certain it
will continue to do so” (Nicholas of Autrecourt EO ll.
44–47; Thijssen 1987: 249 n. 44). So we cannot, with certainty,
form general statements on the basis of the kind of observations to
which Scotus appeals. (This is, of course, the very problem of
induction to which Sextus Empiricus had referred
 [sect. 3.3].)
 Even if we could formulate such general statements, we could not be
certain that they embody causal claims.
We shall come back to this question
 (sect. 4.3),
 which was made more pressing by the nominalism of Scotus’s
successor, William of Ockham. But even if Scotus had no satisfactory
alternative to the doctrine of divine illumination, that doctrine was
soon eclipsed. By the mid-fourteenth century, it seems to have been no
longer considered a viable option. While the idea did not entirely
disappear—it re-emerges, for instance, in the work of Nicolas
Malebranche (1638–1715)—its rejection by late medieval
thinkers marked an important step on the road to a more thorough-going
empiricism. 
Advocates of the doctrine of divine illumination would not count as
cognitive empiricists, for they held that the mind has access to a
source of knowledge that is independent of the senses. What about
those who rejected this doctrine? In many cases it is also difficult
to regard them as cognitive empiricists, because of the remarkable
power they continued to attribute to the mind: that of grasping the
universals embedded in the singular objects of sense perception. What
we see in the work of William of Ockham is a downgrading of this
power, which goes hand-in-hand with a rethinking of the idea of
universals. Ockham’s work thus laid the foundations on which
early modern empiricists would build.
The power of the mind to grasp universals was traditionally attributed
to what was called the “agent intellect,” the intellect as
active or productive. The idea of the agent (or active) intellect is
one of the most complex and contested aspects of medieval
epistemology. It has its origins in some cryptic remarks made by
Aristotle (DA 430a10–19), in which he distinguishes
between two aspects of the mind. There is the mind as “that
which becomes all things” (nous tōi panta
ginesthai) and there is the mind as “that which makes all
things” (ho … tōi panta poiein). Behind
these descriptions is the idea that the mind “becomes” the
object of its knowledge, in the sense of taking on its intelligible
form without the matter in which it was originally embodied. The mind
as passive—as that which becomes all things—stands in
relation to the mind that makes all things in the same way that prime
matter, which is pure potential, stands in relation to its shaping
principle. Aristotle describes the mind as active or
productive—the nous poiētikos, to use a phrase
coined by his commentators—in terms that suggest something
immaterial: it is “separable, unmixed, and impassible.”
This may be because it is not so much a substance, as an operation or
function; indeed Aristotle describes the nous poiētikos
as “by nature activity” (tēi ousiai …
energeia).
As that last interpretive remark suggests, this passage demands
commentary and commentators disagreed about how it was to be
understood. (For a classic survey, see Brentano 1992.) Broadly
speaking, there were two views. The first held that the agent
intellect was separate from each human mind, such that the
intelligible forms “flow” from this immaterial entity into
the mind to produce an act of understanding. This was the view held,
in two quite different forms, by Ibn Sīnā (Avicenna) and Ibn
Rushd (Averroës) (1126–1198). Such a view implies that
there is only one agent intellect, common to all human beings, which
may or may not be identified with God himself. (When it is identified
with God, this view closely resembles the Augustinian doctrine of
divine illumination.) The alternative idea, vigorously defended by
Aquinas, held that both the agent intellect and the potential
intellect are aspects of the human mind. Even among those who held
that latter view, there were different ways in which the agent
intellect was thought to produce knowledge. In some versions of the
doctrine (such as Aquinas’s) the agent intellect was thought to
abstract the intelligible forms from the images produced by the
senses. In other versions, the input of the senses was little more
than the occasion on which the agent intellect drew on its own innate
resources, in the process of which the mind could be thought of as
enlightened by God. Thomas of York (d. ca. 1260), for instance spoke
openly in this context of innate ideas and of a knowledge that came
“from above and not from the senses” (Bowman 1973:
265).
The second of these views, in particular, seems incompatible with both
a tabula rasa and a cognitive empiricism. So it is not
surprising that the development of a more thoroughgoing cognitive
empiricism went hand-in-hand with with an effective abandonment of the
idea of the agent intellect.
The work of the agent intellect had seemed essential because of a
widely held view regarding the object of knowledge. This held that
while the senses deal with particular individuals, the intellect can
grasp only their universal properties. As Aquinas writes, citing
Aristotle (APo. 87b37–39), “sense has to do with
particulars, whereas intellect has to do with universals”
(sensus particularium, intellectus … universalium)
(Aquinas In DA 2.5 [sect. 284]). (The idea that the intellect
has direct knowledge only of universals seems distinctively
Aristotelian; it was not shared by other ancient philosophical schools
[Normore 2007: 114].) Aquinas’s reason for holding this view is
that the intellect, as an immaterial substance, cannot directly grasp
material singulars. Intellectual knowledge therefore requires the work
of the agent intellect, abstracting the immaterial intelligible forms
from the perceptible forms grasped by the senses. We do, of course,
know singular objects, for all the objects of sensation are,
ultimately, singulars. But in Aquinas’s view, the intellect
knows these objects only indirectly, by directing its attention back
to the images yielded by the senses and linking these with the
associated general concept (Aquinas ST 1a 86.1).
William of Ockham, on the other hand, holds what Aquinas expressly
denies: that “the singular object is that which is first known,
in a manner simple and proper to itself” (Ockham Quodl.
I qu. 13). He holds, too, that the immateriality of the intellect is
no barrier to this, since the relation involved is a merely
intentional one (Ockham Ord. I dist. 3, qu. 6; In
Phys. 1.1 [sect. 2]). Ockham, however, goes further in denying the
very existence of universals. All Aristotelians, of course, denied
that universals exist extra rem (distinct from singular
objects). But Christian Aristotelians such as Aquinas continued to
regard the similarities between individuals of a given kind as the
product of a common idea, which existed ante rem (before the
existence of particular objects) in the mind of God (Aquinas
ST 1a 15.2). As aspects of the divine mind, these were
thought to share in the divine nature. Indeed they were nothing less
than “the divine essence as imitable outside itself”
(Klocker 1980: 357). This gave the natural kinds discoverable by
science a metaphysical grounding. While paying lip service to the
Augustinian notion of ideas in the divine mind, Ockham reduced these
to the ideas God has of individual objects in the act of creating
them. These ideas refer, in the first instance, to the creatures
themselves: the only reason for positing them is that when God creates
he knows what he is doing (Deus est rationabiliter operans)
(Ockham Ord. I dist. 35, qu. 5). It follows, as Ockham
writes, that
no universal … exists in any way outside the mind and anything
that can be predicated of many is by its nature in the mind either
psychologically [subiective] or logically
[obiective], and … no universal is of the essence or
nature [de essentia seu quidditate] of any substance. (Ockham
Ord. I dist. 2, qu. 8)
This means that the features that unite entities of a kind, which are
expressed in the general propositions of science, no longer have a metaphysical foundation. While this view is generally
described as “nominalist,” it is more accurately
characterized as “conceptualist,” since the
“names” to which universals were reduced were nomina
mentalia (mental names), or (as we would say) concepts (Maurer
1999: 63–64). But with this qualification in mind, we can
continue to refer to it as “nominalist.”
What implications does this have for the idea of the agent intellect?
Despite his nominalism, Ockham continues to believe that there are
real similarities lying behind our classificatory schemes, rejecting
the idea that these are entirely matters of convention (Ockham
Ord. I dist. 2 qu. 8). But although real similarities exist,
they are not expressions of common essences or natures. Coupled with
the idea that the mind has an immediate grasp of singular objects, it
follows that a special faculty was not longer required in order to
abstract the universal from the particular. It was enough for the mind
to be able to identify similarities among particular individuals.
(Note that the status of these similarities then became a problem,
which Ockham may never satisfactorily have resolved [Goddu 1984:
92–93].) So it comes as no surprise to discover that Ockham
denies any real distinction between the agent intellect and the
potential intellect. “The same intellect,” he writes,
simply “has different names” (Ockham Ord. I dist.
3, qu. 6). Since there was now no distinctive task for the agent
intellect to perform, Ockham could wield his famous razor to abandon
the idea that it represented a distinct power of the mind (Ockham
Rep. II qu. 20).
There is another dimension to the empiricism of this period, which is
a new emphasis on experience as a means of discovering causal
relations. Any Aristotelian, of course, would have agreed that we know
of causal relations by means of experience. But what we find in the
work of Scotus and Ockham is a particular focus on this idea, coupled
with descriptions of how one may isolate particular causes. Historians
have long associated this with a renewed emphasis on God’s
absolute power and the idea that the order of the world depends
entirely on his will, which makes that order radically contingent and
discoverable only a posteriori (Foster 1934: 464–65;
Henry 2009: 88). It is, however, difficult to find a contemporary
expression of this idea and it has recently been contested
(Harrison 2002: 63–64). Nor should one overstate the degree of
novelty in the thought of Scotus and Ockham. Grosseteste had already
outlined the idea of a controlled experiment (Lewis 2013: sect. 11),
noting that we can come to know that scammony (convulvulus
scammonia) purges red bile by administering it “after all
other causes purging red bile have been isolated and excluded”
(Grosseteste In APo. 1.15; Crombie 1953: 74).

It is true,
however, that more detailed accounts of how to isolate causal
relations are found only in the late thirteenth and fourteenth
centuries. Scotus outlined several such methods (Vos 2006:
312–19), all of which involved separating out possible causes
and testing them by seeing in which cases the effect follows. At one
point, for example, Scotus writes: 
How, from perceptible effects, does one arrive at knowledge of the
cause? I respond, by dividing thus: in [a situation of type] A are
present [factors] B, C, D, if you wish to know which of D, B, or C is
a cause, consider the case where you find B without C. If then D
follows B and not C, then in [a situation of type] A, B is the cause
of D. (Scotus In Met. I qu. 4) 
Ockham picks up on this idea. He does not deny that we can know of
some causes by simple reasoning, on the basis of self-evident or
well-established metaphysical principles. We can know, for instance,
that the will causes its own acts (Ockham Ord. I dist. 1, qu.
3) or that there exists a first conserving cause of this world (Ockham
Ord. I dist. 2, qu. 10]). But when it comes to the discovery
of causes within the natural world, we must rely on observation. If a
causal agent is of a very specific kind (in Ockham’s terms,
known by way of its species specialissima), just one
observation will suffice. A single observation of a particular kind of
herb curing a particular illness, for example, can safely be
generalized. It can be generalized on the basis of the principle that
“all agents of the most specific kind will bring about effects
of the same nature” (Ockham Ord. I prol. qu. 2). If
the suspected cause is of a more generic kind, then many instances
will be needed (Ockham Ord. I prol. qu. 2). But in either
case, the process is thoroughly empirical: it involves the isolation
of causal factors by way of experience. As Ockham writes,
although I do not intend to make any general claim about the nature of
immediate [secondary] causes, I shall say what suffices for something
to be an immediate cause, namely that when it is present there occurs
the effect, and when it is not present … the effect does not
occur. And everything that has this character with respect to another
is the cause of that other … That this is sufficient for one
thing to be the cause of another, seems manifest. Because if not,
there remains no way of knowing something to be the cause of something
else. (Ockham Ord. I dist. 45, qu. 1)
It is tempting to see this as a reduction of the idea of causation to
that of the regular association of kinds of events. One could even
argue that such a view would be a logical consequence of Ockham's
nominalism (Klocker 1980: 351). But Ockham’s point here seems to
be epistemological, not metaphysical: this is how we discover a cause
(Adams 1979: 23). It follows that the only kind of cause we can
discover is that which produces a novel (and therefore observable)
effect. Without such an effect, there would (once again) be no way of
knowing something to be a cause (Ockham Sum. II 3). Coupled
with the effective abandonment of the idea of the agent intellect,
this brings us very close to a thoroughgoing cognitive empiricism.
Those sympathetic to empiricism may be inclined to portray this
history as a progress from darkness to light. But a moment’s
reflection suggests it deserves a more cautious evaluation. These
ancient and medieval thinkers certainly laid the foundations on which
early modern and modern empiricists would build. But they also
bequeathed a series of problems, some of which have never been
satisfactorily resolved.
There are, first of all, the problems faced by the Epicureans, who
were genetic but not explanatory empiricists, favouring the atomist
theory of Leucippus and Democritus. As Democritus seems to have
realized, while the atomist doctrine can be supported by observable
facts (such as the fact of motion), once formulated it seems to
undercut a belief in the reliability of such observations. At the very
least, it suggests a distinction between what would later be called
“primary” and “secondary” qualities, narrowing
the range of the kind of experiences to which natural philosophers
would appeal.
The Epicureans also seem to have come up against another enduring
problem: that of the underdetermination of theory by data. If the
senses cannot directly “bear witness” to the existence of
what cannot be observed, being able only to bear witness against it,
there may be a number of apparently equally acceptable hypotheses
about the unobservable. One could argue, as Epicureans seem to have
done, that these should all be regarded as true, in the sense of being
realized somewhere and at some time. But this seems unsatisfactory
when it comes to explaining particular events.
More broadly, there is the problem of just what experience can show.
Can experience be a source of mathematical or logical knowledge? Can
it reveal the causal relations that are traditionally regarded as the
goal of science? Aristotle, as we saw, seems to have held that the
mind has the power of identifying the causal powers that belong to
particular kinds of entities. But it was never clear that experience
alone could achieve such an insight. Medieval discussions of the
“agent intellect” tended to regard it as an external
power, or, at least, a human faculty that participates in a divine
light. Thinkers such as Henry of Ghent went further, embracing the
Augustinian idea that an act of divine illumination is required on
each occasion we attain such insights. Under the impact of
Aristotelian naturalism this idea was abandoned, but without (it must
be said) any clear alternative.
Later empiricists could (and did) follow Ockham in denying that there
are universals to be discovered; they professed to be undisturbed by
the fact that we cannot grasp the “real essences” of the
objects we perceive (Locke Essay 3.6.9). But the problems of
empiricism did not go away. Even one of the empiricist’s
favorite ideas—the “covering law” account of
scientific explanation—assumes we can arrive at true
generalizations, propositions that apply to all members of a
particular class. But for those who take Ockham’s nominalism to
its logical conclusion, a law of nature can be nothing more than a
contingently true proposition. Since the similarities that fix class
membership have no metaphysical grounding, not being based on a shared
nature, we cannot know the truth of the law by any kind of rational
insight. The only way of testing such a proposition is by observation.
It is at this point that there arises the “problem of
induction,” first discussed by Sextus Empiricus and picked up by
Nicholas of Autrecourt.
The problems, however, go beyond that of induction. If laws of nature
are to be distinguished from accidental generalizations, they must be
thought to embody modal knowledge, particularly as this relates to
contrary-to-fact conditionals (Armstrong 1978: 274). Epicurus seems to
have somewhat naïvely believed that “in grasping the
phenomena, we grasp how things can and must be” (Allen 2004:
98). But it is far from clear how observation could lead to such
insights. If Epicurus was naïve in this respect, the same could
be said of many modern empiricists.
This article began with the observation that we should not approach
ancient thinkers in a “Whiggish” fashion; nor should we
force their thought into modern categories. But what this history
shows is that there is no need to do so. Once we understand what these
thinkers were saying, we can see that many of their questions remain
what medievals called quaestiones disputatae, with which we
are still grappling.