Le Grand lived in London for many years before retiring to Oxfordshire
towards the close of his life in 1695. He was generally well-received
at the University of Cambridge, perhaps owing to the influence of some
leading Neo-Platonists at Cambridge such as John Smith, Henry More, and
Ralph Cudworth, who were at least initially sympathetic to Descartes’s
ideas. John Smith, author of Select Discourses (1660), and the
earliest recorded partisan of the Cartesian philosophy in England, was
the first to introduce the study of Descartes to Cambridge. Henry More
corresponded with Descartes, and was sympathetic until about 1665, when
he launched the most vigorous attack on Cartesianism in the age, in his
Enchiridion Metaphysicum (1671). Cudworth, like More although
with less venom, objected to Descartes’s mechanistic account of the
material world in his The True Intellectual System of the
Universe (1678). It was Le Grand who debated and defended
Descartes’s philosophy to these English critics. 
According to Anthony Wood, a contemporary of Le Grand’s and an
historian at Oxford, Le Grand’s Institutio Philosophiae,
secundum principia Domini Renati Descartes (1672), was a
“must read” at Cambridge. (Wood, 1691, p. 620) Further
attesting to the attention it attracted, Jean Robert Armogathe has
detailed how the 1678 edition of this work came to be placed on the
Index in 1709 because of its anti-scholastic arguments.(Armogathe,
2003) Le Grand also published an edition of Jacques
Rohault’s Traité de physique (1671), an
enormously popular physics text, using Bonnet’s 1672 Latin
translation with added commentary, Jacobi Rohaulti tractatus
physicus (1682). In 1692, Samuel Clarke published his own Latin
edition of the text, which incorporates his and Le Grand’s
commentary in the form of footnotes. Clarke, an adherent of
Newton’s physics, thought he could best propagate the new
doctrine by publishing Rohault’s text with suggestive notes
directed at the necessity of modifying Cartesian theory. According to
the biographical preface to Clarke’s Works, at the time
of his entrance to Cambridge in 1691,
Rohault’s Traité was the standard modern
scientific text, and Newton’s Principia (1687), had not
yet been accepted: “The philosophy of Des Cartes was then the
Established philosophy of that university, and the system of nature
hardly allowed to be explained any otherwise than his principles
… . The Great Sir Isaac Newton had indeed then published his
Principia. But this book was but for the few.” Eventually
Clarke’s translation of the
Traité, which underwent four editions, became the new
preferred Cambridge textbook, as the Cartesian physics gave way to that
of Newton early in the eighteenth century.
Antoine Le Grand’s most substantial work, An Entire Body of
Philosophy According to the Principles Of the Famous Renate des
Cartes (1694), is a Cartesian tract from beginning to
end. Richard Blome translated the works into English, which includes
alterations and additions by Le Grand himself. It is divided into
three books, based on three Latin texts, Institutio
(1672), Historia naturae (1673), and Dissertatio de
carentia sensus et cogitationis in brutis (1675). The first
book, The Institution, is intended as a treatment of the
general nature of things according to Descartes’s principles; book
two, The History of Nature, illustrates, by means of a great
variety of reported experiments and examples, the operation of these
first principles in nature. In this book, Le Grand applied the general
Cartesian principles to his study of particular bodies and their
qualities, showing how such principles can explain all natural
phenomena. His extensive discussion includes bodies as various as the
loadstone, plants, and insects. And finally, in the third book, A
Dissertation of the Want of Sense and Knowledge in Brute Animals,
he argued against the supposed link of life and sense from Plato
onwards, and after offering a brief survey of various hypotheses on
the nature of soul by Aristotle, Gassendi, Fabri, and Descartes, he
adopted Descartes’s view. In the Preface, Le Grand wrote that, “
… this whole work contains nothing else, but his [Descartes’s]
opinions, or what may clearly and distinctly be deduced from
them.”
At Oxford, Le Grand received a hostile reception. Samuel Parker
aligned Hobbes’s mechanism with that of Descartes, charging both with
atheism. Parker’s condemnations led to the banning of Descartes’s
philosophy at Oxford, quashing its public entrance at the University.
Le Grand responded to Parker’s charges of atheism in his Apologia
de Descartes (1679), challenging Parker’s criticisms with various
proofs of God’s existence. Another long-time, Oxford critic of Le Grand
was the English secular priest and Aristotelian, John Sergeant.
Sergeant, best known for his criticisms of Locke’s philosophy, was also
highly critical of the Cartesian philosophy. Le Grand responded to
Sergeant’s criticisms of the Cartesian criterion of truth in his
Dissertatio de ratione cognoscendi … in 1679. A second
major controversy occurred between the two authors late in Le Grand’s
life, this time over the nature of ideas. This dispute led Le Grand to
write a series of short pieces, published later as Several Smaller
Pieces Against M. J. Sergeant (1698). In response, Sergeant
attacked the Cartesian idea of extension, to which the aging Le Grand
never publicly responded. Le Grand died at the home of a wealthy farmer
in Oxfordshire, where he had served as a tutor until his death in
1699.
Le Grand defended the first principles of Descartes’s philosophy
with great fidelity. He held to Descartes’s views that the
essence of matter is extension; that the essence of mind is thought;
that material substance and mental substance are essentially, and
really distinct; that mind and body interact; that while humans have
souls, brutes and other living things are mere machines; and that
material things operate by means of moving parts according to the laws
of motion. Le Grand did not make any substantial revisions to
Cartesian metaphysics. However, he did make two important
contributions: first, he attempted to clarify Descartes’s
account of motion which had direct consequences for the Cartesian
account of matter, causation, and mind-body interaction; secondly, he
extended the scope of Cartesian physics, treating such subjects as
metals, plants, insects, animals, and the human body in detail. Both
contributions represented important developments of the Cartesian
science, away from scholastic Aristoteian science.
Le Grand’s contribution to the Cartesian account of motion may either
be seen as an extension or a revision of Descartes’s, sometimes
ambiguous, treatment. Le Grand took seriously the claim that God is
the total and efficient cause of motion in the universe, and that
matter is entirely passive, and hence bodies are incapable of
self-movement, or of moving other bodies. In his Entire Body of
Philosophy, he argued that since a body may be in motion or at
rest, motion must be a mode non-essential to matter. Moreover, given
that matter itself is inert, it cannot be the source of the order and
direction of motion. To provide order and direction, God laid down the
laws of motion. Thus, motion itself as well as the orderly movement of
bodies derive from God who acts as the effective principle. While the
specific position, constitution, and configuration of the parts of a
particular body determine how certain local motions are transferred,
the source and ultimate direction of the motion itself is God. What
this means for body-body interaction is that bodies function as
secondary causes, directing local motions in virtue of the specific
configurations of their parts. Bodies do not possess any causal power
to produce or cease movement. Kenneth Clatterbaugh argues that Le
Grand’s position on body-body causation amounts to
occasionalism. Clatterbaugh identifies four positions that commit Le
Grand to the doctrine articulated by Malebranche: 1) that there are no
accidents; 2) that motion is identical to the will of God; 3) that
conservation and creation are the same such that God creates bodies
and their motions continuously; and 4) that the Divine Will and
Intellect are one. (Clatterbaugh, 1999) However, Le Grand’s references
to secondary causes and his commitment to the created nature of laws
and eternal truths make the occasionalist ascription a complicated
one.
Le Grand’s account of body-body interaction clears the way to
explain mind-body interaction. In the same way as finite bodies, God
functions as the effective principle of finite minds, providing the
ultimate source of change: “… there is nothing, besides motion,
which can strike the organs of the senses, or affect the mind itself.”
(1694, p. 284) Although mind and matter are substances sharing no
common properties, it is in virtue of God acting as the effective
principle that mind and body interact. This kind of interaction is no
more or no less problematic than the interaction of two physical
bodies. There was no real problem of interaction for Le Grand, since he
believed that it was not the substances per se that acted on one
another but in all cases God alone provided the motive force in the
universe. Although things by their nature respond to this motive force
in an orderly way, i.e., according to the laws of nature, the fact that
they exist as they do and that they interact is a fact completely
dependent on God’s will. God’s power is expressed as local motions in
bodies and as passions/thoughts in minds. In short, it is in virtue of
God, their effective principle, that a mind and body, or a body and
body, or even a mind and mind, are said to interact.
Le Grand described the mind-body union in terms directly borrowed
from Descartes. However, Le Grand attempted to explicate further than
did Descartes the nature of the mind-body union. According to Le Grand,
there are three kinds of union, each possessing its own principle which
effects that union: the first is that of two minds whose principle of
union is love; the second is that of two physical bodies whose
principle of union is local presence; and the third is that of the mind
and body whose principle of union is actual dependence. Just as two
physical bodies are joined by physical contact, and as two minds are
joined by love, the mind and body are joined by a mutually dependent
activity. So long as the body actually receives  its specific
motions dependently on the soul, and the soul actually receives its
local motions (passions) dependently on the body, the spirit and the
body are joined. Although there can be no mode common to mind and
matter, there is this mutual action. While there is no mode shared by
two different substances, there is a similitude and relation that
exists between mind and body: “This similitude and relation we have
formerly affirmed to consist in action and passion” (1694, p. 325). In
other words, just as the body is capable of receiving and transmitting
local motions since motion is a mode of matter, the mind is capable of
varying passions since passions are a mode of the mind. It is by the
mutual commerce of such motions and passions that the mind and body are
said to be united. The mutual activity said to occur between the mind
and the body is a property which follows only from the union of mind
and body and cannot proceed from either alone, “And the truth is, since
neither body can think, nor mind be capable of dimension, there can be
no mode common to mind and body, except a mutual acting of each upon
each, from which alone the properties of both can follow” (1694, p.
325).
Le Grand’s extensions to Descartes’s physics included
phenomena now classified as metallurgy, entomology, botany, biology,
physiology, medicine, psychology, and psychiatry. Part II of
the Entire Body of Philosophy, entitled The History of
Nature, catalogues and critically discusses the latest
experiments of his time, as well as the theories of the ancients and
moderns. Prominent in his discussions is the importance of secondary
causes in nature (both exemplary and secondary efficient causes), and
the need for experiments, not just as tools of confirmation, but also
as a means of discovering the true nature of things. This was due to
his application of mechanism to explain not only the behavior of
material bodies but also the entire institution of nature. Le Grand
believed that God laid down the laws of nature and the principles of
being by acting as the primary efficient cause, and that the operation
of these laws and principles manifested themselves in nature in the
form of secondary causes and effects.  Although the laws and their
specific mechanisms of operation are not visible, secondary causes and
their effects are. These causes and effects then are known by
experience and are the starting point of all science, which is
characterized by reasoning from effects (observed in nature) to causes
(first principles discerned by reason). Part III of the Entire
Body of Philosophy, entitled A Dissertation of the Want of
Sense and Knowledge in Brute Animals, extends Descartes’s
treatment of the mechanization of the soul. Le Grand provides detailed
accounts of sensory and motor mechanisms to explain animal movement as
the foundation of Cartesian psychology (Hatfield, 2013)
Le Grand’s account of sensations and ideas is orthodox Cartesianism.
Sensory impressions are what mediate the external object and our mind’s
idea of it, and they consist in nothing more than the immediate motions
of the sensory organs in the body. Such motions are produced by a
natural necessity and they share no similarity or affinity with the
particular objects that cause them. Like Descartes, Le Grand used the
example of the sword wounding the body to illustrate the
non-resemblance or dissimilitude of the relations between external
objects and sensations, and sensations and ideas. (1694, p. 327) 
The sword that produces pain in us is nothing like our sensation or
idea of pain, nor is our idea of pain anything like our sensation of
pain. Yet, we maintain that there is a causal and representational
relation between the sword and the idea it produces. In addition,
Legrand like Descartes made a clear distinction between sensory
impressions, which are particular, quantifiable motions, and ideas,
which are representational or propositional in character. Given that
sensations are non-resembling and non-representational (they are mere
patterns of local motions) it follows that ideas, which are essentially
representational, could not be derived from them. 
From the lack of any form of similitude or affinity between
object/sensation, and sensation/idea, it follows that there is no such
relation which holds between an idea and an external (material) object.
From this lack of similitude, Le Grand concluded that adventitious
ideas (coming from material objects outside us) must be innate or
inbred in the mind. For, if the external object is not like the idea we
form of it, then the only explanation remaining is that the mind is
responsible for it. Likewise, fictitious ideas, like sirens and
chimeras, have no exemplar outside the mind and so must be formed
according to forms natural to the human mind. And finally, common
notions such as substance, truth, goodness, equity, and God, as well as
axioms such as the same thing cannot be and not be, are innate, that
is, they proceed from the mind alone, since all corporeal motions are
particular but these notions are universal. The sense in which they are
innate differs from adventitious and fictitious ideas; innate ideas do
not proceed from the senses or the imagination but “are congenite and
inbred with the said mind, from their original” (1694, p. 328). By this
Le Grand meant that the mind or thought itself, not any of its
faculties such as sense or intellection, is the principle or original
of such ideas. These ideas are formed in the mind by the mind and from
the mind.
Thus as Descartes held, there are three kinds of ideas
(adventitious, fictitious, and innate), which are distinguished by
their differing sources as well as the way in which they are inbred in
the mind. Adventitious ideas proceed from the senses, fictitious ideas
proceed from the imagination and the intellect, and innate ideas
proceed from thought itself, which acts as their ground or original.
Nonetheless, all ideas, regardless of their source or origin, depend on
the mind in some essential way for their form. But this gives rise to
the problem of explaining how ideas can be said to represent, if they
in no way resemble their objects. This problem is especially acute for
Cartesians who held that there is a modal difference between what is
found at the level of sensory perception and intellection, such that
impressions cannot contain any of the properties found at the level of
ideas. What arrives at our faculty of thinking from the senses is not
ideas such as we form them in our thought, as the scholastic
empiricists held, but rather only various particular motions emitted by
external objects. (1694, p. 328)
Le Grand’s solution to the problem of how ideas represent their
objects employed the notion of substitution or ‘supplying a
stead’—wherein the cause (the object) contains all the
properties found in the effect (the idea) not actually but in virtue of
its ability to supply the substitute properties or proxies. And a
relation, according to Le Grand, “…is nothing else but a mode of
our understanding, comparing one thing with others, because of some
properties or acts that are found in them” (1694, p. 17). Descartes
himself never cashed out the notion of representation in terms of
substitution, although he came close to suggesting it in the French
version of the Third Meditation, in which he claimed that such things
as extension, shape, position and movement may be contained in him
eminently, “…and as it were the garments under which corporeal
substance appears to us” (1985–91b, fn.1, p. 31). One could conceivably
interpret this to mean that the garments of corporeal substance, namely
extension, shape, position and movement are the garments supplied by
the mind as the forms or the conceptions under which the mind grasps
material things. Although the mind itself is not extended, shaped,
locally positioned or moved, it dresses material substance in these
properties in order to perceive particular material things. But there
is no suggestion in Descartes regarding how the dressing is related to
the material object grasped. Le Grand’s notion of substitution was
intended as an explication of this relation, and is his contribution to
the Cartesian dialectic on ideas.
Le Grand was one of the few Cartesians to defend Descartes’s
doctrine of the creation of essences and eternal truths. The thesis is
that God is the efficient cause of all things, both actual and
possible, including all the truths we call eternal, “In like manner as
a king is the maker of all laws in his kingdom. For all these truths
are inborn in us from him; as a king also would have them so in his
subjects, if he had power enough to write his laws in their hearts.”
(1694, p. 63)  The main worry that critics, like Malebranche, had
of this doctrine was that it would remove any necessary foundation for
the propositions of science and theology, making them contingent and
uncertain. To answer this worry, Le Grand added that there is one
important difference between kings and God in the way they set down
their laws, “A king can change his laws because his will is changeable,
but God’s will is unchangeable, for it is His perfection to be
invariable in manner” (1694, p. 63). In this way, Le Grand attempted to
account for the dependence of all things on God’s will, while at the
same time accounting for the immutable foundation of the truths of
natural philosophy.
Whereas the creation of true and immutable natures was the work of
God’s freewill (not dictated according to his Wisdom, as Malebranche
and other critics held), once created, they were necessary. In order to
tie this necessity to the immutability of God’s will without limiting
God in any way, Le Grand drew on a Scholastic distinction between
antecedent and consequent necessity. He argued that true and immutable
natures, such as mathematical truths, only possessed a consequent
necessity. God did not will that 6+4=10 because he saw it could not be
otherwise, but in virtue of his free will, 6+4 [necessarily] = 10;
therefore it could not be otherwise. As Descartes put this same point,
“And even if God has willed that some truths should be necessary, this
does not mean that he willed them necessarily; for it is one thing to
will that they be necessary, and quite another to will this
necessarily, or to be necessitated to will it.” [1985–91c, p. 235]. For
nothing outside of God, not even the eternal truths or immutable
essences, necessitate that God act in one way or another, but rather,
they are themselves eternal and immutable in virtue of the fact that
God, whose existence is necessary and immutable, willed them in their
essence and existence. Eternal truths and immutable essences are
necessary only in that they presuppose and are consequent to the act of
God who caused them. (Easton, 2009)
Echoing Descartes in part VI of the Discourse on Method, Le
Grand held that God implanted certain simple, true, and immutable ideas
in our minds so that we could have a science of nature; yet, He also
created a nature whose power is so ample and vast that only observation
can close the gap between the two. Thus, while Le Grand remains
essentially a rationalist in his claim that knowledge of immutable
essences, laws and truths remains the autonomous domain of reason,
which is independent of the appearances of the senses, it is a
rationalism tempered by his view that truths and laws are dependent on
the will of God, and hence, are in some sense contingent. This
dependence means that truth must be sought after in the effects of
nature, and not in something independent of those effects, and that
secondary causes, although dependent both on God’s will and on the
primary truths of nature, have a genuine role in causal explanation. In
other words, our search for truth is in the specific operations of
things, and even though our understanding of these truths is
importantly independent of these specific operations, our discovery of
them is not.
Le Grand’s early ethical and political writings are not Cartesian. In
Le Sage des Stoïques, ou l’Homme sans Passions, Selon les
Sentiments de Sénèque (1662), later translated and
published as Man Without Passions (1675), he expounds the
Stoical doctrines of Seneca, for which the goal of the moral person is
to expunge the passions. He later rejected this view of the passions
and argued the Cartesian view that the passions ought to be trained
(not expunged) in the moral life. Le Grand also wrote a curious
political treatise, Scydromedia (1669), which is a
semi-fictional, utopian work describing his vision of the ideal state. 
There is nothing innovative in Le Grand’s moral theory, yet his
discussions are rich with references to ancient and contemporary
theories. He borrows from the ancient Atomists, the Stoics, the
Scholastics, and the “Moralists” of his time, and frames it, where
possible, in Cartesian terms. Le Grand acknowledges that Descartes
himself wrote little on ethics, but he argues that Descartes’s
treatment of the soul and the passions provides a solid foundation for
the treatment of moral matters. According to Le Grand, the object of
ethics is right reason, its end is the perfection of man, and it is an
active not a speculative science. An example of his reconciling project
can be seen in Book I, Part X of his Entire Body of Philosophy
(1694), where Le Grand attempted to reconcile the doctrines of Seneca
and Epicurus on the role of pleasure in the virtuous life, by drawing
on Descartes’s theory of the passions. (1694, p. 347)  He argues
that pleasure has a role to play in the moral life, since virtue
depends on freewill (as the Stoics held) and pleasure derives from the
satisfaction of the mind in possessing the good (as Epicurus held).
What Descartes’s theory provided was an explanation of how pleasure (a
passion) could aid the will in choosing the right course of action,
while maintaining the voluntary nature of the will and virtue.
Le Grand, although not an innovator, is worthy of study for his
contribution to the development of Cartesianism in the latter half of
the seventeenth century. No less important is the fact that he spent
most of his life in England, where his contact with members of the
Royal Society and the universities of Cambridge and Oxford had a
lasting impact on the reception of Descartes’s ideas in England,
Germany, and France.