Aristotle was not the first thinker to engage in a causal
investigation of the world around us. From the very beginning, and
independently of Aristotle, the investigation of the natural world
consisted in the search for the relevant causes of a variety of
natural phenomena. From the Phaedo, for example, we learn
that the so-called “inquiry into nature” consisted in a
search for “the causes of each thing; why each thing comes into
existence, why it goes out of existence, why it exists” (96 a
6–10). In this tradition of investigation, the search for causes
was a search for answers to the question “why?”. Both in
the Physics and in the Metaphysics Aristotle places
himself in direct continuity with this tradition. At the beginning of
the Metaphysics, Aristotle offers a concise review of the
results reached by his predecessors (Metaph. I 3–7).
From this review we learn that all his predecessors were engaged in an
investigation that eventuated in knowledge of one or more of the
following causes: material, formal, efficient and final cause.
However, Aristotle makes it very clear that all his predecessors
merely touched upon these causes (Metaph. 988 a 22–23;
but see also 985 a 10–14 and 993 a 13–15). That is to say,
they did not engage in their causal investigation with a firm grasp of
these four causes. They lacked a complete understanding of the range
of possible causes and their systematic interrelations. Put
differently, and more boldly, their use of causality was not
supported by an adequate theory of causality. According to
Aristotle, this explains why their investigation, even when it
resulted in important insights, was not entirely successful.
This insistence on the doctrine of the four causes as an indispensable
tool for a successful investigation of the world around us explains
why Aristotle provides his reader with a general account of the four
causes. This account is found, in almost the same words, in
Physics II 3 and Metaphysics V 2.
In the Posterior Analytics, Aristotle places the following
crucial condition on proper knowledge: we think we have knowledge of a
thing only when we have grasped its cause (APost. 71 b
9–11. Cf. APost. 94 a 20). That proper knowledge is
knowledge of the cause is repeated in the Physics: we think
we do not have knowledge of a thing until we have grasped its why,
that is to say, its cause (Phys. 194 b 17–20). Since
Aristotle obviously conceives of a causal investigation as the search
for an answer to the question “why?”, and a why-question
is a request for an explanation, it can be useful to think of a cause
as a certain type of explanation.
Needless to say, not all why-questions are requests for an explanation
that identifies a cause, let alone a cause in the particular sense
envisioned by Aristotle. Still, Aristotle is clearly committed to the
view that giving the relevant cause (or causes) is necessary and
sufficient for offering a scientific explanation. His conception of a
cause has both a metaphysical and an epistemological
 component. Part of the challenge for us is to do justice to both
components. Following a recent suggestion, we may say that
“causes are not ways in which we explain things, except
derivatively, in virtue of the fact that they are ways in which some
elements of the natural world explain others” (Stein 2012a:
705).
In Physics II 3 and Metaphysics V 2, Aristotle
offers his general account of the four causes. This account is general
in the sense that it applies to everything that requires an
explanation, including artistic production and human action. Here
Aristotle recognizes four kinds of things that can be given in answer
to a why-question:
All the four (kinds of) causes may enter in the explanation of
something. Consider the production of an artifact like a bronze
statue. The bronze enters in the explanation of the production of the
statue as the material cause. Note that the bronze is not
only the material out of which the statue is made; it is also the
subject of change, that is, the thing that undergoes the change and
results in a statue. The bronze is melted and poured in order to
acquire a new shape, the shape of the statue. This shape enters in the
explanation of the production of the statue as the formal
cause. However, an adequate explanation of the production of a
statue requires also a reference to the efficient cause or
the principle that produces the statue. For Aristotle, this principle
is the art of bronze-casting the statue (Phys. 195 a 6–8. Cf.
Metaph. 1013 b 6–9).
This result is mildly surprising and requires a few words of
elaboration. There is no doubt that the art of bronze-casting resides
in an individual artisan who is responsible for the production of the
statue. According to Aristotle, however, all the artisan does in the
production of the statue is the manifestation of specific knowledge.
This knowledge, not the artisan who has mastered it, is the salient
explanatory factor that one should pick as the most accurate
specification of the efficient cause (Phys. 195 b
21–25). By picking the art, not the artisan, Aristotle is not
just trying to provide an explanation of the production of the statue
that is not dependent upon the desires, beliefs and intentions of the
individual artisan; he is trying to offer an entirely different type
of explanation–namely, an explanation that does not make a
reference (implicit or explicit) to these desires, beliefs and
intentions. More directly, the art of bronze-casting the statue enters
in the explanation as the efficient cause because it helps us to
understand what it takes to produce the statue; that is to say, what
steps are required to produce the statue. But can an explanation of
this type be given without a reference to the final outcome of the
production, the statue? The answer is emphatically “no”. A
model is made for producing the statue. A mold is prepared for
producing the statue. The bronze is melted and poured for producing
the statue. Both the prior and the subsequent stage are for the sake
of a certain end, the production of the statue. Clearly, the statue
enters in the explanation of each step of the artistic production as
the final cause or that for the sake of which everything in
the production process is done.
In thinking about the four causes, we have come to understand that
Aristotle offers a teleological explanation of the production
of a bronze statue; that is to say, an explanation that makes a
reference to the telos or end of the process. Moreover, a
teleological explanation of the type sketched above does not crucially
depend upon the application of psychological concepts such as desires,
beliefs and intentions. This is important because artistic production
provides Aristotle with a teleological model for the study of natural
processes, whose explanation does not involve beliefs, desires,
intentions or anything of this sort. Some have objected that Aristotle
explains natural process on the basis of an inappropriately
psychological teleological model; that is to say, a teleological model
that involves a purposive agent who is somehow sensitive to the end.
This objection can be met if the artistic model is understood in
non-psychological terms. In other words, Aristotle does not
psychologize nature because his study of the natural world is based on
a teleological model that is consciously free from psychological
factors. (For further information on the role that artistic production
plays in developing an explanatory model for the study of nature, see
Broadie 1987, pp. 35–50.)
One final clarification is in order. By insisting on the art of
bronze-casting as the most accurate efficient cause of the production
of the statue, Aristotle does not mean to preclude an appeal to the
beliefs and desires of the individual artisan. On the contrary, there
are cases where the individual realization of the art obviously enters
in the explanation of the bronze statue. For example, one may be
interested in a particular bronze statue because that statue is the
great achievement of an artisan who has not only mastered the art but
has also applied it with a distinctive style. In this case it is
perfectly appropriate to make reference to the beliefs and desires of
the artisan. Aristotle seems to make room for this case when he says
that we should look “for general causes of general things and
for particular causes of particular things” (Phys. 195
a 25–26). Note, however, that the idiosyncrasies that may be
important in studying a particular bronze statue as the great
achievement of an individual artisan may be extraneous to a more
central (and more interesting) case. To understand why let us focus on
the study of nature. When the student of nature is concerned with the
explanation of a natural phenomenon like the formation of sharp teeth
in the front and broad molars in the back of the mouth, the student of
nature is concerned with what is typical about that
phenomenon. In other words, the student of nature is expected to
provide an explanation of why certain animals typically have
a certain dental arrangement. We shall return to this example in due
course. For the time being, it is important to emphasize this
important feature of the explanatory project attempted by Aristotle; a
feature that we must keep in mind in trying to understand his theory
of causality. This theory has in fact been developed primarily (but
not exclusively) for the study of nature.
In the Physics, Aristotle builds on his general account of
the four causes by developing explanatory principles that are specific
to the study of nature. Here Aristotle insists that all four causes
are involved in the explanation of natural phenomena, and that the job
of “the student of nature is to bring the why-question back to
them all in the way appropriate to the science of nature”
(Phys. 198 a 21–23). The best way to understand this
methodological recommendation is the following: the science of nature
is concerned with natural bodies insofar as they are subject to
change, and the job of the student of nature is to provide the
explanation of their natural change. The factors that are involved in
the explanation of natural change turn out to be matter, form, that
which produces the change, and the end of this change. Note that
Aristotle does not say that all four explanatory factors are involved
in the explanation of each and every instance of natural change.
Rather, he says that an adequate explanation of natural change may
involve a reference to all of them.
Aristotle goes on by adding a specification on his doctrine of the
four causes: the form and the end often coincide, and they are
formally the same as that which produces the change (Phys.
198 a 23–26). This is one of the several times where Aristotle
offers the slogan “it takes a human being to generate a human
being” (for example, Phys. 194 b 13; Metaph.
1032 a 25, 1033 b 32, 1049 b 25, 1070 a 8, 1092 a 16). This slogan is
designed to point at the fundamental fact that the generation of a
human being can be understood only in the light of the end of the
process; that is to say, the fully developed human being. The question
thus arises as to what it takes for a human being to be fully
developed. Aristotle frames his answer in terms of the human form,
maintaining that a human form is fully realized at the end of
generation. But this does not explain why it takes a human
being to generate a human being. Note, however, that a fully
developed human being is not only the end of generation; it is also
what initiates the entire process. For Aristotle, the ultimate moving
principle responsible for the generation of a human being is a fully
developed living creature of the same kind; that is, a human being who
is formally the same as the end of generation. (A final clarification
is in order here: Aristotle is committed to a hylomorphic explanation
of animal generation. His considered view is that the father supplies
the form whereas the mother provides the matter.) 
Thus, the student of nature is often left with three types of causes:
the formal/final cause, the efficient cause, and the material cause.
However, the view that there are in nature causes besides material and
efficient causes was controversial in antiquity. According to
Aristotle, most of his predecessors recognized only the material and
the efficient cause. This explains why Aristotle cannot be content
with saying that formal and final causes often coincide, but he also
has to defend his thesis against an opponent who denies that final
causality is a genuine mode of causality.
Physics II 8 contains Aristotle’s most general defense
of final causality. Here Aristotle establishes that explaining nature
requires final causality by discussing a difficulty that may be
advanced by an opponent who denies that there are final causes in
nature. Aristotle shows that an opponent who claims that material and
efficient causes alone suffice to explain natural change fails to
account for their characteristic regularity. Before considering how
the defense is attempted, however, it is important to clarify that
this defense does not perform the function of a proof. By showing that
an approach to the study of nature that ignores final causality cannot
account for a crucial aspect of nature, Aristotle does not thereby
prove that there are final causes in nature. Strictly speaking, the
only way to prove that nature exhibits final causality is to establish
it on independent grounds. But this is not what Aristotle does in
Physics II 8. Final causality is here introduced as the best
explanation for an aspect of nature which otherwise would remain
unexplained.
The difficulty that Aristotle discusses is introduced by considering
the way in which rain works. It rains because of material processes
which can be specified as follows: when the warm air that has been
drawn up is cooled off and becomes water, then this water comes down
as rain (Phys. 198 b 19–21). It may happen that the
corn in the field is nourished or the harvest is spoiled as a result
of the rain, but it does not rain for the sake of any good or bad
result. The good or bad result is just a coincidence (Phys.
198 b 21–23). So, why cannot all natural change work in the same
way? For example, why cannot it be merely a coincidence that the front
teeth grow sharp and suitable for tearing the food and the molars grow
broad and useful for grinding the food (Phys. 198 b
23–27)? When the teeth grow in just this way, then the animal
survives. When they do not, then the animal dies. More directly, and
more explicitly, the way the teeth grow is not for the sake of the
animal, and its survival or its death is just a coincidence
(Phys. 198 b 29–32).
Aristotle’s reply is that the opponent is expected to explain
why the teeth regularly grow in the way they do: sharp teeth
in the front and broad molars in the back of the mouth. Moreover,
since this dental arrangement is suitable for biting and chewing the
food that the animal takes in, the opponent is expected to explain the
regular connection between the needs of the animal and the
formation of its teeth. Either there is a real causal connection
between the formation of the teeth and the needs of the animal, or
there is no real causal connection and it just so happens that the way
the teeth grow is good for the animal. In this second case it is just
a coincidence that the teeth grow in a way that it is good for the
animal. But this does not explain the regularity of the
connection. Where there is regularity there is also a call for an
explanation, and coincidence is no explanation at all. In other words,
to say that the teeth grow as they do by material necessity and this
is good for the animal by coincidence is to leave unexplained the
regular connection between the growth of the teeth and the needs of
the animal. Aristotle offers final causality as his explanation for
this regular connection: the teeth grow in the way they do for biting
and chewing food and this is good for the animal. (See Code 1997:
127–134.)
One thing to be appreciated about Aristotle’s reply is that the
final cause enters in the explanation of the formation of the parts of
an organism like an animal as something that is good either
for the existence or the flourishing of the animal. In the first case,
something is good for the animal because the animal cannot survive
without it; in the second case, something is good for the animal
because the animal is better off with it. This helps us to understand
why in introducing the concept of end (telos) that is
relevant to the study of natural processes Aristotle insists on its
goodness: “not everything that is last claims to be an end
(telos), but only that which is best” (Phys.
194 a 32–33).
Once his defense of the use of final causes is firmly in place,
Aristotle can make a step further by focusing on the role that matter
plays in his explanatory project. Let us return to the example chosen
by Aristotle, the regular growth of sharp teeth in the front and broad
molars in the back of the mouth. What explanatory role is left for the
material processes involved in the natural process? Aristotle does not
seem to be able to specify what material processes are involved in the
growth of the teeth, but he is willing to recognize that certain
material processes have to take place for the teeth to grow in the
particular way they do. In other words, there is more to the formation
of the teeth than these material processes, but this formation does
not occur unless the relevant material processes take place. For
Aristotle, these material processes are that which is necessary to the
realization of a specific goal; that which is necessary on the
hypothesis that the end is to be obtained.
Hypothetical necessity is often equated to conditional necessity. But
this equation can be a first approximation at best. Stating the
conditions under which something is the case is not yet giving a
successful explanation. In other words, conditional necessity is a
wider, and indeed weaker, notion than hypothetical necessity (see
Stein 2016: 353–382, for a lucid reflection on this point).
Physics II 9 is entirely devoted to the introduction of the
concept of hypothetical necessity and its relevance for the
explanatory ambition of Aristotle’s science of nature. In this
chapter, matter is reconfigured as hypothetical necessity. By so doing
Aristotle acknowledges the explanatory relevance of the material
processes, while at the same time he emphasizes their dependency upon
a specific end.
In the Physics, Aristotle builds on his general account of
the four causes in order to provide the student of nature with the
explanatory resources indispensable for a successful investigation of
the natural world. However, the Physics does not provide
all the explanatory resources for all natural
investigations. Aristotle returns to the topic of causality in the
first book of the Parts of Animals. This is a relatively
independent and self-contained treatise entirely devoted to developing
the explanatory resources required for a successful study of animals
and animal life. Here Aristotle completes his theory of causality by
arguing for the explanatory priority of the final cause over the
efficient cause.
Significantly enough, there is no attempt to argue for the existence
of four fundamental modes of causality in the first book of the
Parts of Animals. Evidently, Aristotle expects his reader to
be already familiar with his general account of the four causes as
well as his defense of final causality. The problem that here concerns
Aristotle is presented in the following way: since both the final and
the efficient cause are involved in the explanation of natural
generation, we have to establish what is first and what is second
(PA 639 b 12–13). Aristotle argues that there is no
other way to explain natural generation than by reference to what lies
at the end of the process. This has explanatory priority over the
principle that is responsible for initiating the process of
generation. Aristotle relies on the analogy between artistic
production and natural generation, and the teleological model that he
has developed for the explanation of artistic production. Consider,
for example, house-building. There is no other way to explain how a
house is built, or is being built, than by reference to the final
result of the process, the house. More directly, the bricks and the
beams are put together in the particular way they are for the sake of
achieving a certain end: the production of the house. This is true
also in the case of natural generation. In this context
Aristotle’ slogan is “generation is for the sake of
substance, not substance for the sake of generation”
(PA 640 a 18–19). This means that the proper way to
explain the generation of an organism like an animal, or the formation
of its parts, is by reference to the product that lies at the end of
the process; that is to say, a substance of a certain type.
From Aristotle we learn that Empedocles explained the articulation of
the human spine into vertebrae as the result of the twisting and
turning that takes place when the fetus is in the womb of the mother.
Aristotle finds this explanation unacceptable (PA 640 a
19–26). To begin with, the fetus must have the power to twist
and turn in the way it does, and Empedocles does not have an
explanation for this fact. Secondly, and more importantly, Empedocles
overlooks the fact that it takes a human being to generate a
human being. That is to say, the originating principle of the
generation is a fully developed human being which is formally the same
as the final outcome of the process of generation. It is only by
looking at the fully developed human being that we can understand why
our spine is articulated into vertebrae and why the vertebrae are
arranged in the particular way they are. This amounts to finding the
role that the spine has in the life of a fully developed human being.
Moreover, it is only by looking at the fully developed human being
that we can explain why the formation of the vertebrae takes place in
the particular way it does. (For further information about the
explanatory priority of the final over the efficient cause, see Code
1997: 127–143.)
Perhaps we are now in the position to understand how Aristotle argues
that there are four kinds of causes and at the same time says that
proper knowledge is knowledge of the cause or knowledge of
the why (APost. 71 b 10–12, 94 a 20;
Phys. 194 b 17–20; Metaph. 981 a 28–30).
Admittedly, at least at first sight, this is a bit confusing.
Confusion dissolves when we realize that Aristotle recognizes the
explanatory primacy of the final/formal cause over the efficient and
material cause. Of course this does not mean that the other causes can
be eliminated. Quite the contrary: Aristotle is adamant that, for a
full range of cases, all four causes must be given in order to give an
explanation. More explicitly, for a full range of cases, an
explanation which fails to invoke all four causes is no explanation at
all. At the same time, however, the final/formal cause is the primary
cause and knowledge of this cause amounts to knowledge of the why.
We have already seen that Aristotle is not committed to the view that
everything has all four kinds of causes, Rather, his view is that a
scientific explanation requires up to four kinds of causes. We may
illustrate this point with the help of an example. Consider, in
particular, the case of a lunar eclipse. In the Metaphysics,
Aristotle says that an eclipse of the moon does not have a final cause
(Metaph. 1044 b 12). He also says that, strictly speaking, a
lunar eclipse does not have matter. Rather, it has a cause that plays
a role analogous to matter. This second claim can be inferred
from what Aristotle says about the things that exist by nature but are
not substances. With respect to these things, Aristotle says that they
do not have matter but rather something that underlies
(Metaph. 1044 b 8–9). In the case of a lunar eclipse,
that which underlies is the subject affected by the eclipse, that is,
the moon. The moon is not strictly speaking the matter of the eclipse
but rather the subject that undergoes an eclipse when the earth comes
in the middle between the moon and the sun. Should we give the earth
as the efficient cause of a lunar eclipse? We have to be careful here.
By saying that the moon is a deprivation of light caused by the earth,
we distinguish this particular deprivation of light from other kinds
of deprivation of light. Still, by citing the earth as the efficient
cause of a lunar eclipse, we are not yet giving the most precise
description of the efficient cause. More directly, we are not yet
saying what the earth is doing to cause a lunar eclipse. A lunar
eclipse is a deprivation of light caused by the interposition of the
earth between the sun and the moon. By coming in the middle of the
moon and the sun the earth blocks the light and causes the moon to
suffer an eclipse. Hence, it is the interposition of the earth between
the sun and the moon is the proximate efficient cause of a
lunar eclipse. Citing the proximate efficient cause is also giving the
most accurate description, and indeed the full explanation, of a lunar
eclipse. (An insightful discussion of how Aristotle explains natural
phenomena such as a lunar eclipse and sleep can be found in Code 2015:
11–45).
This brief discussion of the explanation of eclipse of the moon brings
us back to a point that was already made in connection with
Aristotle’s explanation of the production of an artifact such as a
bronze statue. There too we are required to look for the most accurate
description of the efficient cause, which is to be identified with the
art of bronze-casting a statue rather than the artisan. It is possible
to build on both examples to conclude that Aristotle is concerned not
only with finding the relevant kinds of causes but also with giving
the most accurate description of those causes. By his lights, it is
only the most accurate description of all the relevant causes that
gives us the full explanation, and thereby scientific knowledge, of
something.
The study of nature was a search for answers to the question
“why?” before and independently of Aristotle. A critical
examination of the use of the language of causality by his
predecessors, together with a careful study of natural phenomena, led
Aristotle to elaborate a theory of causality. This theory is
presented in its most general form in Physics II 3 and in
Metaphysics V 2. In both texts, Aristotle argues that a
final, formal, efficient or material cause can be given in answer to a
why-question.
Aristotle further elaborates on causality in the rest of
Physics II and in Parts of Animals I. Aristotle
explores the systematic interrelations among the four modes of
causality and argues for the explanatory priority of the final cause.
In so doing Aristotle not only expands on his theory of causality; he
also builds explanatory principles that are specific to the study of
nature. Aristotle considers these principles an indispensable
theoretical framework for a successful investigation of the natural
world. Both Physics II and Parts of Animals have a
foundational character. More directly, Aristotle expects the student
of nature to have mastered these principles before engaging in the
investigation of any aspect of the natural world.
Although Aristotle’s theory of causality is developed in the
context of his science of nature, its application goes well beyond the
boundaries of natural science. This is already clear from the most
general presentation of the theory in Physics II 3 and in
Metaphysics V 2. Here the four causes are used to explain
human action as well as artistic production. In addition, any
theoretical investigation that there might be besides natural science
will employ the doctrine of the four causes. 
Consider, briefly, the case of Aristotle’s Metaphysics.
Here Aristotle is seeking wisdom. Part of the argument of the
Metaphysics is in an attempt to clarify what sort of wisdom
Aristotle is seeking. Suffice it to say that Aristotle conceives of
this wisdom as a science of substance that is, or is a part of, a
science of being qua being (for further information about this
argument, see the entry Aristotle’s Metaphysics, especially
Sections 1 and 3.) What is important is that this science consists in
a causal investigation, that is, a search for the relevant causes.
This helps us to understand why the most general presentation of
Aristotle’s theory of causality is repeated, in almost the same
words, in Physics II 3 and in Metaphysics V 2.
Although the Physics and the Metaphysics belong to
two different theoretical enterprises, in both cases we are expected
to embark on an investigation that will eventuate in causal knowledge,
and this is not possible without a firm grasp of the interrelations
between the four (types of) causes.