 Nature, according to Aristotle, is an inner principle of change and
being at rest (Physics 2.1, 192b20–23). This means that when
an entity moves or is at rest according to its nature reference to its
nature may serve as an explanation of the event. We have to describe
how—to what extent, through what other processes, and due to
what agency—the preconditions for the process of change or of being
at rest are present, but once we have provided an account of these
preconditions, we have given a complete account of the process.  The
nature of the entity is in and of itself sufficient to induce and to
explain the process once the relevant circumstances do not preempt
it.
 Natures as inner principles of change and rest are contrasted with
active powers or potentialities (dunameis), which are
external principles of change and being at rest (Metaphysics
9.8, 1049b5–10), operative on the corresponding internal passive
capacities or potentialities (dunameis again,
Metaphysics 9.1, 1046a11–13). When a change, or a state of
rest, is not natural, both the active and the passive potentiality
need to be specified. Natures, then, in a way do double duty: once a
nature is operative, neither a further active, nor a further passive
capacity needs to be invoked. Even so, as will be clear from
Aristotle’s discussion, this general thesis 
will require a host of qualifications.
 Because natures—beside the active and passive
potentialities—are ultimate grounds in causal explanations,
Aristotle sets out how they are integrated with the doctrine of
causation.
 An explanation for a state of affairs must specify some feature or
some object (in general, some abstract or concrete entity) which is
responsible for it. The entity responsible is, Aristotle submits, a
cause (aitia or aition, words used interchangeably
by
 Aristotle).[4]
 Different explanations of a single state of affairs are possible, and
indeed usually necessary, because there are different ways of being
responsible for distinct facets of the same state of affairs. The
varieties of responsibilities are grouped by Aristotle under four
headings, the so-called four causes.
 The first two of these are matter and form, what an entity is made up
from according to Aristotle’s hylomorphic 
analysis. Understandably, both of them can be responsible for the 
features and the behaviour of the entity they make up.  Hylomorphic 
analysis, together with the separation of the material and formal 
causes as distinct types, implies that if something is explicable in 
terms of matter or form, explanations in terms of form will be different 
in kind from those given in terms of matter.  As a rule there is a 
collaboration between these causes: matter provides the potentialities 
which are actualised by the form.  Accordingly, these causally 
relevant entities give rise to a hierarchic structure of
explanation.[5]   
In order for a form to be realised, one needs to have suitable matter.  
This suitable matter brings with it the features required by a given 
hylomorphic composite. These features, then, are on the one hand the 
contribution of the matter, and as such the matter is the (material) 
cause of these features of the composite entity, whereas on the other 
hand they are indispensable presuppositions for the realisation of the 
form, and to that extent their presence is prompted by the
 form.[6]
 Such dependency relations between matter and form are labelled by
Aristotle as cases of hypothetical necessity.  Aristotle sometimes
illustrates his point by appealing to the matter required for the
construction of a house.  If there is a house to be built, one needs
building bricks, slabs, mortar, etc. Each part provides material with
properties within a definite range of the sort required for a house to
come into being.  A house cannot, for example, be made out of liquid
water.  This sort of matter provides potentialities not suited to the
form of house.
 Explanations often specify entities beyond the role played by the
matter and the form of the entity itself. These cases are grouped by
Aristotle as efficient or moving causes on the one hand and as final
causes on the other. Efficient causes operate in a straightforward
manner by initiating processes and bringing about their effects,
whereas final causes account for processes and entities by being what
these processes and entities are for, what they objectively intend to
 attain.[7]  
 The fact that the role of efficient causes is not identical to that
of the matter and the form of the entity whose features they are to
explain does not require that every instance of efficient causation
must issue from outside the entity moved.  On the contrary, an
efficient cause can also be internal. In cases in which the efficient
cause is internal, it will be, in its specific function, one of the
parts, or even the formal aspect, of the entity caused to move.
 Natures, understandably, can feature in any of these four causal
functions.  However, when the matter of an entity functions as its 
nature—i.e., when its natural motion and rest
are explained in terms of the matter it is made of—this
matter must possess some causally relevant features, bestowed upon it
by its own formal aspect.
This role of matter can be contrasted to the causal role of the three
further types of causes—of form, of efficient 
cause, and of final cause respectively. This is so, because, as Aristotle
adds, form and final cause often coincide. Moreover, when a nature is 
specified as a first efficient cause, cause and effect are the same in 
form (or in species), though this is not to say that one and the same 
entity causes itself and is caused through its own causal efficacy
(Physics 2.7, 198a24–27, cf. Metaphysics 8.4,
1044a32–b1).
 As internal principles of moving and rest, natures stand in an
exclusive relationship to the efficient or moving causes of the
motions and rests they bring about: in some cases when Aristotle is
not specifying the first moving cause, he can assert the identity of
nature and moving cause. Accordingly, the soul of living beings will
be identified as the substance (i.e., form) and the moving cause of the
 organism whose soul it
is.[8] 
 But the identification, even in this restricted sense, will need
some further important qualifications, to which we will return in
Section 5 below, on movers and unmoved movers.
 Because motion or change (kinêsis) is mentioned in the 
definition of nature, any discussion of nature will need to rely 
upon the explanation of motion. One 
might—erroneously—think
that this is an easy task, because Aristotle’s 
categories (as listed in the  Categories and also elsewhere) do 
contain two related types of entities, action and passion. 
Aristotle’s discussion of motion in the 
Physics, however, starts out in a somewhat different manner. 
When he submits that there is no motion besides the categories 
(Physics 3.1, at 200b32–201a3), he does not assign motions to 
the categories of action and passion. After mentioning that the entities 
in the categories come in oppositions, Aristotle claims a few lines 
later (at 201a8–9) that there are as many kinds of motion and change as 
there are kinds of being. This means that motions are grouped here with 
the entities of the category where they effect
 change.[9]
 Nevertheless, when making this claim, Aristotle speaks about four
kinds of motion and change only—those in substance, in quality,
in quantity and in place—whereas the number of the kinds of
being should have remained ten.
 Indeed, the Physics will later submit its own list of
categories. That list is slightly reduced—it has seven or eight
elements, depending on whether we include or exclude
 time.[10]  
 The reduced list also concludes with the claim that there are three
kinds of motion, plus the additional kind of substantial
 change.[11]
 That is to say, even where Aristotle enumerates a fairly complete
list of categories, he will not have motions in every one of these
categories, and he is not content to relegate motions to the categories
of action and
 passion.[12] 
 But this is a context where Aristotle stresses another issue: he is
not interested in assigning a separate ontological niche for
motions—regardless of whether that might or might not have been
a feasible task within the categorization of entities. Here Aristotle
is more intent on characterizing the ontological links which motions
have to entities falling into different categories, and to find a
general matrix of undergoing and effecting change. This happens in
several steps. First Aristotle claims that changes of relations are
not changes in their own right; rather they are accidental, as they
occur also in entities in which no change occurs at all, if the entity
which they stand in relation to undergoes some
 change.[13]
 After these considerations the crucial two categories of action and
passion are eliminated: As there are no motions of motions, we can set
aside action and passion (items (7) and (8) in the
 Categories).[14]
 This leaves us with the shorter list of relevant categories, (1)
substance, (2) quality, (3) quantity, and (4)
 place.[15] 
 Within the four domains where genuine change can occur, change always
requires the existence of a potentiality which can be actualised.  But
change is neither identical to this potentiality, nor to the lack of a
property, nor, without further qualifications, to the actuality which
is acquired when the potentiality is actualised (Physics 3.2,
201b33–35).  It is a special kind of actuality, the actuality of the
potential in so far as it is potential (Physics 3.2,
201a27–29). Aristotle’s formulation strongly 
suggests that the potentiality actualised in the process of change is 
not a separate and independent potentiality for motion, alongside the 
entity’s potentiality for harbouring the 
end-state of the process: the process, say, house-building, and the 
end result, the house, are different actualisations of the same 
potentiality of a set of materials that is buildable into a house.  
Not only would Aristotle’s definition be
uninformative otherwise, amounting to the tautologous
claim that change is the actualisation of the capacity for change, the
further qualification in the definition, that change is the actuality
of the potential in so far as it is potential, would be completely
idle.[16]
This further restriction is easiest taken as
selecting between the different
types of the realisations of the same
 potentialities.[17] 
 As Aristotle stresses these are the incomplete actualities belonging
to these potentialities, because what is actualised in a process of
realisation is an incomplete potentiality only (Physics 3.2,
201b32–33).  Accordingly, potentialities of change are admitted into
the ontology. They, nevertheless, do not need to feature as potentialities in
their own right, but as the incomplete variants of the fundamental
potentiality for an end 
 result.[18]
 It is furthermore important to note that potentiality in this
discussion throughout excludes actuality. In a formulation closely
matching the formulation of the principle of non-contradiction,
Aristotle asserts that “some things are the same [=have the same
properties, are the same substances] both in potentiality and in
actuality, but not at the same time or not in the same respect, as
e.g.  [a thing is] warm in actuality and cold in potentiality”
(Physics 3.1,
 201a19–22).[19] 
 Hence the ability of Aristotle’s definition 
to pick out the paradoxical entity, which is the actuality of a 
potentiality that can no longer be present once it has been replaced 
by the corresponding property in actuality.
 The definition of motion suggests that such processes can be
characterised in terms of a property or state of an entity, acquired
as a result at the end of the process, which can be labelled the 
form within this process, and an initial lack of this
form. Furthermore, Aristotle claims, there is a third component, which
is not changed in the process, the substrate or subject of the motion
(Physics 
1.7).[20]
 In terms of this threefold division it is the duty of the entity
effecting change to confer the requisite form on the object changed,
as Physics 3.2, 202a9–11 puts it. But there are further
important requirements for such a change to occur. First of all, these
motions or changes occur at the interaction of two
potentialities. One, the passive potentiality, is in the object
undergoing change, while the other, the active potentiality, is in the
entity initiating change.  The two potentialities need to match each
other: when there is a potentiality for being heated in the object
undergoing change, the process needs to be initiated by another object
possessing an active potentiality for effecting the heating. This is true to
the extent that Aristotle can claim that the definition of passive
potentiality is dependent on that of the active potentiality
(Metaphysics 9.1, 1046a9–13). These two potentialities need
to work in tandem, and consequently Aristotle can claim that there is
only a single process going on, which is located in the entity
moved. Thus, for example, when a process of instruction is going on,
it is identical to a process of knowledge acquisition, which happens
in the mind of the learner. Hence although action and passion retain
their categorical difference, because their accounts are different,
what they subsist in, the motion, will be the same (Physics
3.3,
 202b19–22).[21]
 Aristotle already by the introduction of a matching pair of active
and passive potentialities for each causal interaction comes very
close to admitting a separate potentiality for each and every change,
something uncomfortably close to the vis dormitiva, ridiculed
by Molière, according to which a sleeping pill 
allegedly induces sleep just in virtue of its power to induce sleep.  
Aristotle, however, subscribes to an even stronger principle, that 
causes in effecting change transmit the form they possess to the 
entity they effect change in. According to this claim the active capacity
of the item effecting change is at its root an actuality, which is synonymous
(in the Aristotelian sense) with the effect that is brought about
by it. In Aristotle’s favourite example, only a
human in actuality produces a human from what is a human in
potentiality.  If this is so, a sleeping pill need not only possess an
active potentiality for inducing sleep: it needs also to be slumbering
 itself.[22]
 The principle—which we could term the principle of 
causational synonymy—comes from Plato (see e.g.
Phaedo 100B–101D), but Aristotle has his own reasons
for endorsing it. His science attests to the presence and
operation of causally active forms at each level of analysis of the
physical
 world.[23] 
 Hence, as we shall see, Aristotle’s forms 
are the causally significant components of the substance effecting a 
change. Accordingly, when it comes to specifying the moving cause of 
an artefact, Aristotle will refer to the art of the craftsman as the
fundamental component operative in the change.  In cases where a
living being is generated, it is the parental form which is
transmitted to the newly emerging living
 being.[24]
 But it is not only processes of generation that conform to this
requirement.  Instances of qualitative change are often mentioned
alongside substantial generation, and as a crucially important
instance of qualitative alteration—or of 
qualitative quasi-alteration, depending on how we interpret 
Aristotle’s theory of 
perception[25]—Aristotle
presupposes that the principle of causational synonymy 
characterises also the causal link connecting the object of 
sensation and the sense organ.  
 It is, nevertheless, important to note that Aristotle restricts the
principle of causational synonymy in different and subtle ways. Most
significantly, an important domain of cases where a property of an
object is actualised is exempted from the requirements of this
principle. The actualisation of a property can be the continuation of
a previous causal process to the extent that Aristotle claims it is a
second actuality, following upon a previously acquired
first actuality. In these cases the emergence of the second
actuality does not necessarily require an additional external
efficient cause. The operation of this first actuality, through which
it reinforces and completes itself, can be the mere extension of the
operation of the original efficient cause (this will be 
Aristotle’s claim about the natural 
locomotion of the elements, see
 Section 5
 below), or the entity which has acquired this first actuality can be
already causally responsible for its own activities, including the
ones which bring it to a level of higher
 actuality[26]
 (Aristotle’s examples for this case are 
the soul of the embryo or of the newborn cub, which commands and 
effects the nourishing and the activities of the animal; or the 
actual application of a piece of knowledge one has acquired 
beforehand). It is important to note that these claims are far from 
trivial: they rest on further claims that the very definitions of 
these first actualities (what it is to be an element, an animal, or 
knowledge, respectively) inseparably include references to these 
activities.
Second, the principle of causational synonymy is couched in terms
which do not include locomotions: it is substantial, qualitative or
quantitative form which is claimed to be transmitted through the
efficacy of the cause in Physics 3.2, 202a9–12.  One of
the reasons for this is that locomotion, as Aristotle claims, affects
the least the substance, the ousia of the object undergoing
motion (Physics 8.7, 261a20f). Unlike the other types of
change, locomotion does not change the being of the moved object at
all. To some extent that should mean that the predication of place
should remain extrinsic to the being of the entity that is at a
particular
 location.[27]
 Hence the fundamental presupposition of
causation, that it is intrinsic characterisations of entities which
are conferred on the object moved cannot be in full force in cases of
locomotion.[28]
Accordingly, Aristotle will have a more intricate account for natural
and forced locomotions.
 Third, the principle of causational synonymy is restricted to
substances at the end of Metaphysics 
 7.9,[29]
 and in the first half of the same chapter the non-standard presence
of some causally relevant forms may also be envisaged.  
Aristotle’s example there is the heat in 
motion, which produces heat in the body when the doctor rubs the 
patient in the appropriate manner. This heat in the motion can be 
the presence of an active potentiality in the motion which is able 
to elicit heat in the body, without heat being predicable of motion 
itself.  But even if such non-inherential subsistence of properties 
is not envisaged in this passage—the
alternative being that the heat in motion is the heat in the skin of
the patient, caused by the rub, which then enters into the inner
recesses of the body, becoming heat in the body—some 
similar sort of presence is required in two large classes of cases: natural
generations and artificial productions.
 Aristotle claims that in a chain of efficient causes, where the first
element of the series acts through the intermediary of the other
items, it is the first member in the causal chain, rather than the
intermediaries, which is the moving cause (Physics 8.5,
257a10–12).  Then, both in cases of natural generation and artificial
production, it is only this first efficient cause which has to satisfy
the requirement of synonymous causation. 
Aristotle’s prime example, that human 
generates human, is also such a case. Here, the causal efficacy of the 
paternal human form is transmitted through the generative 
potentialities of the semen of the father. The semen, however, although 
it acts as an efficient cause in the process of the formation of the 
embryo, is not a human; it does not possess the form it transmits in 
the same way as the male parent. Aristotle’s 
discussion makes it clear that this is not an isolated instance of an
exception from the general principle.  He compares the case to the
activity of a craftsman, where the form of the product of the artistic
production is in the soul of the craftsman, and then through the
motions of the instruments this form can get imposed on the material
manufactured into an artefact. The instruments and their motions are
efficient causes of the process, but they do not contain the form in
the same way as the soul of the craftsman (On the generation of
animals 730b14–23 and 740b25–29, for further discussion see the
entry on
 Aristotle’s biology).[30]
 All these restrictions notwithstanding, Aristotle can claim that the
principle of causational synonymy remains universally valid. This is
so, because all the three restrictions above specify cases where
Aristotle can claim that a preceding, more prominent cause has already
satisfied the requirement: in the case of second actualities the first
actuality was called into existence by a synonymous cause in the first
place; locomotions, qualitative and quantitative changes, even if not
caused by a synonymous entity, can be part of a larger pattern of
causation, in which a substance is caused by a substance of the same
kind; and causal chains producing substances can be claimed to start
out invariably from synonymous substances.  
 Given his commitment to causal synonymy, Aristotle needs to invoke
considerations through which a chain of efficient causes of some
entity can be meaningfully compared in terms of causal efficacy. These
considerations will on each occasion describe synonymous causes not
only as temporally prior, but also as having priority in terms of
causal efficacy over the intermediate causes, which are responsible
only for the transmission of the forms of the original locus of causal
efficacy.  
 This allows, then, that in the two major paradigms of such
causation—in natural generation and in artificial
production—the forms—the nature of the natural entity, and
the
 art[31]
 of the craftsman exercising his art respectively—are the
causally operative entities initiating change. This has wide ranging
consequences for the status of forms in several respects. First, the
causal relevance of these forms shows that not any arrangement or
configuration can qualify as a full-fledged form. While it is true
that privations are also forms in some sense (Physics 2.1,
193b19–20), this is not the sense in which the causally operative
forms, describable in evaluative terms, can be called forms.
Moreover, the causal relevance of forms allows Aristotle to switch
(e.g. in De generatione et corruptione 1.7) without notice
between the craftsman and the craft itself as the appropriate
specification of the efficient cause in these cases. We should note
that in the latter cases, Aristotle specifies causes which are
unmoved. They do not effect motion by being in motion themselves, in
so far as they are the causally effective forms within the causal
framework; hence they are not under any reactive influence during this
process either.
 Even though the foregoing might have suggested that generation of
substances is fundamental for all the other kinds of changes, in fact
locomotion will have a privileged status.  All other changes depend on
locomotions, because any two entities involved in change, with their
active and passive potentialities respectively, need to come into
contact in order for the interaction to
 occur.[32]
 Contact, however, as a rule needs to be established by locomotion:
either the entity to be moved, or the mover, or both, need to proceed
so that they meet (Physics 8.7, 260a26–b7).  Moreover
locomotion is the form of change which can occur in isolation of
generation, perishing and the other forms of change (Physics
8.7, 260b26–29). Other changes are independent kinds of change insofar
as they can occur in an entity which does not perform any other
change. Nevertheless all these forms of change include or presuppose
that some other entity engages in
 locomotion.[33]
 Aristotle argues at the opening of Physics bk. 8 that motion
and change in the universe can have no beginning, because the
occurrence of change presupposes a previous process of change. With
this argument Aristotle can establish an eternal chain of motions and
refute those who hold that there could have been a previous stationary
state of the universe. Such an eternal chain, Aristotle argues, needs
to rely on a cause which guarantees its persistence: if each of the
constitutive processes in the causally connected web were of finite
duration, for every one of them it can be the case that it is not
present in the world, indeed, at some later time it will not be
present any longer. But then the whole causally connected series of
events, Aristotle claims, would also be
 contingent.[34]
 Hence Aristotle postulates that the processes of the universe depend
on an eternal motion (or on several eternal motions), the eternal
revolution of the heavenly spheres, which in turn is dependent on one
or several unmoved movers (Physics 8.6,
 258b26–259a9).[35]
 The priority of the eternal celestial revolutions, furthermore,
guarantees the causal finitude of the universe. This is so, even
though there are infinite causal chains: behind every single
individual of an animal species there is an infinite series of male
ancestors, each causally responsible for the subsequent members in the
series, because Aristotelian species are eternal and male parents are
the efficient causes of their
 offspring.[36]
 Left to its own devices, the finite universe on its own would certainly
reach a dissolution, a state of complete separation of the elemental
masses into their concentrically arranged natural places. In view of
the fact that such a complete segregation of the elemental masses is
avoided through the constant excitation caused by the celestial
motions, producing heat in the sublunary domain, especially around the
regions of the
 Sun,[37]
 Aristotle will be entitled to assert that the cause of the human
being is in the first instance his or her father, but is at the same
time the Sun as it moves along its annual ecliptic
 path.[38]
 Between celestial revolutions and the individual natural processes
there is always a finite causal chain, as these natural processes
could not possibly have continued without the celestial motions.  The
infinite causal chains passing through male parents cannot subsist on
their own without this constant external support, and this dependence
can always be analysed in terms of finite causal chains.
 The definition of motion as the actuality of a potentiality of the
entity undergoing motion in so far as it is potential requires that in
each case the passive potentiality for the change is present in the
changing object.  The presence of the potentiality can, nevertheless,
be in accordance with the nature of the object—in which case the
change is natural (phusei) or according to
nature (kata phusin), or can happen in the face of a
contrary disposition on the part of the nature of the entity—in
which case the change is forced (biâi) or
contrary to nature (para phusin). A major
presupposition on Aristotle’s part is that 
this division is exhaustive: there are no changes to which the 
nature of the entity would be indifferent or
 neutral.[39]
 The major consideration behind such a presupposition is that natures
regulate the behaviour of the entities to which they belong in a
comprehensive manner, and not merely partially. Any influence the
entity is exposed to interacts with its nature in a substantive
manner. The entity does not possess potentialities for change which
would not be directly related to the tendencies emerging from its
nature.
 Note, however, that even if we endorsed the exhaustiveness of the
dichotomy of natural and forced motions, and accepted the thesis that
simple bodies possess a unique natural motion (De caelo 1.2,
269a8–9), we would not need thereby to accept 
Aristotle’s further major claim, that 
natural and forced motions come in pairs of opposites, with the 
result that if a motion is contrary to the nature of an entity, the 
opposite motion will be its natural motion (De caelo 1.2, 
269a9–18).  Where there is room for some more complex relationships 
among the targets of changes than a simple opposition along an axis 
of a single dimension—and this is eminently so
between locomotions along rectilinear and circular paths
respectively—there can be several forced 
translations in contrast to the single natural motion of the elements
endowed with rectilinear natural motion, as Aristotle 
also admits in some passages of the De caelo (see 1.2, 
269a30–b2 and 269b10–12).
Although this allows for several different motions that are contrary 
to the nature of the same entity, the natural motion will still have a 
single opposite motion, the one which is directed to the opposite 
location. Consequently, natural circular motion will have no motion that
is opposite to it (De caelo 1.4, 
270b32–271a5).[40]
Aristotle’s classification of motions into 
those contrary to nature and those according to nature applies not 
only to the motions of the moved objects, but transfers also to the 
movers effecting motions. A mover can effect a motion which is 
contrary to its own nature. Aristotle’s 
example of such an unnatural mover is the lever, an object heavy by 
nature, with which loads can  be lifted (Physics 8.4, 
255a20–23).  Although such movers can effect motions in the 
contrary direction to the motion at the head of the causal chain 
(levers are operated by the downward push of something heavy at the 
other end), the crucial consideration for Aristotle in this case is 
that the original, initiating cause of the causal chain should 
effect the motion according to its nature. Taken together, these 
considerations imply that we have a complete account of the physical 
domain once we have a thorough description of what is natural to the 
entites in that domain, together with a specification of all the 
circumstances in which they 
 operate.[41]
 Bk. 8 of the Physics argues for the additional thesis that
for each motion, whether natural or contrary to nature, there needs to
exist a mover. [42] 
In cases of forced motion, movers are present in a
perspicuous way. This need not be so, however, in cases of natural
motion.  Apart from the cases where the nature of the entity is at the
same time a moving and efficient cause—i.e., apart from living
beings, whose nature, the soul, is both formal and efficient
cause—the mover may be inconspicuous. This is eminently so in
the remaining large class of natural motions, the natural motions of
the elements. The nature of these elements, their inner principle of
motion and rest is not the moving cause of the motions of the
elements, Aristotle claims. If it were, then it would be up to the
elementary masses to determine when they should perform their motions,
but plainly it is not. Moreover, the principle of causational synonymy
rules out that any homogenous mass, without an internal demarcation
into components which move and are moved, could move itself
(Physics 8.4, 255a5–18). This is so because, on the
assumption that one part of a homogenenous body could move another
part, the active component of change would be, in every aspect,
indistinguishable from the part in which change is effected, and this
in turn would mean that change would occur even though there would be
no transmission of a causally relevant property from the active part
to the passive. This implies that even though we may answer the
question as to why the elements move to their natural places—the
light bodies up and the heavy ones down—by an appeal to their
respective natures as causes (“that it is simply their nature to
move somewhere,[43]
 and this is what it is to be light and to be
heavy,” Physics 8.4, 255b13–17), we do not thereby
specify their moving causes. Their thrust being in a single direction,
the elements cannot circumvent even rather simple obstacles they may
encounter on their way (a sealed container can retain air under water,
the roof stays put pressing down on the walls of a building
etc.). Hence, whoever removes an obstacle to an element’s motion is
causally responsible for the ensuing elemental motions. But even such
a causally responsible agent will not qualify as the moving
cause, without yet further qualifications.  For the identification of
the moving cause of these locomotions Aristotle invokes his
distinction of two potentialities.  Some heavy material can be
potentially light, as it can be transformed into a light material in a
process of generation, whereas the emerging light material is still
potential in a sense until it has acquired its full-fledged status,
which involves its having arrived at that region of the cosmos which
is its natural place.  This analysis, then, describes the natural
locomotion of the elements as a possibly postponed, completing stage
within a single overarching process, and hence in these cases
Aristotle can identify the cause of the second stage of the process
with the efficient cause of the first stage, the entity which
generated the element in the first place (Physics 8.4,
256a1).
 Once it is established that there is a mover for each change, the
finite causal
 chains[44]
can be followed up to the primary instance of motion, the celestial
revolutions. In particular the Sun’s course along the 
ecliptic is responsible for many sublunar changes, the rotating 
seasons being foremost among them. Whether the cosmos has unmoved 
or moved movers, moreover, whether the universe is causally closed 
or needs some continuous external causal influence for its 
preservation, depends ultimately, then, on the status of the 
celestial motions.
 Revolutions in the celestial realm are the natural motions of the
special element making up the celestial spheres. This, however, does
not entail that they have no need of an external
unmoved[45]
 mover: the motions of the sublunary elements also occur under the
influence of a moving cause. Nevertheless, the celestial bodies cannot
be moved by an external mover of the same sort as the sublunary
elements.  These celestial bodies are eternal and ungenerated.
Consequently, Aristotle cannot appeal to the entity which produced
them as responsible for their locomotions.  As they do not encounter
any hindrance during their revolutions, there is no room for an
accidental mover which would remove any obstacles in their way.
Nevertheless, as celestial revolutions are motions, albeit eternal
ones, they include some component of potentiality, which is actualised
in the motion, and hence this potential component is in need of an
actuality as a mover. This requirement implies that whatever can be
the mover of these eternal motions needs to be in actuality without
any restrictions (Metaphysics
 12.6).[46]
 Moreover, such an entity has to possess an infinite
 power[47]
 which it communicates to the moved celestial sphere. Hence, this
entity cannot be divisible and cannot have extension (Physics
8.10).
 All this testifies to the exceptional status of the first movement,
and behind it, of the first mover in the universe.  The mover of these
spheres possesses nothing but actuality, but this actuality is not
what is transmitted in the process of causation.  As we have seen in
Section 3 above, this would not be exceptional as
such: locomotion need not be caused on the transmission model of
causation.  But locomotions caused without immediate transmission of some 
actuality were
understood to be be embedded in larger patterns of causation which
observed the principle of causational synonymy, and it is exactly such
a larger pattern of causation which is missing in the case of
celestial motions.[48] 
Instead, what we hear in Metaphysics 12.6
is that the first mover moves as an object of love and
 striving,[49]
 which comes perilously close to abandoning the claims of
Physics bk. 8 to the effect that there is an unmoved mover
serving as the efficient cause of the motions of the cosmos. Such
doubts, however, should be dismissed. Aristotle is describing here in
the terminology of his physics a supra-physical entity without which
the universe could not function or persist.  Small wonder if its mode
of operation needs to subsume several different dimensions of physical
causation.