A number of significant cultural changes in the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries led to the emergence of a new ideal in the
Western world (Trilling 1972). During this period, human beings came to be
thought of more as individuals than as placeholders in systems of
social relations. This emphasis on the importance of the individual is
seen in the prevalence of autobiographies and self-portraits, where
the individual becomes the centre of attention not because of
extraordinary feats or access to special knowledge, but because he or
she is an individual.
In the same period, society comes to be seen not as an organic
whole of interacting components, but as an aggregate of individual
human beings, a social system with a life of its own, which presents
itself to the individual as not itself quite human but rather as
artificial, the result of a “social contract”. Being human
is understood as being best achieved through being unique and
distinctive, even when these collide with certain social norms. At the
same time, there is an increasing awareness of what Charles Taylor
(1989) calls “inwardness” or “internal
space”. The result is a distinction between one’s private and
unique individuality, and one’s public self (Taylor 1991; Trilling
1972).
With these social changes there is a sharp shift in the conceptions
of approbation and disapproval that are commonly used in judging
others and oneself. For instance, concepts like sincerity and honor
become obsolescent (Berger 1970). In earlier times, a sincere person
was seen as someone who honestly attempts to neither violate the
expectations that follow from the position he holds in society, nor to
strive to appear otherwise than he ought to. However, by the time of
Hegel, the ideal of sincerity had lost its normative appeal. Hegel
polemically refers to sincerity as “the heroism of dumb
service” (Hegel 2002 [1807]: 515) and launches an attack on the
bourgeois “honest man,” who passively internalizes a
particular conventional social ethos. In the condition of sincerity,
the individual is uncritically obedient to the power of
society—a conformity that for Hegel leads to subjugation and a
deterioration of the individual (Hegel 2002 [1807]; Golomb 1995: 9;
Trilling 1972).  For Hegel, in the progress of “spirit”,
the individual consciousness will eventually move from this condition
of sincerity to a condition of baseness, in which the individual
becomes antagonistic to external societal powers and achieves a
measure of autonomy. Hegel shows this clearly in a comment on
Diderot’s Rameau’s Nephew, a story in which the narrator
(supposedly Diderot himself) is portrayed as the reasonable, sincere
man who respects the prevailing order and who has achieved bourgeois
respectability. In contrast, the nephew is full of contempt for the
society in which he figures as a worthless person. However, he is in
opposition to himself, because he still aspires to a better standing
in a society, which he believes has nothing but emptiness to offer
(Despland 1975: 360; Golomb 1995: 13–15). For Hegel, the
narrator is an example of the sincere, honest soul, while the nephew
figures as the “disintegrated,” alienated
consciousness. The nephew is clearly alienated, but for Hegel this
alienation is a step in the progression towards autonomous existence
(Williams 2002: 190).
In the midst of this conceptual change, the term
‘authenticity’ becomes applicable in demarcating a
somewhat new set of virtues. The older concept of sincerity, referring
to being truthful in order to be honest in one’s dealings with others,
comes to be replaced by a relatively new concept of authenticity,
understood as being true to oneself for one’s own benefit.  Earlier,
the moral advice to be authentic recommended that one should be true
to oneself in order thereby to be true to others.  Thus,
being true to oneself is seen as a means to the end of
successful social relations. In contrast, in our contemporary
thinking, authenticity as a virtue term is seen as referring to a way
of acting that is choiceworthy in itself (Ferrara 1993; Varga
2011a; Varga 2011b).
The growing appeal of the idea of authenticity has led to the
emergence of a highly influential modern “ethic of
authenticity” (Ferrara 1993; Ferrara 2017). This ethic acknowledges the value
of the dominant “ethic of autonomy” that shapes modern
moral thought (Schneewind 1998; Dworkin 1988). The idea of autonomy
emphasizes the individual’s self-governing abilities, the independence
of one’s deliberation from manipulation and the capacity to decide for
oneself. It is connected to the view that moral principles and the
legitimacy of political authority should be grounded in the
self-governing individual who is free from diverse cultural and social
pressures. According to the ethic of autonomy, each individual should
follow those norms he or she can will on the basis of rational
reflective endorsement. To some extent, authenticity and autonomy
agree in supposing that one should strive to lead one’s life according
to one’s own reasons and motives, relying on one’s capacity to
follow self-imposed guidelines. In both cases, it is crucial
that one has the ability to put one’s own behavior under reflexive
scrutiny and make it dependent on self-determined goals (Honneth
1994).
One crucial difference is that the ethic of authenticity introduces
the idea that there are motives, desires and commitments that
sometimes should outweigh the restrictions of rational
reflection. This is because those motives are so fundamental to the
cohesion of one’s own identity that overriding them would mean
disintegrating the very self which is necessary to be a moral
agent. The point is that there are types of moral philosophical
reasoning that can be repressive if they arise from “an
autonomous moral conscience not complemented by sensitivity to the
equilibrium of identity and by authenticity” (Ferrara 1993:
102). Besides leading an autonomous life, guided by one’s own,
non-constrained reasons and motives, authenticity requires that these
motives and reasons should be expressive of one’s
self-identity. Authenticity guides the moral agent to follow only
those “moral sources outside the subject [that speak in
a language] which resonate[s] within him or her”, in
other words, moral sources that accord with “an order which is
inseparably indexed to a personal vision” (Taylor 1989:
510). Hence, authenticity entails an aspect that lies beyond the scope
of autonomy, namely, a “language of personal resonance”
(Taylor 1991: 90). This points to the gap between (Kantian) autonomy
and authenticity: one can lead an autonomous life, even if this way of
living fails to express a person’s self-understanding.
 In recent years, more attention has been devoted to highlighting how autonomy and authenticity can come apart (e.g. Oshana 2007; Roessler 2012; MacKay forthcoming). Some argue that authenticity demands more than is necessary for autonomy: a person does not have to reflectively endorse key aspects of her identity in order to qualify as autonomous (Oshana 2007). If she acknowledges that aspects of her identity contradict her self-conception, she might still be autonomous, even if this acknowledgement injects ambivalence into her life.
 In all, the ideal of authenticity does not object to the importance
of the self-given law, but disagrees that full freedom consists in
making and following such a law (Menke 2005: 308). It is not just
about being involved in the authorship of such a law, but about how
this law fits with the wholeness of a person’s life, and how or
whether it expresses who the person is. In this sense, the idea of
autonomy already represents a counterposition to an ethic that is
solely concerned with strict adherence to social norms.
Another decisive factor in the development of the ideal of
authenticity was that it emerged together with a distinctively modern
conception of the self. This is visible in the work of Rousseau, who
argues that the orientation toward life that should guide the conduct
one chooses should come from a source within. This led to questions
about inwardness, self-reflection and introspection, many of them
addressed in his Confessions (1770). When the space of
interiority becomes a guiding authority, the individual must detect
and distinguish central impulses, feelings and wishes from ones that
are less central or conflict with one’s central motives. In other
words, interiority must be divided into what is at the core and what
is peripheral. In this picture, the measure of one’s actions is
whether they spring from and express essential aspects of one’s
identity or whether they come from a peripheral place.
Such a conception of the self exhibits decisive parallels to the
tradition of “religious individualism” that centers
religious life on the individual and stresses the importance of
inwardness and the introspective examination of one’s inner motives,
intentions and conscience. Investigating the characteristics of the
modern subject of inwardness, Foucault (1980: 58–60) suggests
that “it seems to us that truth, lodged in our most secret
nature, ‘demands’ only to surface.” For Foucault,
confession—the look inward to monitor one’s interior life and to
tell certain “truths” about oneself—has become a
part of a cultural life, reaching from religious contexts to
psychological therapy. The radicalization of the distinction between
true and false interiority has led to new possibilities; inner states,
motivations and feelings are now increasingly thought of as
objectifiable and malleable in different contexts.
 Rousseau also adds that acting on motives that spring from the
periphery of the self, while ignoring or denying essential aspects of
one’s self, simply amounts to self-betrayal and annihilation of the
self. Rousseau’s The New Heloise (1997 [1761]) emphasizes
this aspect by showing how the novel accentuates the significant costs
and the potential self-alienation involved in suppressing one’s
deepest motivations. But, in addition, in the Discourse on the
Origin of Inequality, Rousseau argues that, with the emergence of
a competitive public sphere, the ability to turn inward is
increasingly compromised, because competitive relations require
intense role-playing, which Rousseau calls an “excessive
labor” (Rousseau 1992 [1754]: 22). The ongoing instrumental
role-playing not only causes alienation, but ultimately inequality and
injustice, since it destroys the immanent moral understanding with
which, according to Rousseau, humans are hard-wired. Social life requires identification with social roles, but because role identity is determined by other people’s normative expectations, role-playing leads to a tension that might be understood as a matter of politics more than anything else (Schmid 2017).  
The idea of autonomy—the view that each individual must
decide how to act based on his or her own rational deliberations about
the best course of action—has in many ways paved the way for the
idea of authenticity. However, authenticity goes beyond autonomy by
holding that an individual’s feelings and deepest desires can outweigh
both the outcome of rational deliberation in making decisions, and our
willingness to immerse ourselves into the reigning norms and values of
society. Whereas sincerity generally seems to accept a given social
order, authenticity becomes an implicitly critical concept, often
calling into question the reigning social order and public opinion. In
Rousseau’s optic, one of our most important projects is to avert from
the social sphere and to unearth what is truly us underneath
the ‘masks’ that society forces on us. But when
authenticity comes to be regarded as something like sincerity for its
own sake (Ferrara 1993: 86), it becomes increasingly hard to see what
the moral good is that it is supposed to bring into being.
A frequently mentioned worry with the ideal of authenticity is that
the focus on one’s own inner feelings and attitudes may breed a
self-centered preoccupation with oneself that is anti-social and
destructive of altruism and compassion toward others.  Christopher
Lasch (1979)
points out similarities between the clinical disorder referred to as
Narcissistic Personality Disorder and authenticity. According to
Lasch, narcissism and authenticity are both characterized by deficient
empathic skills, self-indulgence and self-absorbed
behavior. Similarly, Allan Bloom (1987: 61) maintains that the culture
of authenticity has made the minds of the youth “narrower and
flatter,” leading to self-centeredness and the collapse of the
public self. While Lasch and Bloom worry about the threat that the
self-centeredness and narcissism of the “culture of
authenticity” poses to morality and political coherence, Daniel
Bell voices worries about its economic viability.  What Bell fears is
that the “megalomania of self-infinitization” that comes
with the culture of authenticity will erode the foundations of market
mechanisms that are “based on a moral system of reward rooted in
the Protestant sanctification of work” (Bell 1976: 84).
More recently, critics have argued that when properly analyzed, authenticity demands positing the existence of a “true self.” It requires positing an essentialist structure leading to metaphysical problems that current accounts of authenticity fail to solve (Bialystok 2014). Correspondingly, Feldman (2014) argues in favor of abandoning the ideal of authenticity because it builds on confused assumptions about the self, the value of one’s “gut feelings” in revealing one’s values, and the supposedly corrupting influence of the “external” social realm (for a critique of this position, see Bauer 2017; Ferrara 2009)
However, one might argue that this only becomes a problem if one
thinks of authenticity as entirely a personal virtue. In other words,
there is only a clash between morality and social life and being
authentic if the “true” self is regarded as fundamentally
prone to anti-social behaviour. But many thinkers at this time
understood human nature as fundamentally disposed toward beneficence,
so that evil was seen as arising from socialization and upbringing
rather than from deep drives within the human being. For instance,
Rousseau holds that certain immoral characteristics are immanent in
man but were produced by the dynamics of modern society, which is
characterized by a competitive way of relating to others and striving
for acknowledgement in the public sphere. Rousseau thus externalizes
the origins of societal evil and alienation from the original nature
of man. The undistorted self-relation of natural man inspires sympathy
and considerate relations with others, sensitive to “seeing any
sentient being, especially our fellow-man, perish or suffer,
principally those like ourselves” (Rousseau 1992 [1754]: 14). In
somewhat the same way, economic theorists of the time supposed that
unregulated markets are self-correcting, as human beings are naturally
inclined to engage in mutually advantageous commercial activities
(Taylor 2007: 221–269). On this view, authenticity does not
amount to egoism or self-absorption. On the contrary, the prevailing
view seems to have been that, by turning inward and accessing the
“true” self, one is simultaneously led towards a deeper
engagement with the social world. This is why Taylor (1989:
419–455) describes the trajectory of the project of authenticity
is “inward and upward”.
It might however be objected that supposing that the
“inner” is a morally worthy guide is deeply misguided and
builds upon an overly optimistic idea of human nature. It may be
argued that once the idea of rational deliberation is set aside, the
powerful impact of the non-rational becomes apparent. Thinkers such as
Nietzsche and Freud have put in question the conception of human
nature, and especially of our “inner” nature, as
fundamentally good.  Following their “hermeneutics of
suspicion” (Ricoeur 1970), human nature comes to be seen as
including forces of violence, disorder and unreason as well as
tendencies toward beneficence and altruism. In that case, any idea of
an ethic based primarily on the ideal of authenticity is simply
untenable.
Others have expressed serious concerns not about the optimistic
view of human nature, but about the conception of the self that
underlies the idea of authenticity. Some argued that the dichotomies
that the concept authenticity was built on, like conformity
vs. independence, individual vs. society, or inner-directedness
vs. other-directedness, were entirely misguided. The underlying
assumption that considers the individual separate from the environment
is an absurd assumption that erodes that bond between the individual
and community, which ultimately is the source of the authentic self
(Slater 1970: 15; Sisk 1973). In agreement with Slater (1970) and Yankelovich
(1981), Bellah et al. (1985) and Fairlie (1978) contend
that such a pursuit of authenticity is self-defeating, for with the
loss of the bond with community, the sense of self is also
diminished.
Additionally, in The Jargon of Authenticity, Adorno
contended that the “liturgy of inwardness” is founded on
the flawed idea of a self-transparent individual who is capable of
choosing herself (Adorno 1973: 70).  The doubtful picture of the
self-centered individual covers up the constitutive alterity and
mimetic nature of the self. In the concluding part of The Order of
Things, Foucault maintained that present society was witnessing a
crisis, not only of authenticity but also of the whole idea of the
subject in its temporary historically contingent constitution,
foreseeing that “man would be erased, like a face drawn in sand
at the edge of the sea” (Foucault 1994: 387). Foucault clearly
opposed the idea of a hidden authentic self, which he critically
referred to as the “Californian cult of the self” (1983:
266). The recognition that the subject is not given to itself in
advance leads him to the practical consequence that it must create
itself as a work of art (Foucault 1983: 392). Rather than searching for a hidden true
self, one should attempt to shape one’s life as a work of art,
proceeding without recourse to any fixed rules or permanent truths in
a process of unending becoming (Foucault 1988: 49). In a similar vein,
Richard Rorty has argued that the idea of coming to “know a
truth which was out there (or in here) all the time” (Rorty
1989: 27) is simply a myth. Postmodern thought raises questions about
the existence of an underlying subject with essential properties
accessible through introspection. The whole idea of the authentic as
that which is “original”, “essential”,
“proper”, and so forth now seems doubtful. If we are
self-constituting beings who make ourselves up from one moment to the
next, it appears that the term “authenticity” can refer
only to whatever feels right at some particular moment.
Yet others have based their criticism of authenticity especially on
the emergence of a pervasive “culture of
authenticity”. Cultural critics have argued that the ostensible
“decline” of modern society might not primarily be a
result of economical or structural transformations, but as the outcome
of an increasingly ubiquitous ideal of authenticity. Before we turn to
these critiques, it is helpful to understand how the ideal of
authenticity became so widespread. First, we should mention that
Rousseau’s work, made a significant contribution to the popularization
of authenticity.  Indeed, some argue that authenticity can be seen as a “keystone” in Rousseau’s work, giving unity to his reflections on sociality, political order, and education (Ferrara 2017: 2). Particularly The New Heloise (1997 [1761])
was enormously influential, with at least 70 editions in print before
1800 (Darnton 1984: 242). This dispersion of the ideal of authenticity
into popular culture was further strengthened by several factors. For
instance, a wide array of intellectuals of the nineteenth and the
early twentieth century had embraced the idea of authenticity, and
even radicalized it by resisting established codes and publicly
defending alternative, “artistic” or
“bohemian” modes of life.
 The reception of the work of Sartre and Heidegger has surely
contributed to the popularization of the idea of authenticity, and the
decisive impact of this idea first began to manifest itself after the
Second World War (Taylor 2007: 475). Rossinow contends that the
politics of the 1960s were centered on questions of authenticity.
Following his account, the main driving force towards political and
social changes of the New Left movement in the 1960s was “a
search for authenticity in industrial American life” (Rossinow
1998: 345).  Both J. Farrell (1997) and Rossinow argue that the New
Left emerged partly as a reaction to traditional American liberalism
and Christian existentialism, replacing the negative concept of
“sin” with “alienation” and the positive goal
of “salvation” with that of
“authenticity”. Confronted with what they understood as
alienation that “isn’t restricted to the poor” (Rossinow
1998: 194), New Left activism reached beyond civil rights to moral
rights and attempted to bring about a recovery of a sense of personal
wholeness and authenticity by curing the institutions of American
society.
The emerging youth culture was characterized by a severe
dissatisfaction with the “morass of conformity” of the
parental generation (Gray 1965: 57). The critique of the growing
conformity of life got more persistent during the 1950s, and a number
of social scientists in widely read books criticized what they saw as
widespread conformity and inauthenticity. Among these, The Lonely
Crowd (1950) by Riesman and The Organization Man (1956)
by Whyte received the most attention. Riesman points out that the
efficacious functioning of modern organizations requires
other-directed individuals who smoothly adjust to their
environment. However, he also notes that such people compromised
themselves, and a society consisting mostly of other-directed
individuals faces substantial deficiencies in leadership and human
potential.
On the background of this development, it seems that at a time when
relativism appears difficult to surmount, authenticity has become a
last measure of value and a common currency in contemporary cultural
life (Jay 2004). So, under the impact of existentialism on Western
culture, the ubiquitous desire for authenticity has emerged in modern
society as “one of the most politically explosive of human
impulses,” as Marshall Berman argues (1970: xix). 
Kierkegaard’s work on authenticity and his suggestion that
each of us is to “become what one is” (1992 [1846]: 130),
is best seen as linked to his critical stance towards a certain social
reality and a certain essentialist trend in philosophical and
scientific thought. On the one hand, he (1962 [1846]) condemned
aspects of his contemporary social world, claiming that many people
have come to function as merely place-holders in a society that
constantly levels down possibilities to the lowest common
denominator. In more contemporary terms, we can say that Kierkegaard
provides a criticism of modern society as causing
“inauthenticity”. Living in a society characterized by
such “massification” lead to what he refers to as
widespread “despair” that comes to the fore as
spiritlessness, denial, and defiance. On the other hand, he rejected
the view that a human being should be regarded as an object,
as a substance with certain essential attributes.  Rather than
being an item among others, Kierkegaard proposes to understand the
self in relational terms: “The self is a relation that relates
itself to itself…” (Kierkegaard 1980 [1849]:13).  This
relation consists in the unfolding project of taking what we find
ourselves with as beings in the world and imparting some meaning or
concrete identity to our own life course. Thus, the self is defined by
concrete expressions through which one manifests oneself in
the world and thereby constitutes one’s identity over time. In
Kierkegaard’s view, “becoming what one is” and evading
despair and hollowness is not a matter of solitary introspection, but
rather a matter of passionate commitment to a relation to something
outside oneself that bestows one’s life with meaning. For Kierkegaard,
as a religious thinker, this ultimate commitment was his defining
relation to God. The idea is that passionate care about something
outside ourselves gives diachronic coherence in our lives and provides
the basis for the narrative unity of the self (Davenport 2012).
Heidegger’s conception of human existence (or, as calls it,
Dasein, ‘being-there’) echoes Kierkegaard’s
conception of the “self”. Rather than being an object
among others, Dasein is a “relation of being”
(Seinsverhältnis; Heidegger 1962 [1927]: 12)—a
relation that obtains between what one is at any moment and what one
can and will be as the temporally extended unfolding of life into a
realm of possibilities. To conceive Dasein as relational means that in
living out our lives, we always already care: for each of us,
our being is always at issue and this is made concrete in the
specific actions we undertake and the roles we enact. Over the course
of our lives, our identities are always in question: we are always
projections into the future, incessantly taking a stand on who we
are.
The most familiar conception of “authenticity” comes to
us mainly from Heidegger’s Being and Time of 1927. The word
we translate as ‘authenticity’ is actually a neologism
invented by Heidegger, the word Eigentlichkeit, which comes
from an ordinary term, eigentlich, meaning
‘really’ or ‘truly’, but is built on the
stem eigen, meaning ‘own’ or
‘proper’. So the word might be more literally translated
as ‘ownedness’, or ‘being owned’, or even
‘being one’s own’, implying the idea of owning up to and
owning what one is and does (for a stimulating recent interpretation, see McManus 2019). Nevertheless, the word
‘authenticity’ has become closely associated with
Heidegger as a result of early translations of Being and Time
into English, and was adopted by Sartre and Beauvoir as well as by
existentialist therapists and cultural theorists who followed
them.[1]
Heidegger’s conception of ownedness as the most fully realized
human form of life emerges from his view of what it is to be a human
being. This conception of human Dasein echoes Kierkegaard’s
description of a “self”. On Heidegger’s account, Dasein is
not a type of object among others in the totality of what is on hand
in the universe. Instead, human being is a “relation of
being”, a relation
that obtains between what one is at any moment (the immediacy of the
concrete present as it has evolved) and what one can and will be as
the temporally extended unfolding or happening of life into
an open realm of possibilities. To say that human being is a relation
is to say that, in living out our lives, we always care about
who and what we are. Heidegger expresses this by saying that, for each
of us, our being (what our lives will amount to overall) is
always at issue. This “being at stake” or
“being in question for oneself” is made concrete in the
specific stands we take—that is, in the roles we
enact—over the course of our lives. It is because our being (our
identity) is in question for us that we are always taking a stand on
who we are. Since the German word for
‘understanding’, Verstehen, is etymologically
derived from the idea of ‘taking a stand’, Heidegger can
call the projection into the future by which we shape our identity
‘understanding’. And because any stand one takes is
inescapably “being-in-the-world”, understanding carries
with it some degree of competence in coping with the world around us.
An understanding of being in general is therefore built into human
agency.
To the extent that all our actions contribute to realizing an
overarching project or set of projects, our active lives can be seen
as embodying a life-project of some sort. On Heidegger’s view, we
exist for the sake of ourselves: enacting roles and
expressing character traits contribute to realizing some image of what
it is to be human in our own cases. Existence has a directedness or
purposiveness that imparts a degree of connection to our life
stories. For the most part, having such a life-plan requires very
little conscious formulation of goals or deliberation about means. It
results from our competence in being members of a historical culture
that we have mastered to a great extent in growing up into a shared
world. This tacit “pre-understanding” makes possible our
familiar dwelling with things and others in the familiar, everyday
world.
Heidegger holds that all possibilities of concrete understanding
and action are made possible by a background of shared practices
opened up by the social context in which we find ourselves, by what he
calls the ‘They’ (das Man). Far from it being the
case that social existence is something alien to and opposed to our
humanity, Heidegger holds that we are always essentially and
inescapably social beings. As he says,
They itself prescribes that way of interpreting
the world that lies closest. Dasein is for the sake of the They in an
everyday manner… In terms of the They, and as the They, I am
‘given’ proximally to ‘myself’…. (1962
[1927]: 167, translation modified)
To be a teacher, for instance, I must adopt (and
perhaps blend) some set of the ready-made styles of classroom
presentation and of dealing with students laid out in advance by
existing norms and conventions of professional conduct.
 To say that we are always the They is not to say we are automata,
however. Heidegger suggests that even in the bland conformism of
“average everydayness” we are constantly making choices
that reflect our understanding of who we are. Nevertheless, in average
everydayness, we are as a rule adrift, acting as one of the
“herd” or “crowd”—a form of life
Heidegger calls “falling” (Verfallen). Heidegger
(1962 [1927]: 220) emphasizes that calling this way of living
“falling” does not imply that it is “a bad or
deplorable ontical property of which, perhaps, more advanced stages of
human culture might be able to rid themselves” (1962 [1927]:
220). On the contrary, since there is no exit from the social
world—since it is the “only game in town”—it
plays a positive role in creating the background of shared
intelligibility that lets us be fully human in the first
place. Nevertheless, Heidegger is aware that there is something deeply
problematic about this falling mode of existence. In “doing what
one does”, he suggests, we fail to own up to who we are. We do
not take over our own choices as our own and, as a result, we are not
really the authors of our own lives. To the extent that our lives are
unowned or disowned, existence is inauthentic (uneigentlich),
not our own (eigen).
Our condition as They-selves is one of dispersal, distraction and
forgetfulness. But this “downward plunge” captures only
one aspect of Dasein, Heidegger says. In order to be able to realize
the capacity for authenticity, one must undergo a personal
transformation, one that tears us away from falling. This is possible
only given certain fundamental insights arising in a life. The first
major shift can occur when one experiences an intense bout of
anxiety. In anxiety, the familiar world that seemed to assure one’s
security suddenly breaks down, and in this world-collapse one finds
that the significance of things is “completely lacking”
(1962 [1927]: 186).  One finds oneself alone, with no worldly supports
for one’s existence. In anxiety, Dasein encounters itself as
an individual, ultimately alone. In Heidegger’s words,
“Anxiety individualizes Dasein and thus discloses it as
‘solus ipse’” (1962 [1927]: 188). The
second transformative event is the encounter with one’s
“ownmost” possibility, the possibility of death as the
possible loss of all possibilities. In facing our own finitude, we
find that we are always future-directed happenings or projects, where
what is crucial to that ongoing forward movement is not its
actualization of possibilities, but the “How” with which
one undertakes one’s life. Heidegger tries to envision a way of life
he calls anticipatory running-forward (Vorlaufen) as
a life that clear-sightedly and intensely carries out its projects, no
matter what they may be. The third transformative event is hearing the
call of conscience. What conscience calls out to us is the fact that
we are “guilty” in the German sense of that word, which
means that we have a debt (Schuld) and are
responsible for ourselves. Conscience tells us that we are falling
short of what we can be, and that we are obliged to take up the task
of living with resoluteness and full engagement. Such resoluteness is
seen clearly in the case of vocational commitments, where one has
heard a calling and feels pulled toward pursuing that
calling.[2]
The three “existentialia” that structure Dasein’s
Being-in-the-world make up the “formal existential totality of
Dasein’s structural whole”, what Heidegger
calls care. To be Dasein, an entity must have some sense of
what it is “coming toward” (Zu-kunft, the German
for “future”), what has “come before” (what is
“passed”, Vorbei), and what one is dealing with
in one’s current situation (“making present”). The
defining characteristics of Dasein’s potentiality-for-Being are
displayed in the transformative events that lead to the possibility of
being authentic (eigentlich, as we saw, from the stem meaning
“proper” or “own”). When Dasein confronts and
grasps its authentic possibility of being, it becomes possible to see
the whole of Dasein, including both its being as a They-self
and as authentic being-one’s-self.  “Dasein is authentically
itself in [its] primordial individualization”, where the
“constancy [Ständigkeit] of the Self
… gets clarified” (1962 [1927]: 322).  What defines the
wholeness and unity of Dasein is determined not by an underlying
substance (e.g., the sub-ject, that which underlies), but by the
“steadiness and steadfastness” (beständigen
Standfestigkeit, ibid) of authenticity.
The key to understanding authenticity lies, as we have seen, in the
characterization of Dasein’s being as a relation between two
aspects or dimensions making up human existence. On the one hand, we
find ourselves thrown into a world and a situation not of our
own making, already disposed by moods and particular commitments, with
a past behind us that constrains our choices. With respect to this
dimension of human life, we are generally absorbed in practical
affairs, taking care of business, striving to get things done as they
crop up from time to time. This “being-in-a-situation”
naturally inclines us to everyday falling as Heidegger describes
it.
At the same time, however, to be human is to be underway toward
achieving ends that are understood as integral to one’s overarching
life-project. My actions at any moment, though typically aimed at
accomplishing tasks laid out by the demands of circumstances, are also
cumulatively creating me as a person of a particular sort. In this
sense, my futural projection as “understanding” has the
structure of being a projection onto one’s ownmost possibility of
being. So, for example, when I attend a boring parent/teacher
conference, I do so as part of handling my current duties. But this
act is also part of being a parent insofar as it contributes
to determining “that for the sake of which” I understand
myself as existing. Given this distinction between current means/ends
strategic actions and long-range life-defining undertakings, it is
possible to see that there are two senses of freedom in play in
Heidegger’s account of human existence. There is freedom in the
humdrum sense of doing what I choose to do under ordinary conditions,
a freedom Heidegger presumably interprets in an agent-libertarian way.
But there is also freedom in an ethically more robust sense. In
addition to choosing courses of action among options, Dasein is
capable of “choosing to choose a kind of being-one’s-self”
(1962 [1927]: 314) through its ongoing constitution of that identity
for the sake of which it exists. Thus, I attend the parent/teacher
conference and behave in a particular way because I care about being a
parent and a citizen of a particular sort. I understand this stance as
having repercussions for my life as a whole, and I grasp the need
for resoluteness in holding steady to undertakings of this
sort if I am to shape my identity in the way I can care about. For
Heidegger, the resolute commitment that is made concrete and defined
in one’s day-to-day actions is what imparts steadiness
and steadfastness to a life. It is also the condition for
being responsible for one’s own existence: “Only so can
[one] be responsible [verantwortlich]”,
Heidegger says (1962 [1927]: 334, translation modified). Authenticity,
defined as standing up for and standing behind what one
does—as owning and owning up to one’s deeds as
an agent in the world—becomes possible in this sort of resolute
commitment to the “for the sake of which” of one’s
existence.
It should be obvious that this conception of authenticity has very
little to do with the older idea of being true to one’s own pregiven
feelings and desires. But there is still a clear respect in which the
idea of “being true to oneself” has a role to play
here. What distinguishes this conception from the conceptions of pop
psychology and romantic views of authenticity is the fact that the
“true self” to which we are to be true is not some
pre-given set of substantive feelings, opinions and desires to be
consulted through inward-turning or introspection. On the contrary,
the “true self” alluded to here is an on-going narrative
construction: the composition of one’s own autobiography through one’s
concrete ways of acting over the course of a life as a whole. Feelings
and desires are, of course, profoundly important, as are the features
of one’s situation and one’s concrete connections to others. Heidegger
wants to recover a firm sense of the wholeness of the existing
individual. But this wholeness is found in the connectedness of what
Heidegger calls the “happening” or “movement”
of a life—that is, in the unfolding and constantly
“in-progress” storyizing that continues until death. What
is at stake in the ideal of authenticity is not being true to some
antecedently given nature, then, but being a person of a
particular sort. Heidegger emphasizes that being authentic presupposes
that one instantiate such virtues as perseverance, integrity,
clear-sightedness, flexibility, openness, and so forth. It should be
obvious that such a life is not necessarily opposed to an ethical and
socially engaged existence. On the contrary, authenticity seems to be
regarded as a “executive virtue” that provides the condition
for the possibility of being a moral agent in any meaningful sense
whatsoever.
Others argue that Heidegger uses authenticity in both
evaluative-normative and purely descriptive senses. In the descriptive
use of the term, inauthenticity is simply the default condition of
everyday life, in which our self-relations are mediated by others. In
this sense, authenticity involves no judgment about which mode of
being is superior for Dasein. But sometimes Heidegger’s language turns
normative (Carman 2003), and the seemingly neutral inauthentic form of
relating transforms into something negative. Inauthentic Dasein is now
“not itself”, loses itself (Selbstverlorenheit), and
becomes self-alienated. At this point, it is argued that when
introducing the normative-evaluative sense, Heidegger presents three
modes of life: authentic—average(ness)—inauthentic, where
the authentic and inauthentic modes are existential modifications of
average everydayness (Blattner 2006: 130; Dreyfus
1991). In this
picture, an authentic way of life is owned, an inauthentic disowned,
and the middle one—which is how we live much of the
time—is simply one that is unowned. Dasein and authenticity
emerge in contrast to this background and out of this background, so
that the primordially indifferent mode is the condition of possibility
for authenticity or inauthenticity. In addition, Carman (2003: 295)
argues that Heidegger’s notion of conscience can help us further
illustrate his account of authenticity and shows how the “call
of conscience” may be interpreted as expressive responsiveness
to one’s own particularity.
Published in 1943, Sartre’s opus magnum, Being and
Nothingness: A Phenomenological Essay on Ontology, had a
significant influence on philosophical thought and intellectual life
in the second half of the twentieth century. His principal goal in
this book is to “repudiate the spirit of
seriousness” of traditional philosophy as well as of
bourgeois culture (Sartre 1992a [1943]: 796). The spirit of
seriousness assumes (1) that there are transcendent values that exist
antecedently to humans, and (2) that the value of a thing is part of
the actual being of the valued thing. Sartre’s view, in contrast, is
that all values are generated by human interactions in situations, so
that value is a human construct with no extra-human existence in
things.
To address the question of human existence, Sartre scrutinizes our
everyday lives, focusing on two particular aspects. He notes that
human beings, like other entities in the world, have certain concrete
characteristics that make up what he calls their
“facticity” or what they are “in themselves”
(en soi). Facticity makes up the element of
“givenness” we must work with: I find myself with a past,
a body and a social situation that constrains me in what I can
do. This “just being there” is above all contingent: there
is no prior justification or reason for the existence of my being. On
Sartre’s view, the “in itself” does not even have any
determinate characteristics, since every determination (every
“this, not that”) is first introduced into the
totality of being by our specific interpretations of things.
While human beings share their “facticity” with other
entities in the world, they are unique among the totality of entities
insofar as they are capable of distancing themselves from what is
“in itself” through reflection and self-awareness. Rather
than being an item in the world with relatively fixed attributes, what
is distinctive about me as a human being is that I am capable of putting
my own being in question by asking myself, for example, whether I want
to be a person of a particular sort. This capacity for gaining
distance inserts a “not” or a “nonbeing” into
the totality of what is, which allows me to organize what surrounds me
into a meaningfully differentiated whole. In addition, human
consciousness is the source of the “not” because it is
itself a “nothingness”. In other words, a human being is
not just an “in itself” but also a “for itself
(pour soi), thus characterized by what Sartre calls
“transcendence”. As transcendence, I am always more than I
am as facticity because, as surpassing my brute being, I stand before
an open range of possibilities for self-definition in the future.
Sartre’s notion of transcendence is closely linked with the idea of
freedom. Humans are free in the sense that they have the
ability to choose how they are going to interpret things, and in these
interpretations they are deciding how things are to count or
matter. We constitute the world through our freedom to the extent that
our ways of taking things determine how reality will be sorted out and
matter to us. At the same time, we constitute ourselves
through our own choices: though the facticity of my situation creates
some constraints on my possible self-interpretations, it is always up
to me to decide the meaning of those constraints, and this means that
what I take to be limitations are in fact produced by my own
interpretations or meaning-giving activities. Such limitations are
grasped in light of antecedent commitments, on the background of which
situations becomes intelligible, as affording certain actions and/or
modes of evaluation. It is our antecedent commitments that shape our
world, making situations and objects intelligible as threatening or
favorable, easy or full of obstacles, or more generally, as affording
certain actions (Sartre 1992a [1943]: 489). Our engagements provide a
hermeneutic structure within which our situations and motives become
comprehensible and reveal themselves in the way situations appear to
us—as significant, requiring our attention, etc. (1992a [1943]:
485).
It is important to note that Sartre’s notion of freedom is
radical. Freedom is absolute to the extent that each person decides
the significance of the constraints in his or her facticity: “I
find an absolute responsibility for the fact that my facticity
… is directly inapprehensible”, because supposed
“facts” about me are never brute facts, “but always
appear across a projective reconstruction of my for-itself”
(Sartre 1992a [1943]: 710).  For Sartre, only our choices and their
projected ends define our situations as meaningful, as threatening or
favorable, as affording certain actions etc. The resistances and
obstacles that one encounters in a situation acquire meaning only in
and through the free choice.  Thus, individuals are responsible not
only for their identities, but for the way the world presents itself
in their experiences. Even others are just
“opportunities and chances” for my free
creative activity. According to this early formulation, it is up to us
to interpret how other people are to matter to us relative to
situations in which we find ourselves engaged (Sartre 1992a [1943]:
711).
But human beings are not merely characterized by facticity and
transcendence; they are also seen as embodying a deep and
irreconcilable tension between facticity and transcendence. This
tension comes to the fore in Sartre’s account of “bad
faith”. Bad faith, a kind of self-deception, involves believing
or taking oneself to be an X while all along one is (and knows
oneself to be) actually a Y. The most familiar form of bad
faith is acting as if one were a mere thing—solely
facticity—and thereby denying one’s own freedom to make oneself
into something very different. Thus, the person who thinks she is a
coward “just as a matter of fact” is excluding from view
the ability to transform her existence through changed ways of
behaving. Such bad faith is a denial of transcendence or freedom.
At first, it might seem that one could escape bad faith by making a
sincere, deep commitment to something and abiding by that
commitment—for example, a total, resolute engagement of the self
comparable to Kierkegaard’s notion of an “infinite
passion”. In this regard, Sartre considers a person who tries to
wholeheartedly believe that his friend really likes
him. “I believe it”, he says, “I decide to
believe in it and maintain myself in this decision…”
(Sartre 1992a [1943]: 114).  My belief will be steady and solid, like
something “in itself” that informs my being and cuts
through all the tenuousness and unsteadiness of my subjective
life. I know I believe it, I will say. If I could
make myself believe something in this way, then to achieve this might
be what we could call “good faith:” to
actually be something, without the questionability of the
“not” creeping in. However, Sartre doubts that such an
absolute, being-determining commitment is possible. In fact, Sartre
claims that any such sort of “good faith” would actually
amount to little more than another form of self-deception. For if my
decision to believe is in fact a decision, it must always be something
that to some extent distances me from what is decided. That is why we
use the word ‘believe’ to imply some degree of
uncertainty, as when we say, “Is he my friend?  Well,
I believe he is”. Lucid self-awareness shows us that in
making a choice, we can never attain the condition of the “in
itself”, because what we are is always in question for us. This
is what Sartre means when he says human being is always
“previously corrupted” and that “bad faith [always]
reapprehends good faith” (Sartre 1992a [1943]: 116). Thus, the
project of being in good faith seems impossible, as we are always
necessarily in bad faith.
The inescapable nature of bad faith seems to leave no room for the
possibility of authenticity. This might be why the word translated as
“authentic” only appears twice in this vast tome. On one
occasion, Sartre attacks Heidegger for introducing the idea of
authenticity as a way of providing something foundational in an
otherwise totally contingent world. The concept of authenticity
“shows all too clearly [Heidegger’s] anxiety to establish an
ontological foundation for an Ethics…” (Sartre 1992a
[1943]: 128). A second and more obscure appearance of the word comes
at the end of the discussion of bad faith early in the book. Here
Sartre acknowledges that his account of bad faith seems to have the
consequence that there can be no such thing as good faith, so that
“it is indifferent whether one is in good faith or in bad
faith”, and that in turn seems to imply that “we can never
radically escape bad faith”. Nevertheless, he goes on, there may
be a “self-recovery of being which has been previously
corrupted”, a recovery “we shall call authenticity, the
description of which has no place here” (Sartre 1992a [1943]:
116n).
One might thus conclude that there is no way to be true to what one
is, because there is nothing that one is. However, such a negative
conclusion would be reached only by someone who embraced from the
outset the “spirit of seriousness” Sartre sets out to
attack. Seriousness would lead us to think that there is simply a fact
of the matter about a person: the person is either a believer or he is
not. But, as Linda A. Bell (1989: 45) has noted, there is another
possibility. If one rejects the spirit of seriousness, one might
lucidly acknowledge that, as transcendence, one’s belief is
always in question and so not really a secure belief. Yet, at the same
time, one might also recognize that, as facticity, one
genuinely holds a belief, and that the belief is central to one’s
being as an engaged agent in this situation. In Sartre’s convoluted
style of formulation, “he would be right if he recognized
himself as a being that is what it is not and is not what it is”
(Bell 1989: 45). On this account, I believe, but I also acknowledge my
ability to retract the belief, since nothing is ever fixed in
stone.
What is suggested here is that a correlate of authenticity can be
found in the idea of being true to the inescapable tension at the core
of the human self. This would be attained if one clear-sightedly
acknowledged the fundamental ambiguity of the human
condition.  Authenticity would then be what Sartre calls a
“self-recovery of being which was previously corrupted”
(1992a [1943]: 116). In a sense, humans can never really be
anything in the way brute objects can be things with determinate
attributes. In Bell’s words, authenticity would be “the
awareness and acceptance of—this basic ambiguity” (1989:
46). This conclusion is supported by Sartre’s later
work, Anti-Semite and Jew where he writes,
Authenticity, it is almost needless to say,
consists in having a true and lucid consciousness of the situation, in
assuming the responsibilities and risks it involves, in accepting it
… sometimes in horror and hate. (1948: 90)
Lucid recognition of the ambiguity of the human condition is the
leading idea behind Beauvoir’s The Ethics of Ambiguity.
Beauvoir takes over Sartre’s characterization of the human condition
and expands on ideas only hinted at in Sartre’s famous lecture,
“The Humanism of Existentialism” (1946), in developing a
conception of authenticity. According to Beauvoir, Sartre’s conception
of the human being as “engaged freedom” implies not just
that each individual finds his or her “reason for being”
in concrete realizations of freedom, but that willing one’s own
freedom necessarily involves willing the freedom of all humans. In
achieving one’s own freedom, she writes, freedom must also will
“an open future, by seeking to extend itself by means of the
freedom of others” (1948: 60). The point here is that a
dedication to freedom, when clearly grasped in its full implications,
will be seen to call for a future in which an unrestricted range of
possibilities is open to all.
Beauvoir also builds on Sartre’s notion of engagement to
extend the idea of authenticity. Following Sartre, we are always
already engaged in the affairs of the world, whether we realize it or
not. To be human is to be already caught up in the midst of social and
concrete situations that call for commitments of certain sorts on our
part. Sartre takes this ground-level fact of engagement as the basis
for exhorting us to be engaged in a deeper sense, where this implies
that we decisively and wholeheartedly involve ourselves in what the
current situation demands. Of course, once we have abandoned the
spirit of seriousness, we will recognize that there are no
antecedently given principles or values that dictate the proper course
for our existential engagement, so that any commitment will be tenuous
and groundless. But the authentic individual will be the one who takes
up the terrifying freedom of being the ultimate source of values,
embraces it, and acts with a clarity and firmness suitable to his or
her best understanding of what is right in this context. In this way,
the conception of authenticity is continuous with the ideal of being
true to ourselves: we are called upon to become, in our concrete
lives, what we already are in the ontological structure of our
being.
This is in agreement with the manner in which Sartre describes the
consequences of acting against one’s deepest commitments.
There is no doubt that I could have done
otherwise, but that is not the problem. It ought to be formulated like
this: could I have done otherwise without perceptibly modifying the
organic totality of the projects that make up who I am?
Sartre goes on to say that the character of the
act may be such that
instead of remaining a purely local and accidental
modification of my behavior, it could be effected only by means of a
radical transformation of my being-in-the-world… In other
words: I could have acted otherwise. Agreed. But at what price?
(Sartre 1992a [1943]: 454)
Thus, acting otherwise or, more precisely,
failing to act on one’s fundamental commitments, comes at the price of
transforming who one is.  This change effectively precludes one from
carrying on with an unchanged self-conception.
In the last three decades, authors like Taylor (1989, 1991, 1995,
2007), Ferrara (1993; 1998), Jacob Golomb (1995), Guignon (2004, 2008) and
Varga (2011a) have attempted to reconstruct authenticity by
maintaining that the justified criticism of self-indulgent forms of
the idea does not justify the total condemnation of the idea itself
(see Taylor 1991: 56). Instead of abandoning the notion of
authenticity, they attempt to reconstruct it in a manner that leads
neither to aestheticism nor to atomistic self-indulgence.
 In The Ethics of Authenticity, and the more fully
articulated Sources of the Self, Taylor makes a case for
retaining the concept of authenticity (and the practices associated
with it) on the grounds that the original and undistorted idea of
authenticity contains an important element of self-transcendence
(Taylor 1991: 15; Anderson 1995).  Unsatisfied with the widespread
criticism of authenticity as an adequate ethical orientation, Taylor
sets out to prove that authenticity does not necessarily lead to
aestheticism or self-indulgence: the justified criticism of
self-indulgent forms of the ideal does not justify the complete
condemnation of the ideal itself (Taylor 1991: 56). This would mean
extricating aestheticism, subjectivism, individualism, and
self-indulgent interpretations of this ideal from what Taylor (Ibid.:
15) holds to be an original understanding of that concept as achieving
self-transcendence (Anderson 1995). Restoring an undistorted version,
Taylor says, could guard against meaninglessness, which is one of the
“malaises of modernity” that Taylor regards as tied to
trivialized forms of the culture of authenticity. Self-transcendence,
which once was a crucial element in the ideal of authenticity, is
practically lost from the contemporary version, giving rise to
cultures of self-absorption, which ultimately deteriorate into the
malaise of absurdity.
Already in Sources of the Self, Taylor draws attention to
how modernism gives birth to a new kind of inward turn that not only
attempts to overcome the mechanistic conception of the self linked to
disengaged reason but also the Romantic ideal of a faultless alignment
of inner nature and reason. Instead, for the modernists, a turn inward
did not mean a turn towards a self that needs articulation.
On the contrary, the turn inward may take us
beyond the self as usually understood, to a fragmentation of
experience which calls our ordinary notions of identity into
question. (Taylor 1989: 462)
While in modernism, the turn inward still contained a
self-transcending moment, the critical point where the ideal of
authenticity becomes flattened is when it becomes
‘contaminated’ by a certain form of
‘self-determining freedom’ that also contains elements of
inwardness and unconventionality (Taylor 1991: 38). Self-determining
freedom
is the idea that I am free when I decide for myself what concerns
me, rather than being shaped by external influences. It is a standard
of freedom that obviously goes beyond what has been called negative
liberty (being free to do what I want without interference by others)
because that is compatible with one’s being shaped and influenced by
society and its laws of conformity. Instead, self-determining freedom
demands that one break free of all such external impositions and
decide for oneself alone. (Taylor 1991: 27)
Not only is self-determining freedom not a necessary part of
authenticity, it is also counterproductive because its
self-centeredness flattens the meanings of lives and fragments
identities. For Taylor, the process of articulating an identity
involves adopting a relationship to the good or to what is important,
which is connected to one’s membership in a language community (Taylor
1989: 34–35). As he clearly states, “authenticity is not
the enemy of demands that emanate from beyond the self; it presupposes
such demands” (Taylor 1991: 41). It cannot be up to me to decide
what is important, since this would be self-defeating.  Instead,
whatever is important for me must connect to an inter-subjective
notion of the good, wherefrom a good part of its normative force
lastly emanates. In this sense, authenticity simply requires
maintaining bonds to collective questions of worth that point beyond
one’s own preferences. Taylor wants to show that modes of contemporary
culture that opt for self-fulfillment without regard
(a) to the demands of our ties with others, or (b)
to demands of any kind emanating from something more or other than
human desires or aspirations are self-defeating, that they destroy the
conditions for realizing authenticity itself. (Taylor 1991:
35)
Thus, not only do we need the recognition of concrete others in
order to form our identities, but we must also (critically) engage
with a common vocabulary of shared value orientations. In other words,
Taylor points out that authenticity needs the appropriation of values
that make up our collective horizons.
In his Reflective Authenticity, Alessandro Ferrara also
sets out to defend authenticity as an ideal, but in contrast to Taylor
he is interested in the social and philosophical issues of the
relation between authenticity and validity. According to Ferrara’s
diagnosis, we are currently witnessing a profound transition that,
besides affecting cultures, values and norms, also touch on the
“foundations of validity,” thereby affecting the
“bedrock of the symbolic network through which we relate to
reality and reproduce our life-forms” (Ferrara 1998: 1). At the
core of this transformation is the reformulation of
“well-being” (eudaimonia) as the normative ideal
of authenticity, which can be of help in reconstructing a contemporary
understanding of normativity. For Ferrara, it can ground a new ideal
of universal validity “ultimately linked with the model of
exemplary uniqueness or enlightening singularity thus far associated
with ‘aesthetics’” (Ferrara 1998: 10). Authenticity
is then characterized by the “self-congruency” of an
individual, collective or symbolic identity (Ferrara 1998: 70), and is
thought of as providing a new universal validity that does not build
on the generalizable but rather on the exemplary. Ferrara views
Simmel’s idea of an individual law as an instructive example of such
an anti-generalizing universalism, and it is exactly this
characteristic that makes it better suited to the pluralist contexts
faced by modern Western societies. More recently, Ferrara (2019) has argued that authenticity currently faces a “dual paradox” and is misconstrued by many critics  advocating its deconstructionist dismissal.
Golomb (1995) provides an informative historical overview of the
genesis and development of the concept of authenticity, paying
attention to both literary and philosophical sources. While
continuously reminding us of the inherently social dimension of
authenticity, one of the achievements here is the focus on boundary
situations where authenticity “is best forged and
revealed” (Ibid.: 201). Golomb takes a neutral position on the
ethical value of authenticity, maintaining that “there is no
reason to suppose that it is any better or any more valuable to be
authentic than to act inauthentically” (Ibid.: 202).
Guignon (2004) explores both the philosophical roots of
authenticity and its contemporary manifestations in popular
culture. He thoughtfully criticizes pop-psychological literature that
deals with the authentic life by making recourse to the subdued
‘inner child’. Since Rousseau, the dichotomy between
authentic and inauthentic has often been interpreted akin to the
distinction between child and adult (Guignon 2004: 43). Like the inner
child, the authentic self is depicted as not yet corrupted by the
pressures, competitiveness, and conformity of modern public
life. Guignon draws on the psychoanalytic theories of Freud and Jung
to remind us of less romanticized visions of the inner
child. Additionally, Guignon (2004: 151) aims to identify the manner
in which authenticity can be understood as being at the same time a
personal and a “fundamentally and irreducibly” social
virtue. Authenticity then involves reflectively discerning what is
really worth pursuing in the social context in which the agent is
situated (Ibid.: 155). If the ideal of authenticity is possible only
in a free society with a solid foundation of established social
virtues, it would seem that trying to be authentic, if it is to be
coherent, must involve a commitment to sustaining and nurturing the
type of society in which such an ideal is possible. A reflection on
the social embodiment of virtues therefore suggests that authenticity,
like many other character ideals, carries with it an obligation to
contribute to the maintenance and well-being of a particular type of
social organization and way of life (Guignon 2008: 288; 2004: 161). On
the other hand, Guignon (2004, 2008) argues that in a democratic
society, in which the authority of government—in setting the
political course—stems from the consent of the governed, there
is good reason to promote virtues like authenticity that sustain such
an organization of government. To be authentic is to be clear about
one’s own most basic feelings, desires and convictions, and to openly
express one’s stance in the public arena. But that capacity is
precisely the character trait that is needed in order to be an
effective member of a democratic society (Guignon 2008: 288).
 Varga (2011a) shares the fundamental assumption that authenticity
has a certain potential (and therefore deserves to be reformulated),
but he also thinks that it could be used for a critical inquiry into
the practices of the self in contemporary life. By way of an analysis
of self-help and self-management literature, Varga detects a
“paradoxical transformation:” the ideal of authenticity
that once provided an antidote to hierarchical institutions and
requirements of capitalism, now seems to function both as an
institutionalized demand towards subjects to match the systemic
demands of contemporary capitalism and as a factor in the economic
utilization of subjective capacities.  Varga argues that it is in
“existential” choices that we express who we are, and that
these have a complex phenomenology characterized by a sense of
necessity. In such choices, described as “alternativeless
choices”, we articulate who we are, bringing into reality some
tacit intuitions that often only take on a gestalt-like formation. In
these cases, we both discover who we are “on the inside”,
and actively constitute ourselves. Varga’s examination of the
structure of our commitments culminates in the claim that the internal
structure of our commitments commits us to more than what we happen to
care about. In many cases it may actually commit us to publicly
intelligible values that we take our commitments to embody—an
aspect that may constrain the manner of our practical deliberation and
the way in which we can pursue our commitments (Varga 2011a,b).
Along similar lines, Bauer (2017) defends authenticity as an ethical ideal, arguing that the ideal should understood as the combination of the ideal of expressing one’s individual personality and the ideal of being an autonomous and morally responsible person. Others have argued that authenticity might require more than living in accord with commitments that one wholeheartedly endorses. For example, Rings (2017) highlights an epistemic criterion. The point is that the commitments in question have to be chosen in light of an acknowledgment of facts concerning one’s personal history and present context. Thus, self-knowledge might matter more than hitherto recognized, even if the self-relation most pertinent to authenticity is not primarily of an epistemic nature.  