Bessarion was born in Trebizond between 1399 and 1408, and baptized
Basil. At a young age, he went to Byzantium, where he studied with John
Cortasmenos (d. 1431/7). He changed his name to Bessarion when he
became a monk in 1423. Pursuing his ecclesiastical
career, Bessarion engaged in diplomatic activity in the service
of the emperor John VIII Palaiologos. This put him in contact with the
court of the Despot of Mistra, a city where he had the opportunity to
deepen his philosophical and mathematical training under the guidance
of Gemistos Pletho (d. 1454). The decisive year in the life of
Bessarion was probably 1437, when he was made metropolitan of Nicea
(hence the common epithet of Cardinal Nicenus) and left for
Italy as member of the Greek delegation to the Council of
Ferrara-Florence.
The Council was mainly devoted to an attempt at
unifying the Latin and Greek Churches, which the Western European
powers had made a condition for providing military support to
Palaiologos as he attempted to fend off the Ottoman Turks. As a member
of the Greek delegation, the young Bessarion was not eager to concede
the main dogmatic point of disagreement between the two churches,
which had led to their separation in the eleventh century: the problem
of the place of the Holy Spirit in the Creed. According to the
Greeks the Spirit proceeded only from the Father, while in the Roman formulation
it also proceeded from the Son (Filioque). And yet, driven by
his concern for the unstable political situation in Greece and finally
convinced by the texts of the Church Fathers, Bessarion changed his
mind and in April 1439 pronounced an oration (the Oratio dogmatica
de unione), in which he advocated for agreement between Greek
and Latin authors. In July 1439 Bessarion read the act of union
between the Roman and the Greek Church in Florence. The same year,
while he was in Greece for the last time, Bessarion was made Cardinal.
Bessarion would spend the rest of his life as one of the most
important and influential members of the Roman Curia. He was selected
for important diplomatic missions; for example, in 1450 Niccolò
V sent him to Bologna as legato a latere. He took particular
care of Greek rites abbeys, like those in Calabria, Messina, and
Grottaferrata. He obtained a number of benefices, and in 1458 he was
selected as protector of the Franciscan Order. In 1463 he also became
Patriarch of Constantinople. He even came close to being elevated to
the papacy at least twice, but apparently his beard—which for
many symbolized his Greek origins—prevented him from garnering
the necessary support. His activities as a cardinal were coupled with
scholarly enterprises, which he undertook personally, and also sponsored
as the patron of a circle of intellectuals who were
in many cases Greek emigrés like him. Men like Theodore Gaza
(d. 1476) and Niccolò Perotti (d. 1480)—and for a short period even his nemesis-to-be George of Trebizond (d. 1473)—were
all part of the Cardinal’s entourage. 
After the fall of 
Constantinople in 1453, Bessarion’s main interest was in
rescuing the cultural heritage of his homeland, Greece, and he pursued
this goal on both intellectual and political planes. From an
intellectual point of view, Bessarion’s plan involved salvaging
Greek texts which were until then unknown in Western Christendom and
were generally rare (to the extent that in some cases they survive
today only in the exemplars collected by the Cardinal). An avid
lifelong book collector, Bessarion assembled a library in order to
prevent the loss of these treasures: “without books, the tomb
would cover the names of men, just as it covers their bodies”.
Bessarion feared—indeed he was consumed with
terror—“lest all those wonderful books, the product of so
much toil and study by the greatest human minds, those very beacons of
the earth, should be brought to danger and destruction in an
instant”. Bessarion felt that Venice—a city with which he
had entertained a long relationship and where he served as papal
legate in 1463—could be a safe haven for his library and the
books he donated around 1468 formed the first nucleus of the
Biblioteca Marciana.
In addition to saving books from destruction,
Bessarion had also a more practical political agenda for his homeland;
he was among the most vocal advocates for the call for a new crusade to
free Greece from Ottoman control. He was therefore engaged in
several diplomatic missions, in Germany and then in Vienna, which
aimed to convince Western rulers to fight the Turks. After an attempt
in 1464 failed because of the death of Pope Pius II in Ancona, Bessarion
worked until the end of his days to build support 
for a project that appeared more and more illusory with every passing
year. It was on the way back from one of these diplomatic missions in
1472, this time to France, that Bessarion fell ill and died in
Ravenna. He was interred in his titular Church, SS. Apostoli in Rome,
where Antoniazzo Romano and Melozzo da Forlì had decorated a
chapel in his name between 1464 and 1467.
Bessarion’s opera omnia include writings prepared for
audiences in both the Byzantine and the Roman courts, such as orations
and pieces of poetry. Of particular interest are the orations he
addressed to Italian rulers, in order to convince them to join a
crusade against the Turks (the Orationes ad principes Italiae
contra Turcos, 1470). The De errore Paschatis, devoted
to calculating the proper date of Easter, was probably composed with
the assistance of Regiomontanus (1436–1476) and reflects
Bessarion’s early interest in astronomy, which he had cultivated
since the time of his training under Cortasmenos and Pletho. Bessarion
also left behind a rich corpus of letters which he had never edited for
publication. In addition to being the patron of important translations, he
also himself translated Greek works into Latin, including Saint
Basil’s De nativitate Domini, Xenophon’s
Memorabilia, and Demosthenes’ First Olinthiac.
However, Bessarion’s most important works, both as an
author and as a translator, are focused on theology and
philosophy.
During his years in Greece, Bessarion adopted traditionalist
positions, which included hostility toward the tenets of the Roman
Church and Scholastic theology, which conflicted with the Hesicastic
contemplative doctrines still dominant in Greece at that time. The
experience of the Council of Ferrara-Florence led him to question and
abandon some of his previous convictions. This is evident in the
Refutationes of two writings, respectively by Maximus
Planudes (13–14th c.) and Marcos Eugenikos (d. 1444,
present himself at the Council), in which Bessarion defended the
procession of the Spirit from the Son. In other writings, and
particularly in the Encyclical letter to the Greeks, composed
when he became Patriarch of Constantinople, he emphasized the primacy
of the Roman Pontiff, inviting the Greeks to restore the union of the
two Churches which had fallen apart after the Council. In On the
Eucharist, which he translated from Greek to Latin and
re-elaborated several times over more than two decades, Bessarion
defended the epiclesis in the Orthodox Eucharist.
 
One of the
most interesting theological writings by Bessarion, nonetheless, was
prompted by a quarrel with George of Trebizond, which along with their
disagreements over George’s translations of the Aristotelian
Problemata and Ptolemy’s Almagestus,
ultimately led to the deterioration of their relationship. When
commenting on John 21:22 during a banquet, Bessarion had observed that
the Latin text of the Vulgate Gospel was corrupted, and rather than reading
“sic volo eum manere donec veniam, quid ad te?”, with
reference to John, should have read “si volo eum manere donec
veniam, quid ad te?”. George of Trebizond opposed the Cardinal,
defending the Vulgate. Bessarion reacted with a short writing, largely
based on the philological teachings of Nicholas Maniacutia
(12th c.), which affirmed the necessity of verifying the
Latin text of the Gospels against the original Greek. For Bessarion,
rejection of George’s philological views went hand in hand with
a dismissal of his millenarian beliefs: by defending the version
containing “sic”, George had in fact shown that he
accepted the idea that John was alive and awaiting the second coming
of Christ. George’s millenarianism resurfaced—with wider
and different implications—during the Plato-Aristotle
controversy, which represented the crux of his dispute with Bessarion
(see below).
Bessarion’s reputation as a Platonist—mainly associated with
his struggle against the arch-Aristotelian George of
Trebizond—has at times obscured in modern scholarship his
contribution to the Peripatetic tradition. By contrast,
Bessarion’s Aristotelian expertise was widely recognized in the
centuries after his death, when his translation of the
Metaphysics was celebrated and reprinted several times, including in Bekker’s Corpus Aristotelicum (1831).
Undertaken between 1446 and 1451 and dedicated to King Alfonso I of
Naples, the translation was praised by Nicholas of Cusa for its
excellence, and by Giannozzo Manetti for its clarity, which he
attributed to the Cardinal’s decision to render the text ad
sensum, rather than ad verbum.
In addition to his
linguistic skills, Bessarion was aided in this enterprise by a deep
knowledge of the Aristotelian works, cultivated since his
Bildungsjahre, as a number of studies on the contents of his
library have revealed. Bessarion was not only receptive to the
Aristotelian tradition, but also to its recent Latin development, as
represented by Scholasticism. Again, studies of Bessarion’s
library have revealed this only apparently surprising aspect of his
philosophical training: Thomas Aquinas in particular was a well-known
author in Byzantium, mostly because of the Greek translations of the
Summa contra gentiles and of the Summa theologiae
made by Demetrios Kydones in the fourteenth century. Bessarion’s
familiarity with these matters also influenced the In
calumniatorem Platonis, where one of the Cardinal’s
recurring arguments is that George of Trebizond was essentially
ignorant of the traditions (Aristotelianism and Scholasticism) he
claimed were superior to Platonism (see below).
Bessarion’s reputation as an expert in matters of Aristotelian
and Scholastic philosophy is exemplified by his role as mediator in a
quarrel over the future contingents between two theologians from
Leuven, Henry of Zomeren and Peter de Rivo. From 1469 until his death,
Bessarion played an important role in this controversy not only
because he had once been a patron of de Zomeren himself, but also
because the Cardinal had gathered around him several skilled
Scholastic philosophers, including Francesco della Rovere (soon to be
Pope as Sixtus IV) and Fernando de Cordoba, both of whom took part in
the dispute. This was not the only circumstance in which Bessarion and
members of his entourage took part in Scholastic disputes. For all
these reasons, the case of Bessarion calls into question the simplistic
opposition between Aristotelian Scholasticism and a purely Platonic
Humanism dear to past scholarship, showing instead the blurred lines
between these traditions (see, e.g., Monfasani 2016b). Even the In
calumniatorem Platonis, a text consecrated even from its title to
the defense of Plato, was no less the result of this ambiguous
relationship between Humanism and Scholasticism, between Platonism and
Aristotelianism.
George of Trebizond’s resentment towards Bessarion was one of
the driving forces behind the Comparatio philosophorum Platonis et
Aristotelis (around 1458), in which George bitterly attacked
Plato, a philosopher for whom the Cardinal’s preference was
notorious. In three books George attacked Plato as ignorant, impious
and vicious, while celebrating the perfect wisdom, piety and virtue of
Aristotle. This kind of work, a comparison of the respective merits of
Plato and Aristotle, especially in religious matters, was not uncommon
in the Byzantine milieu, and Gemistus Pletho had composed his
own comparatio at the time of the Council of Florence:
Pletho’s booklet, written in Greek and therefore little read,
celebrated the piety of Platonic philosophy in an attempt to expose
the frail Aristotelian foundation of Scholasticism. George’s
comparatio was by contrast intended to reinforce the role of Aristotle
as authority of reference for Christian theology, to the extent of
making the Stagirite aware of dogmas such as Trinity and occasionally placing him
above even Thomas Aquinas. George’s
comparatio had an apocalyptic subtext, made explicit in the
final pages of the work, in which the coming of a fourth
Plato—the second and the third were respectively Epicurus and
Mohammed—is connected to the fall of the Byzantine empire, and
characterized as a threat to the Latin West. The unnamed fourth Plato
was possibly either Pletho or Bessarion himself.
George’s Comparatio was immediately perceived as
dangerous by Bessarion, who needed to respond to it in order to
preserve his reputation and that of Plato. If Plato was perceived as
impious, so too was the Cardinal by association. With the help of
several members of his circle, Bessarion produced over the course of
about ten years his masterpiece: the In calumniatorem
Platonis (Against the Slanderer of Plato).
The preparation of the
work required several adjustments, both formal and theoretical. From a
formal point of view, Bessarion realized that a work written in Greek,
as the In calumniatorem initially was, would not have had the
desired impact. He therefore translated the work into Latin, and in
order to make it stylistically appealing engaged a skilled Latinist,
his secretary Niccolò Perotti, to revise the text.
Perotti’s re-elaboration made the work more accessible and
elegant, though he occasionally struggled to do justice to the
philosophical concepts contained within.
From a theoretical point of
view, Bessarion was interested in a different kind of revision. Around
1457, when he was involved in a debate on nature and art in an
epistolary exchange with Theodore Gaza, Bessarion had initially
argued, like his master Pletho, that Plato and Aristotle were
irreconcilably opposed. Yet, the Cardinal changed this
position, after coming across a treatise—now lost—on the
same topic by George of Trebizond: in his own subsequent
booklet—the De natura et arte—destined to become
the sixth book of the In calumniatorem Platonis, Bessarion
embraced a conciliatory view modeled on the approach of late-antique
commentator Simplicius. This interpretation—which is adopted
throughout the In calumniatorem—cast Aristotle as a
natural philosopher, and Plato as a theologian, thus explaining the
apparent disagreement between the two authors as merely a question of
different subject matter and of different levels of reality. This
exegetical move allowed Bessarion to avoid openly attacking
Aristotle, while implicitly maintaining the superiority of Plato,
in particular as an external aid for Christian faith. It also allowed him to avoid contrasts with Aristotelians in the Roman curia, and to rely on Scholastic authorities such as Albert the Great
and Thomas Aquinas to meet his interpretative goals.
This arsenal of
sources was crucial for exposing George’s scarce knowledge of
Aristotelian philosophy and tradition, and therefore the unreliability
of his praise of the Stagirite’s alleged piety: this problem
is the subject of the third book of the In calumniatorem
Platonis, which was composed at a later stage, mainly by the
Dominican theologian Giovanni Gatti (d. ante 1484). Finally,
by defending the agreement between Plato and Aristotle, Bessarion
could also avoid any association with Gemistus Pletho, whose ambiguous
religious reputation could have tainted the Cardinal.
The In calumniatorem is divided into six books: books one, two
and four mirror the three books of George’s
Comparatio.
Book one focuses on proving Plato’s wisdom,
in spite of the elusiveness of his style and the dialogical structure
of his works, against George’s claim that he was ignorant. After
listing authors who praised Plato above Aristotle—mainly Cicero
and Augustine, and several Fathers of the Church—Bessarion
discusses the apparent absence of certain subjects in Plato’s
works by invoking the Pythagorean practice of secrecy. Yet, the Cardinal
also demonstrates that Plato was perfectly trained in all the
disciplines, and offered an alternative encyclopedia of wisdom
to the Aristotelian one.
The second book is the closest to the
Byzantine tradition of the comparatio, and addresses the problem
of Plato’s and Aristotle’s piety. Taking exegeses from
authors like Plotinus, Proclus, the Ps.-Dionysius, Simplicius, and
many others, Bessarion counter-analyzes the different subjects at the
center of George’s invective, suggesting that Plato offered
theorizations of decisive topics such as creation, soul and matter
that were more akin to Christian dogma. Bessarion resolved
embarrassing impasses in Plato’s philosophy, such as the
doctrine of matter and the doctrine of the metasomatosis as
presented in the Timaeus, by employing elaborate distinctions
in the first case, and allegorical explanation in the second, in the
process making them acceptable to Christian readers. Again, Bessarion
repeatedly insists on the only apparent disagreement between Plato and
Aristotle: by recovering another argument from Simplicius, he claims
that the Stagirite attacked the words, and not the meaning of
Plato’s doctrines, so as to preserve them from distortions and
manipulations. Aristotle, Bessarion claims, did the same with Parmenides and Melissus, who spoke
as theologians no less than Plato.
The third book, as indicated above,
reviews a number of problematic issues in George of Trebizond’s
treatment of Aristotle. Lighter topics—such as those related to
sacrifices, and the reliance on poets and women—give
way to more complex issues, such as Aristotle’s purported
knowledge of Trinitarian dogma, his views on the immortality of the
soul, and the place of providence in Peripatetic cosmology.
Particularly important here are the chapters centered on the
impossibility of the individual immortality of the soul in via
Aristotelis, since it contrasts with the eternity of the world
defended in On the Heavens. Bessarion, conversely, finds both
Averroes’ and Alexander of Aphrodisias’ interpretations of
the soul acceptable according to the Aristotelian tenets, despite
their contrast with the Christian faith.
The fourth book deals with
the problem of the virtue of Plato. Relying on Ps.-Dionysius,
Bessarion offers a spiritual interpretation of love—as described
in the Symposium and in the Phaedrus—in
radical contrast with the sexual one postulated by George. In a different section Bessarion employs Herodotus’s comparative method to justify the common use of women advocated by Plato
in the Republic. Additionally, Bessarion defuses George’s millenarian
prophecy about the fourth Plato by arguing that the fall of the Greek
Empire was due to an unescapable cyclical decline that the adoption of
Plato’s doctrines would have forestalled. In the final chapter
of the book, Bessarion rebukes George for his hypocrisy, since he
praised Plato when he translated the Parmenides and the
Laws.
George’s translation of the Laws is
the primary target of the fifth book, which contains a list of the
errors—actual and alleged—made by Trebizond in his
edition. The goal of this chapter is to prove George’s
incompetence in Platonic philosophy, which in turn further proves the
unreliability of his accusations against Plato. Yet, a peculiar
concern with the translation of Platonic works runs throughout the
entire In calumniatorem: Bessarion was aware that Latin
Europeans’ scarce knowledge of Plato might have inclined them to
listen to George of Trebizond. Bessarion’s practice of offering
in his work translations of Platonic texts, accompanied by alternative
exegeses to those offered by George—was intended to correct this
knowledge gap in the Western world. Bessarion also presented to his
Latin readers Aristotelian authors, such as Alexander of Aphrodisias,
who had until then limited circulation in the Latin world, but whose
interpretations of Aristotle placed the Stagirite in contradiction
with Christian dogma. These insertions were part of Bessarion’s
strategy for exposing the religious limits of Aristotelian
philosophy, so providing implicit support for the notion that Plato
could serve as a better external aid for true faith, in the tradition
of the Church Fathers, and of Greek theologians such as Eusebius of
Cesarea and Theodore Metochites.
The sixth book of the In
calumniatorem, the above-mentioned De natura et arte, is the exegesis of a passage from the second book of the
Aristotelian Physics. Written before the other books
composing the In calumniatorem, it is the only one in which
Bessarion openly names George as his adversary and—as stated
above—is the first work in which Bessarion expresses
conciliaristic views about Plato and Aristotle. In this sense the De natura et arte
represented a sort of “dress rehearsal” for the magnum
opus applied to a single exegetical problem, which had
nonetheless significant implications for crucial subjects (such as the
doctrine of Ideas and divine causality in the world).
While George’s Comparatio appeared in print only
posthumously in 1523 in a single defective edition, Bessarion took
full advantage of the newly discovered technology of the printing press to reach his
audience: it offered Bessarion another advantage over his
opponent by ensuring wider circulation of the finished text. The In
calumniatorem Platonis was printed in 1469 by Schweynheym and
Pannartz. In the very the same year they also published
Alcinous’s Didaskalikon, and Apuleius’s De
deo Socratis and De Platone et eius dogmate, probably as
part of a filo-Platonic editorial project orchestrated by
the Cardinal. The In calumniatorem was subsequently reprinted
twice, by the Aldine printing press, in 1503 and 1516. Both editions,
which are not identical, included Bessarion’s own revisions to
the 1469 version of the text.
Bessarion’s moderate Christianized
reading of Plato provided authors like Marsilio Ficino and Francesco
Cattani da Diacceto with powerful exegetical schemes, such as those
taken from Plotinus, Proclus, and the Ps.-Dionysius (whose
authenticity Bessarion defended even against members of his own
circle). In the case of Ficino, these interpretive keys were magnified
in an even more ambitious Christianization of Plato, in which the
ancient philosopher was compared to Moses. A monumental work which
included several lists of quotations and authorities, the In
calumniatorem quickly became a repertory of material for
sixteenth-century writers and philosophers. Sections like those on the
Pythagorean secrets (I.2) enjoyed the attention of numerous readers,
as did the letter of Lysis to Hipparchus. Louis le Roy (d. 1577)
relied heavily on the second book of the In calumniatorem for
his commentary to the Timaeus. Without citing his source, Symphorien Champier (d. 1540)
recovered passages from the In calumniatorem in many
of his works. Champier wanted to convince his friend Jacques Lefèvre
d’Étaples (d. 1536) of Plato’s utility for
Christian religion and the In calumniatorem offered a wealth of material to support his efforts. Though he admired Bessarion’s translation of
the Metaphysics, which he was the first to publish,
Lefèvre d’Étaples—along with Guillaume
Budé—nonetheless favored the position of George of
Trebizond.
 
The composite nature of the In calumniatorem
allowed for divergent interpretations of the nature of
Bessarion’s work. In the In calumniatorem Bessarion
himself oscillated between describing the text as an apology of Plato
and as a comparison between Plato and Aristotle. Despite the fact that
the In calumniatorem helped to disseminate the genre
the comparatio Platonis et Aristotelis in the
early modern period, the work was mostly perceived as an apology of
Plato, and this made Bessarion an obvious target at the time of
the anti-Platonic reaction led by the Jesuits at the end of the sixteenth
century. Members of other orders, like the Franciscans and
Augustinians, were nonetheless more sympathetic to the Cardinal,
praising him and the In calumniatorem well into the
seventeenth century. Bessarion also made an impact within the walls of the universities.
His emphasis on Aristotle as a mere natural philosopher, in fact,
provided Peripatetic professors with valid arguments against
metaphysical interpretations of the Philosopher: for example, both Pietro
Pomponazzi (1462–1525) and Francesco Vimercato (d. 1569), though
arguing in favor of the mortality of the soul from different
perspectives, were in debt to passages from the third book of the
In calumniatorem Platonis. 