In Aesthetics, Beardsley develops a philosophy of art that is
sensitive to three things: (i) art itself and people's
pre-philosophical interest in and opinions about art, (ii) critics'
pronouncements about art, and (iii) developments in philosophy,
especially, though not exclusively, those in the analytic
tradition. To explain each of these elements further: (i) In the late
1940s and early 1950s, the time at which Beardsley developed his
philosophy of art, there were developments in the arts—new forms
in music, painting, and literature had appeared and were
appearing—but there was also a well established and relatively
large canon of works almost universally regarded as aesthetically
superior and worthy of attention. (ii) Art criticism had become an
industry, with major schools of all sorts flourishing: Marxist,
Formalist, psychoanalytic, semiotic, historical, biographical. (iii)
And philosophy had changed in rapid and unexpected ways. Analytic
philosophy, with its emphasis on language and strong empiricist
tendencies, had gained ascendancy in American universities in little
more than 20 years, and dominated the philosophical scene.
Beardsley responded to each of the three. His position on developments
in the arts is probably best described as open-minded moderation. He
welcomed new developments, and reference to new works and works that
lack the luster of fame, notoriety, or ready recognition appear
frequently in Aesthetics and his other work. He didn't
automatically embrace the latest fad, fashion, or movement, however,
but tried, as he said, to get something out of a work.
As for art criticism, the school of criticism that attracted
Beardsley, and that his philosophy of art ultimately underwrites, is
the so-called New Criticism. The New Criticism made the literary work
the center of critical attention, and denied, or at least greatly
devaluated, the relevance of facts about the origin of literary works,
their effects upon individual readers, and their personal, social, and
political influence. Close reading is what is required of a critic,
not biographical information about the author, a rundown of the state
of society at the time the work was written, data about the psychology
of creation, predictions about the effects of the work on society, and
certainly not a piece of autobiography detailing the critic's own
personal response to the work. Though based in literary criticism, the
New Criticism could be, and should be, extended to the other arts,
Beardsley thought: all art criticism should make a serious effort to
recognize its objects as special, autonomous, and important in their
own right, and not subservient to ulterior aims or values; all art
criticism should attempt to understand how works of art work, and what
meanings and aesthetic properties they have; all art criticism should
strive for objective and publicly accessible methods and standards to
test its pronouncements.
Developments in philosophy were a different story. Beardsley embraced
a general form of analytic philosophy not heavily influenced by either
logical positivism or ordinary language philosophy, the dominant
movements of the time. For him, an analytic approach to the philosophy
of art meant no more than critically examining the fundamental
concepts and beliefs underlying art and art criticism.  Doing
philosophy of that sort required clarity, precision, and a good eye
for identifying, exposing, and evaluating arguments, but left
aesthetics, as a systematic study, a real possibility.
Not all the arts could be covered in detail in even so long a book as
Aesthetics—it's over 600 pages—so Beardsley had
to content himself with concentrating on three relatively disparate
arts: literature, music, and painting. In keeping with the conception
of philosophy mentioned above, aesthetics was thought of as
meta-criticism. “There would be no problems of aesthetics,” Beardsley
says, “if no one ever talked about works of art…. We can't do
aesthetics until we have some critical statements to work on”
(pp. 1,4). Aesthetics is concerned with “the nature and basis of
criticism, … just as criticism itself is concerned with works of art”
(p. 6). The then-current and still widespread view that philosophy is
a second-order, meta-level, and essentially linguistic activity,
taking as its object of study the pronouncements of first-order
activities, such as chemistry, religion, or history, is reflected in
Beardsley's view on the nature of aesthetics.
Critical statements are of three kinds, Beardsley thinks: descriptive,
interpretative, and evaluative. The first concerns non-normative
properties of works of art that are simply in it, in some sense, and
are available, at least in principle, to anyone of normal eyes and
ears if sufficiently sensitive, attentive, and experienced.
‘There is a small red patch in the upper right-hand corner of
the painting’ is a descriptive statement, but so is
‘Haydn's 23rd Symphony abounds in dynamic
tension.’ The philosophical problems that descriptive statements
give rise to involve the concept of form, Beardsley
thinks. Interpretative statements are also non-normative, but concern
the ‘meaning’ of a work of art, with ‘meaning’
here referring to a semantic relation, or at least a purported
semantic relation, between the work and something outside it.
‘That's a picture of Notary Sojac’ is an interpretative
statement, as are ‘That's a picture of a unicorn,’
‘The passage refers to Brutus's betrayal of Caesar,’ and
‘The thesis of Macbeth is exceedingly simple: Thou
shalt not kill.’ Last, critical evaluations are normative
judgments that basically say that a work of art is good or bad, or how
good or bad it is. ‘Mozart's Turkish March is an
excellent short piano piece’ is a critical evaluation, and so is
‘The Face on the Barroom Floor is wretched
verse.’ The judgment ‘This is beautiful’—the
paradigm of a judgment of taste, according to Kant—is sometimes
thought of as a critical evaluation (p. 9), but more often (e.g.,
pp. 463, 507), and always in Beardsley's later writing, as a
descriptive judgment, and one that frequently forms at least a partial
basis for a critical evaluation.
The first chapter of Aesthetics is in part devoted to the
ontology of art—or aesthetic objects, as Beardsley was then wont
to say.  The term ‘work of art’ was largely avoided by him
at the time, because, as he later admitted, he did “not [want] to
become enmeshed … in [the question of the definition of
‘work of art,’ a question] that … [had] not
convince[d] [him] of its importance or promise[d] any very
satisfactory and agreeable resolution” (p. xviii).
The ontology argued for begins with a distinction between physical
objects and perceptual objects. In speaking of a thing being six feet
by six feet in size and at rest, we're speaking of a physical object;
in speaking of a thing being dynamic and frightening, we're speaking
of a perceptual object. Perceptual objects are the objects we
perceive, objects “some of whose qualities, at least, are open to
direct sensory awareness” (p. 31). Aesthetic objects are a subset of
perceptual objects. This doesn't necessarily mean that aesthetic
objects aren't physical objects, however. Aesthetic objects might be
other than physical objects—the conceptual distinction might
mark a real distinction—or they might be physical
objects—the conceptual distinction, though somewhat misleadingly
couched in terms of objects, might simply mark “two aspects of the
same” thing (p. 33). At first indifferent as to which alternative is
opted for—Beardsley mentions that he doesn't “see that it makes
much difference which terminology [that of objects or aspects] is
chosen” (p. 33)—he then proceeds to develop an ontology that
stresses objects more than aspects.
The ontology is phenomenalistic in its leanings, though open to a more
physicalistic interpretation. A presentation of an aesthetic object is
defined as the object as experienced by a particular person on a
particular occasion. Essentially, presentations are sense-data of
aesthetic objects. Aesthetic objects aren't presentations, however,
for that would invite not just an uncontrollable population explosion
of aesthetic objects, but chaos in criticism; and neither are
aesthetic objects classes of presentations, for aesthetic objects must
have at least some perceptual properties, but classes, as abstract
entities, have none. However, “whenever we want to say anything about
an aesthetic object, we can talk about its presentations”
(p. 54). This, Beardsley says, “does not ‘reduce’ the
aesthetic object to a presentation; it only analyzes statements
about aesthetic objects into statements about presentations”
(p. 54). In effect, this is a form of linguistic phenomenalism, and
commits Beardsley to meaning-preserving translations of statements
about aesthetic objects into statements about the presentations of
such objects—in effect, statements about experiences of such
objects.
Not satisfied with this, Beardsley presses on to distinguish (a) the
artifact—the play itself, say, as written down—from (b) a
particular production of it—the Old Vic's production, as opposed
to the Marquette University theater department's production—from
(c) a particular performance of it—last night's performance in
the Haelfer Theater—from (d) a particular presentation of
it—the play as it shows up in Peter Alelyunas's experience of
it, upon attending last night's performance. The same distinctions
hold across the arts, though differently in different arts, and
somewhat more naturally in some than others. There is Beethoven's
D Minor Symphony (the artifact), a production of it (The
Philadelphia Symphony Orchestra's recording of it), a particular
performance of it (my playing the recording last night, in my house),
and particular presentations of it (mine and other people's
experiences of it last night, in my house). At least in many arts, a
single artifact can have many productions; a single production can
have many performances; and a single performance can give rise to many
presentations. As Beardsley notes, these distinctions collapse to some
extent in some of the arts, and would have to be stretched a bit to
fit them all. In reading a poem silently, he says, the production is
the presentation (and I would also think the performance); “in
architecture, the architect's plans are the artifact; the completed
building is the production” (pp. 57–58) (and also presumably the
performance); and in painting and sculpture, “the distinction between
artifact and production almost disappears” (p. 58) (with the
performance presumably being identical with both).
But what is the aesthetic object, the object of critical attention?
It's not a presentation or class of presentations, and it's not the
artifact—Beethoven's 9th Symphony, for example. If the
aesthetic object were the artifact, it would have contradictory
characteristics, since different recordings of the 9th have
different, incompatible characteristics: some are shorter than 60
minutes, some longer. What's left, and what the aesthetic object must
be, is the production. Thus the primary object of critical attention
is the production of an artifact, and the basic job of the critic is
to describe, interpret, and evaluate such productions.
Although Beardsley's early views on ontology tended to either
linguistic phenomenalism or unsystematic pluralism—some
productions are physical objects, some mental objects, and some
physical events—there were hints, event at that time, of a
simpler and more commonsensical view. The ontology can be seen lurking
beneath the surface of his postulates of art criticism:
Taking ‘aesthetic object’ to mean ‘work of
art,’ the underlying ontology isn't a sense-datum ontology or a
mixed-category ontology at all. A number of the postulates—2, 4,
and 6; possibly 3 and 7—are in fact prima facie incompatible
with a sense-datum ontology. Rather, what 1-7 strongly suggest is that
a work of art is a physical object: it's perceptible, publicly or
inter-subjectively available in both time and space, can appear
differently from different points of view and at different times, may
not be exhaustively understood on any given occasion, has properties
that may be correctly or incorrectly perceived, and is such that
attributions to it obey the law of the excluded middle.
Not surprisingly, after 1958 Beardsley “moved steadily in the
direction of some form of non-reductive materialism, of seeing how far
it is possible to go in treating artworks as physical objects”
(Aesthetics, p. xxiv). The materialism is non-reductive, in
that works of art have properties that physical objects generally
don't. Such materialism works well with “singular” works of art, such
as paintings, Beardsley thinks, but “multiple artworks”—musical
compositions which have many performances, poems which exist in
multiple printings—present problems. The musical composition
isn't any single score or performance, the poem any single printed
text. For that reason, Beardsley once again is driven back in the
direction of ontological pluralism: perhaps works of art are either
physical objects (the singular works) or kinds of physical object (the
multiple works), with “physical object” construed broadly here so as
to include events (such as a dance).
As mentioned above, Beardsley “sedulously avoided” (p. 59) the term
‘work of art’ as much as possible in
Aesthetics. He later did offer a definition, however, and,
somewhat surprisingly, a neo-Romantic and intentionalistic one. A work
of art, he says, is “either an arrangement of conditions intended to
be capable of affording an experience with marked aesthetic character
or (incidentally) an arrangement belonging to a class or type of
arrangements that is typically intended to have this capacity”
(The Aesthetic Point of View, p. 299). The first disjunct is
the more important one; it says that something's a work if it's an
artifact, “an arrangement of conditions,” that was intended by its
creator to be capable of providing an experience with non-negligible
aesthetic character. This definition doesn't say that a work of art is
intended to provide (or be capable of providing) a full-blown
aesthetic experience. Only “an experience with marked aesthetic
character” is required. It also doesn't say that a work of art doesn't
or can't have a utilitarian function, in the everyday sense of the
term. A work of art could be a chair that's many times simply sat in,
for example. And, last, it doesn't say that the primary intention
behind the creation of the artifact is an aesthetic one. The primary
intention behind the creation of a religious icon, for example, could
be to bring worshippers closer to God.
The second part of the definition picks up those objects that
definitely are works of art, but were created in a mechanical, almost
an assembly-line fashion, or as just another instance of its
kind. Some beautiful vases may fall into the first class, and many
medieval icons into the second. To make sure that the extension of the
definiens matches that of the definiendum, Beardsley
thinks, the second disjunct of the definition is needed.
But why accept the definition? For a number of reasons, according to
Beardsley. First, a definition “chosen for a role in aesthetic theory
should mark a distinction that is … significant for aesthetic
theory” (p. 299), and Beardsley's does. Second, “in selecting key terms
for aesthetic theory we ought to stay as close as convenient to
ordinary use” (p. 300). Not everyone's use of a term needs to be
captured in fashioning a definition, which would be impossible in any
case with a term as elastic and tendentiously used as ‘work of
art.’ Beardsley's definition has the merit of capturing
“reasonably well a use that has been prominent for some centuries and
still persists quite widely today, outside the speech and writing of
or about the avant-garde” (p. 300). Third, a definition of ‘work
of art’ “should be of the greatest possible utility to inquirers
in other fields besides aesthetics—fields to which aesthetics
itself should (sometimes) be thought of as a support and underpinning”
(p. 304). The fields Beardsley has in mind, more than any other, are
art history and anthropology. Fourth and last, a definition of
‘work of art’ should “conceptually link … art and
the aesthetic” (p. 312). That Beardsley's does in spades, directly
defining art in terms of the aesthetic as it does.
Despite his many books and articles, Beardsley is probably best known
for his very first article in aesthetics. In “The Intentional
Fallacy,” a paper co-written with William K. Wimsatt and published in
1946 (and widely re-printed, e.g., in Joseph Margolis, ed.,
Philosophy Looks at the Arts, 3rd edition, 1987), he argued
against the neo-Romantic view that a work of art means what the artist
says it means, or what he intends it to mean. More precisely, the
issue can put in terms of the relation between
and
According to E.D. Hirsch, (1) entails (2), at least if w is a literary
work, because the meaning of ‘x’ simply is what
the writer meant or intended by ‘x.’ Knowing the
artist's intention is thus knowing the work's meaning. That's one end
of the spectrum on the relation between (1) and (2).
Beardsley sits at the other end. He holds that the intentions of the
artist aren't relevant to the interpretation of a work of art at all.
(1) not only doesn't entail (2); in and of itself, it provides no
direct evidential support for (2). An artist's intentions have nothing
to do with what a work means.
Beardsley was in fact more than consistent on the issue of the
intentional fallacy; he also held that
provides no direct evidential support for
and that
provides no direct evidential support for
An artist's intentions are utterly irrelevant to the descriptive,
interpretive, and evaluative properties of his work.
And in addition to “The Intentional Fallacy,” there's also “The
Affective Fallacy.” In a paper bearing that name, and also co-written
with William Wimsatt, Beardsley argues that a person's affective
responses to a work of art are irrelevant to its descriptive,
interpretive, and evaluative properties.
Beardsley's arguments against intentionalism in interpretation are of
a variety of sorts. In “The Intentional Fallacy,” he says
that the intentions of the artist are neither “available nor
desirable” (p. 367), with this meaning that such intentions aren't always
available and are never desirable. Since we frequently can and do
correctly interpret a work of art with little or no knowledge about
the artist, the fact that the artist's intentions aren't always
available is enough to show that Hirsch's position is wrong.
“Judging a poem is like judging a pudding or a machine,”
according to Beardsley. “One demands that it work. It is only
because an artifact works that we infer the intention of the
artificer …. A poem can be only through its
meaning … yet it is, simply is, in
the sense that we have no excuse for inquiring what part is intended
or meant” (p. 368). In other words, a poem or other work of art is
independent of its creator, just as any other artifact—a pudding
or a washing machine—is. A pudding consists of milk, eggs, and
other ingredients, a washing machine of a metal drum, rubber gaskets,
and other parts, and a poem of words. In all three cases, the parts
exist and are what they are independently of the artificers, and the
artifacts are to be judged—and interpreted—on the basis of
their properties. There's no need to bring in the artificer.
In Aesthetics, the attack is a little different. “We must
distinguish between the aesthetic object and the intention in the mind
of its creator,” Beardsley says, and the irrelevance of the latter to
interpretation can be shown if we consider a certain sculpture, “a
large, twisted, cruller-shaped object of polished teak, mounted at an
oblique angle to the floor.” The creator of the sculpture intends it
to “symbolize … Human Destiny.” Try as we might, however, we
“see in it no such symbolic meaning.” The philosophical question then
is, “Should we say that we have simply missed the symbolism, but that
it must be there, since what a statue symbolizes is precisely what its
maker makes it symbolize? Or should we say, in the spirit of Alice
confronting the extreme semantic conventionalism [intentionalism] of
Humpty Dumpty, that the question is whether that object can be made to
mean Human Destiny?” Obviously the latter, Beardsley thinks, for the
former entails that “anyone can make anything symbolize anything just
by saying it does, for another sculptor could copy the same object and
label it ‘Spirit of Palm Beach, 1938’”
(Aesthetics, pp. 18–19, 21).
In addition to sculpture, the irrelevance of the author to the meaning
of his text is also argued for by Beardsley, though only partly by
counterexample. “Suppose someone utters a sentence,” he says. “We can
[then] ask two questions: (1) What does the speaker mean?
(2) What does the sentence mean?” Although answers to the two
questions usually coincide, they can diverge; people can mean one
thing and say another. The reason that's possible is that “what a
sentence means depends not on the whim of the individual, and his
mental vagaries, but upon public conventions of usage that are tied up
with habit patterns in the whole speaking community.” Sentence
meaning—that is, textual meaning—is thus one thing, and is
anchored in “the whole speaking community,” while speaker
meaning—what the author meant—is quite another, and is
anchored in his own, quite possibly idiosyncratic intentions. Thus an
author can be wrong about what his own work means. A.E. Housman, for
example, was probably wrong in claiming that his poem “1887” wasn't
ironic (pp. 25–26).
In The Possibility of Criticism, three arguments are offered
against intentionalism, which is again taken to be the view that the
meaning of a work of art is what the artist intends it to mean. The
first is that “some texts that have been formed without the agency of
an author, and hence without authorial meaning, nevertheless have a
meaning and can be interpreted” (p. 18). What Beardsley has in mind is
the kind of verbal mistake made at a publishing house, or by a
computer in scanning a document. He cites the sentence “Jensen argued
like a man filled with righteous indigestion” as an example of a text
that can be read and interpreted, yet no agency, a fortiori no
author's intention, stands behind it. “Indignation” became
“indigestion” at the printer's, by mechanical error.
The second argument is that “the meaning of a text can change after
its author has died. But the author cannot change his meaning after he
has died. Therefore, textual meaning is not identical to the authorial
meaning.” Bolstering this argument is the fact that “the OED furnishes
abundant evidence that individual words and idioms acquire new
meanings and lose old meanings as time passes; these changes can in
turn produce changes of the meaning in sentences in which the words
appear.” As an example, Beardsley cites a line from a poem written in
1744, “He raised his plastic arm,” and notes that “plastic arm” has
“acquired a new meaning in the twentieth century.” Thus the line “in
which it occurs has also acquired a new meaning” (p. 19).
The third argument is the familiar one that “a text can have
meanings that its author is not aware of. Therefore, it can have
meanings that its author did not intend. Therefore, textual meaning is
not identical to authorial meaning” (p. 20).
More than this, what's really needed to decide whether there's an
intentional fallacy is a theory of meaning. A theory of meaning is a
theory of what it is for w (some object, in the broad sense
of the term) to mean p. Beardsley was always aware of the
need for a theory of meaning, and in Aesthetics he proposed
one, a complicated theory which he later rejected. A few years later,
however, he embraced a speech-act theory based on the work of William
Alston, and used it to defend the intentional fallacy in his final
paper on the topic.
Alston believes that the meaning of a sentence is the sentence's
speech act potential, its potential for performing all of the various
speech acts it can be used to perform. In effect, this is to take the
slogan “Meaning is use” very seriously, and to cash in “use” in terms
of the performance of speech acts. Sentence meaning is primary on this
theory, and word meaning secondary and derivative, since it's defined
in terms of a word's contribution to the speech act potential of the
sentences into which it can figure.  Beardsley thought this theory
correct and used it to argue that the intentional fallacy is indeed a
fallacy.
In “Intentions and Interpretations” (The Aesthetic Point of
View), he claims that in composing a poem the poet doesn't
perform a speech act, but rather represents the performance of a
speech act or acts. When Wordsworth writes,
England hath need of thee—
his words are ostensibly addressed to a long-dead poet, but to perform
an illocutionary, any illocutionary action, a person must believe that
he can or will “secure uptake,” that is, secure understanding of his
sentence and the speech act performed. Wordsworth, however, knew that
Milton was long dead, and had no such belief. He thus didn't perform
the illocutionary act of addressing Milton, or stating that England
needs him. He does represent the performance of those illocutionary
acts, though. What poets and other authors of literary works do,
Beardsley thinks, is represent the performance of illocutionary acts,
not perform illocutionary acts themselves.
Beardsley's complete argument is basically:
The proof of (6) is that
Broader than concerns about the relevance of the artist's intention
and encompassing them is the distinction between external and internal
evidence. “Internal evidence,” Beardsley says, “is evidence from
direct inspection of the object” (Aesthetics, p. 20). What is
internal is publicly accessible; “it is discovered [in the case of
poetry] through the semantics and syntax of a poem, though our
habitual knowledge of the language through grammars, dictionaries, and
all the literature which is the source of dictionaries, in general
through all that makes a language and culture” (“The Intentional
Fallacy,” p. 373). “External evidence,” on the other hand, “is
evidence from the psychological and social background of the object,
from which we may infer something about the object itself”
(Aesthetics, p. 20). What is external is not publicly
accessible; it is “private or idiosyncratic; not [again in the case of
poetry] a part of the work as a linguistic fact: it consists of
revelations (in journals, for example, or letters or recorded
conversations) about how or why the poet wrote the poem—to what
lady, while sitting on what lawn, or at the death of a friend or
brother” (“The Intentional Fallacy,” p. 373). In addition to internal
and external evidence, there is “an intermediate kind of evidence
about the character of the author or about private or semi-private
meanings attached to words or topics by the author or by a coterie of
which he is a member” (“The Intentional Fallacy,” p. 373). External
evidence is verboten in criticism, Beardsley thinks, but at least at
the time of “The Intentional Fallacy,” intermediate evidence was
admissible, the reason being that “the meaning of words is the history
of words, and the biography of an author, his use of a word, and the
associations the word had for him, are part of the word's
history and meaning” (“The Intentional Fallacy,” p. 373). Caution has
to be exercised, though, for the line between intermediate evidence
and external evidence isn't sharp, and “a critic who is concerned with
[internal] evidence … and moderately with [intermediate]
evidence will in the long run produce a different sort of comment from
that of the critic who is concerned with [external] evidence and with
[intermediate] evidence” (“The Intentional Fallacy,” p. 373).
Intermediate evidence is never mentioned in Aesthetics or in
any of Beardsley's subsequent writings, however, and the category
seems to have been subsumed under “external evidence.” The result is
an even sharper line between what is and isn't admissible evidence in
criticism.