Perhaps the most familiar basic issue in the theory of beauty is
whether beauty is subjective—located ‘in the eye of the
beholder’—or whether it is an objective feature of
beautiful things. A pure version of either of these positions seems
implausible, for reasons we will examine, and many attempts have been
made to split the difference or incorporate insights of both
subjectivist and objectivist accounts. Ancient and medieval accounts
for the most part located beauty outside of anyone's particular
experiences. Nevertheless, that beauty is subjective was also a
commonplace from the time of the sophists. By the eighteenth century,
Hume could write as follows, expressing one ‘species of
philosophy’:
Beauty is no quality in things themselves: It exists merely in the
mind which contemplates them; and each mind perceives a different
beauty. One person may even perceive deformity, where another is
sensible of beauty; and every individual ought to acquiesce in his own
sentiment, without pretending to regulate those of others. (Hume 1757,
136)
And Kant launches his discussion of the matter in The Critique of
Judgment (the Third Critique) at least as emphatically:
The judgment of taste is therefore not a judgment of cognition, and is
consequently not logical but aesthetical, by which we understand that
whose determining ground can be no other than subjective.
Every reference of representations, even that of sensations, may be
objective (and then it signifies the real [element] of an empirical
representation), save only the reference to the feeling of pleasure
and pain, by which nothing in the object is signified, but through
which there is a feeling in the subject as it is affected by the
representation. (Kant 1790, section 1) 
However, if beauty is entirely subjective—that is, if anything
that anyone holds to be or experiences as beautiful is beautiful (as
James Kirwan, for example, asserts)—then it seems that the word
has no meaning, or that we are not communicating anything when we call
something beautiful except perhaps an approving personal attitude. In
addition, though different persons can of course differ in particular
judgments, it is also obvious that our judgments coincide to a
remarkable extent: it would be odd or perverse for any person to deny
that a perfect rose or a dramatic sunset was beautiful. And it is
possible actually to disagree and argue about whether something is
beautiful, or to try to show someone that something is beautiful, or
learn from someone else why it is.
On the other hand, it seems senseless to say that beauty has no
connection to subjective response or that it is entirely objective.
That would seem to entail, for example, that a world with no
perceivers could be beautiful or ugly, or perhaps that beauty could be
detected by scientific instruments. Even if it could be, beauty would
seem to be connected to subjective response, and though we may argue
about whether something is beautiful, the idea that one's experiences
of beauty might be disqualified as simply inaccurate or false might
arouse puzzlement as well as hostility. We often regard other people's
taste, even when it differs from our own, as provisionally entitled to
some respect, as we may not, for example, in cases of moral,
political, or factual opinions. All plausible accounts of beauty
connect it to a pleasurable or profound or loving response, even if
they do not locate beauty purely in the eye of the beholder.
Until the eighteenth century, most philosophical accounts of beauty
treated it as an objective quality: they located it in the beautiful
object itself or in the qualities of that object. In De Veritate
Religione, Augustine asks explicitly whether things are beautiful
because they give delight, or whether they give delight because they
are beautiful; he emphatically opts for the second (Augustine, 247).
Plato's account in the Symposium and Plotinus's in the
Enneads connect beauty to a response of love and desire, but
locate beauty itself in the realm of the Forms, and the beauty of
particular objects in their participation in the Form. Indeed,
Plotinus's account in one of its moments makes beauty a matter of what
we might term ‘formedness’: having the definite shape
characteristic of the kind of thing the object is.
We hold that all the loveliness of this world comes by communion in
Ideal-Form. All shapelessness whose kind admits of pattern and form,
as long as it remains outside of Reason and Idea, is ugly from that
very isolation from the Divine-Thought. And this is the Absolute Ugly:
an ugly thing is something that has not been entirely mastered by
pattern, that is by Reason, the Matter not yielding at all points and
in all respects to Ideal-Form. But where the Ideal-Form has entered,
it has grouped and coordinated what from a diversity of parts was to
become a unity: it has rallied confusion into co-operation: it has
made the sum one harmonious coherence: for the Idea is a unity and
what it moulds must come into unity as far as multiplicity may.
(Plotinus, 22 [Ennead I, 6])
In this account, beauty is at least as objective as any other concept,
or indeed takes on a certain ontological priority as more real than
particular Forms: it is a sort of Form of Forms.
Though Plato and Aristotle disagree on what beauty is, they both
regard it as objective in the sense that it is not localized in the
response of the beholder. The classical conception
 (see below)
 treats beauty as a matter of instantiating definite proportions or
relations among parts, sometimes expressed in mathematical ratios, for
example the ‘golden section.’ The sculpture known as
‘The Canon,’ by Polykleitos (fifth/fourth century BCE),
was held up as a model of harmonious proportion to be emulated by
students and masters alike: beauty could be reliably achieved by
reproducing its objective proportions. Nevertheless, it is
conventional in ancient treatments of the topic also to pay tribute to
the pleasures of beauty, often described in quite ecstatic terms, as
in Plotinus: “This is the spirit that Beauty must ever induce:
wonderment and a delicious trouble, longing and love and a trembling
that is all delight” (Plotinus 23, [Ennead 1, 3]).
At latest by the eighteenth century, however, and particularly in the
British Isles, beauty was associated with pleasure in a somewhat
different way: pleasure was held to be not the effect but the origin
of beauty. This was influenced, for example, by Locke's distinction
between primary and secondary qualities. Locke and the other
empiricists treated color (which is certainly one source or locus of
beauty), for example, as a ‘phantasm’ of the mind, as a
set of qualities dependent on subjective response, located in the
perceiving mind rather than of the world outside the mind. Without
perceivers of a certain sort, there would be no colors. One argument
for this was the variation in color experiences between people. For
example, some people are color-blind, and to a person with jaundice
much of the world takes on a yellow cast. In addition, the same object
is perceived as having different colors by the same the person under
different conditions: at noon and midnight, for example. Such
variations are conspicuous in experiences of beauty as well.
Nevertheless, eighteenth-century philosophers such as Hume and Kant
perceived that something important was lost when beauty was treated
merely as a subjective state. They saw, for example, that
controversies often arise about the beauty of particular things, such
as works of art and literature, and that in such controversies,
reasons can sometimes be given and will sometimes be found convincing.
They saw, as well, that if beauty is completely relative to individual
experiencers, it ceases to be a paramount value, or even recognizable
as a value at all across persons or societies.
Hume's “Of the Standard of Taste” and Kant's Critique
Of Judgment attempt to find ways through what has been termed
‘the antinomy of taste.’ Taste is proverbially subjective:
de gustibus non est disputandum (about taste there is no
disputing). On the other hand, we do frequently dispute about matters
of taste, and some persons are held up as exemplars of good taste or
of tastelessness. Some people's tastes appear vulgar or ostentatious,
for example. Some people's taste is too exquisitely refined, while
that of others is crude, naive, or non-existent. Taste, that is,
appears to be both subjective and objective: that is the antinomy.
Both Hume and Kant, as we have seen, begin by acknowledging that taste
or the ability to detect or experience beauty is fundamentally
subjective, that there is no standard of taste in the sense that the
Canon was held to be, that if people did not experience
certain kinds of pleasure, there would be no beauty. Both acknowledge
that reasons can count, however, and that some tastes are better than
others. In different ways, they both treat judgments of beauty neither
precisely as purely subjective nor precisely as objective but, as we
might put it, as inter-subjective or as having a social and cultural
aspect, or as conceptually entailing an inter-subjective claim to
validity.
Hume's account focuses on the history and condition of the observer as
he or she makes the judgment of taste. Our practices with regard to
assessing people's taste entail that judgments of taste that reflect
idiosyncratic bias, ignorance, or superficiality are not as good as
judgments that reflect wide-ranging acquaintance with various objects
of judgment and are unaffected by arbitrary prejudices. “Strong
sense, united to delicate sentiment, improved by practice, perfected
by comparison, and cleared of all prejudice, can alone entitle critics
to this valuable character; and the joint verdict of such, wherever
they are to found, is the true standard of taste and beauty”
(“Of the Standard of Taste” 1757, 144).
Hume argues further that the verdicts of critics who possess those
qualities tend to coincide, and approach unanimity in the long run,
which accounts, for example, for the enduring veneration of the works
of Homer or Milton. So the test of time, as assessed by the verdicts
of the best critics, functions as something analogous to an objective
standard. Though judgments of taste remain fundamentally subjective,
and though certain contemporary works or objects may appear
irremediably controversial, the long-run consensus of people who are
in a good position to judge functions analogously to an objective
standard and renders such standards unnecessary even if they could be
identified. Though we cannot directly find a standard of beauty that
sets out the qualities that a thing must possess in order to be
beautiful, we can describe the qualities of a good critic or a
tasteful person. Then the long-run consensus of such persons is the
practical standard of taste and the means of justifying judgments
about beauty.
Kant similarly concedes that taste is fundamentally subjective, that
every judgment of beauty is based on a personal experience, and that
such judgments vary from person to person.
By a principle of taste I mean a principle under the condition of
which we could subsume the concept of the object, and thus infer, by
means of a syllogism, that the object is beautiful. But that is
absolutely impossible. For I must immediately feel the pleasure in the
representation of the object, and of that I can be persuaded by no
grounds of proof whatever. Although, as Hume says, all critics can
reason more plausibly than cooks, yet the same fate awaits them. They
cannot expect the determining ground of their judgment [to be derived]
from the force of the proofs, but only from the reflection of the
subject upon its own proper state of pleasure or pain. (Kant 1790,
section 34)
But the claim that something is beautiful has more content merely than
that it gives me pleasure. Something might please me for reasons
entirely eccentric to myself: I might enjoy a bittersweet experience
before a portrait of my grandmother, for example, or the architecture
of a house might remind me of where I grew up. “No one cares
about that,” says Kant (1790, section 7): no one begrudges me
such experiences, but they make no claim to guide or correspond to the
experiences of others.
By contrast, the judgment that something is beautiful, Kant argues, is
a disinterested judgment. It does not respond to my
idiosyncrasies, or at any rate if I am aware that it does, I will no
longer take myself to be experiencing the beauty per se of the thing
in question. Somewhat as in Hume—whose treatment Kant evidently
had in mind—one must be unprejudiced to come to a genuine
judgment of taste, and Kant gives that idea a very elaborate
interpretation: the judgment must be made independently of the normal
range of human desires—economic and sexual desires, for
instance, which are examples of our ‘interests’ in this
sense. If one is walking through a museum and admiring the paintings
because they would be extremely expensive were they to come up for
auction, for example, or wondering whether one could steal and fence
them, one is not having an experience of the beauty of the paintings
at all. One must focus on the form of the mental representation of the
object for its own sake, as it is in itself. Kant summarizes this as
the thought that insofar as one is having an experience of the beauty
of something, one is indifferent to its existence. One takes pleasure,
rather, in its sheer representation in one's experience:
Now, when the question is whether something is beautiful, we do not
want to know whether anything depends or can depend on the existence
of the thing, either for myself or anyone else, but how we judge it by
mere observation (intuition or reflection). … We easily see
that, in saying it is beautiful, and in showing that I have
taste, I am concerned, not with that in which I depend on the
existence of the object, but with that which I make out of this
representation in myself. Everyone must admit that a judgement about
beauty, in which the least interest mingles, is very partial and is
not a pure judgement of taste. (Kant 1790, section 2)
One important source of the concept of aesthetic disinterestedness is
the Third Earl of Shaftesbury's dialogue The Moralists, where
the argument is framed in terms of a natural landscape: if you are
looking at a beautiful valley primarily as a valuable real estate
opportunity, you are not seeing it for its own sake, and cannot fully
experience its beauty. If you are looking at a lovely woman and
considering her as a possible sexual conquest, you are not able to
experience her beauty in the fullest or purest sense; you are
distracted from the form as represented in your experience. And
Shaftesbury, too, localizes beauty to the representational capacity of
the mind. (Shaftesbury 1738, 222)
For Kant, some beauties are dependent—relative to the sort of
thing the object is—and others are free or absolute. A beautiful
ox would be an ugly horse, but abstract textile designs, for example,
may be beautiful in themselves without a reference group or
“concept,” and flowers please whether or not we connect
them to their practical purposes or functions in plant reproduction
(Kant 1790, section 16). The idea in particular that free beauty is
completely separated from practical use and that the experiencer of it
is not concerned with the actual existence of the object leads Kant to
conclude that absolute or free beauty is found in the form or
design of the object, or as Clive Bell put it, in the
arrangement of lines and colors (in the case of painting) (Bell 1914).
By the time Bell writes in the early twentieth century, however,
beauty is out of fashion in the arts, and Bell frames his view not in
terms of beauty but in terms of a general formalist conception of
aesthetic value.
Since in reaching a genuine judgment of taste one is aware that one is
not responding to anything idiosyncratic in oneself, Kant asserts
(1790, section 8), one will reach the conclusion that anyone similarly
situated should have the same experience: that is, one will presume
that there ought to be nothing to distinguish one person's judgment
from another's (though in fact there may be). Built conceptually into
the judgment of taste is the assertion that anyone similarly situated
ought to have the same experience and reach the same judgment. Thus,
built into judgments of taste is a ‘universalization’
somewhat analogous to the universalization that Kant associates with
ethical judgments. In ethical judgments, however, the universalization
is objective: if the judgment is true, then it is objectively the case
that everyone ought to act on the maxim according to which one acts.
In the case of aesthetic judgments, however, the judgment remains
subjective, but necessarily contains the ‘demand’ that
everyone should reach the same judgment. The judgment conceptually
entails a claim to inter-subjective validity. This accounts for the
fact that we do very often argue about judgments of taste, and that we
find tastes that are different than our own defective.
The influence of this series of thoughts on philosophical aesthetics
has been immense. One might mention related approaches taken by such
figures as Schopenhauer, Hanslick, Bullough, and Croce, for example. A
somewhat similar though more adamantly subjectivist line is taken by
Santayana, who defines beauty as ‘objectified pleasure.’
The judgment of something that it is beautiful responds to the fact
that it induces a certain sort of pleasure; but this pleasure is
attributed to the object, as though the object itself were having
subjective states.
We have now reached our definition of beauty, which, in the terms of
our successive analysis and narrowing of the conception, is value
positive, intrinsic, and objectified. Or, in less technical language,
Beauty is pleasure regarded as the quality of a thing. … Beauty
is a value, that is, it is not a perception of a matter of fact or of
a relation: it is an emotion, an affection of our volitional and
appreciative nature. An object cannot be beautiful if it can give
pleasure to nobody: a beauty to which all men were forever indifferent
is a contradiction in terms. … Beauty is therefore a positive
value that is intrinsic; it is a pleasure. (Santayana 1896,
50–51)
It is much as though one were attributing malice to a balky object or
device. The object causes certain frustrations and is then ascribed an
agency or a kind of subjective agenda that would account for its
causing those effects. Now though Santayana thought the experience of
beauty could be profound or could even be the meaning of life, this
account appears to make beauty a sort of mistake: one attributes
subjective states (indeed, one's own) to a thing which in many
instances is not capable of having subjective states.
It is worth saying that Santayana's treatment of the topic in The
Sense of Beauty (1896) was the last major account offered in
English for some time, possibly because, once beauty has been admitted
to be entirely subjective, much less when it is held to rest on a sort
of mistake, there seems little more to be said. What stuck from Hume's
and Kant's treatments was the subjectivity, not the heroic attempts to
temper it. If beauty is a subjective pleasure, it would seem to have
no higher status than anything that entertains, amuses, or distracts;
it seems odd or ridiculous to regard it as being comparable in
importance to truth or justice, for example. And the twentieth century
also abandoned beauty as the dominant goal of the arts, again possibly
in part because its trivialization in theory led artists to believe
that they ought to pursue more real and more serious projects. This
decline is explored eloquently in Arthur Danto's book The Abuse of
Beauty (2003).
However, there has been a revival of interest in beauty in both art
and philosophy in recent years, and several theorists have made new
attempts to address the antinomy of taste. To some extent, such
approaches echo G.E. Moore's: “To say that a thing is beautiful
is to say, not indeed that it is itself good, but that it is a
necessary element in something which is: to prove that a thing is
truly beautiful is to prove that a whole, to which it bears a
particular relation as a part, is truly good” (Moore 1903, 201).
One interpretation of this would be that what is fundamentally
valuable is the situation in which the object and the person
experiencing are both embedded; the value of beauty might include both
features of the beautiful object and the pleasures of the
experiencer.
Similarly, Crispin Sartwell in his book Six Names of Beauty
(2004), attributes beauty neither exclusively to the subject nor to
the object, but to the relation between them, and even more widely
also to the situation or environment in which they are both embedded.
He points out that when we attribute beauty to the night sky, for
instance, we do not take ourselves simply to be reporting a state of
pleasure in ourselves; we are turned outward toward it; we are
celebrating the real world. On the other hand, if there were no
perceivers capable of experiencing such things, there would be no
beauty. Beauty, rather, emerges in situations in which subject and
object are juxtaposed and connected.
Alexander Nehamas, in Only a Promise of Happiness (2007),
characterizes beauty as an invitation to further experiences, a way
that things invite us in, while also possibly fending us off. The
beautiful object invites us to explore and interpret, but it also
requires us to explore and interpret: beauty is not to be regarded as
an instantaneously apprehensible feature of surface. And Nehamas, like
Hume and Kant, though in another register, considers beauty to have an
irreducibly social dimension. Beauty is something we share, or
something we want to share, and shared experiences of beauty are
particularly intense forms of communication. Thus, the experience of
beauty is not primarily within the skull of the experiencer, but
connects observers and objects such as works of art and literature in
communities of appreciation.
Aesthetic judgment, I believe, never commands universal agreement, and
neither a beautiful object nor a work of art ever engages a catholic
community. Beauty creates smaller societies, no less important or
serious because they are partial, and, from the point of view of its
members, each one is orthodox—orthodox, however, without
thinking of all others as heresies. … What is involved is less
a matter of understanding and more a matter of hope, of
establishing a community that centers around it—a
community, to be sure, whose boundaries are constantly shifting and
whose edges are never stable. (Nehamas 2007, 80–81)
Each of the views sketched below has many expressions, some of which
may be incompatible with one another. In many or perhaps most of the
actual formulations, elements of more than one such account are
present. For example, Kant's treatment of beauty in terms of
disinterested pleasure has obvious elements of hedonism, while the
ecstatic neo-Platonism of Plotinus includes not only the unity of the
object, but also the fact that beauty calls out love or adoration.
However, it is also worth remarking how divergent or even incompatible
with one another many of these views are: for example, some
philosophers associate beauty exclusively with use, others precisely
with uselessness.
The art historian Heinrich Wölfflin gives a fundamental
description of the classical conception of beauty, as embodied in
Italian Renaissance painting and architecture:
The central idea of the Italian Renaissance is that of perfect
proportion. In the human figure as in the edifice, this epoch strove
to achieve the image of perfection at rest within itself. Every form
developed to self-existent being, the whole freely co-ordinated:
nothing but independently living parts…. In the system of a
classic composition, the single parts, however firmly they may be
rooted in the whole, maintain a certain independence. It is not the
anarchy of primitive art: the part is conditioned by the whole, and
yet does not cease to have its own life. For the spectator, that
presupposes an articulation, a progress from part to part, which is a
very different operation from perception as a whole. (Wölfflin
1932, 9–10, 15)
The classical conception is that beauty consists of an arrangement of
integral parts into a coherent whole, according to proportion,
harmony, symmetry, and similar notions. This is a primordial Western
conception of beauty, and is embodied in classical and neo-classical
architecture, sculpture, literature, and music wherever they appear.
Aristotle says in the Poetics that “to be beautiful, a
living creature, and every whole made up of parts, must …
present a certain order in its arrangement of parts” (Aristotle,
volume 2, 2322 [1450b34]). And in the Metaphysics: “The
chief forms of beauty are order and symmetry and definiteness, which
the mathematical sciences demonstrate in a special degree”
(Aristotle, volume 2 1705 [1078a36]). This view, as Aristotle implies,
is sometimes boiled down to a mathematical formula, such as the golden
section, but it need not be thought of in such strict terms. The
conception is exemplified above all in such texts as Euclid's
Elements and such works of architecture as the Parthenon,
and, again, by the Canon of the sculptor Polykleitos (late
fifth/early fourth century BCE).
The Canon was not only a statue deigned to display perfect
proportion, but a now-lost treatise on beauty. The physician Galen
characterizes the text as specifying, for example, the proportions of
“the finger to the finger, and of all the fingers to the
metacarpus, and the wrist, and of all these to the forearm, and of the
forearm to the arm, in fact of everything to everything…. For
having taught us in that treatise all the symmetriae of the
body, Polyclitus supported his treatise with a work, having made the
statue of a man according to his treatise, and having called the
statue itself, like the treatise, the Canon” (quoted in
Pollitt 1974, 15). It is important to note that the concept of
‘symmetry’ in classical texts is distinct from and richer
than its current use to indicate bilateral mirroring. It also refers
precisely to the sorts of harmonious and measurable proportions among
the parts characteristic of objects that are beautiful in the
classical sense, which carried also a moral weight. For example, in
the Sophist (228c-e), Plato describes virtuous souls as
symmetrical.
The ancient Roman architect Vitruvius gives as good a characterization
of the classical conception as any, both in its complexities and,
appropriately enough, in its underlying unity:
Architecture consists of Order, which in Greek is called
taxis, and arrangement, which the Greeks name
diathesis, and of Proportion and Symmetry and Decor and
Distribution which in the Greeks is called oeconomia.
Order is the balanced adjustment of the details of the work
separately, and as to the whole, the arrangement of the proportion
with a view to a symmetrical result.
Proportion implies a graceful semblance: the suitable display of
details in their context. This is attained when the details of the
work are of a height suitable to their breadth, of a breadth suitable
to their length; in a word, when everything has a symmetrical
correspondence.
Symmetry also is the appropriate harmony arising out of the details of
the work itself: the correspondence of each given detail to the form
of the design as a whole. As in the human body, from cubit, foot,
palm, inch and other small parts come the symmetric quality of
eurhythmy. (Vitruvius, 26–27)
Aquinas, in a typically Aristotelian pluralist formulation, says that
“There are three requirements for beauty. Firstly, integrity or
perfection—for if something is impaired it is ugly. Then there
is due proportion or consonance. And also clarity: whence things that
are brightly coloured are called beautiful” (Summa Theologica I,
39, 8).
Francis Hutcheson in the eighteenth century gives what may well be the
clearest expression of the view: “What we call Beautiful in
Objects, to speak in the Mathematical Style, seems to be in a compound
Ratio of Uniformity and Variety; so that where the Uniformity of Bodys
is equal, the Beauty is as the Variety; and where the Variety is
equal, the Beauty is as the Uniformity” (Hutcheson 1725, 29).
Indeed, proponents of the view often speak “in the Mathematical
Style.” Hutcheson goes on to adduce mathematical formulae, and
specifically the propositions of Euclid, as the most beautiful objects
(in another echo of Aristotle), though he also rapturously praises
nature, with its massive complexity underlain by universal physical
laws as revealed, for example, by Newton. There is beauty, he says,
“In the Knowledge of some great Principles, or universal Forces,
from which innumerable Effects do flow. Such is Gravitation, in Sir
Isaac Newton's Scheme” (Hutcheson 1725, 38).
A very compelling series of refutations of and counter-examples to the
idea that beauty can be a matter of any specific proportions between
parts, and hence to the classical conception, is given by Edmund Burke
in A Philosophical Enquiry into the Origin of our Ideas of the
Beautiful and the Sublime:
Turning our eyes to the vegetable kingdom, we find nothing there so
beautiful as flowers; but flowers are of every sort of shape, and
every sort of disposition; they are turned and fashioned into an
infinite variety of forms. … The rose is a large flower, yet it
grows upon a small shrub; the flower of the apple is very small, and
it grows upon a large tree; yet the rose and the apple blossom are
both beautiful. … The swan, confessedly a beautiful bird, has a
neck longer than the rest of its body, and but a very short tail; is
this a beautiful proportion? we must allow that it is. But what shall
we say of the peacock, who has comparatively but a short neck, with a
tail longer than the neck and the rest of the body taken together?
… There are some parts of the human body, that are observed to
hold certain proportions to each other; but before it can be proved,
that the efficient cause of beauty lies in these, it must be shewn,
that wherever these are found exact, the person to whom they belong is
beautiful. … For my part, I have at several times very
carefully examined many of these proportions, and found them to hold
very nearly, or altogether alike in many subjects, which were not only
very different from one another, but where one has been very
beautiful, and the other very remote from beauty. … You may
assign any proportions you please to every part of the of the human
body; and I undertake, that a painter shall observe them all, and
notwithstanding produce, if he pleases, a very ugly figure. (Burke
1757, 84–89)
There are many ways to interpret Plato's relation to classical
aesthetics. The political system sketched in The Republic
characterizes justice in terms of the relation of part and whole. But
Plato was also no doubt a dissident in classical culture, and the
account of beauty that is expressed specifically in The
Symposium—perhaps the key Socratic text for neo-Platonism
and for the idealist conception of beauty—expresses an
aspiration toward beauty as perfect unity.
In the midst of a drinking party, Socrates recounts the teachings of
his instructress, one Diotima, on matters of love. She connects the
experience of beauty to the erotic or the desire to reproduce (Plato,
558–59 [Symposium 206c–207e]). But the desire to reproduce
is associated in turn with a desire for the immortal or eternal:
‘And why all this longing for propagation? Because this is the
one deathless and eternal element in our mortality. And since we have
agreed that the lover longs for the good to be his own forever, it
follows that we are bound to long for immortality as well as for the
good—which is to say that Love is a longing for
immortality” (Plato, 559, [Symposium 206e–207a]). What
follows is, if not classical, at any rate classic:
The candidate for this initiation cannot, if his efforts are to be
rewarded, begin too early to devote himself to the beauties of the
body. First of all, if his preceptor instructs him as he should, he
will fall in love with the beauty of one individual body, so that his
passion may give life to noble discourse. Next he must consider how
nearly related the beauty of any one body is to the beauty of any
other, and he will see that if he is to devote himself to loveliness
of form it will be absurd to deny that the beauty of each and every
body is the same. Having reached this point, he must set himself to be
the lover of every lovely body, and bring his passion for the one into
due proportion by deeming it of little or no importance.
Next he must grasp that the beauties of the body are as nothing to the
beauties of the soul, so that wherever he meets with spiritual
loveliness, even in the husk of an unlovely body, he will find it
beautiful enough to fall in love with and cherish—and beautiful
enough to quicken in his heart a longing for such discourse as tends
toward the building of a noble nature. And from this he will be led to
contemplate the beauty of laws and institutions. And when he discovers
how every kind of beauty is akin to every other he will conclude that
the beauty of the body is not, after all, of so great moment.
…
And so, when his prescribed devotion to boyish beauties has carried
our candidate so far that the universal beauty dawns upon his inward
sight, he is almost within reach of the final revelation. …
Starting from individual beauties, the quest for universal beauty must
find him mounting the heavenly ladder, stepping from rung to
rung—that is, from one to two, and from two to every
lovely body, and from bodily beauty to the beauty of institutions,
from institutions to learning, and from learning in general to the
special lore that pertains to nothing but the beautiful
itself—until at last he comes to know what beauty is.
And if, my dear Socrates, Diotima went on, man's life is ever worth
living, it is when he has attained this vision of the very soul of
beauty. (Plato, 561–63 [Symposium 210a–211d])
Beauty here is conceived—perhaps explicitly in contrast to the
classical aesthetics of integral parts and coherent whole—as
perfect unity, or indeed as the principle of unity itself.
Plotinus, as we have already seen, comes close to equating beauty with
formedness per se: it is the source of unity among disparate things,
and it is itself perfect unity. Plotinus specifically attacks what we
have called the classical conception of beauty:
Almost everyone declares that the symmetry of parts towards each other
and towards a whole, with, besides, a certain charm of colour,
constitutes the beauty recognized by the eye, that in visible things,
as indeed in all else, universally, the beautiful thing is essentially
symmetrical, patterned.
But think what this means.
Only a compound can be beautiful, never anything devoid of parts; and
only a whole; the several parts will have beauty, not in themselves,
but only as working together to give a comely total. Yet beauty in an
aggregate demands beauty in details; it cannot be constructed out of
ugliness; its law must run throughout.
All the loveliness of colour and even the light of the sun, being
devoid of parts and so not beautiful by symmetry, must be ruled out of
the realm of beauty. And how comes gold to be a beautiful thing? And
lightning by night, and the stars, why are these so fair?
In sounds also the simple must be proscribed, though often in a whole
noble composition each several tone is delicious in itself. (Plotinus,
21 [Ennead 1.6])
And Plotinus declares that fire is the most beautiful physical thing,
“making ever upwards, the subtlest and sprightliest of all
bodies, as very near to the unembodied. … Hence the splendour
of its light, the splendour that belongs to the Idea” (Plotinus,
22 [Ennead 1.3]). For Plotinus as for Plato, all multiplicity must be
immolated finally into unity, and all roads of inquiry and experience
lead toward the Good/Beautiful/True/Divine.
This gave rise to a basically mystical vision of the beauty of God
that, as Umberto Eco has argued, persisted alongside an anti-aesthetic
asceticism throughout the Middle Ages: a delight in profusion that
finally merges into a single spiritual unity. In the sixth century,
Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite characterized the whole of creation as
yearning toward God; the universe is called into being by love of God
as beauty (Pseudo-Dionysius, 4.7; see Kirwan 1999, 29).
Sensual/aesthetic pleasures could be considered the expressions of the
immense, beautiful profusion of God and our ravishment thereby. Eco
quotes Suger, Abbot of St Denis in the twelfth century, describing a
richly-appointed church:
Thus, when—out of my delight in the beauty of the house of
God—the loveliness of the many-colored gems has called me away
from external cares, and worthy meditation has induced me to reflect,
transferring that which is material to that which is immaterial, on
the diversity of the sacred virtues: then it seems to me that I see
myself dwelling, as it were, in some strange region of the universe
which neither exists entirely in the slime of the earth nor entirely
in the purity of Heaven; and that, by the grace of God, I can be
transported from this inferior to that higher world in an anagogical
manner. (Eco 1959, 14)
This conception has had many expressions in the modern era, including
in such figures as Shaftesbury, Schiller, and Hegel, according to whom
the aesthetic or the experience of art and beauty is a primary bridge
(or to use the Platonic image, stairway or ladder) between the
material and the spiritual. For Shaftesbury, there are three levels of
beauty: what God makes (nature); what human beings make from nature or
what is transformed by human intelligence (art, for example); and
finally what makes even the maker of such things as us (that is, God).
Shaftesbury's character Theocles describes “the third order of
beauty,”
which forms not only such as we call mere forms but even the forms
which form. For we ourselves are notable architects in matter, and can
show lifeless bodies brought into form, and fashioned by our own
hands, but that which fashions even minds themselves, contains in
itself all the beauties fashioned by those minds, and is consequently
the principle, source, and fountain of all beauty. … Whatever
appears in our second order of forms, or whatever is derived or
produced from thence, all this is eminently, principally, and
originally in this last order of supreme and sovereign beauty.
… Thus architecture, music, and all which is of human
invention, resolves itself into this last order. (Shaftesbury 1738,
228–29)
Schiller's expression of a similar series of thoughts was
fundamentally influential on the conceptions of beauty developed
within German Idealism:
The pre-rational concept of Beauty, if such a thing be adduced, can be
drawn from no actual case—rather does itself correct and guide
our judgement concerning every actual case; it must therefore be
sought along the path of abstraction, and it can be inferred simply
from the possibility of a nature that is both sensuous and rational;
in a word, Beauty must be exhibited as a necessary condition of
humanity. Beauty … makes of man a whole, complete in himself.
(1795, 59–60, 86)
For Schiller, beauty or play or art (he uses the words, rather
cavalierly, almost interchangeably) performs the process of
integrating or rendering compatible the natural and the spiritual, or
the sensuous and the rational: only in such a state of integration are
we—who exist simultaneously on both these levels—free.
This is quite similar to Plato's ‘ladder’: beauty as a way
to ascend to the abstract or spiritual. But Schiller—though this
is at times unclear—is more concerned with integrating the
realms of nature and spirit than with transcending the level of
physical reality entirely, a la Plato. It is beauty and art that
performs this integration.
In this and in other ways—including the tripartite dialectical
structure of the view—Schiller strikingly anticipates Hegel, who
writes as follows.
The philosophical Concept of the beautiful, to indicate its true
nature at least in a preliminary way, must contain, reconciled within
itself, both the extremes which have been mentioned [the ideal and the
empirical] because it unites metaphysical universality with real
particularity. (Hegel 1835, 22)
Beauty, we might say, or artistic beauty at any rate, is a route from
the sensuous and particular to the Absolute and to freedom, from
finitude to the infinite, formulations that—while they are
influenced by Schiller—strikingly recall Shaftesbury, Plotinus,
and Plato.
Both Hegel and Shaftesbury, who associate beauty and art with mind and
spirit, hold that the beauty of art is higher than the beauty of
nature, on the grounds that, as Hegel puts it, “the beauty of
art is born of the spirit and born again” (Hegel 1835,
2). That is, the natural world is born of God, but the beauty of art
transforms that material again by the spirit of the artist. This idea
reaches is apogee in Benedetto Croce, who very nearly denies that
nature can ever be beautiful, or at any rate asserts that the beauty
of nature is a reflection of the beauty of art. “The real
meaning of ‘natural beauty’ is that certain persons,
things, places are, by the effect which they exert upon one,
comparable with poetry, painting, sculpture, and the other arts”
(Croce 1928, 230).
Edmund Burke, expressing an ancient tradition, writes that, “by
beauty I mean, that quality or those qualities in bodies, by which
they cause love, or some passion similar to it” (Burke 1757,
83). As we have seen, in almost all treatments of beauty, even the
most apparently object or objectively-oriented, there is a moment in
which the subjective qualities of the experience of beauty are
emphasized: rhapsodically, perhaps, or in terms of pleasure or
ataraxia, as in Schopenhauer. For example, we have already
seen Plotinus, for whom beauty is certainly not subjective, describe
the experience of beauty ecstatically. In the idealist tradition, the
human soul, as it were, recognizes in beauty its true origin and
destiny. Among the Greeks, the connection of beauty with love is
proverbial from early myth, and Aphrodite the goddess of love won the
Judgment of Paris by promising Paris the most beautiful woman in the
world.
There is an historical connection between idealist accounts of beauty
and those that connect it to love and longing, though there would seem
to be no entailment either way. We have Sappho's famous fragment 16:
“Some say thronging cavalry, some say foot soldiers, others call
a fleet the most beautiful sights the dark world offers, but I say
it's whatever you love best” (Sappho, 16). (Indeed, at
Phaedrus 236c, Socrates appears to defer to “the fair
Sappho” as having had greater insight than himself on love
[Plato, 483].)
Plato's discussions of beauty in the Symposium and the
Phaedrus occur in the context of the theme of erotic love. In
the former, love is portrayed as the ‘child’ of poverty
and plenty. “Nor is he delicate and lovely as most of us
believe, but harsh and arid, barefoot and homeless” (Plato, 556
[Symposium 203b–d]). Love is portrayed as a lack or absence that
seeks its own fulfillment in beauty: a picture of mortality as an
infinite longing. Love is always in a state of lack and hence of
desire: the desire to possess the beautiful. Then if this state of
infinite longing could be trained on the truth, we would have a path
to wisdom. The basic idea has been recovered many times, for example
by the Romantics. It fueled the cult of idealized or courtly love
through the Middle Ages, in which the beloved became a symbol of the
infinite.
Recent work on the theory of beauty has revived this idea, and turning
away from pleasure has turned toward love or longing (which are not
necessarily entirely pleasurable experiences) as the experiential
correlate of beauty. Both Sartwell and Nehamas use Sappho's fragment
16 as an epigraph. Sartwell defines beauty as “the object of
longing” and characterizes longing as intense and unfulfilled
desire. He calls it a fundamental condition of a finite being in time,
where we are always in the process of losing whatever we have, and are
thus irremediably in a state of longing. And Nehamas writes
I think of beauty as the emblem of what we lack, the mark of an art
that speaks to our desire. … Beautiful things don't stand
aloof, but direct our attention and our desire to everything else we
must learn or acquire in order to understand and possess, and they
quicken the sense of life, giving it new shape and direction. (Nehamas
2007, 77)
Thinkers of the 18th century—many of them oriented
toward empiricism—accounted for beauty in terms of pleasure. The
Italian historian Ludovico Antonio Muratori, for example, in quite a
typical formulation, says that “By beautiful we
generally understand whatever, when seen, heard, or understood,
delights, pleases, and ravishes us by causing within us agreeable
sensations” (see Carritt 1931, 60). In Hutcheson it is not clear
whether we ought to conceive beauty primarily in terms of classical
formal elements or in terms of the viewer's pleasurable response. He
begins the Inquiry Into the Original of Our Ideas of Beauty and
Virtue with a discussion of pleasure. And he appears to assert
that objects which instantiate his “compound ratio of uniformity
and variety’ are peculiarly or necessarily capable of producing
pleasure:
The only Pleasure of sense, which our Philosophers seem to consider,
is that which accompanys the simple Ideas of Sensation; But there are
vastly greater Pleasures in those complex Ideas of objects, which
obtain the Names of Beautiful, Regular, Harmonious. Thus every one
acknowledges he is more delighted with a fine Face, a just Picture,
than with the View of any one Colour, were it as strong and lively as
possible; and more pleased with a Prospect of the Sun arising among
settled Clouds, and colouring their Edges, with a starry Hemisphere, a
fine Landskip, a regular Building, than with a clear blue Sky, a
smooth Sea, or a large open Plain, not diversify'd by Woods, Hills,
Waters, Buildings: And yet even these latter Appearances are not quite
simple. So in Musick, the Pleasure of fine Composition is incomparably
greater than that of any one Note, how sweet, full, or swelling
soever. (Hutcheson 1725, 22)
When Hutcheson then goes on to describe ‘original or absolute
beauty,’ he does it, as we have seen, in terms of the qualities
of the beautiful thing, and yet throughout, he insists that beauty is
centered in the human experience of pleasure. But of course the idea
of pleasure could come apart from Hutcheson's particular aesthetic
preferences, which are poised precisely opposite Plotinus's, for
example. That we find pleasure in a symmetrical rather than an
asymmetrical building (if we do) is contingent. But that beauty is
connected to pleasure appears, according to Hutcheson, to be
necessary, and the pleasure which is the locus of beauty itself has
ideas rather than things as its object.
Hume writes in a similar vein in the Treatise of Human
Nature:
Beauty is such an order and construction of parts as, either by the
primary constitution of our nature, by custom, or by caprice, is
fitted to give a pleasure and satisfaction to the soul. …
Pleasure and pain, therefore, are not only necessary attendants of
beauty and deformity, but constitute their very essence. (Hume 1740,
299)
Though this appears ambiguous as between locating the beauty in the
pleasure or in the impression or idea that causes it, Hume is soon
talking about the ‘sentiment of beauty,’ where sentiment
is, roughly, a pleasurable or painful response to impressions or
ideas, though beauty is a matter of cultivated or delicate pleasures.
Indeed, by the time of Kant's Third Critique and after that for
perhaps two centuries, the direct connection of beauty to pleasure is
taken as a commonplace, to the point where thinkers are frequently
identifying beauty as a certain sort of pleasure. Santayana, for
example, as we have seen, while still gesturing in the direction of
the object or experience that causes pleasure, emphatically identifies
beauty as a certain sort of pleasure.
One result of this approach to beauty—or perhaps an extreme
expression of this orientation—is the assertion of the
positivists that words such as ‘beauty’ are meaningless or
without cognitive content, or are mere expressions of subjective
approval. Hume and Kant were no sooner declaring beauty to be a matter
of sentiment or pleasure and therefore to be subjective than they were
trying to ameliorate the sting, largely by emphasizing critical
consensus. But once this fundamental admission is made, any consensus
is contingent. Another way to formulate this is that it appears to
certain thinkers after Hume and Kant that there can be no
reasons to prefer the consensus to a counter-consensus
assessment. A.J. Ayer writes:
Such aesthetic words as ‘beautiful’ and
‘hideous’ are employed … not to make statements of
fact, but simply to express certain feelings and evoke a certain
response. It follows…that there is no sense attributing
objective validity to aesthetic judgments, and no possibility of
arguing about questions of value in aesthetics. (Ayer 1952, 113)
All meaningful claims either concern the meaning of terms or are
empirical, in which case they are meaningful because observations
could confirm or disconfirm them. ‘That song is beautiful’
has neither status, and hence has no empirical or conceptual content.
It merely expresses a positive attitude of a particular viewer; it is
an expression of pleasure, like a satisfied sigh. The question of
beauty is not a genuine question, and we can safely leave it behind or
alone. Most twentieth-century philosophers did just that.
Philosophers in the Kantian tradition identify the experience of
beauty with disinterested pleasure, psychical distance, and the like,
and contrast the aesthetic with the practical. “Taste
is the faculty of judging an object or mode of representing it by an
entirely disinterested satisfaction or dissatisfaction. The
object of such satisfaction is called beautiful” (Kant
1790, 45). Edward Bullough distinguishes the beautiful from the merely
agreeable on the grounds that the former requires a distance from
practical concerns: “Distance is produced in the first instance
by putting the phenomenon, so to speak, out of gear with our
practical, actual self; by allowing it to stand outside the context of
our personal needs and ends.“ (Bullough 1912, 244)
On the other hand, many philosophers have gone in the opposite
direction and have identified beauty with suitedness to use.
‘Beauty’ is perhaps one of the few terms that could
plausibly sustain such entirely opposed interpretations.
According to Diogenes Laertius, the ancient hedonist Aristippus of
Cyrene took a rather direct approach.
Is not then, also, a beautiful woman useful in proportion as she is
beautiful; and a boy and a youth useful in proportion to their beauty?
Well then, a handsome boy and a handsome youth must be useful exactly
in proportion as they are handsome. Now the use of beauty is, to be
embraced. If then a man embraces a woman just as it is useful that he
should, he does not do wrong; nor, again, will he be doing wrong in
employing beauty for the purposes for which it is useful. (Diogenes
Laertius, 94)
In some ways, Aristippus is portrayed parodically: as the very worst
of the sophists, though supposedly a follower of Socrates. And yet the
idea of beauty as suitedness to use finds expression in a number of
thinkers. Xenophon's Memorabilia puts the view in the mouth
of Socrates, with Aristippus as interlocutor:
Socrates: In short everything which we use is considered both
good and beautiful from the same point of view, namely its use.
Aristippus: Why then, is a dung-basket a beautiful thing?
Socrates: Of course it is, and a golden shield is ugly, if
the one be beautifully fitted to its purpose and the other ill.
(Xenophon, Book III, viii)
Berkeley expresses a similar view in his dialogue Alciphron,
though he begins with the hedonist conception: “Every one knows
that beauty is what pleases” (Berkeley 1732, 174, see Carritt
1931, 75). But it pleases for reasons of usefulness. Thus, as Xenophon
suggests, on this view, things are beautiful only in relation to the
uses for which they are intended or to which they are properly
applied. The proper proportions of an object depend on what kind of
object it is, and again a beautiful ox would make an ugly horse.
“The parts, therefore, in true proportions, must be so related,
and adjusted to one another, as they may best conspire to the use and
operation of the whole” (Berkeley 1732, 174–75, see
Carritt 1931, 76). One result of this is that, though beauty remains
tied to pleasure, it is not an immediate sensible experience. It
essentially requires intellection and practical activity: one has to
know the use of a thing, and assess its suitedness to that use.
This treatment of beauty is often used, for example, to criticize the
distinction between fine art and craft, and it avoids sheer
philistinism by enriching the concept of ‘use,’ so that it
might encompass not only performing a practical task, but performing
it especially well or with an especial satisfaction. Ananda
Coomaraswamy, the Ceylonese-British scholar of Indian and European
medieval arts, adds that a beautiful work of art or craft expresses as
well as serves its purpose.
A cathedral is not as such more beautiful than an airplane, … a
hymn than a mathematical equation. … A well-made sword is not
more beautiful than a well-made scalpel, though one is used to slay,
the other to heal. Works of art are only good or bad, beautiful or
ugly in themselves, to the extent that they are or are not well and
truly made, that is, do or do not express, or do or do not serve their
purpose. (Coomaraswamy 1977, 75)
Roger Scruton, in his book Beauty (2009) returns to a
modified Kantianism with regard to both beauty and sublimity, enriched
by many and varied examples. "We call something beautiful," writes
Scruton, "when we gain pleasure from contemplating it as an individual
object, for its own sake, and in its presented form."
(Scruton 2009, 26)
Despite the Kantian framework, Scruton, like Sartwell and Nehamas,
throws the subjective/objective distinction into question. He compares
experiencing a beautiful thing to a kiss. To kiss someone that one
loves is not merely to place one body part on another, "but to touch
the other person in his very self. Hence the kiss is compromising - it
is a move from one self toward another, and a summoning of
the other into the surface of his being." (Scruton 2009, 48)