Euclid defined a boundary as “that which is an extremity of
anything” (Elements Bk I, Df 13), and Aristotle made
this more precise by defining the extremity of a thing x as
“the first point beyond which it is not possible to find any
part [of x], and the first point within which every part
[of x] is.” (Metaphysics V, 17, 1022a4–5) This
definition is intuitive enough and may be regarded as the natural
starting point for any investigation into the concept of a
boundary. Indeed, although Aristotle's definition was only meant to
apply to material substances, it intuitively applies to events as well
(insofar as they have mereological structure) and by extension also to
abstract entities such as concepts and sets (compare the topologically
standard notion of the boundary of a set x as the set of
those points all of whose neighborhoods intersect both x and
the complement of x). Nonetheless, precisely this intuitive
characterization gives rise to several puzzles that justify
philosophical concern, especially with respect to the boundaries of
spatio-temporal particulars such as objects and events.
The first sort of puzzle relates to the intuition that a boundary
separates two entities (or two parts of the same entity),
which are then said to be continuous with each other. Imagine
ourselves traveling from Maryland to Pennsylvania. What happens as we
cross the Mason-Dixon line? Do we pass through a last point p
in Maryland and a first point q in Pennsylvania? Clearly not,
given the density of the continuum; for then we should have to admit
an infinite number of further points between p and q
that would be in neither State. But, equally clearly, we can hardly
acknowledge the existence of just one of p and q, as
is dictated by the standard mathematical treatment of the continuum,
for either choice would amount to a peculiar privileging of one State
over the other. And we cannot identify
p with q, either, for we are speaking of two adjacent
States, so their territories cannot have any parts in common. So,
where is the Mason-Dixon line, and how does it relate to the
two adjacent entities it separates?
The puzzle can be generalized. Consider the dilemma raised by Leonardo
in his Notebooks: What is it that divides the atmosphere from
the water? Is it air or is it water? (1938: 75–76). Or consider
Suárez's worry in Disputation 40 (Sect. V, §58),
repeatedly echoed by Peirce (1892: 546; 1893: 7.127): What color is
the line of demarcation between a black spot and its white background?
Perhaps figure/ground considerations could be invoked to provide an
answer in this second case, based on the principle that the boundary
is always owned by the figure — the background is topologically
open (Jackendoff 1987, App. B). But what is figure and what is ground
when it comes to two adjacent halves of the same black spot? What is
figure and what is ground when it comes to Maryland and Pennsylvania?
What happens when we dive into the water? Besides, it would be natural
to suppose that all entities of the same sort be treated alike, for
instance, that all material bodies be construed as figure-like
entities, each possessing its own boundary. But then, how could any
two of them ever come into contact, short of penetrability? (In this
last form, the question is widely discussed in recent literature; see
e.g. Kline and Matheson 1987, Hazen 1990, Zimmerman 1996b, Kilborn
2007.)
Consider also Aristotle's classical version of the puzzle in regard to
temporal boundaries: When a moving object comes to rest, is it in
motion or is it at rest? (Physics VI, 3, 234a ff.) Of course,
one could maintain that there is no motion or rest at an
instant, but only during an interval, as Aristotle himself
held (232a32–34). Yet the question remains: Does the transitional
moment belong to the motion interval or to the rest interval? (On this
version of the puzzle, see Medlin 1963, Hamblin 1969, Kretzmann 1976,
and Sorabji 1983, ch. 26.)
A second sort of puzzle relates to the fact that Aristotle's
mereological definition, and the common-sense intuition that it
captures, only seem to apply to the realm of continuous
entities. Modulo the above-mentioned difficulty, the thought that
Maryland and Pennsylvania are bounded by the Mason-Dixon line is fair
enough. But ordinary material objects — it might be observed
— are not truly continuous (or dense) and speaking of an
object's boundary is like speaking of the “flat top” of a
fakir's bed of nails (Simons 1991: 91). On closer inspection, the
spatial boundaries of physical objects are imaginary entities
surrounding swarms of subatomic particles, and their exact shape and
location involve the same degree of idealization of a drawing obtained
by “connecting the dots”, the same degree of arbitrariness
as any mathematical graph smoothed out of scattered and inexact data,
the same degree of abstraction as the figures' contours in a Seurat
painting. Similarly, on closer inspection a body's being in motion
amounts to the fact that the vector sum of the motions of zillions of
restless particles, averaged over time, is non-zero, hence it makes no
sense to speak of the instant at which a body stops moving
(Galton 1994: 4). All this may be seen as good
news vis-à-vis the puzzles of Section 1.1, which would
not even get off the ground (at least in the form given above; see
S. R. Smith 2007 and Wilson 2008 for qualifications). But then the
question arises: Is our boundary talk a mere façon de
parler?
Even with reference to the Mason-Dixon line — and, more
generally, those boundaries that demarcate adjacent parts of a
continuous manifold, as when an individual cognitive agent
conceptualizes a black spot as being made of two halves — one
can raise the question of their ontological status. Such boundaries
reflect to various degrees the organizing activity of our intellect,
or of our social practices. And it might be argued that belief in
their objectivity epitomizes a form of metaphysical realism that cries
for justification. We may, in this connection, introduce a conceptual
distinction between natural or bona fide boundaries, which
are in some sense objective, i.e., grounded in some physical
discontinuity or qualitative heterogeneity betwixt an entity and its
surroundings, and artificial or fiat boundaries, which are
not so grounded in the autonomous, mind-independent world (B. Smith
1995, building on Curzon 1907). Geo-political boundaries such as the
Mason-Dixon line are obviously of the fiat sort, and on
closer inspection it appears that even the surfaces of ordinary
material objects such as apples and tables involve fiat
articulations of some kind. So the question is, are
there any bona fide boundaries? And, if not, is
the fiat nature of our boundary talk a reason to justify an
anti-realist attitude towards boundaries altogether? (Compare also how
the issue arises in the realm of abstract entities: Are there concepts
that carve the world “at the joints”, as per Plato's
recipe in the Phaedrus 265e?)
The question has deep ramifications. For once the fiat/bona
fide opposition has been recognized, it is clear that it can be
drawn in relation to whole objects and events also (Smith and Varzi
2000, Smith 2001). Insofar as (part of) the boundary of a whole is of
the fiat sort, the whole itself may be viewed as a conceptual
construction, hence the question of the ontological status of
boundaries becomes of a piece with the more general issue of the
conventional status of ordinary objects and events. Cfr. Goodman:
“We make a star as we make a constellation, by putting its parts
together and marking off its boundaries” (1980: 213) This is not
to imply that we end up with imaginary or otherwise unreal wholes: as
Frege wrote, the objectivity of the North Sea “is not affected
by the fact that it is a matter of our arbitrary choice which part of
all the water on the earth's surface we mark off and elect to call the
‘North Sea’” (1884, §26). It does, however,
follow that the entities in question would only enjoy an individuality
as a result of our fiat, like the cookies carved out of the
big dough: their objectivity is independent, but their individuality
— their being what they are, perhaps even their having the
identity and persistence conditions they have — would depend on
the baker's action (Sidelle 1989; Heller 1990; Jubien 1993; Varzi
2011).
A third puzzle relates to vagueness. Aristotle's definition (as well
as standard topology) suggests that there is always a sharp
demarcation between the inside and the outside of a thing. Yet it may
be observed that ordinary objects and events, as well as the
extensions of many ordinary concepts, may have boundaries that are in
some sense fuzzy or indeterminate. Clouds, deserts, mountains, let
alone the figures of an impressionist painting, all seem to elude the
idealized notion of a sharply bounded entity. Likewise, the temporal
boundaries of many events, let alone their spatial boundaries, seem to
be indeterminate.  When exactly did the industrial revolution begin?
When did it end?  Where did it take place? And certainly the concepts
corresponding to such predicates as ‘bald’ or
‘heap’ do not posses definite boundaries, either. As again
Frege famously put it, to such concepts there seems to correspond
“an area that ha[s] not a sharp boundary-line all around, but in
places just vaguely fade[s] away into the background” (1903:
§56).
How is such fuzziness to be construed? One option is insist on a
purely epistemic account: the fuzziness would lie exclusively in our
ignorance about the exact location of the relevant boundaries
(Sorensen 1988, Williamson 1994). Alternatively, one may distinguish
here between a de re account and a de dicto
account. On the de re account, the fuzziness is truly
ontological; the boundary of Mount Everest (say) would be vague
insofar as there is no objective, determinate fact of the matter about
which parcels of land lie on which side (Tye 1990; Copeland 1995;
Akiba 2004; Hyde 2008).  Likewise, on this account a predicate such as
‘bald’ would be vague because it stands for a vague set, a
set with truly fuzzy boundaries. By contrast, the de dicto
account corresponds to a purely linguistic (or conceptual) notion of
vagueness. There is no vague boundary demarcating Mount Everest on
this view; rather, there are many distinct parcels of land, each with
a precise border, but our linguistic practices have not enforced a
choice of any one of them as the official referent of the name
‘Everest’ (Mehlberg 1958; Lewis 1986; McGee
1997). Similarly, on this view the set of bald people does not have a
fuzzy boundary; rather, our linguistic stipulations do not fully
specify which set of people corresponds to the extension of
‘bald’ (Fine 1975; Keefe 2000). For boundaries of
the fiat sort, a de dicto account suggests itself
naturally: insofar as the process leading to the definition of a
boundary may not be precise, the question of whether something lies
inside or outside the boundary may be semantically indeterminate. But
this account does not sit well with boundaries of the bona
fide sort (if any); if any such boundary were vague, it would be
so independently of our cognitive or social articulations, hence a
de re account would seem to be necessary, which means that
there would be genuine worldly indeterminacy.
A fourth source of concern relates to the intuition, implicit in
Aristotle's definition, that boundaries are lower-dimensional
entities, i.e., have at least one dimension fewer than the entities
they bound.  The surface of a (continuous) sphere, for example, is
two-dimensional (it has no “substance” or “divisible
bulk”), the Mason-Dixon Line is one-dimensional (it has
“length” but no “breadth”), and a boundary
point such as the vertex of a cone is zero-dimensional (it extends
in no direction). This intuition is germane to much of what we
ordinarily say about boundaries. But it is problematic insofar as it
contrasts with several independent intuitions that are of a piece with
both common sense and philosophical theorizing. For instance, there is
a standing tradition in epistemology (from Moore 1925 to Gibson 1979)
according to which boundaries play a crucial role in perception: we
see (opaque) physical objects indirectly by seeing their surfaces. Yet
it is not clear how one could see entities that lack physical
bulk.  Likewise, we often speak of surfaces as of things that may be
pitted, or damp, or that can be scratched, polished, sanded, and so
on, and it is unclear whether such predicates can be applied at all to
immaterial entities. In such cases, it would rather seem that surfaces
(and boundaries more generally; see Jackendoff 1991) are to be
construed as “thin layers” that are schematized
as having fewer dimensions than the wholes to which they apply.
Arguably, this conceptual tension between boundaries understood as
lower-dimensional entities and boundaries understood as thin layers
reflects an irreducible ambiguity in ordinary speech (Stroll 1979,
1988).  And, arguably, it is only the first conception that gives rise
to the puzzles outlined in the foregoing sections; bulky boundaries
can be treated as ordinary, extended parts of the bodies they bound. Yet
a general theory of boundaries should have something to say about the
second conception as well — and more generally about the
interaction between the mathematical idealization associated with the
former conception and the physical, cognitive, and philosophical
significance of the latter (Galton 2007).
The issue also relates to the question of whether there can be
extended mereological simples (raised by van Inwagen 1981 and Lewis
1991: 32, 76 and extensively discussed e.g. in Markosian 1998, Parsons
2000, Simons 2004, Braddon-Mitchell and Miller 2006, and McDaniel
2007, inter alia). For the characterization of boundaries as
lower-dimensional extremities is compatible with the possibility that
a boundary's spatiotemporal extension transcend its mereological
structure. A pointy boundary, for instance, could be pointy in that it
has no proper parts, but that does not rule out that it be located at
an extended region short of assuming that the mereological structure
of a thing always matches perfectly that of its location (what Varzi
2007:1018 calls “mirroring” and Shaffer 2009:138, Uzquiano
2011 “harmony”).
So boundaries are, on the one hand, central to the common-sense
picture of the world and yet, on the other, deeply problematic. We may
accordingly distinguish two main sorts of theories, depending on
whether one is willing to take the problems at face value (realist
theories) or to bypass them altogether, treating boundaries as
fictional abstractions of some sort (eliminativist theories).
Most realist theories about boundaries, construed as lower-dimensional
entities, share the view that such entities are ontological parasites:
points, lines, and surfaces cannot be separated and cannot exist in
isolation from the entities they bound (pace Suárez,
who thought that God would be capable of such marvels;
see Disputation 40, V, 41). This view does justice to the
intuition that boundaries, if real, are somewhat “less
real” than bulky entities, and as such it goes back to Aristotle
(Metaphysics XI, 2, 1060b12–16) and has been defended e.g. by
Boethius (Second Commentary I, xi, 14–21), revived by Abelard
(Glosses on Porphyry, 8.1–4), and eventually endorsed by
Brentano (1976) and his pupils (Chisholm 1984).  Realist theories may
differ significantly, however, with regard to how such dependent,
lower-dimensional entities relate to the extended entities they
bound. Thus, with reference to the first puzzle of Section 1,
let A and B be any two extended entities separated
by a common boundary (such as Maryland and Pennsylvania). Then we may
distinguish four main views (Varzi 1997):
These four views are mutually exclusive, but they need not be
exhaustive and can be further articulated or integrated to address the
issues raised by the other puzzles of Section 1. For example, with
reference to the second puzzle (Section 1.2), Smith and Varzi (2000)
consider a double-barred theory that is of type (2) with respect to
bona fide boundaries and of type (4) with respect to
fiat boundaries (so there is no coincidence of real
boundaries but merely of fiat articulations). Similarly, the
indeterminacy hypothesis advocated by type-(2) theories can be
regarded as being of a piece with the sort of indeterminacy that is
involved in the phenomenon of vagueness (Section
1.3). For fiat boundaries, for instance, a de dicto
account may be applied in both cases: statements about such boundaries
are true iff they are super-true, i.e., true under every admissible
way of precisifying the relevant fiat articulations (Varzi
2001 and references therein). There are other options, too. For
instance, Hudson (2005, ch. 3) offers an account of boundaries that
permits instances of each of (1), (2) and (3) (and without any
dialethic implications). It is also possible to reject the
mereotopological setting that leads to the taxonomy above and, with
it, the need to choose among (1)–(4). See, e.g., Breysse and De Glas
(2007) for a proposal in this spirit.
Eliminativist theories move from the idea that talk of boundaries
involves some sort of abstraction — an idea that can be found
already in the medieval and modern debate on anti-indivisibilism
(Zimmerman 1996a; Holden 2004) and that has recently become the focus
of renewed attention in connection with the hypothesis that the
universe might consist of “atomless gunk” (Lewis 1991:
20), i.e., that either space and time or matter, or both, divide
forever into smaller and smaller parts (Sider 1993, Zimmerman 1996b;
Hawthorne and Weatherson 2004; McDaniel 2006; Hudson 2007;
J. T. Russell 2008; Arntzenius 2008). What sort of abstraction would
be involved here? And how can one account for our ordinary and
mathematical talk about boundaries if these are to be explained away
as fictional abstractions? With special reference to the boundaries of
spatio-temporal particulars, we may distinguish two main
approaches.
One standard objection to type-(2) theories is that the abstractness
of boundaries seems to run afoul of the abstractness of set-theoretic
constructions. One can see and paint the surface of a table, and one
can even see and paint an infinite series of ever thinner layers of
table-parts. But one cannot paint the set of these parts
(unless of course this is simply another way of saying that the
parts are painted). Indeed, Theodore de Laguna, one of the very
first sponsors of Whitehead's method, remarked that the identification
of points and other boundaries with classes of solids is open to
serious misinterpretation: “Although we perceive solids, we perceive no
abstractive sets of solids […] In accepting the abstractive set,
we are as veritably going beyond experience as in accepting the solid
of zero-length” (de Laguna 1922: 460).
A third option, alternative to both type-(1) and type-(2) theories,
would be an “operationalist” account of the sort advocated
by Adams (1984, 1996), where the abstractive process by which boundary
elements are derived from concrete observables is explained in terms
of “operational tests”. Arguably, however, such an account
is best regarded as a parallel story, one that offers an explanation
of empirical knowledge concerning boundaries while remaining
ultimately neutral with regard to their ontological status.
[What follows is a list of significant passages from the
philosophical literature. These should provide the reader with a
useful set of examples.]
“A point is that which has no part. A line is breadthless
length.  The extremities of a line are points. […] A surface is
that which has length and breadth only. The extremities of a surface
are lines. […] A boundary is that which is an extremity of
anything.” [Euclid, Elements, Bk I, Dfs 1–3,
5–6, 13 (1908: p. 153)]
“We call a limit the last point [το
εσχατον] of each thing, i.e.,
the first point beyond which it is not possible to find any part [of
the thing], and the first point within which every part [of the thing]
is.” [Aristotle, Metaphysics V, 17, 1022a4–5 (1984:
1613)]
“[I]nasmuch as it is the same now that belongs to both the times
[past and future], and it is possible for a thing to be in motion
throughout one time and to be at rest throughout the other, and that
which is in motion or at rest for the whole of a time will be in
motion or at rest in any part of it in which it is of such a nature as
to be in motion or at rest: it will follow that the same thing can at
the same time be at rest and in motion; for both the times have the
same extremity, viz. the now.” [Aristotle, Physics V,
3, 234a35–234b4 (1984: 395)]
“If we are to suppose lines or what comes after these (I mean
the primary surfaces) to be principles, these at least are not
separable substances, but sections and divisions — the former of
surfaces, the latter of bodies (while points are sections and
divisions of lines); and further they are limits of these same things;
and all these are in other things and none is separable.”
[Aristotle, Metaphysics XI, 2, 1060b12–16 (1984: 1675f)]
“A line is something in a body. And what it is it owes to the
body. That is, it keeps its being through the body. This is explained
as follows. If it is separated from the body, it does not subsist. Who
by any sense faculty ever grasped a line separated from a body?”
[Boethius, Second Commentary on Porphyry's Isagoge I, xi,
14–21 (English translation  from Spade 1994: 23–24)]
“There are two species of incorporeals. Some of them, such as
God and the soul, can endure in their incorporeality outside
sensibles. But others, such as a line without subject body, are
entirely unable to be outside the sensibles they are in.” [Peter
Abelard, Glosses on Porphyry, 8.1–4 (English
translation from Spade 1994: 26)]
“[T]he spherical body does not touch the flat body primarily
with a part that is such that each of its parts touches the
flat body. Therefore, it does not touch it primarily with some part
that is prior to all the other touching parts. Rather, any given
touching part is still such that a half of it does not touch
immediately, and a half of that half does not touch immediately, and
so on ad infinitum.” [William of Ockham, Quodlibetal
Questions, I, q. 9, ad 2 (1991: 53)]
Points are “things completely indivisible”, lines are
“things divisible only in one dimension”, and surfaces are
“things divisible in two dimensions.” [Gregory of Rimini,
Commentary of the Sentences II, d. 2, q. 2, ad 1
(English translation  from Duhem 1985: 25–26)]
“What is it […] that divides the atmosphere from the
water?  It is necessary that there should be a common boundary which
is neither air nor water but is without substance, because a body
interposed between two bodies prevents their contact, and this does
not happen in water with air. […] Therefore a surface is the
common boundary of two bodies which are not continuous, and does not
form part of either one or the other, for if the surface formed part
of it, it would have divisible bulk, whereas, however, it is not
divisible and nothingness divides these bodies the one from the
other.” [Leonardo da Vinci, Notebooks (1938:
75–76)]
“Real contact occurs in some entity which truly and formally
exists in things; for the contact itself is real, and properly and
formally exists in reality; therefore it occurs in some real entity
which formally exists in the thing; and yet it occurs in an
indivisible thing; therefore such an indivisible entity exists
formally in the thing itself.” [Francisco
Suárez, Metaphysical Disputations 40, V, §19
(English translation  from Zimmerman 1996a: 160)]
“[I]t could plausibly be said that a line can be conserved by
God without a limiting point, and a surface without a line, and a body
without a surface.” [Francisco Suárez, Metaphysical
Disputations 40, V, §41 (English translation  by Robert Pasnau)]
“The other difficulty is that these indivisibles cannot be
admitted in the case of forms or qualities that are extended in matter
or quantity, because otherwise it would follow that two qualities that
are maximal contraries with respect to something real and positive
belonging to them would be conjoined at the same time in the same
indivisible subject, which involves an absurdity. The inference is
clear, for suppose that, in the continuous surface of a wall, one half
is maximally white and the other half is maximally black, and those
qualities each have their own indivisible boundaries
[termini] by which they are contained and limited. It will
then be necessary that, from that part in virtue of which they are
contiguous, they each have their own boundaries inhering at the same
time in the same line connecting [continuanti] the
quantitative surface. […] From this it further happens that in
the same indivisible boundary of matter there would be, at the same,
time two specific substantial forms with respect to something that is
indivisible in extension.” [Francisco
Suárez, Metaphysical Disputations 40, V, §58
(English translation  by Robert Pasnau)]
“[B]y superficies we do not here mean any portion of the
surrounding body, but merely the extremity which is between the
surrounded body and that surrounded, which is but a mode; or
[…] we mean the common surface which is a surface that is not a
part of one body rather than the other, and that is always considered
the same, so long as it retains the same magnitude and figure.”
[René Descartes, Principles of Philosophy, Part II,
Principle 15 (1911: 261)]
“The schoolmen were so sensible of the force of this
argument, that some of them maintained, that nature has mixed among
those particles of matter, which are divisible in infinitum,
a number of mathematical points, in order to give a termination to
bodies; and others eluded the force of this reasoning by a heap of
unintelligible cavils and distinctions. Both these adversaries equally
yield the victory. […] Thus it appears, that the definitions of
mathematics destroy the pretended demonstrations; and that if we have
the idea of indivisible points, lines and surfaces conformable to the
definition, their existence is certainly possible: but if we have no
such idea, 'tis impossible we can ever conceive the termination of any
figure; without which conception there can be no geometrical
demonstration.” [David Hume, A Treatise of Human
Nature, I-ii-4 (1941: 44)]
“In all bounds there is something positive (e.g., a surface is
the boundary of corporeal space, and is therefore itself a space, a
line is a space, which is the boundary of the surface, a point the
boundary of the line, but yet always a place in space), whereas limits
contain mere negations.” [Immanuel Kant, Prolegomena to Any
Future Metaphysics, §57 (1977: 94)]
“I define the limit of a body as the aggregate of all the
extreme [äusserst] ether-atoms which still
belong to it. […] A closer consideration further shows
that many bodies are at certain places altogether devoid of limiting
atoms; none of their atoms can be described as the extreme
ones among those which still belong to it and would accompany it if it
started to move. [Two bodies are in contact] when the extreme atoms of
the one, […] together with certain atoms of the other, form a
continuous extension.” [Bernard Bolzano Paradoxes of the
Infinite, § 66 (1851: 167–168)]
“One of the two lines into which the line would be split upon
division would […] have an end point, but the other no
beginning point. This inference has been quite correctly drawn by
Bolzano, who was led thereby to his monstruous doctrine that there
would exist bodies with and without surfaces, the one class containing
just so many as the other, because contact would be possible only
between a body with a surface and another without. He ought, rather,
to have had his attention drawn by such consequences to the fact that
the whole conception of the line and of other continua as sets of
points runs counter to the concept of contact and thereby abolishes
precisely what makes up the essence of the continuum.” [Franz
Brentano, ‘Nativistic, Empiricist, and Anoetistic Theories of
our Presentation of Space’ (1976: 146)]
“If a red surface and a blue surface are in contact with each
other, then a red and a blue line coincide.” [Franz Brentano,
‘On What Is Continuous’ (1976: 41)]
“One calls the equator an imaginary line, but it would be wrong
to call it a line that has merely been thought up. It was not created
by thought as the result of a psychological process, but is only
apprehended or grasped by thought. If its being apprehended were a
matter of its coming into being, then we could not say anything
positive about the equator for any time prior to this supposed coming
into being.” [Gottlob Frege, The Foundations of
Arithmetic § 26 (1884: 35)]
“A definition of a concept (of a possible predicate) must
[…] unambiguously determine, as regards any object, whether or
not it falls under the concept (whether or not the predicate is truly
assertible of it). […] We may express this metaphorically as
follows: the concept must have a sharp boundary. To a concept without
sharp boundary there would correspond an area that had not a sharp
boundary-line all around, but in places just vaguely faded away into
the background. […] The law of the excluded middle is really
just another form of the requirement that the concept should have a
sharp boundary.” [Gottlob Frege, The Fundamental Laws of
Arithmetic, Vol. II, §56 (1903: 159)]
“A drop of ink has fallen upon the paper and I have walled it
round. Now every point of the area within the walls is either black or
white; and no point is both black and white. That is plain. The black
is, however, all in one spot or blot; it is within bounds. There is a
line of demarcation between the black and the white. Now I ask about
the points of this line, are they black or white? Why one more than
the other? Are they (A) both black and white or (B) neither black nor
white? Why A more than B, or B more than A? […] The logical
conclusion […] is that the points of the boundary do not
exist.” [Charles S. Peirce, ‘The Logic of Quantity’
(1893: 7.127)]
“[We must distinguish between the category of Natural Frontiers
and] the category of Artificial Frontiers, by which are meant those
boundary lines which, not being dependent upon natural features of the
earth's surface for their selection, have been artificially or
arbitrarily created by man.” [George Nathaniel
Curzon, Frontiers (1907: 12)].
“The limits [Grenzen] of my language mean the limits of
my world.” [Ludwig Wittgenstein, Tractatus
Logico-Philosophicus, 5.6]
“An indefinite boundary is not really a boundary at all.”
[Ludwig Wittgenstein, Philosophical Investigations, I,
§99 (1953: 45e)]
“It is unnatural to draw a conceptual boundary line where there
is not some special justification for it, where similarities would
constantly draw us across the arbitrarily drawn line.” [Ludwig
Wittgenstein, Remarks on the Philosophy of Psychology, II,
§626 (1980: 108e)]
“I hold it to be quite certain that I do not directly
perceive my hand; and that when I am said (as I may be
correctly said) to ‘perceive’ it, that I
‘perceive’ it means that I perceive (in a different and
more fundamental sense) something which is (in a suitable sense)
representative of it, namely, a certain part of its surface.”
[G. E. Moore, ‘A Defence of Common Sense’ (1925: 217)]
“‘Surface,’ it is true, is a substantive in grammar;
but it is not the name of a particular existent, but of an
attribute.” [H. H. Price, Perception (1932: 106)]
“If we can give a definition of points which will make them
fulfil a certain pair of conditions, it will not matter though points
in themselves should turn out to be entities of a very different kind
from what we had supposed them to be. The two conditions are (i) that
points must have to each other the kind of relations which geometry
demands; and (ii) that points must have to finite areas and volumes
such a relation that a reasonable sense can be given to the statement
that such areas and volumes can be exhaustively analysed into sets of
points.” [C. D. Broad, Scientific Thought (1959:
39)]
“It is […] wrong to imply that everything has a surface.
Where and what exactly is the surface of a cat?” [John
L. Austin,
Sense and Sensibilia (1962: 100)]
“The surface is where most of the action is. The surface is where
light is reflected or absorbed, not the interior of the substance. The
surface is what touches the animal, not the interior. The surface is
where chemical reactions mostly take place. The surface is where
vaporization or diffusion of substances into the medium occurs. And the
surface is where vibrations of the substance are transmitted into the
medium.” [J. J. Gibson, The Ecological Approach to Visual
Perception (1979: 23)]
“The picture of reality as an amorphous lump, not yet
articulated into discrete objects, thus proves to be a correct one, so
long as we make the right use of it […] Such a picture corrects
the naïve conception […] [that] presupposes that the world
presents itself to us already dissected into discrete objects, which
we know how to recognize when we encounter them again, in advance of
our acquiring any grasp of language at all.” (Michael
Dummett, Frege. Philosophy of Language (1973: 577)]
“Now as we thus make constellations by picking out and putting
together certain stars rather than others, so we make stars by drawing
certain boundaries rather than others. Nothing dictates whether the
skies shall be marked off into constellations or other objects. We
have to make what we find, be it the Great Dipper, Sirius, food, fuel,
or a stereo system.” [Nelson Goodman, ‘Notes on the
Well-Made World’ (1983: 104)]
“If the continuous object is cut in half, then does the one
boundary [that demarcates two adjacent parts] become two boundaries,
one thing thus becoming two things? […] But how can one thing
— even if it is only a boundary — become two things? And
does this mean that when two things become continuous, then two things
that had been diverse become identical with each other, two
things thus becoming one thing?” [Roderick Chisholm,
‘Boundaries as Dependent Particulars’ (1984: 88)]
“The reason why it's vague where the outback begins is not that
there's this thing, the outback, with imprecise borders; rather there
are many things, with different borders, and nobody has been fool
enough to try to enforce a choice of one of them as the official
referent of the word ‘outback’.” [David K. Lewis, The
Plurality of Worlds (1986: 212)]
“There is no line which sharply divides the matter composing [Mount]
Everest from the matter outside it. Everest's boundaries are fuzzy.
Some molecules are inside Everest and some molecules outside. But some
have an indefinite status: there is no objective, determinate fact of
the matter about whether they are inside or outside.” [Michael Tye,
‘Vague Objects’ (1990: 535)]
“A vague concept is boundaryless in that no boundary marks the
things which fall under it from the things which do not, and no
boundary marks the things which definitely fall under it from the
things which do not definitely do so; and so on. Manifestations are
the unwillingness of knowing subjects to draw any such boundaries, the
cognitive impossibility of identifying such boundaries, and the
needlessness and even disutility of such boundaries.” [Mark
Sainsbury, ‘Concepts without Boundaries’ (1990: 257)]
“The world is capable of being cut up in so many ways, and
whenever we consider such a cut (some principle of individuation), we
are considering the world cut that way, i.e., so articulated. An
articulation will specify both actual conditions which must be met for
something to be (an) F, and identity conditions for tracing Fs through
space, time, and possible worlds. If there are portions of the world
which meet the actual conditions, then there are Fs.” [Alan
Sidelle, ‘Rigidity, Ontology, and Semantic Structure’
(1992: 172)]