This entry concerns the historical individual, traditionally called
Gautama, who is identified by modern scholars as the founder of
Buddhism. According to Buddhist teachings, there have been other
Buddhas in the past, and there will be yet more in the future. The
title ‘Buddha’, which literally means
‘awakened’, is conferred on an individual who discovers the
path to nirvana, the cessation of suffering, and propagates that
discovery so that others may also achieve nirvana. If the teaching that
there have been other Buddhas is true, then Gautama is not the founder
of Buddhism. This entry will follow modern scholarship in taking an
agnostic stance on the question of whether there have been other
Buddhas, and likewise for questions concerning the superhuman status
and powers that some Buddhists attribute to Buddhas. The concern of
this entry is just those aspects of the thought of the historical
individual Gautama that bear on the development of the Buddhist
philosophical tradition.
The Buddha will here be treated as a philosopher. To so treat him is
controversial, but before coming to why that should be so, let us first
rehearse those basic aspects of the Buddha’s life and teachings
that are relatively non-controversial. Tradition has it that Gautama
lived to age 80. Up until recently his dates were thought to be
approximately 560–480 BCE, but many scholars now hold that he must have
died around 405 BCE. He was born into a family of some wealth and
power, members of the Śākya clan, in the area of the present
border between India and Nepal. The story is that in early adulthood he
abandoned his comfortable life as a householder (as well as his wife
and young son) in order to seek a solution to the problem of
existential suffering. He first took up with a number of different
wandering ascetics (śramanas) who claimed to know the
path to liberation from suffering. Finding their teachings
unsatisfactory, he struck out on his own, and through a combination of
insight and meditational practice attained the state of enlightenment
(bodhi) which is said to represent the cessation of all
further suffering. He then devoted the remaining 45 years of his life
to teaching others the insights and techniques that had led him to this
achievement.
Gautama could himself be classified as one of the
śramanas. That there existed such a phenomenon as the
śramanas tells us that there was some degree of
dissatisfaction with the customary religious practices then prevailing
in the Gangetic basin of North India. These practices consisted largely
in the rituals and sacrifices prescribed in the Vedas. Among the
śramanas there were many, including the Buddha, who
rejected the authority of the Vedas as definitive pronouncements on the
nature of the world and our place in it (and for this reason are called
‘heterodox’). But within the Vedic canon itself there is a
stratum of (comparatively late) texts, the Upaniṣads,
that likewise displays disaffection with Brahmin ritualism. Among the
new ideas that figure in these (‘orthodox’) texts, as well
as in the teachings of those heterodox śramanas whose
doctrines are known to us, are the following: that sentient beings
(including humans, non-human animals, gods, and the inhabitants of
various hells) undergo rebirth; that rebirth is governed by the causal
laws of karma (good actions cause pleasant fruit for the agent, evil
actions cause unpleasant fruit, etc.); that continual rebirth is
inherently unsatisfactory; that there is an ideal state for sentient
beings involving liberation from the cycle of rebirth; and that
attaining this state requires overcoming ignorance concerning
one’s true identity. Various views are offered concerning this
ignorance and how to overcome it. The Bhagavad Gītā
(classified by some orthodox schools as an Upaniṣad)
lists four such methods, and discusses at least two separate views
concerning our identity: that there is a plurality of distinct selves,
each being the true agent of a person’s actions and the bearer of
karmic merit and demerit but existing separately from the body and its
associated states; and that there is just one self, of the nature of
pure consciousness (a ‘witness’) and identical with the
essence of the cosmos, Brahman or pure undifferentiated Being.
The Buddha agreed with those of his contemporaries embarked on the
same soteriological project that it is ignorance about our identity
that is responsible for suffering. What sets his teachings apart (at
this level of analysis) lies in what he says that ignorance consists
in: the conceit that there is an ‘I’ and a
‘mine’. This is the famous Buddhist teaching of non-self
(anātman). And it is with this teaching that the
controversy begins concerning whether Gautama may legitimately be
represented as a philosopher. First there are those who (correctly)
point out that the Buddha never categorically denies the existence of a
self that transcends what is empirically given, namely the five
skandhas or psychophysical elements. While the Buddha does
deny that any of the psychophysical elements is a self, these
interpreters claim that he at least leaves open the possibility that
there is a self that is transcendent in the sense of being
non-empirical. To this it may be objected that all of classical Indian
philosophy—Buddhist and orthodox alike—understood the
Buddha to have denied the self tout court. To this it is
sometimes replied that the later philosophical tradition simply got the
Buddha wrong, at least in part because the Buddha sought to indicate
something that cannot be grasped through the exercise of philosophical
rationality. On this interpretation, the Buddha should be seen not as a
proponent of the philosophical methods of analysis and argumentation,
but rather as one who sees those methods as obstacles to final
release.
Another reason one sometimes encounters for denying that the Buddha
is a philosopher is that he rejects the characteristically
philosophical activity of theorizing about matters that lack evident
practical application. On this interpretation as well, those later
Buddhist thinkers who did go in for the construction of theories about
the ultimate nature of everything simply failed to heed or properly
appreciate the Buddha’s advice that we avoid theorizing for its
own sake and confine our attention to those matters that are directly
relevant to liberation from suffering. On this view the teaching of
non-self is not a bit of metaphysics, just some practical advice to the
effect that we should avoid identifying with things that are transitory
and so bound to yield dissatisfaction. What both interpretations share
is the assumption that it is possible to arrive at what the Buddha
himself thought without relying on the understanding of his teachings
developed in the subsequent Buddhist philosophical tradition.
This assumption may be questioned. Our knowledge of the
Buddha’s teachings comes by way of texts that were not written
down until several centuries after his death, are in languages
(Pāli, and Chinese translations of Sanskrit) other than the one he
is likely to have spoken, and disagree in important respects. The first
difficulty may not be as serious as it seems, given that the
Buddha’s discourses were probably rehearsed shortly after his
death and preserved through oral transmission until the time they were
committed to writing. And the second need not be insuperable either.
But the third is troubling, in that it suggests textual transmission
involved processes of insertion and deletion in aid of one side or
another in sectarian disputes. Our ancient sources attest to this: one
will encounter a dispute among Buddhist thinkers where one side cites
some utterance of the Buddha in support of their position, only to have
the other side respond that the text from which the quotation is taken
is not universally recognized as authoritatively the word of the
Buddha. This suggests that our record of the Buddha’s teaching
may be colored by the philosophical elaboration of those teachings
propounded by later thinkers in the Buddhist tradition.
Some scholars are more sanguine than others about the possibility of
overcoming this difficulty, and thereby getting at what the Buddha
himself had thought, as opposed to what later Buddhist philosophers
thought he had thought. No position will be taken on this dispute
here. We will be treating the Buddha’s thought as it was understood
within the later philosophical tradition that he had inspired. The
resulting interpretation may or may not be faithful to his
intentions. It is at least logically possible that he believed there
to be a transcendent self that can only be known by mystical
intuition, or that the exercise of philosophical rationality leads
only to sterile theorizing and away from real emancipation. What we
can say with some assurance is that this is not how the Buddhist
philosophical tradition understood him. It is their understanding that
will be the subject of this essay.
The Buddha’s basic teachings are usually summarized using the
device of the Four Noble Truths:
The first of these claims might seem obvious, even when
‘suffering’ is understood to mean not mere pain but
existential suffering, the sort of frustration, alienation and despair
that arise out of our experience of transitoriness. But there are said
to be different levels of appreciation of this truth, some quite subtle
and difficult to attain; the highest of these is said to involve the
realization that everything is of the nature of suffering. Perhaps it
is sufficient for present purposes to point out that while this is not
the implausible claim that all of life’s states and events are
necessarily experienced as unsatisfactory, still the realization that
all (oneself included) is impermanent can undermine a precondition for
real enjoyment of the events in a life: that such events are meaningful
by virtue of their having a place in an open-ended narrative.
It is with the development and elaboration of (2) that substantive
philosophical controversy begins. (2) is the simple claim that there
are causes and conditions for the arising of suffering. (3) then makes
the obvious point that if the origination of suffering depends on
causes, future suffering can be prevented by bringing about the
cessation of those causes. (4) specifies a set of techniques that are
said to be effective in such cessation. Much then hangs on the correct
identification of the causes of suffering. The answer is traditionally
spelled out in a list consisting of twelve links in a causal chain that
begins with ignorance and ends with suffering (represented by the
states of old age, disease and death). Modern scholarship has
established that this list is a later compilation. For the texts that
claim to convey the Buddha’s own teachings give two slightly
different formulations of this list, and shorter formulations
containing only some of the twelve items are also found in the texts.
But it seems safe to say that the Buddha taught an analysis of the
origins of suffering roughly along the following lines: given the
existence of a fully functioning assemblage of psychophysical elements
(the parts that make up a sentient being), ignorance concerning the
three characteristics of sentient existence—suffering,
impermanence and non-self—will lead, in the course of normal
interactions with the environment, to appropriation (the identification
of certain elements as ‘I’ and ‘mine’). This
leads in turn to the formation of attachments, in the form of desire
and aversion, and the strengthening of ignorance concerning the true
nature of sentient existence. These ensure future rebirth, and thus
future instances of old age, disease and death, in a potentially
unending cycle.
The key to escape from this cycle is said to lie in realization of
the truth about sentient existence—that it is characterized by
suffering, impermanence and non-self. But this realization is not
easily achieved, since acts of appropriation have already made desire,
aversion and ignorance deeply entrenched habits of mind. Thus the
measures specified in (4) include various forms of training designed to
replace such habits with others that are more conducive to seeing
things as they are. Training in meditation is also prescribed, as a way
of enhancing one’s observational abilities, especially with
respect to one’s own psychological states. Insight is cultivated
through the use of these newly developed observational powers, as
informed by knowledge acquired through the exercise of philosophical
rationality. There is a debate in the later tradition as to whether
final release can be attained through theoretical insight alone,
through meditation alone, or only by using both techniques.
Ch’an, for instance, is based on the premise that enlightenment
can be attained through meditation alone, whereas Theravāda
advocates using both but also holds that analysis alone may be
sufficient for some. (This disagreement begins with a dispute over how
to interpret D I.77–84.) The third option seems the most plausible, but
the first is certainly of some interest given its suggestion that one
can attain the ideal state for humans just by doing philosophy.
The Buddha seems to have held (2) to constitute the core of his
discovery. He calls his teachings a ‘middle path’ between
two extreme views, and it is this claim concerning the causal origins
of suffering that he identifies as the key to avoiding those extremes.
The extremes are eternalism, the view that persons are eternal, and
annihilationism, the view that persons go utterly out of existence
(usually understood to mean at death, though a term still shorter than
one lifetime is not ruled out). It will be apparent that eternalism
requires the existence of the sort of self that the Buddha denies. What
is not immediately evident is why the denial of such a self is not
tantamount to the claim that the person is annihilated at death (or
even sooner, depending on just how impermanent one takes the
psychophysical elements to be). The solution to this puzzle lies in the
fact that eternalism and annihilationism both share the presupposition
that there is an ‘I’ whose existence might either extend
beyond death or terminate at death. The idea of the ‘middle
path’ is that all of life’s continuities can be explained
in terms of facts about a causal series of psychophysical elements.
There being nothing more than a succession of these impermanent,
impersonal events and states, the question of the ultimate fate of this
‘I’, the supposed owner of these elements, simply does not
arise.
This reductionist view of sentient beings was later articulated in
terms of the distinction between two kinds of truth, conventional and
ultimate. Each kind of truth has its own domain of objects, the things
that are only conventionally real and the things that are ultimately
real respectively. Conventionally real entities are those things that
are accepted as real by common sense, but that turn out on further
analysis to be wholes compounded out of simpler entities and thus not
strictly speaking real at all. The stock example of a conventionally
real entity is the chariot, which we take to be real only because it is
more convenient, given our interests and cognitive limitations, to have
a single name for the parts when assembled in the right way. Since our
belief that there are chariots is thus due to our having a certain
useful concept, the chariot is said to be a mere conceptual fiction.
(This does not, however, mean that all conceptualization is
falsification; only concepts that allow of reductive analysis lead to
this artificial inflation of our ontology, and thus to a kind of
error.) Ultimately real entities are those ultimate parts into which
conceptual fictions are analyzable. An ultimately true statement is one
that correctly describes how certain ultimately real entities are
arranged. A conventionally true statement is one that, given how the
ultimately real entities are arranged, would correctly describe certain
conceptual fictions if they also existed. The ultimate truth concerning
the relevant ultimately real entities helps explain why it should turn
out to be useful to accept conventionally true statements (such as
‘King Milinda rode in a chariot’) when the objects
described in those statements are mere fictions.
Using this distinction between the two truths, the key insight of
the ‘middle path’ may be expressed as follows. The ultimate
truth about sentient beings is just that there is a causal series of
impermanent, impersonal psychophysical elements. Since these are all
impermanent, and lack other properties that would be required of an
essence of the person, none of them is a self. But given the right
arrangement of such entities in a causal series, it is useful to think
of them as making up one thing, a person. It is thus conventionally
true that there are persons, things that endure for a lifetime and
possibly (if there is rebirth) longer. This is conventionally true
because generally speaking there is more overall happiness and less
overall pain and suffering when one part of such a series identifies
with other parts of the same series. For instance, when the present set
of psychophysical elements identifies with future elements, it is less
likely to engage in behavior (such as smoking) that results in present
pleasure but far greater future pain. The utility of this convention
is, however, limited. Past a certain point—namely the point at
which we take it too seriously, as more than just a useful
fiction—it results in existential suffering. The cessation of
suffering is attained by extirpating all sense of an ‘I’
that serves as agent and owner.
The Buddha’s ‘middle path’ strategy can be seen as
one of first arguing that there is nothing that the word
‘I’ genuinely denotes, and then explaining that our
erroneous sense of an ‘I’ stems from our employment of the
useful fiction represented by the concept of the person. While the
second part of this strategy only receives its full articulation in the
later development of the theory of two truths, the first part can be
found in the Buddha’s own teachings, in the form of several
philosophical arguments for non-self. Best known among these is the
argument from impermanence (S III.66–8), which has this basic
structure:
It is the fact that this argument does not contain a premise
explicitly asserting that the five skandhas (classes of
psychophysical element) are exhaustive of the constituents of persons,
plus the fact that these are all said to be empirically observable,
that leads some to claim that the Buddha did not intend to deny the
existence of a self tout court. There is, however, evidence
that the Buddha was generally hostile toward attempts to establish the
existence of unobservable entities. In the Pohapāda Sutta (D
I.178–203), for instance, the Buddha compares someone who posits an
unseen seer in order to explain our introspective awareness of
cognitions, to a man who has conceived a longing for the most beautiful
woman in the world based solely on the thought that such a woman must
surely exist. And in the Tevijja Sutta (D I.235–52), the Buddha rejects
the claim of certain Brahmins to know the path to oneness with Brahman,
on the grounds that no one has actually observed this Brahman. This
makes more plausible the assumption that the argument has as an
implicit premise the claim that there is no more to the person than the
five skandhas.
Premise (1) appears to be based on the assumption that persons
undergo rebirth, together with the thought that one function of a self
would be to account for diachronic personal identity. By
‘permanent’ is here meant continued existence over at least
several lives. This is shown by the fact that the Buddha rules out the
body as a self on the grounds that the body exists for just one
lifetime. (This also demonstrates that the Buddha did not mean by
‘impermanent’ what some later Buddhist philosophers meant,
viz., existing for just a moment; the Buddhist doctrine of
momentariness represents a later development.) The mental entities that
make up the remaining four types of psychophysical element might seem
like more promising candidates, but these are ruled out on the grounds
that these all originate in dependence on contact between sense faculty
and object, and last no longer than a particular sense-object-contact
event. That he listed five kinds of psychophysical element, and not
just one, shows that the Buddha embraced a kind of dualism. But this
strategy for demonstrating the impermanence of the psychological
elements shows that his dualism was not the sort of mind-body dualism
familiar from substance ontologies like those of Descartes and of the
Nyāya school of orthodox Indian philosophy. Instead of seeing the
mind as the persisting bearer of such transient events as occurrences
of cognition, feeling and volition, he treats ‘mind’ as a
kind of aggregate term for bundles of transient mental events. These
events being impermanent, they too fail to account for diachronic
personal identity in the way in which a self might be expected to.
Another argument for non-self, which might be called the argument
from control (S III.66–8), has this structure:
Premise (1) is puzzling. It appears to presuppose that the self
should have complete control over itself, so that it would effortlessly
adjust its state to its desires. That the self should be thought of as
the locus of control is certainly plausible. Those Indian
self-theorists who claim that the self is a mere passive witness
recognize that the burden of proof is on them to show that the self is
not an agent. But it seems implausibly demanding to require of
the self that it have complete control over itself. We do not require
that vision see itself if it is to see other things. The case of vision
suggests an alternative interpretation, however. We might hold that
vision does not see itself for the reason that this would violate an
irreflexivity principle, to the effect that an entity cannot operate on
itself. Indian philosophers who accept this principle cite supportive
instances such as the knife that cannot cut itself and the finger-tip
that cannot touch itself. If this principle is accepted, then if the
self were the locus of control it would follow that it could never
exercise this function on itself. A self that was the controller could
never find itself in the position of seeking to change its state to one
that it deemed more desirable. On this interpretation, the first
premise seems to be true. And there is ample evidence that (2) is
true: it is difficult to imagine a bodily or psychological state
over which one might not wish to exercise control. Consequently, given
the assumption that the person is wholly composed of the psychophysical
elements, it appears to follow that a self of this description does not
exist.
These two arguments appear, then, to give good reason to deny a self
that might ground diachronic personal identity and serve as locus of
control, given the assumption that there is no more to the person than
the empirically given psychophysical elements. But it now becomes
something of a puzzle how one is to explain diachronic personal
identity and agency. To start with the latter, does the argument from
control not suggest that control must be exercised by something other
than the psychophysical elements? This was precisely the conclusion of
the Sāṃkhya school of orthodox Indian philosophy. One of
their arguments for the existence of a self was that it is possible to
exercise control over all the empirically given constituents of the
person; while they agree with the Buddha that a self is never observed,
they take the phenomena of agency to be grounds for positing a self
that transcends all possible experience.
This line of objection to the Buddha’s teaching of non-self is
more commonly formulated in response to the argument from impermanence,
however. Perhaps its most dramatic form is aimed at the Buddha’s
acceptance of the doctrines of karma and rebirth. It is clear that the
body ceases to exist at death. And given the Buddha’s argument
that mental states all originate in dependence on sense-object contact
events, it seems no psychological constituent of the person can
transmigrate either. Yet the Buddha claims that persons who have not
yet achieved enlightenment will be reborn as sentient beings of some
sort after they die. If there is no constituent whatever that moves
from one life to the next, how could the being in the next life be the
same person as the being in this life? This question becomes all the
more pointed when it is added that rebirth is governed by karma,
something that functions as a kind of cosmic justice: those born into
fortunate circumstances do so as a result of good deeds in prior lives,
while unpleasant births result from evil past deeds. Such a system of
reward and punishment could be just only if the recipient of pleasant
or unpleasant karmic fruit is the same person as the agent of the good
or evil action. And the opponent finds it incomprehensible how this
could be so in the absence of a persisting self.
It is not just classical Indian self-theorists who have found this
objection persuasive. Some Buddhists have as well. Among these
Buddhists, however, this has led to the rejection not of non-self but
of rebirth. (Historically this response was not unknown among East
Asian Buddhists, and it is not rare among Western Buddhists today.) The
evidence that the Buddha himself accepted rebirth and karma seems quite
strong, however. The later tradition would distinguish between two
types of discourse in the body of the Buddha’s teachings: those
intended for an audience of householders seeking instruction from a
sage, and those intended for an audience of monastic renunciates
already versed in his teachings. And it would be one thing if his use
of the concepts of karma and rebirth were limited to the former. For
then such appeals could be explained away as another instance of the
Buddha’s pedagogical skill (commonly referred to as
upāya). The idea would be that householders who fail to
comply with the most basic demands of morality are not likely (for
reasons to be discussed shortly) to make significant progress toward
the cessation of suffering, and the teaching of karma and rebirth, even
if not strictly speaking true, does give those who accept it a
(prudential) reason to be moral. But this sort of ‘noble
lie’ justification for the Buddha teaching a doctrine he does not
accept fails in the face of the evidence that he also taught it to
quite advanced monastics (e.g., A III.33). And what he taught is not
the version of karma popular in certain circles today, according to
which, for instance, an act done out of hatred makes the agent somewhat
more disposed to perform similar actions out of similar motives in the
future, which in turn makes negative experiences more likely for the
agent. What the Buddha teaches is instead the far stricter view that
each action has its own specific consequence for the agent, the hedonic
nature of which is determined in accordance with causal laws and in
such a way as to require rebirth as long as action continues. So if
there is a conflict between the doctrine of non-self and the teaching
of karma and rebirth, it is not to be resolved by weakening the
Buddha’s commitment to the latter.
The Sanskrit term karma literally means
‘action’. What is nowadays referred to somewhat loosely as
the theory of karma is, speaking more strictly, the view that there is
a causal relationship between action (karma) and
‘fruit’ (phala), the latter being an experience of
pleasure, pain or indifference for the agent of the action. This is the
view that the Buddha appears to have accepted in its most
straightforward form. Actions are said to be of three types: bodily,
verbal and mental. The Buddha insists, however, that by action is meant
not the movement or change involved, but rather the volition or
intention that brought about the change. As Gombrich (2009) points out,
the Buddha’s insistence on this point reflects the transition
from an earlier ritualistic view of action to a view that brings action
within the purview of ethics. For it is when actions are seen as
subject to moral assessment that intention becomes relevant. One does
not, for instance, perform the morally blameworthy action of speaking
insultingly to an elder just by making sounds that approximate to the
pronunciation of profanities in the presence of an elder; parrots and
prelinguistic children can do as much. What matters for moral
assessment is the mental state (if any) that produced the bodily,
verbal or mental change. And it is the occurrence of these mental
states that is said to cause the subsequent occurrence of hedonically
good, bad and neutral experiences. More specifically, it is the
occurrence of the three ‘defiled’ mental states that brings
about karmic fruit. The three defilements (kleśas) are
desire, aversion and ignorance. And we are told quite specifically (A
III.33) that actions performed by an agent in whom these three
defilements have been destroyed do not have karmic consequences; such
an agent is experiencing their last birth.
Some caution is required in understanding this claim about the
defilements. The Buddha seems to be saying that it is possible to act
not only without ignorance, but also in the absence of desire or
aversion, yet it is difficult to see how there could be intentional
action without some positive or negative motivation. To see one’s
way around this difficulty, one must realize that by
‘desire’ and ‘aversion’ are meant those
positive and negative motives respectively that are colored by
ignorance, viz. ignorance concerning suffering, impermanence and
non-self. Presumably the enlightened person, while knowing the truth
about these matters, can still engage in motivated action. Their
actions are not based on the presupposition that there is an
‘I’ for which those actions can have significance.
Ignorance concerning these matters perpetuates rebirth, and thus
further occasions for existential suffering, by facilitating a
motivational structure that reinforces one’s ignorance. We can
now see how compliance with common-sense morality could be seen as an
initial step on the path to the cessation of suffering. While the
presence of ignorance makes all action—even that deemed morally
good—karmically potent, those actions commonly considered morally
evil are especially powerful reinforcers of ignorance, in that they
stem from the assumption that the agent’s welfare is of paramount
importance. While recognition of the moral value of others may still
involve the conceit that there is an ‘I’, it can
nonetheless constitute progress toward dissolution of the sense of
self.
This excursus into what the Buddha meant by karma may help us see
how his middle path strategy could be used to reply to the objection to
non-self from rebirth. That objection was that the reward and
punishment generated by karma across lives could never be deserved in
the absence of a transmigrating self. The middle path strategy
generally involves locating and rejecting an assumption shared by a
pair of extreme views. In this case the views will be (1) that the
person in the later life deserves the fruit generated by the action in
the earlier life, and (2) that this person does not deserve the fruit.
One assumption shared by (1) and (2) is that persons deserve reward and
punishment depending on the moral character of their actions, and one
might deny this assumption. But that would be tantamount to moral
nihilism, and a middle path is said to avoid nihilisms (such as
annihilationism). A more promising alternative might be to deny that
there are ultimately such things as persons that could bear moral
properties like desert. This is what the Buddha seems to mean when he
asserts that the earlier and the later person are neither the same nor
different (S II.62; S II.76; S II.113). Since any two existing things
must be either identical or distinct, to say of the two persons that
they are neither is to say that strictly speaking they do not
exist.
This alternative is more promising because it avoids moral nihilism.
For it allows one to assert that persons and their moral properties are
conventionally real. To say this is to say that given our interests and
cognitive limitations, we do better at achieving our
aim—minimizing overall pain and suffering—by acting as
though there are persons with morally significant properties.
Ultimately there are just impersonal entities and events in causal
sequence: ignorance, the sorts of desires that ignorance facilitates,
an intention formed on the basis of such a desire, a bodily, verbal or
mental action, a feeling of pleasure, pain or indifference, and an
occasion of suffering. The claim is that this situation is usefully
thought of as, for instance, a person who performs an evil deed due to
their ignorance of the true nature of things, receives the unpleasant
fruit they deserve in the next life, and suffers through their
continuing on the wheel of saṃsāra. It is useful to think of
the situation in this way because it helps us locate the appropriate
places to intervene to prevent future pain (the evil deed) and future
suffering (ignorance).
It is no doubt quite difficult to believe that karma and rebirth
exist in the form that the Buddha claims. It is said that their
existence can be confirmed by those who have developed the power of
retrocognition through advanced yogic technique. But this is of little
help to those not already convinced that meditation is a reliable means
of knowledge. What can be said with some assurance is that karma and
rebirth are not inconsistent with non-self. Rebirth without
transmigration is logically possible.
When the Buddha says that a person in one life and the person in
another life are neither the same nor different, one’s first
response might be to take ‘different’ to mean something
other than ‘not the same’. But while this is possible in
English given the ambiguity of ‘the same’, it is not
possible in the Pāli source, where the Buddha is represented as
unambiguously denying both numerical identity and numerical
distinctness. This has led some to wonder whether the Buddha does not
employ a deviant logic. Such suspicions are strengthened by those cases
where the options are not two but four, cases of the so-called
tetralemma (catuṣkoṭi). For instance, when the
Buddha is questioned about the post-mortem status of the enlightened
person or arhat (e.g., at M I.483–8) the possibilities
are listed as: (1) the arhat continues to exist after death,
(2) does not exist after death, (3) both exists and does not exist
after death, and (4) neither exists nor does not exist after death.
When the Buddha rejects both (1) and (2) we get a repetition of
‘neither the same nor different’. But when he goes on to
entertain, and then reject, (3) and (4) the logical difficulties are
compounded. Since each of (3) and (4) appears to be formally
contradictory, to entertain either is to entertain the possibility that
a contradiction might be true. And their denial seems tantamount to
affirmation of excluded middle, which is prima facie
incompatible with the denial of both (1) and (2). One might wonder
whether we are here in the presence of the mystical.
There were some Buddhist philosophers who took ‘neither the
same nor different’ in this way. These were the Personalists
(Pudgalavādins), who were so called because they affirmed
the ultimate existence of the person as something named and
conceptualized in dependence on the psychophysical elements. They
claimed that the person is neither identical with nor distinct from the
psychophysical elements. They were prepared to accept, as a
consequence, that nothing whatever can be said about the relation
between person and elements. But their view was rejected by most
Buddhist philosophers, in part on the grounds that it quickly leads to
an ineffability paradox: one can say neither that the person’s
relation to the elements is inexpressible, nor that it is not
inexpressible. The consensus view was instead that the fact that the
person can be said to be neither identical with nor distinct from the
elements is grounds for taking the person to be a mere conceptual
fiction. Concerning the persons in the two lives, they understood the
negations involved in ‘neither the same nor different’ to
be of the commitmentless variety, i.e., to function like illocutionary
negation. If we agree that the statement ‘7 is green’ is
semantically ill-formed, on the grounds that abstract objects such as
numbers do not have colors, then we might go on to say, ‘Do not
say that 7 is green, and do not say that it is not green either’.
There is no contradiction here, since the illocutionary negation
operator ‘do not say’ generates no commitment to an
alternative characterization.
There is also evidence that claims of type (3) involve
parameterization. For instance, the claim about the arhat
would be that there is some respect in which they can be said to exist
after death, and some other respect in which they can be said to no
longer exist after death. Entertaining such a proposition does not
require that one believe there might be true contradictions. And while
claims of type (4) would seem to be logically equivalent to those of
type (3) (regardless of whether or not they involve parameterization),
the tradition treated this type as asserting that the subject is beyond
all conceptualization. To reject the type (4) claim about the
arhat is to close off one natural response to the rejections
of the first three claims: that the status of the arhat after
death transcends rational understanding. That the Buddha rejected all
four possibilities concerning this and related questions is not
evidence that he employed a deviant logic.
The Buddha’s response to questions like those concerning the
arhat is sometimes cited in defense of a different claim about
his attitude toward rationality. This is the claim that the Buddha was
essentially a pragmatist, someone who rejects philosophical theorizing
for its own sake and employs philosophical rationality only to the
extent that doing so can help solve the practical problem of
eliminating suffering. The Buddha does seem to be embracing something
like this attitude when he defends his refusal to answer questions like
that about the arhat, or whether the series of lives has a
beginning, or whether the living principle (jīva) is
identical with the body. He calls all the possible views with respect
to such questions distractions insofar as answering them would not lead
to the cessation of the defilements and thus to the end of suffering.
And in a famous simile (M I.429) he compares someone who insists that
the Buddha answer these questions to someone who has been wounded by an
arrow but will not have the wound treated until they are told who shot
the arrow, what sort of wood the arrow is made of, and the like.
Passages such as these surely attest to the great importance the
Buddha placed on sharing his insights to help others overcome
suffering. But this is consistent with the belief that philosophical
rationality may be used to answer questions that lack evident
connection with pressing practical concerns. And on at least one
occasion the Buddha does just this. Pressed to give his answers to the
questions about the arhat and the like, the Buddha first
rejects all the possibilities of the tetralemma, and defends his
refusal on the grounds that such theories are not conducive to
liberation from saṃsāra. But when his questioner
shows signs of thereby losing confidence in the value of the
Buddha’s teachings about the path to the cessation of suffering,
the Buddha responds with the example of a fire that goes out after
exhausting its fuel. If one were asked where this fire has gone, the
Buddha points out, one could consistently deny that it has gone to the
north, to the south, or in any other direction. This is so for the
simple reason that the questions ‘Has it gone to the
north?’, ‘Has it gone to the south?’, etc., all share
the false presupposition that the fire continues to exist. Likewise the
questions about the arhat and the like all share the false
presupposition that there is such a thing as a person who might either
continue to exist after death, cease to exist at death, etc. (Anālayo 2018, 41) The
difficulty with these questions is not that they try to extend
philosophical rationality beyond its legitimate domain, as the
handmaiden of soteriologically useful practice. It is rather that they
rest on a false presupposition—something that is disclosed
through the employment of philosophical rationality.
A different sort of challenge to the claim that the Buddha valued
philosophical rationality for its own sake comes from the role played
by authority in Buddhist soteriology. For instance, in the Buddhist
tradition one sometimes encounters the claim that only enlightened
persons such as the Buddha can know all the details of karmic
causation. And to the extent that the moral rules are thought to be
determined by the details of karmic causation, this might be taken to
mean that our knowledge of the moral rules is dependent on the
authority of the Buddha. Again, the subsequent development of Buddhist
philosophy seems to have been constrained by the need to make theory
compatible with certain key claims of the Buddha. For instance, one
school developed an elaborate form of four-dimensionalism, not because
of any deep dissatisfaction with presentism, but because they believed
the non-existence of the past and the future to be incompatible with
the Buddha’s alleged ability to cognize past and future events.
And some modern scholars go so far as to wonder whether non-self
functions as anything more than a sort of linguistic taboo against the
use of words like ‘I’ and ‘self’ in the
Buddhist tradition (Collins 1982: 183). The suggestion is that just as
in some other religious traditions the views of the founder or the
statements of scripture trump all other considerations, including any
views arrived at through the free exercise of rational inquiry, so in
Buddhism as well there can be at best only a highly constrained arena
for the deployment of philosophical rationality.
Now it could be that while this is true of the tradition that
developed out of the Buddha’s teachings, the Buddha himself held
the unfettered use of rationality in quite high esteem. This would seem
to conflict with what he is represented as saying in response to the
report that he arrived at his conclusions through reasoning and
analysis alone: that such a report is libelous, since he possesses a
number of superhuman cognitive powers (M I.68). But at least some
scholars take this passage to be not the Buddha’s own words but
an expression of later devotionalist concerns (Gombrich 2009: 164).
Indeed one does find a spirited discussion within the tradition
concerning the question whether the Buddha is omniscient, a discussion
that may well reflect competition between Buddhism and those
Brahmanical schools that posit an omniscient creator. And at
least for the most part the Buddhist tradition is careful not to
attribute to the Buddha the sort of omniscience usually ascribed to an
all-perfect being: the actual cognition, at any one time, of all
truths. Instead a Buddha is said to be omniscient only in the much
weaker sense of always having the ability to cognize any individual
fact relevant to the soteriological project, viz. the details of their
own past lives, the workings of the karmic causal laws, and whether a
given individual’s defilements have been extirpated. Moreover,
these abilities are said to be ones that a Buddha acquires through a
specific course of training, and thus ones that others may reasonably
aspire to as well. The attitude of the later tradition seems to be that
while one could discover the relevant facts on one’s own, it
would be more reasonable to take advantage of the fact that the Buddha
has already done all the epistemic labor involved. When we arrive in a
new town we could always find our final destination through trial and
error, but it would make more sense to ask someone who already knows
their way about.
The Buddhist philosophical tradition grew out of earlier efforts to
systematize the Buddha’s teachings. Within a century or two of
the death of the Buddha, exegetical differences led to debates
concerning the Buddha’s true intention on some matter, such as
that between the Personalists and others over the status of the person.
While the parties to these debates use many of the standard tools and
techniques of philosophy, they were still circumscribed by the
assumption that the Buddha’s views on the matter at hand are
authoritative. In time, however, the discussion widened to include
interlocutors representing various Brahmanical systems. Since the
latter did not take the Buddha’s word as authoritative, Buddhist
thinkers were required to defend their positions in other ways. The
resulting debate (which continued for about nine centuries) touched on
most of the topics now considered standard in metaphysics, epistemology
and philosophy of language, and was characterized by considerable
sophistication in philosophical methodology. What the Buddha would have
thought of these developments we cannot say with any certainty. What we
can say is that many Buddhists have believed that the unfettered
exercise of philosophical rationality is quite consistent with his
teachings.