What is cancer? Is cancer one disease, or many? If many, how many
cancers are there? One might think that such questions are merely
empirical. However, it turns out that defining and classifying cancer
is contested, for at least two reasons. First, there is little
agreement on how to classify disease, more generally. Second, cancer
itself poses a variety of challenges—both in terms of its
intrinsic heterogeneity, and in light of its variable natural history.
In section 1.1, we will consider challenges facing cancer
classification in light of cancer’s intrinsic heterogeneity, and
in section 1.2, we will consider challenges facing cancer
classification in light of its variable natural history.
Prima facie, what distinguishes diseases are typical symptoms, disease
course, and a common cause. The last criterion—common
cause—is inherited from a model of disease classifications that
grew in part out of the successes of the germ theory of disease
(Carter 2003). Following Koch’s postulates (1884), what enables
one to distinguish diseases is the ability to isolate a causal agent
as present in each and every case of characteristic symptoms.
Unfortunately, such a model of disease is not terribly helpful for
cancer. Cancer can be present without clinically detectable symptoms,
has variable disease course, and is a “multifactorial”
disease—there are many causes of cancer. It is rather difficult
to pick out a “causal bottleneck” uniquely necessary for
cancer, let alone each cancer type and subtype. While cancers are
typically classified by their cell-of-origin—or the tissue, or
organ, and cell-type where they originated (e.g., squamous cell
carcinoma of the skin or ovaries), it turns out that cancers can
contain mixes of different cells of origin, and cancers arising in the
same cells or tissues can have very different features. Moreover,
cancers with many of the same features (at least initially), may
evolve in different ways, and have different vulnerability to
treatment (Marusyk, et al. 2012). How, then, are we to classify such
poorly behaving kinds?
Classifications of cancer have largely been in service of diagnosis,
prognosis, and treatment decisions. Oncologists, surgeons and
pathologists typically classify cancer types and subtypes, in light of
organ and tissue type of origin (such as leukemia, or glioma), broadly
shared signs and symptoms, disease course, gross histopathology (size,
shape and rate of division of cells), and “biomarkers”
(e.g., estrogen sensitivity, genetic profile). Solid tumors (of the
lung, for instance) may be classified as either “benign,”
or “malignant,” and malignant cancers can present at
different “stages” and have different “grades.”
Pathologists use various measures (e.g., size, extent of lymphatic
involvement, number of metastases, number of lymphocytes (white blood
cells)) to estimate stage of progression of the disease.
“Grade” is a term used to classify solid tumors in light of
other measures (e.g., degree of “dedifferentiation” of
cells in a tumor—or loss of characteristics typical of a
breast, prostate, or colon cells and tissue) and is taken to indicate
likely disease course. Decisions about staging criteria are
conventionally agreed upon by specialists in oncology and pathology,
though informed by the best available evidence. Early stage disease can
be very difficult to classify, and thus also to know whether (or how)
treat. And, some cancers seem particularly recalcitrant to treatment.
This led researchers to ask: Are there distinctive genetic or molecular
“signatures” of each cancer that can help us estimate risk
of progression, or chances of recurrence, as well as predict responses
to treatment? Perhaps these molecular signatures are the key to a
natural taxonomy of cancer types and subtypes?
The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) project, a federally funded U.S.
research program, supported jointly by the National Cancer Institute
(NCI) and National Human Genome Research Institute (NHGRI), sought to
characterize the genomic features of each cancer type and subtype,
resulting in thirty-three “marker” papers, laying out
molecular features of each cancer type, often yielding novel
subclassifications of each type. For example, in 2016, a working group
affiliated with TCGA published “Comprehensive Pan-Genomic
Characterization of Adrenocortical Carcinoma,” which identified
three subtypes of adrenocortical carcinoma, and in 2015, another
working group published “Comprehensive Genomic Characterization
of Head and Neck Squamous Cell Carcinomas,” which identified
specific mutations associated with human-papillomavirus-associated
versus smoking-related head and neck cancers. While TCGA did result in
a more comprehensive understanding of cancer biology, it also raised
many questions. One particular challenge has been determining which
mutations to which genes are the “drivers” of cancer, or
which ones enable cancer cells to “succeed” in an
environment that would (ordinarily) prevent their growth. Cancer
genomes have many mutations, so a central puzzle has been determining
which among the many changes to cancer genomes are causally relevant
to cancer progression. Solving this puzzle has been difficult, because
cancers are far more heterogeneous than they initially
anticipated. Or, perhaps it is better to say: sorting the
“signal” from the noise has proven more difficult than
anticipated, as Meyerson, et al. (2010) explains, paraphrasing
Tolstoi:
… normal human genomes are all alike, but every cancer genome
is abnormal in its own way. Specifically, cancer genomes vary
considerably in their mutation frequency,… in global copy
number or ploidy, and in genome structure… (Meyerson,
et al. 2010)
In other words, there are very different rates, numbers and types of
mutations across and within different cancer types and subtypes. Which
ones matter, how, and how much, in different cancer types and
subtypes, and indeed, over the course of cancer progression, is a
difficult puzzle to solve. Complicating this further, a cancer may
contain several subpopulations of cells (or, multiple evolving
lineages), with different numbers and types of mutations within each
lineage. That is, cancers have varying types and degrees of
“intratumor heterogeneity.” So, samples of a tumor taken
when cancer is first diagnosed may be representative of only one
subpopulation of an early stage of a dynamic process. Such samples may
not be representative of the genomic changes of greatest relevance to
treatment-resistant late stage disease. Yet, it is late-stage disease
that we need better tools to more effectively intervene upon; most
cancers—if caught early—can be treated relatively
effectively.
All this would be challenging enough as it is, but there is a yet
further challenge to cancer classification. Cancers arising in the
same tissue or organ can be more genetically dissimilar than cancers
arising in different tissues or organs. Or, “cell-of-origin
influences, but does not fully determine, tumor classification”
(Hoadley, et al. 2014, 2018). Genomic information, far from providing
a way to sort all cancers into a Linnean hierarchy, instead yields
what philosophers have called cross-cutting classifications (Khalidi,
1998). One might think genetic profile should trump tissue or cell of
origin for purposes of classification. But it turns out that where a
cancer arises in the body is rather important to know. Characteristics
of the tissues and organs in which a cancer arises shape the course of
disease in a complex fashion (Öhlund, et al. 2017; Fessler, et
al. 2016).  Moreover, the rise of epigenomics, proteomics, and
transcriptomics, and “regulomics” generates further
challenges with classification, suggesting genomic information needs
to be supplemented. For instance, it turns out changes in microRNA in
cancer cells—non-coding RNA, which affects the expression of
genes—can affect cancer initiation, progression, and responses
to drugs (Hrovatin, et al. 2018). This is just one of several
“extra-genomic” factors that play an important role in
cancer causation and thus, presumably, ought to play at least a
partial role in informing cancer taxonomy.
This does not exhaust all factors of causal relevance to cancer onset,
and thus also (at least potentially) classification. Family history
and inherited (as opposed to somatic) mutations, life history
(e.g. parity, or number of children, and age at first birth),
environmental exposures, and histories of infection, inflammation, and
immune response, contribute differentially to cancer’s age of
onset, rate of progression, histopathology, and response to treatment.
For instance, infectious agents (e.g., HPV- or HCV-) are associated
with cervical and liver cancers, and some proportion of esophageal
cancers (Cancer Genome Atlas, 2015). Cancers of the prostate and
breast are associated with hormonal environments, which are in turn
affected by parity (number of
pregnancies). “Pregnancy-associated” breast cancers are
cancers that arise during or shortly after pregnancy (see, e.g.,
Schedin 2006). The “same” cancer in the same tissue or
organ can be classified as either “somatic,” or
“familial”—due in part to whether the patient
possesses inherited mutations, such as those with Li Fraumeni
syndrome.  Smoking associated lung cancers and non-smoking associated
lung cancers are distinct genetically, epigenetically, and
phenotypically (i.e., in terms of both gross pathology, and course of
progression, as well as response to treatment). Which of these several
causal factors ought to figure centrally in classification? Depending
upon how fine-grained a characterization of the causal basis of cancer
one adopts, there could be hundreds or thousands of cancer types and
subtypes. It’s far from clear whether there is one obvious
choice of causal basis that best reflects anything like a
“natural” division of type and subtypes. Indeed, this case
raises the larger question of whether one can or should expect a
univocal classification of multifactorial disease, or indeed, of
disease more generally. Are diseases, such as cancer,
“natural” kinds? Or, are they simply ways of carving up
the world that we happen to find useful? Is the
‘naturalness’ of a classification in science a matter of
degree?
Several philosophers have weighed in on the matter of the nature of
disease and disease classification (see, e.g., Ereshefsky, et al. 2015;
Lange 2007; Broadbent 2009 and 2015; Williams 2011; Khalidi 2013;
Sorenson 2011). The questions these authors are addressing are both
epistemic—what warrants choice of criteria of classification of
disease—and metaphysical—given diseases like cancer lack
“essential” properties, is it correct to think of disease
“kinds” as “natural”?
Lange (2007) for instance, argues that, “a disease is a natural
kind of incapacity that features in interesting function-analytic
explanations of other unhealthful incapacities”(Lange, 2007,
266). Cancer is not a “natural kind,” in his view, because
the “typical patterns of disruption of cell birth and
death” characteristic of cancer are multiply
realized. Categories like “breast cancer” or “lung
cancer” seem to be increasingly replaced in modern medicine by
appeal to molecular subtypes. Molecular subtypes of cancer are not,
however, “natural kinds of incapacity,” on Lange’s
view, and so are not distinct diseases. Indeed, many “disease
kinds” lack unifying “function-analytic”
explanations. Thus, modern medicine has, in a sense, led to the
“end of diseases” as natural kinds. In a similar vein, but
for very different reasons, Sorenson (2011) argues that diseases are
“para-natural” kinds.  Insofar as diseases are
“deficiencies,” or “departures from the norm,”
they lack the “integrity” or “internal nature”
characteristic of natural kinds. Diseases are
“reflections” of natural kinds of process. They
“inherit the lawfulness and projectability of the natural kinds
that shape them.” In other words, both Lange and Sorenson seem
similarly skeptical that diseases are natural kinds.
In contrast, while Broadbent (2009, 2015), Williams (2011), and
Khalidi (2013) agree that diseases lack essential properties, they
claim that disease classifications in light of distinctive causes, or
types of cause, either pick out distinctive “deviations from
normal functional ability,” or (in Khalidi's case) homeostatic
property cluster kinds. For instance, Broadbent’s (2009, 2015)
“contrastive” model of disease classification roughly
takes diseases to be distinct in light of distinctive causes. Where
there is a difference in at least one of a set of causes shared by
“controls” and “cases” (where cases are
identified in light of “parts and processes deviating
(negatively) from normal functional ability”), we have a
distinct disease. Broadbent takes this account to explain why, for
instance, “cervical cancer is a disease, but HPV-itis is
not.” Though, it’s not clear that HPV-itis is not properly
regarded as a legitimate disease category; or, at least, this case
raises an interesting question as to whether potential, rather than
overt, dysfunction is more central to disease designation. In public
health contexts, whether a strain of HPV causes cancer or not is not
as important as deploying interventions that limit the spread of HPV
more generally. Strains of HPV that do not currently cause cancer
could well evolve the capacity to do so. So, perhaps from a public
health perspective, “HPV-itis” is a perfectly legitimate
disease category. That is, from a preventive medicine perspective,
what matters is that a disease category is a good one for predicting
and intervening, even where functional disruption does not always (or
even most of the time) eventuate. Which choice of classification we
ought to make in demarcating disease types, in other words, might
depend on not only on which contrast we are interested in explaining
retrospectively, but also which kind of intervention we wish to
promote prospectively.
Khalidi (2013) argues that cancer might be a homeostatic property
cluster kind. Khalidi argues that cancer is driven by
“homeostatic” mechanisms—namely, mutations to
“caretaker” genes, or genes that play a
“gatekeeping” role in preventing or permitting the
emergence of a tumor. Acquisition of mutations to specific
“caretaker” genes, on this view, serve a function akin to
Boyd’s (1999) “homeostatic mechanisms,” in that they
permit the further acquisition of “hallmark” properties of
cancer cells. Khalidi is drawing upon a very common view of cancer,
articulated by two famous cancer researchers, Hanahan and Weinberg
(2000, 2011). They identify what they take to be the
“hallmarks” of cancer: “a small number of molecular,
biochemical, and cellular traits—acquired
capabilities—shared by most and perhaps all types of human
cancer.” They identified these “six essential alterations
in cell physiology that collectively dictate malignant growth”
as: self-sufficiency in growth signals, insensitivity to antigrowth
signals, evasion of apoptosis (cell death), sustained angiogenesis (the
ability to develop a blood supply), tissue invasion and metastasis
(Hanahan, et al. 2000, 57). By way of example of a caretaker,
TP53 is called a tumor suppressor, because it carries the
function of sensing and responding to signals associated with cell
damage, typically inducing apoptosis, or cell death. It is one of the
only genes mutated in a majority of cancers sequenced (Bailey, et al.
2018), and Weinberg (2013) characterizes it as “master guardian
and executioner,” in that it prevents further mutations by
inducing cell death where there are signs of trouble. On
Khalidi’s view, one ought to understand disruption of these very
specific capacities as a “homeostatic mechanism” for
cancer.
At first blush, this seems a vivid case of a homeostatic property
cluster kind. However, demarcating mechanisms is far from
straightforward. Where we take a mechanism to begin and end is in
large part a pragmatic matter (Craver 2009); so, depending upon how we
carve up the “homeostatic mechanisms for” cancer, we can
yield many or few cancer subtypes. As perhaps may have been expected,
Hanahan and Weinberg’s initial picture has been complicated
since 2001. In 2011, Hanahan and Weinberg updated their hallmarks to
include four more: “genome instability, which generates the
genetic diversity that expedites their acquisition, and inflammation,
which fosters multiple hallmark functions… reprogramming of
energy metabolism, and evading immune destruction.” And,
“In addition to cancer cells, tumors exhibit another dimension
of complexity: they contain a repertoire of recruited, ostensibly
normal cells that contribute to the acquisition of hallmark traits by
creating the tumor microenvironment” (2011, 646). In other
words, hallmarks of cancer appear to no longer involve all and only
intrinsic properties of cancer cells, but also dynamic interactions
between cancer cells and the immune system and extra-tumor
environment. This may not be such a serious challenge to
Khalidi’s view that caretaker mutation are mechanisms for
cancer; one could, arguably, just expand the mechanisms for
homeostasis to the tumor microenvironment. However, such a strategy is
complicated by the context-sensitivity of mechanism activation. Many
cells on the surface of the skin as we age possess as many mutations
to “caretaker” genes as those in a breast tumor, but most
such skin cells are shed (Martincorena, et al. 2015). The
“same” mechanisms may well lead to harm in one context,
and be entirely harmless in another.
The larger concern cases like this raise is whether there is one way
to privilege choice of causal basis for classifying diseases like
cancer. Different choice of temporal or spatial scale, or more or less
fine-grained characterization of causal processes, might yield
multiple, overlapping disease classifications.  While some may be
willing to bite this bullet, and indeed, endorse pluralism and
non-hierarchical classifications (see, e.g., Khalidi 1998, 2013),
others might be concerned that this would yield too permissive an
array of disease types. More generally, whether and how scientific
researchers and clinicians are likely to to converge on a common
classification for cancer raises some interesting puzzles about the
aims and methods of classification in the biomedical sciences more
generally. That genomic features of cancer are unlikely to
unproblematically yield a natural taxonomy suggests that a reductive
picture of disease classification is more generally implausible.  It
seems that classifications of disease like cancer form a kind of
‘hybrid’—they are intended to capture natural
regularities and their causes, but also to be of use for a wide array
of agents with different purposes. It’s unclear whether all
these purposes can be served by one univocal method or set of
classificatory criteria.
One further complication surrounding classification in the case of
cancer, is that cancers have variable disease course (Foulds 1958;
Cairns 1975; Lynch 2007; Bertolaso & Dupré 2018). Not all
cancers progress uniformly to metastasis and death; some growths
progress slowly or not at all. Some very common cancers (in the
prostate and thyroid) are either slow growing, or tend to remain
“indolent” (Esserman, et al. 2013; Siegel, et al.
2017). There is some disagreement in the medical community about how
to characterize such cases; it’s unclear in many cases whether
they are best viewed as very slow growing precancerous lesions, or
perhaps ought not be characterized as “cancer” at
all. Such cases raise a host of practical questions about the merits
of screening, and the risk of overdiagnosis—the diagnosis of
disease that might never have progressed in the lifetime of the
patient (see, e.g., Walker & Rogers 2016; Hofman 2017; Esserman,
et al. 2013; Welch & Black 2010), but they also raise interesting
philosophical questions about the nature of disease.
Some philosophers (Schwartz 2014), drawing upon the biostatistical
theory of disease as departure from age and sex-typical function
(Boorse 1977), argue that we ought to classify such early stage
cancers as risk factors, rather than disease. Such growths are not
disease, on this view, because they are not atypical and do not as yet
impair function—in fact as many as one half of men over 60 have
some lesions the prostate (Welch & Black 2010). Reclassification of
such cancers as mere risk factors, it’s hoped, will prevent
overdiagnosis and overtreatment. Other philosophers less sympathetic to
the biostatistical approach (e.g., Reid 2016) argue that this approach
fails to acknowledge how the practice of diagnosis is itself a sort of
risk-benefit calculation, informed in part by our knowledge of the
prevalence of early stage growths like DCIS (ductal carcinoma in situ),
or indolent prostate disease, and in part by more or less precautionary
values. As we’ve learned how common such indolent diseases are,
with the growing realization that many such growths do not progress, it
seems that they fall into some further (and less well-defined)
category. It seems this debate is not only a scientific or empirical
one, but also a normative one; much like debates about PTSD or obesity,
there are normative dimensions to how we define and classify disease.
Labeling can have both positive and negative consequences for patients,
clinicians, insurers, not to mention developers and producers of
screening, medical device, and pharmaceuticals (Ereshefsky 2009).
Overdiagnosis of early stage disease can lead to serious harms; not
least, treating a “cancer” that may or may not progress in
the lifetime of a patient is costly and harmful to quality of life.
One hope driving the precision medicine research program is that the
identification of biomarkers of aggressive disease will resolve these
ambiguities with respect to early stage disease, as well as identify
targets of effective treatment (see, e.g., Collins, et al. 2005).
However, as we have seen, interpreting genomic data has been far from
straightforward, and classifying cancer types and subtypes by appeal to
genomic information alone can lead to a loss of important information.
While genomic and molecular data is no doubt useful, it is not
necessarily decisive.
In sum, much like genes and species, diseases like cancer lack
essences, are heterogeneous, blur together at the edges, are caused in
many different ways, and have variable dynamics. Perhaps inconsistent
classifications are simply to be expected in such cases. That this is
so does not (necessarily) show that we ought to give up on realism
about disease kinds; indeed, perhaps we ought to endorse
“promiscuous realism” (Dupré 1996). As knowledge
has grown, and practical interests shift, on this view, classifications
can multiply and even cross-classify the same kinds. This is nothing to
fear, so long as the kinds we countenance do the predictive or
explanatory work intended for them, in the context intended. Others
have a somewhat less permissive view, however, arguing that there need
to be some empirical constraints or other on classification of
“scientific kinds,” whether or not these categories count
as examples of “natural” kinds (Slater 2014; Ereshefsky,
et al. 2015). For instance, Ereshefsky, et al. (2015)
argue that all and only categories that serve the needs of
“progressive” research programs are legitimate.
Given the complex causal pathways and heterogeneity of cancer,
perhaps it is not surprising that, as Bertolaso (2016) argues, the
history of attempts to identify defining features of cancer, let alone
arrive at a unified theory, have floundered. Either cancer is defined
so vaguely as to include non-pathological states, or focused so
narrowly on a specific class of causes as to rule out cases that might
otherwise be included. Among the many definitions she canvases are:
“abnormal proliferation,” “unregulated growth,”
“a disease of cell differentiation rather than
multiplication,” “the result of destruction of tissue
architecture,” “a systems biology disease,”
“blocked ontogeny,” a disease of “suppressed (sic)
immune function,” a “metabolic” and of course, a
“genomic” disease. Such a variety of definitions is,
Bertolaso argued, due to the fact that cancer has many causes, and many
effects; moreover, it involves many different types of dysregulation,
at a variety of temporal and spatial scales. Suffice it to say, it is
no small challenge to identify defining features of cancer, let alone
arriving at a unified “theory” of disease etiology.
One might well ask, however, whether the lack of a unified theory of
cancer is a cause for concern? Is this a sign of immature science?
Kincaid has argued to the contrary (2008), “biomedical science
can make significant progress without precise definitions of disease,
without full-fledged theories of disease and of normal biological
functioning, and without disease entities being natural
kinds” (p. 368). Pointing out how tumor microenvironment shapes
how cancer cells behave as they do, Kincaid argues that “There is
no clear definition of what constitutes a cancerous cell in terms of
necessary and sufficient conditions. However, no one thinks that cancer
research should stop until we get this definition settled, or that
creating linguistic uniformity is important for understanding the
science. The science certainly makes progress nonetheless…
Likewise, there is no parsimonious theory of the disease and the normal
functioning from which it is a deviation. Instead, we have piecemeal
causal explanations” (p. 373). Kincaid is correct. Much of cancer
research is piecemeal in character, offering partial and locally
constrained characterizations of the loss or promotion of some
particular activity of a cell associated with this or that mutation
typical of cancer cells. Whether we require a unified theory of cancer
remains an open question. Or, at least, the question of what function
such a unified theory might serve is a matter of some debate. This is
reflected in the fact that the research program seeking to identify
genetic mechanisms associated with cell birth and death has received so
many different names: the “oncogene paradigm,” (Bishop
1995; Morange 1997) “vision,” (Morange 1997),
“theory,” (Sonnenschein & Soto 2008),
“model” (Temin 1974; Vogelstein & Kinzler 1993),
“theory-method package” (Fujimura 1988, 1992), and
recently, “framework” (Blassime, et al. 2013).
One suggestion that seems plausible is that a better way of framing
the project of cancer research involves commitment to an
“explanatory framework.” For instance, Blassimie, et al.
(2013) characterize the search for oncogenes as an “explanatory
framework”: “causal patterns, schemata (in the sense of
Darden 2002), intuitions, hypotheses, evidential standards and various
bits of evidence and data coming from different experimental settings
and instrumental devices,” which “establish selective and
local criteria of causal relevance that drive the search for,
characterization and use of biological mechanisms.” Rather than
consisting of sets of laws or general principles, such frameworks help
generate strategies in the search for causes, and narrow the field of
inquiry. Blassime, et al. argue that “explanatory frameworks
allow for changes of scientific perspective on the causal relevance of
mechanisms without necessarily fully replacing previous explanatory
frameworks” (p. 375). Explanatory frameworks, in other words, can
“coexist” or be “gradually displaced,” rather
than stand in mutually exclusive relations with one another. As new
questions arose, and new information was discovered, this explanatory
framework became elaborated; depending upon how permissive or
restrictive our characterization of this framework, it need not be
viewed as at odds with, for instance, attention to the tissue
microenvironment in cancer. This sort of multifaceted approach is
perhaps what one ought to expect for such a heterogeneous disease,
where causes and effects can be described at very different temporal
and spatial scales. Much like other complex, multifactorial diseases,
cancer is not a single phenomenon, but a heterogeneous class of
disease processes, with few definitive properties or unique
causes. This makes not only classification, but also explanation,
enormously difficult, as we will see below.
What does it mean to explain cancer? The question is ambiguous, and
fraught. For, by “cancer” one could have several targets
of explanation in mind: the transformation of a cell into a
“cancer cell,” the (general) process of carcinogenesis,
the process of invasion and metastasis in solid tumors, the emergence
and roles of intratumor heterogeneity, differential rates of incidence
of different cancer types, patterns of cancer incidence or mortality
in different environments, socioeconomic groups, races, ages, or
sexes. Each of these explanatory targets arguably calls for quite
different kinds of explanation and not only different
explanatory information. Cancer scientists make appeals to
generalizations of wide scope, for instance, and will also offer
detailed, specific mechanistic explanations of specific outcomes. The
fact that these explanations are different in kind may (in part)
explain why there appears to be such a variety of views amongst
philosophers concerning the aim and character of explanation and
progress in cancer research. There is, of course, a long history of
debate among philosophers of biology concerning norms of
explanation. It’s still hotly debated whether, for instance, all
explanations in the biological sciences must identify causes, or
mechanisms, or whether “mathematical” or
“equilibrium” explanations are distinct in kind, and how
“network” models or “systems theoretical”
explanations are distinct from other kinds of explanation, are all
live debates (See the entries on
  scientific explanation and
  philosophy of systems and synthetic biology). 
However,
there is also a history of dispute amongst cancer scientists about
both competing research agendas and explanatory strategies.
As mentioned above, for most of the last twenty or so years of the
20th Century and the first decades of the 21st,
the central concern of the majority of cancer researchers seems to
have been identification of mechanisms at the cell and molecular level
that regulate cell birth and death. Two characteristic features of
cancer cells are their uncontrolled growth, and failure to undergo
cell death.  This is often accomplished via changes to the
“cellular machinery,” or mutations and associated
disruption of pathways associated with regulation of cell division or
cell death (Hanahan & Weinberg 2001). So, it is natural to assume
that explaining cancer requires identifying the chromosomal
alterations, mutations, and epigenetic changes to cells that give them
distinctive capacities of a cancer cell, as well as describe the ways
in which these mutations systematically yield these effects. This
framework for explaining cancer has been characterized as
“somatic mutation theory,” insofar as cancer is viewed as
a product of a series of mutations to cells during somatic cell
division. Onset of cancer, on this view, may be accelerated either by
inheritance of “oncogenes” or “tumor
suppressors,” or by damage to DNA, for instance, due to smoking
or UV radiation.
This picture of cancer was pieced together over decades from various
sources of evidence—from Virchow’s observations of
chromosomal abnormalities in cancer cells, to epidemiological patterns
of incidence in cancer, to the discovery of the “src”
gene—one of the first mutations found to be associated with
cancer.  This vision of cancer as the product of oncogenes replaced a
“regulatory” view of cancer, according to which cancer was
a “breakdown in normal constraints on growth” (for a
history, see, e.g., Morange 1993, 1997, 2003). Not coincidentally,
the “oncogene paradigm” arose at the same time that some
of the first bioengineering technologies, which enabled early cancer
researchers to use the techniques of molecular biology to study
identify genes associated with cancer progression (Fujimura 1987).
While this is a reductionist research program, in the sense that the
aim is to decompose the system of interest and understand the parts in
operation, not all early advocates of the multistage theory were cell
and molecular biologists. Two of the first advocates of a multi-stage
theory of carcinogenesis—Armitage and Doll—found that
curves of average lifetime incidence of lung cancer in smokers
appeared to have the same shape as that of nonsmokers, simply shifted
to earlier ages. This suggested that cancer could arise from a
rate-limited series of insults acquired over the life course. Since
the 1980s, hundreds of genes have been identified, mutations to which
are associated with the hallmarks of cancer. Carcinogenesis, on this
view, results from damage to DNA, or errors in the process of cell
division, as well as either endogenous factors (various hormonal or
other factors that promote cell growth), or exogenous factors
(infection, and inflammation), which over time can lead to
dysregulated cell growth.
In one paradigmatic example, Vogelstein and his group collected
tissue samples (premalignant polyps) from patients with a familial or
inherited form of bowel cancer (FAP, or familial adenomatous
polyposis). They discovered that mutations to genes associated with
various cancers accumulated in series of steps, what has been called
the “Vogelstein cascade.” The study of familial or strongly
inherited forms of cancer (cancers that appear at relatively young
ages, and occur in families) has enabled the identification of several
genes, mutations to which (whether inherited or acquired during somatic
cell division) play a role in cancer: APC, RB, and p53 (associated with
familial adenomatous polyposis, retinoblastoma, and Li Fraumeni
syndrome, respectively).
This picture of explaining cancer might be expected to resonate
quite well with the picture of scientific explanation advocated by what
has been called the “new mechanists.” According to this
view, one of the central aims of biological scientists is the
identification of mechanisms. The biological sciences, on this view,
are unique in their focus on mechanisms, rather than laws or general
principles, of the sort (typically imagined) to be central to the
physical sciences. A mechanistic explanation identifies parts and
processes that typically yield specific outcomes of interest (Machamer,
et al. 2000). If we wish to understand regulation of apoptosis (cell
death), for instance, we might identify particular genes and proteins
that play an important role in cell senescence, and determine how their
activity and organization yield (or fail to yield) a given outcome.
This mechanistic picture of the aims and character of explanation in
the biological sciences seems prima facie to characterize current
cancer research quite well, or at least the past 25 years of this
research.
However, several philosophers have argued that this picture fails to
capture the diverse explanatory strategies carried out by cancer
scientists, at least currently. For instance, some have argued that
this fails to take into consideration more “organicist” or
“holistic” views of cancer causation, which they contrast
with a “reductionist” approach in cancer research
(Bertolaso 2009). Some also argue that apparently competing
perspectives can be fruitfully integrated (Bertolaso 2011; Marcum
2005; Malaterre 2007).
Even advocates of the mechanistic perspective have argued that it
needs to be amended to accommodate the complex causal processes
involved in cancer’s etiology. For instance, according to Bechtel
(forthcoming), a linear picture of mechanisms for cancer leaves out an
important dimension. He characterizes the mechanisms associated with
apoptosis, for instance, as made up of two types: “primary”
and “control” mechanisms. Failure to respond to signals
promoting apoptosis in cancer may be a result of disruption in either
one (or both) such mechanisms. Advocates of the mechanistic perspective
have failed, Bechtel argues, to attend to the complex negative feedback
processes of control and constraint affecting primary mechanisms. As
evidence of the significance of such control mechanisms, he points out
how cancer researchers utilize novel methods, such as network analysis
to identify regulatory networks or feedback loops, associated with
specific functions. Bechtel’s distinction between
“primary” and “control” mechanism raises some
interesting questions about the organization of causal pathways in
cancer. Whether such pathways are, for instance, relatively fixed or
static in organization, is an open question. Moreover, the category of
“controller” versus “primary” mechanism itself
may be relatively fluid, or context dependent. The “same”
mechanism in a different environment might exert different controls,
and, control mechanisms may themselves be viewed as primary, given
one’s characterization of the function that is the subject of
inquiry. 
Some critics of the somatic mutation theory and its associated search
for mechanisms of cancer at the cell and molecular level are far more
radical in their ambitions. In the late 1990s, and early 2000s, two
researchers proposed what they took to be an alternative theory or
“paradigm” to the “somatic mutation theory”
(SMT), namely, the Tissue Organization Field Theory (or, TOFT) (Soto
& Sonnenschein 2000). Soto and Sonnenschein object not only to
reductionist methodology, but reductionist assumptions about the
causes of cancer. That is, their concern is not only with experimental
approaches that focus on dysregulated growth of cancer cells in cell
culture, but also with the claims regarding the role of mutations in
cancer. In their view, cancers are not the result of mutations, but
instead “alterations in the communication among cells and
tissues that affect tissue architecture” (2013, p. 90). On this
view, mutations do not lead the way—or, directly affect these
signaling pathways—but follow upon disruptions to tissue
organization. It is these alterations of patterns of interaction
between cells that leads to “downward causation effects”
on cells and cellular components, inducing aneuploidy and mutations
(Soto & Sonnenschein 2006; Sonnenschein & Soto 2008). Arguments
such as this one raise several interesting philosophical
questions. First, Soto and Sonnenschein are skeptical of the
scientific methodology supporting SMT. They bring attention to some
interesting broader questions as to when are we warranted in inferring
from cell culture or model organism work to general claims about
cancer etiology.
Given that the development of cancer is an immensely complex causal
process that cannot be observed directly, many scientific claims about
cancer’s causes are based on indirect inference, using model
organisms or cells in culture. For instance, tumors are grown in nude
mice using xenotransplantation, or, tumors are observed to grow in
mice in which “driver genes” are “knocked
out.” Soto and Sonnenschein have argued that the artificial
experimental circumstances that have enabled or promoted the study of
cancer “genes” render judgments about their causal
efficacy suspect; in principle, they claim, it’s consistent with
these experiments to suggest that these mutations are mere effects of
the true causes of carcinogenesis. Whether or not one agrees with
their conclusions about TOFT v. SMT, they do raise methodological
questions worth exploring about the scope and limitations of model
organism work. Germain (2013) points out that cancer in these
xenotransplantation experiments are “highly artificial”
contexts, and echoes concerns of researchers that the use of
immunodeficient mice to study cancer stem cells, for instance, may or
may not warrant the conclusions they claim to
establish. Xenotransplantation, for instance, has been used to
articulate and test hypotheses about “intrinsic
tumorigenicity” of some cells, particularly cells expressing a
particular antigen, ABCB5+, which were then designated “cancer
stem cells” in light of their capacity to form tumors in nude
mice (Germain, 2013, p. 9). The problem with using these tools,
however, is that the matter of when and whether a cell is
“tumorigenic” varies across different backgrounds—in
immune deficient mice, lacking a particular receptor (interleukin-2
gamma receptor, or Il2rg), tumors will grow, but not in mice with such
a receptor. Which experimental context is relevant to understanding
how and why cancer is caused by “stem cells,” thus depends
upon which causes we wish to isolate, and how. As Germain points
out,
A second question that Soto and Sonnenschein's work raises is whether
“downward causation” is at work in cancer. Several
philosophers have weighed in on this question (Malaterre 2011;
Bertolaso 2016; Green 2019).  Malaterre (2011) argues that advocates
of TOFT need not commit to non-reductive physicalism, or emergent
properties. Instead, he argues, Soto and Sonnenschein are drawing
attention to dynamic relationships between variables that supervene
over molecular and cellular activities, and a “higher
level,” or less granular explanation of cancer etiology may be
preferred in some contexts, both for pragmatic and epistemic
reasons. Malaterre makes appeal to Woodward’s (2010) argument
that choice of causal variables often involves appeal to something
like a notion of “proportionality,” such that, depending
on the target of inquiry, we may be “led to the incorporation of
more fine-grained detail in the specification of causes […] or
toward specifications that abstract away from such detail”
(2010, 299).
Soto and Sonnenschein would likely reject this analysis, insofar as
their argument was not simply that tissue organization is deserving of
our attention, for pragmatic reasons, but “that carcinogenesis
resulted from the disruption of the reciprocal interactions between
stroma and epithelium.” Or more precisely, “the cancer
phenotype is an emergent phenomenon occurring at the tissue level of
organization” (2006, p. 371). What evidence is offered up for this
kind of causal relationship? There are three sources of evidence that
Soto and Sonnenschein have emphasized as of relevance to their defense
of “organicism” and TOFT:
All of these phenomena are taken as evidence that there are features
of the tissue microenvironment that affect either the induction of or
progression of cancer, and such features are not reducible to, or
explainable in terms of properties or processes at or below the cell
and molecular level. Further, Soto and Sonnenschein claim that the
somatic mutation theory cannot account for these observations, and that
they can only be accommodated on a view that takes that tissue
architecture itself as causally relevant to the progression of disease,
which is described in this case as downward causation.
Do such cases genuinely count as downward causation in, for
instance, Kim’s (1999) sense? After all, strictly speaking, the
idea that causation is synchronic across the whole and part of the same
entity seems contradictory. Soto and Sonnenschein accept this
criticism, and propose that the kind of causation they are invoking is
not synchronic, but “diachronic emergence”: 
“cellular and tissue events occurring before the expression of a
particular set of genes takes place may act downwardly modifying the
expression of these genes at a later time” (Soto, et al. 2008,
271).
This, however, seems to be not as radical a metaphysical thesis as
talk of downward causation may initially suggest. Indeed, Soto and
Sonnenschein seem to simply refer to a form of constraint. Green
(2019) takes “downward causation” to mean just this:
“the role of solid-state tissue properties in tumor progression
can be interpreted as a form of downward causation, understood as
constraining relations between tissue-scale and micro-scale
variables” (p. 1). She notes that while this suggestion is
“a ‘weaker’ form of downwards causation than the one
Kim (2000) and others oppose,” and so departs from standard use
of the expression (at least among philosophers of mind), the advantage
of this weaker notion that it better captures what scientists have in
mind when arguing for the “necessity of higher-scale features
for the realization and understanding of biological phenomena.”
Similarly, Bertolaso (2016) argues that:
She characterizes this as an instance of synchronic reflexive
emergence—“a different mode of causation. In such a mode,
effects are not expressed in terms of a progression of events, but of
maintenance of states at different levels of biological
organization” (Bertolaso 2016, p. 95).
It seems that each of these authors is pointing to an important role
for structural organization in the maintenance of homeostasis as
playing an important role in carcinogenesis. Indeed, evidence provided
by Bissell’s lab (Weaver, et al. 1997, 2002) seems to indicate
that structural features of the extracellular matrix somehow either
prevent the emergence of disease, or can accelerate it.  It seems such
examples do not point to “downward causation,” but instead
suggest that we need to expand our understanding of the causes of
cancer to include maintenance of tissue integrity. That is, the case
of cancer seems to require a richer, more integrative and
interdisciplinary approach to investigating cancer.
Another major research program that in some ways challenges a
mechanistic picture of cancer (or at least some (Laplane, 2016) see as
opposed to the “classical view” of cancer) is the
“cancer stem cell” theory (CSC).  However, the idea of
cancer stem cells has been somewhat controversial, in part due to the
experimental models used to establish and identify cancer stem
cells. Fagan (2016) characterizes the notion of a cancer stem cell, as
well as the current state of the field, succinctly as follows.
The cancer stem cell theory in part is descended from the view that
cancers are in several ways akin to ordinary tissue (though distorted),
containing a mixture of proliferating stem cells and their more
differentiated products. This view played an important role in cancer
research in the 1960s and 1970s, and is sometimes called the 
“developmental” theory of cancer, in light of the fact that
it takes cancer to be a disease of “development,” or
cellular differentiation in particular (Pierce & Speers 1988, Morange
2015, Laplane 2016). This model of cancer etiology was revived in the 90s,
when Lapidot, Bonnet, and Dick identified “leukemic stem
cells” (Lapidot, et al. 1994, Bonnet and Dick 1997), and was
expanded upon in the early 2000s with the identification of an
analogous cell population in breast cancer, suggesting that CSCs are a
general feature of all cancers (Al-Hajj, et al. 2003). 
The notion that there are subpopulations of cells within a tumor that
play a distinctive role—either in initiating a cancer, or in
seeding new cancers, has been influential in current research,
suggesting new avenues for both treatment and prevention. Historically
the cancer stem cell theory (CSC) was framed in opposition to the
somatic mutation theory (e.g. Reya, et al. 2001; Wicha, et al. 2006;
Shipitsin, et al. 2007). Laplane (2016) has argued that the cancer stem
cell theory (CSC) has various advantages over the alternative, which
she calls the “classical” theory. Laplane takes the
following to be the four fundamental theses of CSC theory:
The first two claims concern the concept of a stem cell; the latter
two claims concern carcinogenesis itself: how cancer
arises. It’s the latter two theses that Laplane takes to be in
tension with the “classical” theory. Laplane argues that
CSC theory is more “parsimonious”, because it
“explains cancer development, propagation and relapse”
from a “limited number of hypotheses” (Laplane 2016,
28). In contrast, the classical view neither predicts nor explains
cancer heterogeneity, or relapse, but must invoke special
(“additional” or “ad hoc” theories) to explain
them, in particular, evolutionary processes.  Moreover, the CSC theory
has the advantage that it “connects basic research and
intervention by suggesting new therapeutic strategy” (Laplane
2016, 28)
Fagan (2016) argues, to the contrary, that on a
“model-based” approach, it’s not clear that these two
theories are inconsistent. Indeed, Laplane (2017) has more recently
pointed out how the CSC can serve to supplement the evolutionary
perspective. The presence and number of cancer stem cells can, it has
been suggested, affect the rate and nature of evolutionary change in a
population of cancer cells. Essentially, if all cells in a tumor are
descended from one or a few cancer stem cells, this restricts
population size, and thus suggests that to a large extent cancer
progression is driven by drift, rather than selection. Rather than see
the two theories as mutually exclusive, in other words, we might see
the two as complementary, in the process of integration, or overlapping
models.
All this discussion of the role and nature of cancer stem cells,
however, is complicated by the fact that there is a great deal of
dispute around what counts as a cancer stem cell. Both Laplane and
Fagan draw attention to the fact that the concept of cancer stem
cell is multiply ambiguous, in at least the following ways:
What’s clear is that some populations of cells in a tumor appear
to have “stemness” properties—the ability to renew
oneself. What is less clear is whether these capacities are context
sensitive, and how and by which cells they may be acquired. The
plasticity of many types of cancer cells suggests that they may
acquire a stemness phenotype, and even shift back to non-stem
phenotype. Given this, it appears that the CSC is just one of a
continuum of general views, some of which take only specific types of
cells to be precursors to cancer and others which grant that many
different types of cells have the potential to develop such
properties. That is, the real question at issue is whether the cells
that initiate a tumor are in some way distinctive or require
distinctive precursors, and how properties of stemness are
acquired. Whether stemness is intrinsic or acquirable, niche-dependent
or independent, moreover, will drastically change the therapeutic
strategy. The CSC model (the idea that CSC are at the origin of cancer
development, resistance to treatment, and relapse) might be true and
yet CSC-targeting strategy might fail. Indeed, what kind of property
“stemness” is may vary across cancers, and even over time
within a cancer (Laplane and Solary 2019).
In sum, there appear to remain several open questions about the
nature of cancer stem cells, and more generally, how to best intervene upon
cancer to successfully eradicate the disease. According to the model of
the disease inherited from the latter third of the 20th
Century, somatic mutations, acquired over a lifetime, to the
acquisition of cancer’s “hallmarks.” So, the best
strategy for intervention may be targeting specific pathways associated
with these hallmarks. In contrast, according to the Tissue Organization
Field Theory (TOFT), changes in tissue organization yield
carcinogenesis. Thus, the best strategy for intervention might be
finding ways to intervene in the tissue microenvironment, so as to
create an environment less hospitable to the growth of cancer cells.
According to the cancer stem cell theory, cancer arises in cells that
have distinctive properties: continuous renewal, and indefinite growth,
permitting the emergence of new disease. On this view, eradicating
these stem cells seems essential to cancer treatment. Philosophical
work on cancer causation and explanation can better illuminate the
competing presuppositions of different approaches, clarify their
commitments, and offer insights into fruitful integration of new data.
It is already clear that philosophical discussions of ambiguities in
how we define and measure stemness is essential to understanding how
best to prevent recurrence and treat the disease (Clevers 2016).
Philosophical discussions of how and why TOFT and CSC challenge a
simple reductionist picture of cancer etiology are only two of several
examples. Other philosophers have described (or critiqued)
evolutionary explanations of cancer (especially models of multilevel
selection) (Germain 2012a; Lean and Plutynski 2016; Germain and
Laplane 2017; Plutynski, 2018). Still others emphasize systems
biology-based approaches to cancer (Bertolaso 2016; Plutynski &
Bertolaso 2018), or the important role of a developmental perspective
(Laplane 2016, 2018; Fagan 2017). Others still emphasize how one might
model cancer as an infectious disease (Liu, et al. 2017), and or an
evolutionary-developmental process (Liu 2018). What all these
philosophers seem to emphasize is that the study of mechanisms
associated with cancer at the cell and molecular level requires
supplementation to better predict and explain the origin of the
disease, and design effective therapies. In addition, Pradeu
(forthcoming) has recently pointed out how the immune system plays an
apparently “paradoxical” dual role in cancer, both acting
to prevent and promote cancer. This raises interesting questions about
the function of the immune system, as well as the appropriate way of
understanding “organism,” “self” and
“non-self” in biological contexts. There remain
interesting questions about how to integrate various perspectives on
this complex disease.
Dobzhansky (1973) wrote that “nothing in biology makes sense
except in light of evolution.” Can evolutionary thinking shed
light on cancer? After all, cancer is ordinarily understood to be a
case of failure of otherwise functional controls on cell birth and
death. At first pass, this view seems fundamentally at odds with
taking an evolutionary perspective on cancer. For, how can something
that is an exemplary case of “dysfunction” count as an
evolutionary process or product of adaptive evolution? Moreover, how
ought we to square this picture of cancer with the fact that cancer
cells seem to co-opt developmental processes—i.e., the process
of “de-differentiation” typical of early embryonic cells?
Is cancer a byproduct of development? Finally, cancer seems to
increase in incidence as we age. Is cancer simply a byproduct of
aging?  Relatedly, if—as some argue—aging itself is
selected for (a contested question!), is cancer in some sense
“adaptive”? All these perspectives on cancer require us to
perhaps rethink the nature of function and dysfunction, or at least
better understand how there are trade-offs in fitness at different
temporal and spatial scales over the course of our life and
evolutionary history. The best perspective to take on this may be a
“multilevel” evolutionary perspective—i.e.,
thinking of evolution by natural selection as operating at different
temporal and spatial scales, both sequentially, and in some cases,
simultaneously, sometimes yielding unfortunate “cross-level
byproducts” of selection at one temporal and spatial scale, for
entities or processes at other temporal or spatial scales (cf. Okasha
2007).
First, it is relatively uncontroversial that understanding a
species’ evolutionary history, and the selective trade-offs they
face over the course of their life history, can inform our
understanding of how and why they are more or less vulnerable to
disease. For instance, some species are more vulnerable to cancer than
others. Why? Comparative biology—the comparison of different
species—may help us identify mechanisms associated with disease
vulnerability, onset and progression, when they arose, where and why
they are shared, as well as how they have diverged (Aktipis, et al.
2015). Comparing and contrasting how development, immunity, and other
mechanisms of suppression of cancer across species can help cancer
researchers identify targets of opportunity for either treatment or
prevention of cancer. In addition, we can look to unique features of
our own evolutionary history in order to explain patterns of disease
incidence, suggesting selective “mismatches” with our
ancestral environment, a kind of “byproduct” explanations
of our vulnerability to diseases. This enterprise is broadly
characterized as “evolutionary medicine” (Crespi, et
al. 2005; Gluckman, et al. 2009; Stearns & Koella 2008; Sun, et
al. 2014).
While the broad principles behind evolutionary medicine are
relatively uncontroversial—we all are evolved organisms after
all—philosophers of biology have been skeptical of particular
claims about how our evolutionary history has shaped our vulnerability
to disease. Some such claims have been particularly contentious, either
because the nature of the disease itself is not well characterized
(especially mental illness, for instance), or evidence in support of
evolutionary “mismatch” with our ancestral environment is
both scant and disputed. Particularly where alternative explanations
may well involve attributing responsibility to, e.g., pollutants, or
choices in lifestyle that are politically or socially sensitive,
philosophers of science have been particularly skeptical. Some have
argued that many arguments in evolutionary medicine make
“adaptationist” assumptions, i.e., assumptions that a given
trait is adaptive, or selectively advantageous, founded on at best
“just so” stories (Valles 2011; see also Murphy 2006).
Of course, there are better and worse such arguments; the best
arguments consider not only the widest array of evidence, but also
trade offs in fitness, as well as the role of constraints arising out
of development and life history. For instance, traits adaptive early in
life may yield fitness costs later in life. A vivid example of a
trade-off in fitness is androgenic hormones; such hormones predispose
men to higher prostate cancer risk, but they may also yield an
advantage early in life, in terms of increasing sperm production,
relative growth and size at sexual maturity, and thus (potentially)
access to mates and resources. Some defenders of evolutionary
perspectives on medicine claim that high prostate cancer risk in taller
men may thus be a case of a “mismatch” between our
ancestral and current contexts (see, e.g., Summers, et al. 2008 for
discussion). Presumably, philosophers are likely to contest such
arguments on a variety of grounds—either speculative
assumptions about the adaptive advantage of size or early age of sexual
maturity in our evolutionary past, or concerns about how or how much
variability in hormones contributes either to body size or cancer risk.
Though, this provides an interesting case study for considering how
hypotheses about the role of sex and age in disease risk are tested, an
area of growing interest.
“Mismatch” hypotheses suggest that traits that may have
been adaptive in the past leave us vulnerable to disease in our current
environment. For instance, many advocates of evolutionary medicine have
argued that the high correlation between nulliparity and cancer risk
might be explained by our evolutionary history. The argument is that
women in the evolutionary past were pregnant for much of their lives,
starting at an earlier age; breast development and differentiation was
thus adapted to a lifetime of frequent pregnancy and nursing. Delaying
or avoiding pregnancy changes the developmental processes typical for
our species, and might expose women to more cycles of estrogen, which
could increase breast cancer risk. Of course, such hypotheses are
contentious; there is always the potential for confounding causes (in
this case, of increased cancer risk due to a variety of risk factors at
work in modern society) (Greaves 2000). Nonetheless, it has been
known for centuries that nulliparity (not having children) raises
breast cancer risk, and since at least the 1970s, it’s been
widely known (at least in the cancer research community) that the more
children one has, starting at a younger age, the lower the risk of
breast cancer. In a 1970 case-control study conducted at eight
different locations around the globe, a WHO group led by McMahon et
al., estimated that “breast cancer risk for women having their
first birth under the age of 20 years is about half that for
nulliparous women,” and that “women having their first
child when aged under 18 years have only about one-third the breast
cancer risk of those whose first birth is delayed until the age of 35
years or more.” Evolutionary “byproduct” explanations
appeal to our evolutionary history to explain this observation.
Another type of “byproduct” explanation of
cancer—though one that appeals to a much more distant event in
our evolutionary history—is that cancer is a product of the
emergence of multicellularity. At one point in the very distant past,
single celled organisms formed collectives that cooperate; these
collectives eventually became multicellular organisms. Any collective
of cells, especially collectives whose survival and reproductive
success depends on functional organization, are potentially vulnerable
to breakdown in cooperative organization. On this view, then, cancer
is a product of breakdown in mechanisms that permitted the emergence
of multicellularity—the mechanisms that protect us from
“revolt from within” are not error-free, and over time
will fail. According to Greaves and others (Greaves, et al. 2012;
Merlo, et al. 2006) the evolutionary picture of cancer dovetails
nicely with the somatic mutation theory; somatic cells divide and
acquire mutations during our lifetimes; some of these mutations
involve failures in regulatory pathways that ordinarily
“enforce” functional organization, and thus
cooperation. In this way, an evolutionary
perspective—understanding how evolution of multicellularity
required the emergence of cooperative organization—is essential
to understanding cancer. Moreover, on this view, cancer itself may be
viewed as an evolutionary process—the emergence of adaptive
features of cancer cells, where these “adaptations” enable
short term “fitness,” or relative success at survival and
reproduction. Several scientists have developed theoretical models of
this process, linking it to empirical data, e.g., on the emergence of
chemotherapy resistance (Frank 2007; Wodarz & Komarova 2015).
On this view, cancer is a both a process and byproduct of
multi-level selection, where selection may be understood as operating
at several levels of biological organization simultaneously, or
sequentially (Damuth, et al. 1988; Lean, et al. 2016). That is,
cancer cells may bear adaptations, and, they are also evolutionary
byproducts of selective processes at other level of organization. It
appears that cancer cells co-opt or hijack otherwise adaptive features
of organisms. Signaling pathways that are ordinarily in service of
adaptive functions in early stages of development or wound healing are
reactivated in (some) cancer cells, in service of the transition to
metastasis. This is a classic example of a cross-level selective
byproduct (Okasha 2005, 2006). Traits advantageous at one level in the
organization of multicellular organisms may be coopted by component
parts. Some of the capacities that invasive cancer cells acquire (the
capacity to invade and metastasize) are in fact due to a change in
phenotype from epithelial to mesenchymal type cells, and losing
adhesive properties enables such cells to invade the lymph and blood
system. Lean and Plutynski (2016) have argued that cancer may in some
ways parallel the patterns of emergence of multicellularity as
characterized by Damuth and Heisler (1988), shifting over the course of
emergence of disease from a simple selective process between individual
cells to several kinds of multilevel selective process (MLS1 to MLS2).
Critics contest that the process of metastasis only weakly mimics MLS2,
however (Germain, et al. 2017).
To be sure, there are both analogies and disanalogies between
evolution in whole organisms, and the evolving population of cancer
cells in a tumor (Germain 2012). However, thinking of cancer as a
dynamic, evolutionary process, has great potential for applications in
cancer treatment, and perhaps also, in prevention. For instance, some
have suggested that we might give young girls drugs or nutritional
supplements that remodel the breast in ways akin to pregnancy, as a way
to prevent the emergence of breast cancer (Katz, et al. 2015). Others
suggest that modeling the evolution of multi-drug resistance may help
prevent one of the major causes of cancer mortality. Drugs can be more
or less effective in different patients, and lose their effectiveness
over time. An evolutionary perspective on cancer may shed light on how
drug resistance comes about, in patients with more or less intratumor
heterogeneity (Greaves 2000, 2007; Frank & Nowak 2004; Merlo, et
al. 2006; Greaves and Maley, 2010). 
A third type of byproduct explanation for cancer is the view that
cancer is a disease of aging—that is, cancer incidence by and
large increases as we age, perhaps in part as a byproduct of
breakdowns in mechanisms associated with immune response and tissue
integrity.  This claim raises some broader questions about how we
assess function and dysfunction, or how we assess function at
different temporal and spatial scales of analysis, as well as how we
understand the role of the immune system and the integrity of the
organism as an individual.  Indeed, all evolutionary and byproduct
explanations of cancer raise similar philosophical questions about
hypothesis testing, as well as definitions of “function”
and “individuality,” both at the individual and group
level, and over the course of one’s life history. On the
evolutionary view of cancer, for instance, cancer cells are in some
sense highly adaptive (Hausman 2011; Germain 2012; Godfrey-Smith
2009). One relatively controversial view of aging, first proposed by
August Weisman, is that aging has the evolutionary
advantage—effectively clearing the way for the young. If indeed
cancer is a necessary byproduct of aging, and aging is selected for,
then on one view, cancer may be thought of as adaptive.  Such a view
raises a variety of questions about evidence and adaptationist
explanations (see SEP entry on “Adaptation”).  They also
raise questions about the merits of group versus individual level
selection hypotheses. Moreover, the dual role of the immune system in
both preventing—and paradoxically, in some cases, promoting
cancer—raises interesting questions about the nature of
biological individuality, as well as how we define
“immunity” an the role of the immune system in setting out
the boundaries of the organism. (For a vivid discussion, see, e.g.,
(Okasha 2006; Godfrey-Smith 2009; Bouchard & Huneman 2013; Clarke
2011, 2013; Love & Brigandt 2017; Bueno, et al. 2019; Pradeu 2012,
2013, 2016, 2019).
There are several ways in which biomedical and public health
research on cancer intersects with debates about the proper role of
values in science. First, epidemiological and toxicological research is
used in support of regulatory policy and toxic tort law. Decisions
about when and what is “carcinogenic” have significant
public health import, and thus raise a variety of philosophical
questions about evidence, values risk, and precaution (Mayo, et al.
1994; Cranor 1993, 2006, 2011, 2018).
Evidence for such claims is often indirect, and underdetermination is
rife. In tests of carcinogenicity, there is a choice of levels of
significance, and even optimally done epidemiological studies, or
toxicological studies, for instance, at best lend high probability to
claims about health risk. In such contexts, there is “inductive
risk”, or the risk of error either in over- or under-estimation
of actual risk of cancer, and thus, room for values to play a role.
Several philosophers of science have weighed in on this matter of when
and whether values ought to play a role in such contexts, as well as
which values, in particular precautionary judgments that may have
import for policy or law (see, e.g., Mayo 1988; Douglas 2000, 2009;
Brown 2013; Steel 2007, 2010, 2015; Elliott 2011; Shrader-Frechette
1993, 1994, 2002, 2004; and Mitchell 2009). As one might imagine,
there is also a substantive history of debate among epidemiologists,
public health scientists, scholars of the law, around when we have
good reason to claim that X or Y is carcinogenic, or what counts as
good or “good enough” evidence, going back to the dispute
between Doll and Hill and their detractors, regarding the causal link
between smoking and lung cancer (Hill, 1965). For a compelling history
of this literature, see, e.g., Proctor (1995), or more recently,
Oreskes, et al. (2011). Problems of underdetermination are no less
rife in the context of assessments of “effectiveness” of
cancer screening and prevention (see, e.g., Solomon 2015; Stegenga
2017; Plutynski 2017. (For a discussion, see the entry on
  philosophy of medicine.)
Second, much of basic cancer research—e.g., research on the
cell and molecular bases of the disease—is supported by federal
funds, which often are allocated in the hopes that such research will
(eventually) yield better health outcomes. Yet, the relationship
between “bench and bedside” is, by all accounts, extremely
indirect, and shaped by many factors outside of the merits of the
science itself. So, it’s unclear whether and how
“basic” cancer science ought to be evaluated in light of
whether or how it leads to better health outcomes. However, this is
hard to avoid, particularly when so many lives depend upon a research
program’s promised outcomes.
This whole matter is complicated by the fact that the study of cancer
is itself big business. Indeed, some compare cancer research and
medicine to a “medical industrial complex.” Cancer
pharmaceuticals, medical devices, and cancer research more generally,
are major drivers of the economy. On the one hand, given the loss of
life due to cancer, one could argue that the time and energy devoted
to cancer care and research is proportional to the threat. Löwy
(1996) in her Between Bench and Bedside characterizes this as
the “white” (optimistic) reading of the situation.
Arguably, however, many other diseases, often those more prevalent in
“developing” parts of the world, cause far more extensive
loss of life. As Reiss and Kitcher (2009) and Reiss (2009) have
argued, from a “Millian” perspective, we ought to be
expending our resources on those diseases that proportionally cause
the greatest loss of life, and so, at least from a strictly maximizing
utilitarian perspective, these diseases have a greater claim on our
investments.  The vast funds invested in cancer research—at
least during the past 25 years or so—have done very little to
shift mortality rates. This leads to what Löwy might call the
pessimistic answer to this question. According to one line of
thinking, the centrality of cancer in biomedical research is a product
of several historical, economic, institutional, and social forces in
combination, some of which are self-perpetuating (Proctor 1995;
Fujimura 1996; Clarke & Fujimura 2014). Ever since Nixon’s
1971 call for a “war” on cancer, advertised implications
for cancer treatment or prevention have been used to bolster much of
basic research into genetics, genomics, and cell and molecular
biology, fostering investment in biotechnology. Some have argued that
this has led to an unduly excessive, or disproportionate fear of
cancer as a disease, an excess of anxiety, and perhaps also
unnecessary or unwarranted use of medical screening and testing
(Aronowitz 2007, 2009, 2015).
On the other hand, cancer research has led to important innovations
in science and medicine with impacts much wider than cancer itself.
Moreover, particularly in the U.S., regulations on research by, e.g.,
the FDA on the design and conduct of clinical trials for approval of
drugs, for instance, may in part be slowing research and leading to
excessive costs. Some argue that we ought to lift restrictions on such
tests for novel and more “precise” (or targeted) drugs that
might benefit very few. Such matters are of course intertwined with
larger debates among both clinician-researchers and philosophers of
medicine around when and whether we have sufficient evidence to claim
that, e.g., this or that mode of intervention is effective. In part,
such debates are shaped by the economic costs of large clinical trials,
and in part, by epistemic issues around what and how we can and should
measure, in making claims to “effective” intervention
(Ashcroft 2002; Cartwright 2011; Howick 2011; Stegenga 2015; Teira
2011; Teira, et al. 2015; González-Moreno, et al. 2015;
Deaton, et al. 2018).
One area where such questions are particularly fraught is
“precision” medicine; Obama’s Reinvestment act
budgeted a significant component toward cancer genomics, with the idea
that a more fine grained analysis of the molecular and genomic
features of cancer would promote more effective prediction and control
of cancer risk, enable detection of cancers at much earlier stages,
and less debilitating, more targeted treatments. With better
technologies and more fine-tuned risk information, the practice of
medicine has been shifting from diagnosis (and treatment) of disease,
to constant surveillance and intervention on disease risk, as well as
higher rates of overdiagnosis and overtreatment (diagnosis and
treatment for a proto-disease state that may never have progressed in
the lifetime of a patient) (Welch, et al. 2011; Esserman, et al.
2014). Moreover, one concern some have raised about precision oncology
is that it has been less successful than hoped or advertised (Prasad
& Gale 2016, Prasad, et al. 2016).  Such skepticism should raise
genuine concerns—especially given the hopes of patients and
families hanging upon the promises of such treatments, and the overall
costs of both cancer care, and precision medicine research. In sum,
current practices of cancer research, screening and treatment raise a
number of questions: How ought we to allocate research funds in cancer
research? How is investment in precision medicine likely to yield the
benefits promised? When is medical intervention on disease risk
(rather than disease itself) unduly excessive? What exactly does it
mean to speak of effective medical intervention? Is overdiagnosis and
overtreatment a serious harm, or is it simply an inevitable byproduct
of an otherwise effective strategy—treating disease risk? How
ought clinicians to communicate about risk and benefit of novel
targeted interventions to patients, especially where there are gray
areas of benefit and harm?  Are the (frequently) excessive costs of,
and inequitable access to, cancer care, matters of justice?
Cancer research—and especially the hope and hype surrounding
precision medicine—provides a focused lens through which to
consider problems central to critical examination of the concepts and
methods of the biomedical sciences. That is, cancer and the scientific
study of cancer illustrate challenges facing disease classification,
fuzzy borders between disease versus health, the problems with genetic
essentialism, the ever-present reference class problem and ever
promised solutions, as well as specific ways in which
underdetermination of evidence in biomedicine shapes matters of
justice in public health. Moreover, it provides a case study in how
matters of evidence, disease status, and questions of values and
justice are deeply intertwined.