Philosophical interest in categories may be traced back to Aristotle
who, in his treatise Categories, attempts to enumerate the
most general kinds into which entities in the world divide. He does not
begin from a single highest kind, but rather lists the following as the
ten highest categories of things “said without any
combination” (Categories 1b25):
There are two sorts of substance: a primary substance is, e.g., an
individual man or horse; the species (and genera) of these
individuals (e.g., man, animal) are secondary
substances. While the ten categories are all equally highest kinds,
primary substances nonetheless have a certain sort of priority, since
“all the other things are either said of the primary substances
as subjects or in them as subjects. So if the primary substances did
not exist it would be impossible for any of the other things to
exist” (Categories 2b4).
Elsewhere, in Metaphysics (998b22), Aristotle argues
explicitly that there cannot be a highest genus (e.g., of
being or unity) shared by entities of different
categories (cf. Ackrill 1963, 81). For a species is defined in terms of
its subsuming genus and differentia (e.g., man is definable as an
animal that is rational), and while the genus (animal) may be
predicated of the species (man), it may not be predicated of the
differentia (rational). As a result, if being (or unity) were
a genus, no differentiae could be said to have being (or to be one);
but “the differentiae of any genus must each of them both have
being and be one” (Metaphysics 998b22–3).
The ancient Greek term ‘kategoria’ described what could be
said against someone in a court of law, and indeed Aristotle uses what
can be said of or in a subject as a route to
distinguishing categories. There is controversy in the literature,
however, about precisely how he arrived at his categories (Studtmann
2007). On one prominent interpretation, put forward by J. L. Ackrill,
Aristotle arrived at his list of categories by way of distinguishing
“different questions which may be asked about something”
and noting “that only a limited range of answers can be
appropriately given to any particular question” (Ackrill 1963,
78–9), e.g., the question ‘what is it’ can only be
asked of a substance, and only answers describing substances are
appropriate. The question ‘how much’, by contrast,
requires a quantity for an answer, and so on.
But although on this interpretation Aristotle seems to have arrived at
his categories by considering different sorts of question and answer,
the categories he was offering were supposed to be categories of
entities, not of language; language was just a clue to truths
about the world.  As J. L. Ackrill writes,
Aristotle’s Categories “is not primarily or explicitly
about names, but about the things that names signify…Aristotle
relies greatly on linguistic facts and tests, but his aim is to
discover truths about non-linguistic items” (1963, 71).
Other interpretations have also been suggested about how Aristotle’s
categories were derived. Some hold that Aristotle’s list was arrived
at by reflecting on grammatical categories, and assuming a parallelism
between structures of language and structures of the world (Baumer
1993). But others have developed interpretations that do not consider
Aristotle to have arrived at his categories by considering linguistic
matters such as grammatical structure or the questions we may
ask. Instead, they take them to arise from more worldly considerations
such as which types of entity any sensible particular must be related
to (Moravcsik 1967). For an overview of the interpretive options, see
Studtmann (2007). 
In any case, regardless of how the categories were derived,
Aristotle’s approach to categories is generally taken to be in the
spirit of what Brian Carr calls “categorial
realism” – an approach conceiving of a system of categories
as a list of the highest genera of beings (not merely of language or
thought – even if those may be used in deriving the metaphysical
categories). As Studtmann (2007) puts it, Aristotle “ assumes
rather than defends a posture of realism with respect to the
metaphysical structures of the world”. Given this approach, a
complete system of categories would offer a systematic inventory of
what there is, considered at the most abstract level (although it is
not clear whether Aristotle intended his categories to be
exhaustive). Thus on a categorial realist approach, providing a system
of categories can be seen as one, or even
the central task of metaphysics (cf. Grossman 1983, 3). Such a
system of categories may also play a central role in answering
individual questions of nature, providing the most general sort of
answer to questions of the form “What is this?”, and
providing the basis for definitions of narrower sorts of things by
specifying the most general category (genus) under which things of this
sort fall, and the differentia that distinguishes them from other
things of the same category. This has endured as the paradigmatic
approach to categories, and several recent authors have offered new
theories of categories in this spirit of Aristotelian realism (see
§1.4 below).
Others, however, have shied away from this robustly realist approach
to categories, generally on grounds of skepticism about our ability to
discern intrinsic divisions in ‘reality itself’, and have
instead treated the project of categories as a matter of laying out the
highest categories governing our conceptual scheme. This shift in
approach to what Carr (1987, 6) calls “categorial
conceptualism” was made famous by Immanuel Kant. While Kant
famously denied that we have access to intrinsic divisions (if any) of
the thing in itself that lies behind appearances or phenomena, he held
that we can discover the essential categories that govern
human understanding, which are the basis for any possible cognition of
phenomena. Thus, as H. J. Paton puts it, for Kant “We can have
a priori knowledge by means of the categories, only if the
categories are due to the nature of the mind and are imposed by the
mind on the objects which it knows” (1936, 258).
In his Critique of Pure Reason, Kant arrives at his list of
categories by first enumerating the forms of possible judgment
(A70/B95-A93/B109). On this view, objective empirical judgments (i.e.,
empirical judgments which purport to refer to objects rather than
merely subjective seemings or connections of sense impressions, and
which purport to be universally valid for all judging subjects) are
endowed with their objectivity and generality in virtue of the a priori
concepts embodied in the relevant forms of judgment. If we can identify
all of the possible forms of objective empirical judgment, we can then
hope to use them as the basis to discover all of the most general
concepts or categories that are employed in making such judgments, and
thus that are employed in any cognition of objects (Körner 1955,
48–49).
Thus in distinguishing his categories, Kant begins from Aristotelian
logic in outlining four respects in which one can classify any
judgment: according to its quantity, quality, relation, or modality. In
each of these respects or ‘moments’ of judgment, there are
three alternative classifications; thus, e.g., in respect of quantity,
a judgment may be universal, particular, or singular; in respect of its
relation, a judgment may be categorical, hypothetical, or disjunctive,
and so on. These Aristotelian ways of classifying judgments are the
clue to discerning the twelve correlated concepts of the understanding.
So, e.g., from noting that all judgments are either universal (e.g.,
All swans are white), particular (e.g., Some swans are white) or
singular (e.g., Cygmund is white), we can arrive at the three
corresponding categories of quantity: unity, plurality, and totality.
Via this route, Kant ultimately distinguishes twelve pure concepts of
the understanding (A80/B106), divided into four classes of three:
The categories are presented as forming a single exhaustive list,
with the four classes of categories imposing four different forms of
unity on the object known (Paton 1936, 295–9). Thus, one may separately
inquire after an object’s quantity, quality, relation, and modality,
receiving one of the three sub-answers in each case on the way to a
more complete characterization of the object.
Although these are categories of the understanding, they nonetheless
retain a certain sort of ontological import, as it is a priori
that they apply universally to all objects of possible cognition
(A79/B105). In this way, by delineating the concepts that are a
priori necessary for the cognition of objects, we can
acquire knowledge of categories governing any possible object
of cognition, and so acquire a sort of descriptive set of ontological
categories, though these must be understood explicitly as categories
of objects of possible cognition, not of the thing in itself.
Thus Kant was able to treat his system of concepts as a system of
categories in something like the Aristotelian sense, “for our
primary purpose is the same as his [Aristotle’s], although widely
diverging from it in manner of execution” (A80/B105).
Nonetheless, it is clear that for Kant the categories find their
original source in principles of human understanding, not in intrinsic
divisions in mind-independent reality, and are discoverable by paying
attention to possible forms of human judgment, not by study of the
world itself, nor by study of our contingent manners of speaking.
Edmund Husserl introduced two sorts of innovation to the study of
categories. First, while Aristotle used language as a clue to
ontological categories, and Kant treated concepts as the route to
categories of objects of possible cognition, Husserl explicitly
distinguished categories of meanings from categories of
objects, and attempted to draw out the law-like correlations
between categories of each sort (Smith 2007, 139ff.). Secondly,
whereas Aristotle and Kant each lay out a single system of categories,
Husserl distinguishes two ways of arriving at top-level ontological
classifications: by
formalization and by generalization, yielding two
separate, orthogonal, systems of categories, in two different
dimensions (cf. Smith 2004, chapter 8).
Husserl is careful to distinguish categories of meanings (by
way of which we can think about the highest kinds or
‘essences’ of objects) from the
categories meant – the latter are the categories of
objects, or
ontological categories, considered as the highest essences
that entities might have: “by ‘categories’ we can
understand, on the one hand, concepts in the sense of meanings, but on
the other also, and to better effect, the formal essences themselves
which find their expression in these meanings” (1913 [1962],
61–2).  But although the two sorts of categories must be
distinguished, according to Husserl categories of the two sorts are
essentially correlated (see below), so we can learn about one by way
of the other.
Regardless of whether we are studying categories of meanings or of
objects, Husserl is quite clear that the study of categories, for him,
is an entirely a priori matter; the categories of meanings and
objects alike “arise … solely in relation to our varying
thought-functions: their concrete basis is solely to be found in
possible acts of thought, as such, or in the correlates which can be
grasped in these” (1913 [2000], 237). As he puts it later, in the
Ideas, the study of categories is a study of essences, based
in essential insights about the types of meanings and
correlative types of things. Such studies of essence may be conducted
by way of imaginative variation of cases, independently of any matter
of fact, including whether or not there actually is anything
of the ontological kinds distinguished (1913 [1962], 51). Thus
Husserl’s ontological categories, in this sense, are
descriptive categories of highest essences of possible things
(that might fall under those essences), and do not purport to provide
an inventory of what things actually exist (as a matter of
empirical fact).
Husserl provides an extensive discussion of categories of meaning in
the Logical Investigations, arguing that differences in
categories of meaning (which seem to be more like syntactic than
semantic categories) can be distinguished by noting where nonsense
results from substituting one term for another. E.g., in the sentence
“This tree is green” we may substitute
“chair” – but not “careless” – for
“tree” without turning sense into nonsense, marking the
difference between the meaning categories of nominative
material and adjectival material (1913 [2000],
511–512). Husserl’s understanding of ‘nonsense’ is
rather strict: he counts only those strings of words that
are syntactically incorrect (so that they form a mere
‘heap of words’ and cannot be combined into any unified
meaning (Husserl 1913 [2000], 522)) as strictly nonsensical, and thus as
signs of differences in categories of meaning. (Husserl repeatedly
distinguishes the nonsense of verbal formations like “a round
or” (in which no unified meaning emerges) from cases of
mere absurdity such as “a round square”, in which
the expression has a unified meaning, although it is a priori
that no object can correspond to the expression (1913 [2000],
516–17)).
Correlated with the categories of meanings are ontological
categories; e.g., object, state of affairs, unit, plurality, number,
and relation are (formal) categories that categorize objects, not
meanings (Husserl 1913 [2000], 237). Categories of the two sorts are,
according to Husserl, connected by ‘ideal laws’. Thus, for
example, presumably objects are the ontological correlates of the
meaning category of nominative expressions, properties are the
ontological correlates of adjectival expressions, and states of affairs
are the ontological correlates of propositions. So while Husserl does
not (to my knowledge) explicitly lay out a method of discerning
ontological categories, it may be that we can derive them by
beginning from the above nonsense test for distinguishing meaning
categories, and then shifting attention to the correlative ontological
categories, since “pure truths concerning meaning can be
transformed into pure truths concerning the object” (1913 [1962],
61).
As well as explicitly distinguishing categories of meanings from
categories of the correlated objects that could possibly be
‘meant’, Husserl introduced a second innovation to the
study of categories by distinguishing highest formal essences
(which Husserl calls ‘categories’) from highest
material essences (which he calls ‘regions’)
(1913 [1962], §10; cf. Smith 1995, 329–330 and Smith 2007,
142–148). Thus far I have been describing the formal
ontological categories, the correlates of the different meaning
categories distinguishable by the nonsense test. In fact, Husserl
reserves the term ‘category’ for the highest formal
genera, which are distinguished by a process of
formalization – a removal of content. These
‘categorial essences’ begin with ‘object in
general’ at the top of the tree, which is then divided at the
next level into categories including (as examples) object, state of
affairs, property, relation, number, etc. (compare lists 1913 [2000], 237
and 1913 [1962], 61). Much as Aristotle distinguished (independent)
primary substances from (dependent) things of other kinds, within his
formal categories Husserl distinguishes the ‘substrative’
category of individuals (or, more properly, the mere
this-there) from the dependent ‘syntactic
objectivities’ – the correlates of nominative terms that
are derived from ways in which we speak about the primary substances
(1913 [1962], 62–3 and 67) (as, e.g., the nominative term ‘this
relation of brightness’ may be derived from claims that ‘A
is brighter than B’ (1913 [2000], 797–8)).
Husserl’s material categories, by contrast, classify entities
according to their nature or essence, with the highest material genera
to be arrived at by a process of generalization to the most
general kind of content involved, rather than by the
formalization that involves an emptying of all content
(1913 [1962], 65). The highest material categories are the three
regions: nature (including physical objects and events), culture
(including artifacts, social entities, and values), and consciousness
(cf. Smith 2004). While formal and material category systems each form
a hierarchy (1913 [1962], 64), considered jointly their categories are
not mutually exclusive, since one and the same entity may be
categorized either in terms of its material nature or its form. For
further discussion of Husserl’s categories, see Smith (2007,
135–161).
Husserl is nowhere explicit about the proper method for
distinguishing material ontological categories, but he does distinguish
material absurdity from formal absurdity, and from the formal nonsense
that marks the difference in meaning categories (1913 [2000], 523).
Expressions are formally absurd if it is a priori
that no object could correspond to them, based purely on formal,
logical laws, without regard to which particular material concepts are
employed, e.g., “a round not-round thing” is formally
absurd; its absurdity would remain regardless of which adjective we
substituted for ‘round’ or which noun for
‘thing’. On the other hand, expressions are materially
absurd if the impossibility of there being any corresponding object is
based in the particular material concepts employed, e.g., ‘a
round square’ is a materially absurd expression based in the
particular meanings of ‘round’ and ‘square’.
Thus presumably one could attempt to distinguish material ontological
categories by the material absurdity that results from substituting
expressions for objects of different material kinds; ‘a
round table’, for example, makes perfect sense, but if we
substitute for ‘table’ a term for a geometric figure such
as ‘square’ or for a day of the week such as
‘Thursday’, we get a materially absurd statement (to which
it is a priori that nothing corresponds). As we will see in
§2.2 below, Gilbert Ryle developed Husserl’s nonsense test for
category differences in something like this way.
Roman Ingarden (1960 [1964], 22ff) took Husserl’s multi-dimensional
ontology one step further. Like Husserl, he distinguished formal
categories from material categories, but he also distinguished
categories in a third dimension: existential categories (those
describing an entity’s mode of being). The highest existential
categories on Ingarden’s list are the real (spatio-temporal
being), the ideal (abstract), the absolute (completely independent,
atemporal), and purely intentional (consciousness-dependent). While any
conceivable entity should be uniquely locatable in a single category of
each dimension, the three sorts of ontology are mutually orthogonal,
providing different most abstract ways of considering the putative
entity in question. Thus, e.g., a sculpture might be categorized
formally as an object, materially as a work of art, and existentially
as purely intentional.
In the twentieth century, systems of ontological categories fell
somewhat out of fashion (for reasons I will discuss in
§1.5 below), with most discussion of categories shifting to
merely articulating category differences rather than aiming to outline a
comprehensive system of categories.
One important exception to this comes in the work of Samuel Alexander,
who, in his 1920 work Space, Time and Deity develops a theory
of categories in the realist spirit. Alexander defends a monist
ontology in which he posits Space-Time as "the one monistic entity
that encompasses every entity and every feature in reality" (Fisher
2015, 246). He sees the categories as grounded on the intrinsic nature
of Space-Time, and posits as categorial features only those which are
'pervasive', that is, instantiated by every entity. The categories he
identifies come in three 'grades' (or ranks of increasing complexity,
in which the latter grades presuppose the former), giving us the
following system: 
In recent years there have also been several notable attempts to offer
new systems of categories in either the realist or descriptivist
spirit, although little agreement exists about what the categories are
or how one could decide among competing systems.
Ingvar Johansson (1989) and Roderick Chisholm (1996) both take a
neo-Aristotelian realist approach to categories, attempting to lay out
a complete system of the categories, where this is understood as
providing a list of categories of real entities in the world. Ingvar
Johansson explicitly insists that his interest is in the world:
“This book is a book about the world. I am concerned with
ontology, not merely with language” (1989, 1), and attempts to
offer “a realist theory of categories regarded as real aspects of
being” (1989, 2). His list (1989, 20) includes nine main
categories (some of which subdivide further):
Unlike Aristotle, Johansson makes no explicit use of language in
discerning ontological categories, instead appealing to the method of
successive abstraction (Johansson 1989, 1–2). Thus, e.g., we arrive at
the category ‘quality’ by moving up in abstraction from a
particular shade of dark red, to red, color, and finally quality.
Similarly (to use an example of Sellars’) one might try to arrive at
the category of ‘substance’ by considering an individual
entity, say, Fido, and moving by successive abstraction from
“Fido is a dachshund” through “Fido is a dog”
and “Fido is an animal”, ultimately reaching “Fido is
a substance” (1970 [1974], 321). Like Aristotle’s categories,
Johansson’s categories top out with a number of distinctions without a
highest single category subsuming them all.
Like Aristotle and Johansson, Roderick Chisholm presents his work on
categories as being “about the ultimate categories of
reality” (1996, 3). Unlike them, however, Chisholm (1996, 3)
lays out categories in the form of a porphyrian tree starting from a
single most general category comprising everything, but divided into
successively narrower genera at lower levels of branching. (For an
interesting discussion of whether such general terms as
‘entity’ or ‘thing’ could be seen as naming a
highest category, see Thompson 1957, cf. §2.3 below). Chisholm’s
system of categories thus reads:
Other contemporary authors have approached the issue of categories
in a purely descriptive spirit. Reinhardt Grossman, for example,
distinguishes eight highest categories (1983, xvi):
But although Grossman characterizes his book as an attempt to
“bring Aristotle’s Categories up-to-date” (1983,
xv), he is explicit in denying that he is making any claims about
whether or not there are things belonging to any of the eight
categories he distinguishes, taking this as beyond the scope of
ontology (1983, 10–12).
Joshua Hoffman and Gary Rosenkrantz (1994) lay out a tree-form
system of categories, with entity the summum genus,
subdivided into abstract and concrete (rather than
Chisholm’s contingent and necessary), each of which
is further subdivided:
They, too, explicitly offer their system of categories in the spirit
of categorial description, as offering an analysis of the various
possible categories of being, rather than making any claims about which
of these categories is non-empty (1994, 7–8).
E. J. Lowe takes categories to be categories of “what kinds of
things can exist and coexist” (2006, 5). Such categories, he
argues, are to be individuated according to the existence and/or
identity conditions of their members; fundamental categories are those
regarding which the existence and identity conditions for their
members cannot be exhaustively specified in terms of ontological
dependence relations they bear to entities of other categories (2006,
8). Accordingly, he argues that there are four fundamental ontological
categories: objects (individual substances such as Fido), modes
(property or relation instances such as Fido’s four-leggedness), kinds
(substantial universals such as the kind dog), and attributes
(property or relation universals, such as being
four-legged). But although he argues that there are exactly
four fundamental categories, Lowe nonetheless takes a
hierarchical approach to arranging categories. The four fundamental
categories appear at the third level of his hierarchical chart; the
categories that appear at the higher levels (particulars and
universals at the second level; entity at the top) are “mere
abstractions and do no serious ontological work on their own
account” (2006, 39). His fuller chart of categories appears as
follows:
Others, taking the project of developing categories in an
explicitly realist spirit and driven by the goal of offering a
parsimonious ontology, have aimed to offer a more minimal system of
fundamental ontological categories. For example, Laurie Paul (2016)
has recently defended a ‘one-category’ ontology that accepts (at the
fundamental level) only the existence of intrinsic characters or
qualities. Against those who accept more categories, she argues that
we have no need (for example) for a fundamental division between
individuals and their properties, and that a one-category ontology is
both more parsimonious and has a better claim to carve the world at
its ‘ontological joints’.
Both realist and descriptivist category systems, at least as
traditionally presented, seem to presuppose that there is a unique true
answer to the question of what categories of entity there are – indeed
the discovery of this answer is the goal of most such inquiries into
ontological categories. Grossman, for example, argues that a list of
categories must be complete, contain everything, with everything in its
proper place (1983, 4). Johansson similarly takes his project
as to “develop a coherent system of all the most
abstract categories needed to give a true description of the
world” (1989, 1). Arguments about which of the many systems of
categories offered is correct likewise seem to presuppose that there is
a uniquely correct list of categories.
But actual category systems offered vary so much that even a short
survey of past category systems like that above can undermine the
belief that such a unique, true and complete system of categories may
be found. Given such a diversity of answers to the question of what the
ontological categories are, by what criteria could we possibly choose
among them to determine which is uniquely correct?
Some minimal standards of adequacy immediately suggest themselves
(Butchvarov 1995, 75). Whether one takes a realist or descriptivist
approach to providing a system of categories, if that system is
supposed to be comprehensive, it clearly must meet at least the
standard of being exhaustive – providing a category for everything
there is (on the realist approach) or might be (on the descriptive
approach). Nonetheless, one may, as Hoffman and Rosenkrantz (1994,
140) do, present a system of some fundamental categories
without taking it to be exhaustive.
Another minimal criterion of adequacy is generally taken to be that
the highest categories (or, for tree systems, the categories at each
level of branching) be mutually exclusive, ensuring that whatever
there is (or might be) finds its place in exactly one highest
category, or one category at each level (Chisholm 1989, 162). (This
still allows for nested categories, so that something may belong to
both a more specific category like substance and a more general
category like individual.)
But these criteria are not enough to provide the needed reassurance.
First, we lack assurance that most proposed category systems meet even
these minimal conditions. As mentioned above, Aristotle drew out his
categories largely by considering the types of question that could be
asked (and the types of answer appropriate to them). It is difficult to
know, however, how one can be assured that all kinds of questions have
been surveyed, and so difficult to know that an exhaustive list of
categories has been offered – a point Aristotle does not attempt
to demonstrate (Ackrill 1963, 80–81). Indeed, the fact that Aristotle
provides different lists of categories in different places suggests
that he did not consider his list final and exhaustive. Similarly,
Kant’s system of categories can be thought to be exhaustive only
as long as the list of forms of judgment from which he derives them
exhausts the possible forms of judgment – but we have reason to
think this is not so (Körner 1955, 50). Johansson, as we have
seen, instead uses the method of successive abstraction. But it is not
clear how following such a method could ensure either that the
categories thereby distinguished are exhaustive (how do we know we have
considered something of each highest kind if we do not yet know what
the highest kinds are?) or even mutually exclusive.
Secondly, even if we can verify that the standards of mutual
exclusivity and exhaustiveness are met, these conditions alone are far
too weak to uniquely pick out a system of categories. Provided one
accepts the law of the excluded middle, an endless supply of mutually
exclusive and exhaustive classifications can be generated at will: we
can divide things into the spatio-temporally located and the
not-spatio-temporally-located, the intentional and the non-intentional,
the extended and the non-extended, to name but a few of the more
relevant ways in which things could be divided. Indeed one of the
sources of puzzlement about categories comes from the fact that
philosophers have selected so many different sorts of divide as
the fundamental category difference – for Descartes, the
extended and the thinking (unextended), for Chisholm the contingent and
the necessary, for Hoffman and Rosenkrantz the concrete and the
abstract, and so on. Thus another reason for skepticism about the
existence of a unique set of categories comes from the fact
that categories are supposed to be the most abstract genera under which
things (may) fall. But from any given entity, abstraction may
apparently be done in a variety of ways – even if we are careful
to do so in ways that ensure mutual exclusivity and exhaustiveness.
Doubts about possibilities for discovering the one true category
system have led many to eschew talk of category systems altogether, and
others to adopt some kind of relativism about category systems that
ceases to take systems of categories seriously as candidate lists of
the single set of highest genera under which anything falls
(or could fall). Jan Westerhoff (2005), for example, argues that there
is no unique, absolute set of ontological categories. On his view
categories in metaphysics turn out to be analogous to axioms in
mathematical theories; in each case, there may be more than one way to
systematize our knowledge from a relatively simple basis. The result
is a kind of relativity about systems of categories: “which set
of ontological categories we choose is primarily a matter of
convenience, in the same way as specific axiomatizations of
propositional logic or Newtonian mechanics are more convenient to use
than others” (2005, 218). As a result, Westerhoff argues, we
must reassess the importance of ontological categories in
metaphysics – these should not be considered “the most
fundamental parts of the world, but... the most fundamental parts
of our systematization of the world” (2005, 135). 
Others have taken the variety of category systems explicitly offered
or presupposed by philosophers as mere evidence of the particular
presuppositions of their thought, or prejudices of their age – not
as evidence about anything to do with the world and its
divisions. Thus, e.g., Stephan Körner’s discussion of categorial
frameworks is designed to make explicit how a thinker’s
framework categorizes objects, making use of certain individuative
principles, and making clear his reasons for holding that framework
(1970, 10). R. G. Collingwood, in similar vein, treats the task of
metaphysics generally as merely uncovering the “presuppositions
underlying ordinary science” (1940 [1998]).
The specific worries about (1) guaranteeing the mutual exclusiveness
and joint exhaustiveness of the categories, and (2) whether or not any
single system of categories could purport to be uniquely correct, can, however,
be met by certain ways of formulating ontological categories. The first
sort of worry can be met by ensuring that categories (of the same
level) are defined in ways that guarantee mutual exclusiveness and
exhaustiveness. Thus, e.g., Thomasson (1999, chapter 8) distinguishes
categories in terms of what relations of dependence a purported entity
has or lacks on mental states (and a second dimension is
distinguished in terms of what relations of dependence a purported
entity has or lacks on spatio-temporally located objects), so that the
law of the excluded middle alone ensures mutual exclusiveness and
exhaustiveness of the categories distinguished. (Dummett’s method
of distinguishing categories provides another route for guaranteeing
mutual exclusivity – see §2.3 below).
Multi-dimensional systems (Husserl 1913 [1962], §10; Ingarden
1960 [1964], Chapter 2; Thomasson 1999, Chapter 8; Smith forthcoming,
Chapter 8) address the second worry to some extent by acknowledging
that the different dimensions of categorization are possible, and that
no one-dimensional list can purport to completeness. In principle,
multi-dimensionalists may even accept that there is no fixed number or
limit on how many one-dimensional lists of categories there may be,
though each such list may purport to provide a unique, correct,
exhaustive categorization of entities considered in the chosen
respect.
In any case, given the great potential uses of a system of categories
(many of which do not depend on claims that that category system is
uniquely ‘correct’), we should not prematurely abandon
attempts at developing and evaluating systems of categorization. Even
if we do not think of a category system as providing a realist
inventory of all that exists or a description of the fundamental
intrinsic ‘divisions of reality’, a system of categories laid
out in the descriptivist spirit provides a framework within which
existence questions can be answered in a systematic and wholesale way,
by enumerating categories so that we can then undertake further
investigations into whether or not there really is anything of each
kind. Working from within a categorial framework can help ensure that
whatever ontology we provide is principled and unified,
avoiding ad hoc and piecemeal decisions. The descriptivist’s
categories also provide a tool that may be used elsewhere in ontology,
e.g., in helping to ensure that comparisons of parsimony are
legitimately made (by examining which categories of entity are
accepted and which denied by various theories), and in checking that
potential solutions to metaphysical problems are not overlooked by
tacit use of a category system that is not exhaustive (Thomasson 1999,
Chapters 8 and 9). Another important use of systems of categories is that, with a proposed set of categories laid out, we can, as Daniel Nolan (2011) suggests, go on to investigate questions about the relationships among entities that are placed in different categories: for example,  questions about whether events depend on or are grounded in things, or (as Nolan suggests) whether things and events may ultimately be identified as belonging to a single category. Assumptions about categorizations play such
a strong role in philosophical discussions (e.g., discussions of the
Cartesian theory of mind, Platonist theories of mathematics, etc.),
that doing the work on categories necessary to make these categorial
assumptions explicit and open them for examination must remain a
highly useful exercise regardless of doubts about the prospects for
discovering a uniquely correct system of categories.
For those who approach categories in a descriptive spirit, as a matter
of determining the categories of our language or thought, it is
natural to turn to linguistics or cognitive science for
assistance. 
A prominent approach to determining the ontological categories that
are implicit in the use of natural language is via Natural Language
Ontology, which provides one way of undertaking a descriptivist
approach to categories. As Friederike Moltmann (2017) makes clear,
however, the methodology for doing natural language ontology is
importantly different from attempts to determine a common sense
ontology by simply asking what ontological claims or categories people
explicitly accept or would accept on reflection. So, for example,
Natural Language Ontology doesn’t determine the ontological categories
of a natural language by looking to explicit assertions speakers make
(or would assent to) about categories, such as “objects are not
events”. Instead, natural language category distinctions are revealed
by uncovering the presuppositions of sentences used by
ordinary speakers. For example, the fact that one can acceptably say
“The building existed last year” but not “The building took place last
year”, and “John’s arrival took place last week” but not “John’s
arrival existed last week”, it has been argued, presupposes a
difference of category between material objects and events, since the
conditions of applicability for these predicates apparently presuppose
that they apply to entities of different categories (Moltmann 2017,
Section 3.1). Since Natural Language Ontology “concerns itself with
the ontological categories and structures a speaker accepts when using
a language, not those a speaker accepts when engaging in some form of
philosophical reflection”, its results may differ widely from the
ontological categories many philosophers would reflectively accept,
and even from those commonly attributed to natural language (Moltmann
2017, Section 1). We have reason to engage in natural language
ontology, Moltmann argues, since it may give us “the best indication
of how we, implicitly, conceive of things” (2017, Section 7). A
question that remains is whether there will be a uniform ontology
found across all natural languages, perhaps one fixed by our cognitive
structure.
One might, of course, turn to cognitive science to attempt to address
the question of whether there is a fixed system of categories
determined by our cognitive structure. And indeed, discussions of
categories also play an important role in cognitive science, where the
goal is not to discover the fundamental categories of being, but
rather the means by which experiencers come to categorize their
world. Here, debates have centered on how humans in fact come to group
things into categories – whether this involves lists of definitional
(observable or hidden) features, resemblance to prototypes, prominent
features weighted probabilistically, etc. Debates also concern the
relation between conceptual and linguistic categories, which levels of
category are more basic, whether there is a most basic set of
categories, whether or to what extent categorizations are consistent
across cultural groups, and whether or not some fundamental categories
are innate. The psychologist Susan Carey (2011) has engaged in a
number of studies on infants and primates which, she argues, suggest
that there are a number of concepts of ‘core cognition’ that are
innate, designed to represent certain classes of entity in the world,
and that are shared across pre-linguistic human infants, adults, and
other primates. These include the concept of object (taken as a sortal
concept that makes use of boundedness and spatio-temporal continuity
in individuation), quantity, intentional agency, and causation. For
further discussion of the debates about categorization in cognitive
science see Lakoff (1987) and Rakison and Oakes (2003).
Recently, work on ontological categories has attracted interest not
only among philosophers, but also in information science and the
biomedical sciences, where ontologies are used to organize the
knowledge represented in information systems (Smith 2003). In some
cases, the ontologies developed are domain-specific (e.g. specific to
medical information, geographic information, etc.), but there has also
been a great deal of interest in developing a ‘top-level’
ontology of maximally general categories applicable to all specific
domains and enabling data sharing across systems. It is such top-level
ontologies that draw upon philosophical work on ontological categories
most directly, although categorial distinctions also play a crucial
role in domain-specific ontologies. Both sorts of philosophical work
on categorization promise to have a wide variety of practical
applications to information management that are just beginning to be
explored (see Sowa 1995, Munn & Smith (eds.) 2008)
Much recent work on categories has been influenced by skepticism about
the possibility of offering a system of ontological categories.
Difficulties like those mentioned above have undermined the idea that
a uniquely true and comprehensive system of ontological categories can
be found. The skepticism that comes from noting the proliferation of
category systems is compounded by general skepticism about
metaphysics. In some cases this has come from imputations of logical
positivists that all metaphysical talk is nonsense. More recently, the
skepticism has arisen from general doubts about the epistemology of
metaphysics (Bennett 2009, Kriegel 2013, Thomasson 2015), as well as
more specific doubts that we can make sense of the idea that the world
has a distinctly ‘ontological structure’, or that if it
does make sense, we could discover what that structure is.
As a result, while categories have continued to play a central role in
analytic philosophy in the past century, and while some have continued
to pursue work on categories in the realist spirit, others have
shifted their focus to identifying differences
in semantic categories rather than drawing
out systems of ontological categories.  Thus when
Gilbert Ryle (1949, 1938 [1971]) talks of categories, he does not speak
directly of categories of entities, but rather of differing logical
types of concepts, where such type differences are detectable by the
absurdities that result from substituting in terms of one sort for
terms of another in sentences of certain kinds (see §2.2
below). Wilfrid Sellars, developing a strategy of Ockham’s,
argues explicitly that we may construe category statements as
disguised metalinguistic statements about the role of certain
expressions (and their functional counterparts in other
languages). According to Sellars, “Socrates is a
substance”, for example, has the sense of “The
·Socrates· is a basic mental singular term”, and
“Yellow is a quality” has the sense of “The
·yellow· is a (one-place) predicate (in
mentalese)” (1970 [1974], 328) (where the
“·___·” notation has the function of
enabling us to speak about linguistic roles without being tied to a
particular natural language). As a result, we can replicate the work
done by traditional category distinctions between, e.g., substance and
quality, without committing ourselves ontologically to the existence
of qualities or other abstracta (1970 [1974], 329).
Those who focus on articulating category distinctions rather than on
laying out complete systems of categories generally invoke categories
not in hopes of providing answers to such basic metaphysical questions
as ‘what exists’, but rather as a way of exposing,
avoiding, or dissolving various presumed philosophical mistakes,
confusions, and paradoxes.
Thus, e.g., Russell and Whitehead introduced type theory (which
might in some sense be considered a theory of categories) to avoid a
certain form of paradox found in Fregean set theory (where we must
consider the putative set of all non-self membered sets, which is a
member of itself if and only if it is not a member of itself),
liar’s paradoxes (“This sentence is false”, which is
true if and only if it is false), etc. On their analysis, paradoxes
like these arise from the attempt to form an illegitimate totality by
trying to collect into a single totality a collection that has members
that presuppose the existence of the totality. To avoid such paradoxes,
we must accept that “Whatever involves all of a
collection must not be one of the collection” (1913 [1962], 37) and
thus that such totalities (involving all of a collection) must be of a
higher type, making, e.g., classes of sets of a higher type than are
sets of individuals, and so on, leading to an infinite hierarchy of
types. The type-mixing paradox-generating claims are rejected as
ill-formed and meaningless (1913 [1962]).
Most famously, Ryle (1949) introduced the idea of the category mistake
as a way of dispelling the confusions he thought to be rampant in the
Cartesian theory of the mind, and thus of dissolving many apparent
problems in philosophy of mind. According to Ryle, one makes a
category mistake when one mistakes the logical type or category of a
certain expression (1949, 16–17). Thus, e.g., a foreigner would
make a category mistake if he observed the various colleges,
libraries, and administrative offices of Oxford, and then asked to be
shown the university. The foreigner mistakes the university for
another institution like those he has seen, when in fact it is
something of another category altogether: “the way in which all
that he has already seen is organized” (1949, 16). The category
mistake behind the Cartesian theory of mind, on Ryle’s view, is
based in representing mental concepts such as believing, knowing,
aspiring, or detesting as acts or processes (and concluding they must
be covert, unobservable acts or processes), when the concepts of
believing, knowing, and the like are actually dispositional (1949,
33). Properly noting category distinctions may help alleviate a
variety of philosophical problems and perplexities, and the idea of
the category mistake was widely wielded (by Ryle and others) with this
aim. Ofra Magidor suggests that it is “far from clear what Ryle
took the central mistake in the dualistic position to be” (2013,
10).  Jonah Goldwater (forthcoming), however, argues that, in The
Concept of Mind, the category mistakes Ryle identifies all have
the form of mistakenly conjoining entities that belong in two
different categories – implicitly assigning their conjuncts to a
shared category. But on Ryle’s view (Goldwater argues) there is
often no single highest category (‘existent’) under which
we can subsume the conjoined entities, and so we cannot sensibly
conjoin, count, or quantify over them together. This, Goldwater
argues, not only clarifies the basis for Ryle’s critique of both
Cartesian and physicalist theories of mind, but also has the potential
to dissolve various current debates in metaphysics, such as arguments
against co-location that are based on denying (for example) that there
is a statute and a lump both on the pedestal.
Along similar lines, Thomasson (2007) argues
that various mistakes and puzzlements in ontology can be traced to the
mistaken use of category-neutral existential and quantificational
claims. A great many
arguments in ontology rely on claims about whether, in various
situations, there is some object present (or how many objects
there are), where the term ‘object’ must be used in a category-neutral
way for the argument to go through (Thomasson 2007, 112–118). But if
existential and quantificational claims must tacitly
presuppose some category or categories of entity over which we are
quantifying, then such arguments go astray. Thomasson (2007) gives
independent grounds for thinking that all quantification must at least
tacitly presuppose a category or categories of entity over which we
are quantifying, and argues that adopting that view provides the
uniform basis for dissolving a number of problems supposed to arise
with accepting an ontology of ordinary objects.
Work on category distinctions is also relevant to debates in
linguistics and philosophy of language about what, exactly, a category
mistake is, and why category mistakes are infelicitous. Ofra Magidor
(2013) surveys past answers to the question of what makes a category
mistake infelicitous, including: that they are syntactically
ill-formed, that they are meaningless, that they are meaningful but
lacking in truth-value, and that they are (despite being well formed,
meaningful and having truth-value) pragmatically
inappropriate. Magidor argues against the first three options, and
defends instead a presuppositional account of why sentences that seem
to contain category mistakes are infelicitous. Roughly, on her view, a
sentence like ‘Two is green’ triggers the presupposition
that two is colored – a presupposition that is difficult to
accommodate (2013, 132). Thus, on her analysis, the sentence is
infelicitous, but still has a truth-value (it is false).
While those who only make use of the idea of category differences
(rather than purporting to offer a category system) have no need to
worry about how to provide an exhaustive list of categories, they
nonetheless owe an account of the conditions under which we can
legitimately claim that two entities, concepts, or terms are of
different categories, so that we know when a category mistake is (and
is not) being made. Otherwise, they would face the charge of
arbitrariness or ad hocery in views about which categories
there are or where category differences lie. Yet there is little more
agreement about the proper criteria for distinguishing categories than
there is about what categories there are.
Ryle famously considered absurdities to be the key to detecting
category differences. But although Ryle made the method famous, he
apparently derived the idea from Husserl’s method of distinguishing
categories of meaning (cf. Ryle 1970, 8; Simons 1995, 120; Thomasson
2002, 124–8, and §1.3 above). But while Husserl used
syntactic nonsense as a way of detecting differences in
categories of meaning (yielding different grammatical
categories), Ryle broadened the idea, taking absurdities more
widely conceived to be symptoms of differences in logical or
conceptual categories (1938 [1971], 180). Thus, e.g., the
statement “She came home in a flood of tears and a
sedan-chair” (Ryle 1949, 22) is perfectly well-formed
syntactically, but nonetheless Ryle classifies it as a sentence that
is absurd, where the absurdity is a symptom of the fact that the
sentence conjoins terms of different categories.
In his earlier paper “Categories”, Ryle describes the test
for category differences as follows: “Two proposition-factors
are of different categories or types, if there are sentence-frames
such that when the expressions for those factors are imported as
alternative complements to the same gap-signs, the resultant sentences
are significant in the one case and absurd in the other”
(1938 [1971], 181) – in other words, two expressions (or rather:
what they signify) differ in category if there are contexts in which
substituting one expression for the other results in absurdity. This
test, of course, provides no way of establishing that two
expressions are of the same category (but only that they are
not), since there is an infinite number of sentence-frames, and one
may always yet be found that does not permit the substitution to be
made without absurdity. It also leaves open and merely intuitive the
notion of ‘absurdity’ itself; in fact, Ryle concludes his
paper “Categories” with the question “But what are
the tests of absurdity?” (1938 [1971], 184). Ryle’s approach
was further developed, in a more formal fashion, by Fred Sommers
(1959, 1971).
J. J. C. Smart (1953) criticized Ryle’s criterion for drawing
category distinctions on grounds that it could apparently be used to
establish a category difference between any two expressions
whatsoever.  “Thus ‘the seat of the – is hard’
works if ‘chair’ or ‘bench’ is put into the
blank, but not if ‘table’ or ‘bed’ is. And if
furniture words do not form a category, we may well ask what do”
(1953, 227). Without a test for absurdity apart from a certain kind of
intuitive unacceptability to native speakers, we seem to be left
without a means of declaring ‘Saturday is in bed’ to be a
category violation but ‘The seat of the bed is hard’ not
to be. Bernard Harrison attempts to meet this challenge by
distinguishing the sorts of inappropriateness that result from
violations of category facts (such as the former) from those that
result from mere violations of facts of usage (the latter) (1965,
315–16). The use of the term ‘bed’ could conceivably
be extended in ways that would make ‘The seat of the bed is
hard’ acceptable (e.g., if beds came to be made with seats),
whereas ‘Saturday’ could not conceivably be extended in a
way that would make ‘Saturday is in bed’
acceptable – any such attempted ‘extension’ would just
involve using ‘Saturday’ homonymously (e.g., as the name
for a day of the week and for a person) (1965, 316–18). For
further discussion of intersubstitutability approaches to drawing
category distinctions, see Westerhoff (2005, 40–59 and 2002,
338–339). Westerhoff (2004) develops a method of distinguishing
categories based on substitutability in worldly states of affairs
rather than language.
Frege treats distinctions in categories as correlates of distinctions
in types of linguistic expression. The category of object,
for example, is distinguished by reference to the linguistic category
of proper name (Dummett 1973 [1981], 55–56; cf. Wright
1983, 13 and Hale 1987, 3–4) – i.e., an object just is the
correlate of a proper name, where proper names are held to include all
singular terms (including singular substantival phrases preceded by
the definite article). Broadly Fregean approaches have been more
recently developed and defended by Michael Dummett (1973 [1981]) and Bob
Hale (2010).
Hale develops and defends the Fregean idea that “the division of
non-linguistic entities into different types or categories [is]
dependent upon a prior categorization of the types of expressions by
means of which we refer to them” (2010, 403). As he develops the
idea, to be an object is “to be the referent of
a possible singular term, to be a property is to be the
referent of a possible (first-level) predicate, and so on for
other cases” (2010, 411). He also argues that this encourages a
deflationary approach to existence questions according to which we may
argue for the existence of entities of a certain kind by simply
arguing “that there are true statements involving expressions of
the relevant kind” (2010, 406).
Dummett (1973 [1981]) also aims to develop and precisify a broadly
Fregean approach to category distinctions. Frege leaves the
distinction between so-called ‘proper names’ and other
parts of speech merely intuitively understood, but Dummett argues
that, e.g., one could make a start at criteria for distinguishing
proper names by requiring substitutability of terms while preserving
the well-formedness of a sentence (which, as we have seen in
§1.3, also plays a role in Husserl’s distinction of meaning
categories), and while preserving the validity of various patterns of
inference (where the latter requirement is needed to distinguish
proper names from other substantival terms such as
‘someone’ and ‘nobody’) (1973 [1981], 58 ff.).
(For further refinements of these criteria, see Dummett (1973 [1981],
61–73) and Hale (1987, Chapter 2).)
In line with Frege’s requirement (1884 [1968], §62) that names
must be associated with a criterion of identity, Dummett argues that an
additional test (beyond these formal tests) is needed to distinguish
genuine proper names (to which objects correspond) from other sorts of
expression: “Even though an expression passes the more formal
tests we devised, it is not to be classified as a proper name, or
thought of as standing for an object, unless we can speak of a
criterion of identity, determined by the sense of the expression, which
applies to the object for which it stands” (1973 [1981], 79).
Thus once grammatical categories are distinguished, enabling us to
thereby distinguish the logical category object by reference
to the linguistic category of proper name, we can go on to
draw out category distinctions among objects. To avoid confusion,
Dummett calls the first range of distinctions (among logical
categories of objects, properties, relations, etc.) distinctions among
‘types’ and the second range of distinctions (within the
type object) distinctions among ‘categories’
(1973 [1981], 76).
Since, as Dummett argues (in a point further developed in Lowe 1989
and Wiggins 2001), proper names and sortal terms must be associated
with a criterion of identity that determines the conditions under
which the term may be correctly applied again to one and the same
thing (1973 [1981], 73–75), we may use the associated criteria of
identity in order to distinguish categories of objects referred
to. All of those names and general sortal terms (usable in forming
complex names) that share a criterion of identity are said to be terms
of the same category, even if the criteria of application for
the associated sortals vary (1973 [1981], 546). Thus, e.g., the sortal
terms ‘horse’ and ‘cow’ (similarly, names of
horses and cows) are terms of the same category, since they share the
identity criteria suitable for animals.
As Lowe (1989, 108–118) notes, this approach to categories blocks
certain reductivist moves in metaphysics. For, e.g., if sortal terms
such as ‘person’ and ‘organism’ are associated
with different identity conditions, then those who seek to reductively
identify persons with biological organisms are involved in a category
mistake.
The idea that category distinctions among objects may be drawn out in
terms of the identity and/or existence conditions associated with
terms of each category has recently gained popularity. Though they
differ in details, versions of the approach have been utilized not
only by Frege, Dummett and Hale but also by Lowe (2006, 6) and
Thomasson (2007). 
This approach to drawing category distinctions among objects can avoid
various potential problems and sources of skepticism. It is not subject
to problems like those Smart raised for Ryle’s criterion, for
days of the week clearly have different identity conditions than do
persons, whereas beds and chairs seem to share identity conditions
(those suitable for artifacts). Such a method of drawing out categories
also is not subject to the sorts of skepticism raised above for
category systems. Here there is no claim to provide an exhaustive list
of categories, and for a principled reason: different categories may
come into discussion as long as nominative terms or concepts associated
with distinct identity conditions may be invented.
Following this method also guarantees that the categories
distinguished are mutually exclusive, for it is a corollary of this
position that entities may be identified only if they are governed by
the same identity conditions (and meet those), so that it is ruled
out a priori that one and the same entity could belong to two
or more distinct categories, in violation of the mutual exclusivity
requirement.
This method of distinguishing categories also provides a principled
way of answering some of the central questions for theories of
categories, including whether or not there is a single summum
genus, and what the relationship is between linguistic/conceptual
and ontological categories. Such completely general terms as
“thing” “entity” or “object”, on
Dummett’s view, are not genuine sortal terms, since they fail to
provide any criteria of identity. Thus clearly on this view (as on
Aristotle’s) there is no summum genus under which categories
such as artifact, animal, etc. could be arranged as
species, since (lacking criteria of identity) such candidate catch-all
terms as ‘object’, ‘being’,
‘entity’ and the like are not even sortal terms and so
cannot be categorial terms.
Views that, like the Rylean and Fregean approaches, distinguish categories by
way of language, are sometimes criticized as
capable only of noting differences in category of certain linguistic
expressions. For why, it might be asked, should that have anything to
tell us about differences in the categories of real things? 
Hale argues that there is no serious alternative to using types of
expression that aim at referring to entities of different types if we
hope to characterize such basic logical categories (or types) as
object and property (2010, 408). For what it is to be an object or
property evidently cannot be conveyed merely by ostension, nor by more
substantive criteria, without being restrictive in ways that beg the
question against various views of what objects or properties there
are. Moreover, he argues that we can avoid making our (logical)
categories unduly dependent on what language we actually have by
treating objects and properties as correlates of possible,
not merely actual, expressions of the relevant sorts (2010, 411).
Dummett’s way of understanding categories of objects also opens the
way for a reply to this objection. For Dummett argues that, without
some associated categorial concept, we cannot single out objects (even
using names or demonstratives) (1973 [1981], 571). Categorial concepts
are necessary for us to single out ‘things’ at all, and
cannot be derived from considering ‘things’ preidentified
without regard to categories. (It would thus follow from this that
Johansson’s idea that we could arrive at categories by
abstraction from considering individual things would be
wrong-headed.) On this view, then, categories not only may
but must be distinguished primarily by way of distinguishing
the identity conditions criterially associated with the proper use of
different sortal terms and names. If we cannot refer to, discover, or
single out objects at all except by way of a certain categorial
conception (providing application and identity conditions), then the
categorial differences in our sortal terms or names (marked by their
differences in identity conditions) are
ipso facto, and automatically, category differences in the
things singled out by these terms – the possibility of a
‘mistake’ here just does not arise, and the connection
between the category of an expression used to refer to a given entity
and the category of the entity referred to is ensured.