Cockburn was born in London on August 16,
 1679.[1]
 As a child, she taught herself to write, became proficient in French,
and studied Latin grammar and logic. In addition to her studies, she
devoted time to writing plays. In 1695, Cockburn’s first play
Agnes de Castro was staged, and was published the following
year. In 1698, her second play, Fatal Friendship, was staged
and printed. Both plays were very well received and she enjoyed some
celebrity in theatrical circles. Cockburn wrote three more plays over
the next three years.
While Catharine Trotter was establishing her reputation as a
playwright, she was also studying Locke’s work, An Essay
Concerning Human Understanding. Trotter was so deeply impressed
with his ideas that she felt obliged to take up her pen in defense of
Locke against one critic in particular. This critic was the
posthumously-identified Thomas Burnet, who, beginning in 1697, wrote
three pamphlets in criticism of
Locke’s Essay. Cockburn’s first philosophical
work was a response to Burnet. Entitled The Defence of
Mr. Locke’s Essay of Human Understanding, Cockburn’s
work was published in 1702. Locke himself was so impressed with the
work, he presented Cockburn with a substantial gift of money and books
in appreciation.
In 1739, Cockburn wrote her Remarks upon some Writers in the
Controversy concerning the Foundation of moral Duty and moral
Obligation. It was finally published, anonymously, in 1743 in the
English literary journal The History of the Works of the
Learned. Remarks upon some Writers considers primarily
the work of philosopher Samuel Clarke and various critics of his moral
theory. In 1747, she published a critique of the moral philosophy of
Dr. Thomas Rutherforth, entitled Remarks upon the Principles and
Reasonings of Dr. Rutherforth’s Essay on the Nature and Obligation of
Virtue, whose work was strongly critical of Samuel
Clarke’s moral theory. In this work, Cockburn again defends a Clarkean
view of morality.
Cockburn was also deeply interested in religious issues and she wrote
and published a series of theological works. These included a work, in
the form of two letters, that examined Catholic and Protestant
doctrine entitled A Discourse concerning a Guide in
Controversies. This work was first published in 1707. Another
work, first published in 1726, entitled A Letter to Dr. Holdsworth
Occasioned by his Sermon, was mainly a defense of Locke’s
orthodoxy against charges of heresy. She wrote and published a second
Vindication of Locke’s orthodoxy against Holdsworth, in two
parts.
Cockburn’s work had attracted sufficient attention that Thomas Birch
approached her with the idea of a volume of her collected works,
including her correspondence. She aided in the editing of this work,
but did not live to see its publication in 1751. She died in May of
1749.
Although primarily concerned with moral issues, Cockburn philosophical
writings (which are taken here to include The Defence of
Mr. Locke’s Essay of Human Understanding (hereafter referred to
as the Defence), Remarks upon some Writers and
Remarks upon the Principles and Reasonings of Dr.
Rutherforth’s Essay) address a range of philosophical issues. In
the Defence, she answers Burnet on a series of issues
regarding the deficiencies of Locke’s empiricism, which include not
only moral knowledge, but also the knowledge humans can have of God’s
veracity and of the immortality of the human soul. There is also a
broad range of topics addressed in her work Remarks upon some
Writers, in which Cockburn begins by addressing several
philosophical issues – necessity, the infinitude of space, and
the nature and existence of spirits with regard to the notion of
substance.  The latter discussion revolves generally around
epistemological concerns regarding the knowledge of real essences and
the nature of substance, in which she argues that spirits must have
extension of a sort in order to be proper substances. She makes this
argument by appeal to a broadly Lockean view regarding substance.
However, it is her moral theory that is most prominently emphasized
throughout her works. Cockburn was mainly concerned with grappling
with the defects and strengths of some of the predominating issues in
moral theory at this time. Cockburn’s own position is an amalgam of
three dominant strains of eighteenth-century morality: moral
rationalism, moral fitness theory and moral sense theory. Moral
rationalism is, broadly speaking, the view that morality is the result
of a rational process, whereby the mind reasons about moral ideas and
creates moral rules (although many thinkers, like Cockburn, argued
that the mind, by this process, is actually in some way discovering
eternal moral rules).  Moral fitness theory is a rationalist theory
that includes the notion that the human mind is able to grasp the
various moral relations that result from the essential natures of
things in the universe; e.g., the nature of humans and God creates a
relation that necessitates the allegiance of humans to their superior
(this view was made most famous by Samuel Clarke). Moral sense theory
is the view that humans possess a special sensory ability that can
determine, pre-rationally, what is good or evil (This view was made
most famous by Shaftesbury and Hutcheson). However, for many
theorists, like Cockburn, this sensory information is not definitive
– but is seen as an aid to moralizing that can, and should, be
corrected by reason.
Cockburn’s earliest philosophical work, the Defence is a
response to the work one of Locke’s critics, Thomas Burnet. In a
series of critical pamphlets, Burnet raised doubts concerning the
tenability of Locke’s epistemology as a foundation for, among other
things, moral knowledge. In the Essay and other works, Locke
had suggested that morality could be known by reason and had
emphasized the demonstrative character of morality – thereby
making a claim to the certainty with which moral ideas could be
known. However, Locke never provided an explicit account of how
fundamental moral ideas are derived. Burnet concludes that Locke’s
epistemology is simply insufficient to the task, and that moral ideas,
on Locke’s system, remain as uncertain as the ideas of God’s nature
and the immortality of the soul. Burnet uses his critique of Locke as
the springboard for his own moral position, one best described as a
brand of moral sense theory, in which conscience is the human capacity
for empirically discerning the moral value of acts. In other words,
for Burnet, one can, upon observing a given set of circumstances, know
with immediate certainty whether that act is morally good or evil.
Cockburn responds to Burnet by showing that Locke’s epistemology can
satisfy these concerns. Cockburn approaches the question of Locke’s
epistemological foundations by emphasizing an aspect of Locke’s theory
of ideas of which Locke himself makes little use in his account of
moral knowledge. However, it is a concept that he uses in his proof of
God’s existence (the proof of which Cockburn reiterates in her
Defence). Cockburn’s moral theory employs Locke’s concept of
reflection as a foundation not just for our knowledge of God, but also
as a means for human moral knowledge. She argues that it is by
reflecting upon the operations of our own minds that we can reach an
understanding of both human and divine nature. According to Cockburn,
morality is grounded in human nature, and the truth of moral laws is
guaranteed by the fact that humans are designed by God. This emphasis
on human nature leads Cockburn quite naturally into a fitness account
of morality that predates Clarke’s own view – human nature
entails that certain actions are fit and appropriate for humans and
certain are not. In later works, Cockburn explicitly adopts the
language of fitness relations to describe the necessary moral order
arising from our created natures.
In the Defence, Cockburn also introduces the idea of
‘conscience’ as a way of accounting for human moral
sentiment.  According to Cockburn, conscience is a faculty, which she
describes as a “sudden affection.” This idea of conscience
as a kind of natural moral affection complements Cockburn’s view that
morality is founded upon human nature: Moral knowledge arises
from reflection upon our own natures and moral affection
arises out of our natural constitutions. Cockburn uses this notion of
conscience as a response to Burnet’s account of morality. She argues
that conscience is not an immediate source of moral knowledge, as
Burnet would have it, but a source of moral affection or feeling that
complements, and presupposes, a proper (i.e., rational) knowledge of
moral laws.
In later works, Cockburn adopts the term ‘moral sense’ to
describe the affective faculty of conscience, a term which is not
meant to signal any affinity with Francis Hutcheson. She understood
Hutcheson to found morality exclusively on the moral sense while her
own view sees moral sense as only one component within a largely
rationalistic account of human moral understanding. It is not
surprising that Cockburn developed a proto-moral sense theory in the
Defence and in later works. She sought early on to establish
a foundation for morality in human nature that sufficiently accounted
for the type of natural and seemingly immediate human moral
sensibility that Burnet believed was not accounted for by Locke.
Cockburn takes up the defense of Samuel Clarke’s theory in later
works. Her first defense of Clarke was made in Remarks upon some
Writers. Here we find the language of ‘fitness’ occupying
an even more prominent place than it had done in the Defence.
This is only natural, given that the work is partly devoted to a
defense of Clarke’s fitness theory, which had come to prominence in
the intervening years. Throughout her discussion, Cockburn maintains a
commitment to the basic view that morality is founded in the nature of
humans and God. She sees this view as cohering with the general
concept of fitness that she locates in Clarke and his followers. In
the Remarks upon some Writers, Cockburn responds to critics
of Clarkean moral fitness theory. These critics attack Clarke from a
shared basic view of morality as a system of laws expressing God’s
will. These laws are enforced by rewards and punishments that obligate
by appealing to the fundamental human desire for happiness and freedom
from pain. Rewards and punishments are thus seen as the fundamental
means of harmonizing God’s will and human interest. Their main
objection to fitness theory is that fitness relations are not
primitive moral constructs, but actually presuppose more primitive
constructs – i.e., God’s will and human interest. Clarke’s
theory is accused of failing to provide sufficient account of these
fundamental facts of divine and human nature. Cockburn responds to
this line of criticism by arguing that fitness theory in fact rests
upon a more robust conception of the relationship between the will of
God and human interest than do the voluntarist accounts offered by
Clarke’s critics.
According to Cockburn, fitness theory assumes that both human nature
and God’s creative will are fundamental for morality. Fitness theory
rests upon the view that human interest is a basic expression of a
human nature brought into being by divine will. Natural good and evil
are thus fundamental concepts for moral fitness theory, for it is
human nature and all that is associated with it that provides the
basis for moral law. For Cockburn, it is through knowledge of our own
and God’s natures that humans can understand the right and proper
relations that ought to subsist in the universe. According to this
account, moral obligation arises from the demands of our natures
– that is, we ought to be guided by that which is suitable and
proper to our natures as rational and social beings. Common sense
judges virtuous practice according to what is fit and natural, and not
merely according to the good the practice produces.
In Cockburn’s third and last philosophical work, the Remarks upon
the Principles and Reasonings of Dr. Rutherforth’s Essay, she
answers Dr. Thomas Rutherforth, a critic of Clarke’s fitness theory.
Rutherforth himself offers a brand of consequentialism, defining as
moral goodness that which brings about good and prevents
evil. Cockburn objects to this view, arguing that it ignores the
underlying fitness relations that serve to define what harms and
benefits are significant or relevant for human beings in particular
circumstances. Even a hermit or someone stranded on a deserted island
may possess a sense of virtue, Cockburn argues, since virtue is not
founded on our prediction of the effects our actions will have on
other people. On Cockburn’s view, humans have a natural and innate
tendency toward what is good and benevolent that transcends merely
weighing the effects of one’s actions. Cockburn identifies the moral
sense as being a source of this disinterested affection essential to
moral decision-making.  While reason retains its position of
prominence in her morality, the moral sense plays an important role
according to her in motivating agents to act morally. The obligation
we feel to obey moral rules arises, for Cockburn, not from reason
alone, but from the perceptions of natural conscience, or moral
sense. The moral sense, if governed by the “natural perceptions
of the understanding,” ought to influence our actions – it
is a necessary component in creating moral obligation.
Here again, Cockburn sought to distance herself from Hutcheson’s moral
sense theory. For Cockburn, moral sense was an important factor in
accounting for moral judgments, but she insisted on its subordination
to reason as a guide in moral judgment. She holds this moral sense
account in concert with her rationalistic fitness view. She presents
her moral sense theory within the context of a general moral fitness
theory, suggesting that Clarkean moral fitness theory could easily
accommodate such an account. In this way, Cockburn sees herself as
offering an account of moral motivation not entirely obvious in
Clarke’s theory, but tempering the suggestion of blind instinct she
sees in Hutcheson’s moral sense view. Cockburn’s morality sought to
establish a foundation for morality in human nature that sufficiently
accounted for the type of natural and seemingly immediate human moral
sensibility that Burnet believed was not accounted for by Locke and
that Clarke’s critics saw as lacking in his fitness view.