Article 1 of the United Nations Convention defines a child as any
human being below the age of eighteen years ‘unless,’ it
adds, ‘under the law applicable to the child, majority is
attained earlier’ (United Nations 1989). In what follows this
definition will be assumed. Some think it obvious that children do
have rights and believe that the only interesting question is whether
children possess all and only those rights which adults possess.
Others are sceptical believing that given the nature both of rights
and of children it is wrong to think of children as right-holders.
One background worry against which such scepticism may be set is an
oft-expressed concern at the proliferation of rights by either
extending the list of right-holders or expressing more demands as
rights claims. The concern is that the prodigality of rights
attributions devalues them rights. A favoured metaphor in this context
is monetary: the inflation of rights talk devalues the currency of
rights (Sumner 1987, 15; Steiner 1998, 233). 
This thought must trouble the defenders of children’s rights
since, after all, talk of children having rights has post-dated the
introduction and general acceptance of rights talk as such. There are,
however, more particular reasons for being suspicious of the idea that
children have rights. To appreciate these it is necessary to be
clearer about the language of rights. With respect to rights in
general we can inquire as to what it is for someone to have a right,
or, put another way, we can ask what being a right-holder consists in.
There are here two competing accounts, one of which is seen as fatal
to the idea of children as right-holders. We can ask a different
question, namely what must be true for there to be rights. That is, we
can try to specify what have been called the ‘existence
conditions for rights’ (Sumner 1987, 10–11). We can also
construct a taxonomy of the different kinds of rights. Finally we can
ask what the moral significance of having a right is, or what weight
rights have. With regard to any acknowledged right we can identify it
by means of its content (what is it a right to?) and its scope (who
has it and against whom do they have it?), as well as its weight
relative to other rights and to other moral considerations. Not all of
these questions are relevant when we want to focus on the particular
issue of whether or not children have rights, and, if so, which ones.
However the first question raised above is especially salient.
What is it for someone to have a right? Here there are two competing
theories whose respective virtues and vices have been extensively
debated. In one camp is the will or choice theory (Hart 1973; Sumner
1987; Steiner 1994); inthe opposing camp is the welfare or interest
theory (MacCormick 1982; Raz 1984; Kramer 1998). The first theory sees
a right as the protected exercise of choice. In particular to have a
right is to have the power to enforce or waive the duty of which the
right is the correlative. The second theory sees a right as the
protection of an interest of sufficient importance to impose on others
certain duties whose discharge allows the right-holder to enjoy the
interest in question. It is natural to think that each theory is more
appropriate for certain kinds of rights. The will theory fits rights
actively to do things (to speak, to associate with others) whereas the
interest theory fits rights passively to enjoy or not to suffer things
(to receive health care, not to be tortured). However the distinction
between the theories of what it is to have a right is not the
distinction between different kinds of rights, even if there are
important relations between the two distinctions.
In this present context one alleged defect of the will theory
is——its exclusion of some humans from the category of
right-holders. This is because whilst all humans, and perhaps many
classes of non-humans such as animals, have interests that ought to be
protected, not all humans have the capacity to exercise choice.
Children—along with the severely mentally disabled and the
comatose—cannot thus, on the will theory, be the holders of
rights. For at least one prominent defender of the interest theory the
fact that children evidently do have rights is sufficient to display
the falsity of the will theory, thus making children a
‘test-case’ for the latter (MacCormick 1982). Of course
someone who is convinced of the correctness of the will theory might
readily concede that the theory entails the denial of rights to
children but see no reason to abandon the theory. For her the
entailment is not, ‘Children have rights. Therefore, the will
theory is false’. It is, ‘The will theory is true.
Therefore, children cannot have rights’.
The claims in question can be set out as follows. These are not
premises in a single argument. Rather they are claims made and
conclusions drawn by the different theories of rights. In particular
claims 1–4 are made by the will theory, and claims 5–7 by
the interest theory.:
To explain (6). An important claim held by many is that for each and
every right there is a correlative duty. To say that I have a right to
something is to say that someone else has a duty to me in respect of
that thing. This of course does not mean that there may not be some
kinds of duties which do not correlate withany rights. Indeed some
critics of children’s rights will concede that adults have
duties to protect important interests of children but deny that these
interests correlate with rights held by children. Now clearly (4) and
(7) contradict one another: either children are right-holders or they
are not. (4) follows from (2) and (3). (2) expresses the will theory.
(3) is obviously a contestable, and contested, claim. But insofar as
children cannot exercise choice and are required to do so on the will
theory if they are to have rights, then it follows that they cannot
have rights. (7), on the other hand, follows from (5) and (6) which
give expression to the interest theory, although they do so only
insofar as the duties adults have in respect of children are such that
they do correlate with rights held by children. If they do then as
things stand either the will theory is true and children do not have
rights, or the interest theory is true and they do. Or, put another
way, either children have rights in which case the will theory cannot
be true, or they do not in which case that theory could be true.
A will theorist who did not want to deny that children have rights
might deny (2). He might say that although it is true that children
are themselves incapable of exercising choice it does not follow that
they cannot still be possessors of rights. For children might have
representatives, such as most obviously their parents or guardians,
who could exercise the choices on behalf of the children. The
representatives would choose for the children as the children would
choose if they were capable of choosing for themselves. This proxy
exercise of choice would take place only during the period when the
children were incapable of exercising choice and in acknowledgment of
the fact that the children will eventually be capable of exercising
their own choices. The will theory’s most prominent defender
(Hart 1973, 184 n.86) makes just such a modification of the will
theory in respect of children.
Now such a modification must meet a number of challenges. First, how
should the representatives be selected? Should those empowered to act
as representatives be those who are most likely to choose as the
children would choose if capable, or are there are other independent
grounds on which they are selected—such, as most obviously, that
they are the child’s parents? Think of the representation of
children as like a trust. The children entrust their decision-making
to their representatives who are thus their trustees. Now, second, are
the terms of the trust sufficiently clear and determinate? Is it, for
instance, perspicuous and evident what a child would choose if capable
of choosing? Note that the criterion is not what is in the best
interests of the child for, consistent with the will theory, we must
appeal to choices rather than interests. It is not easy to say what
some adult who cannot currently choose—because she is, for
instance, temporarily comatose—would choose if able. It is even
harder in the case of someone, a child, who is for the period of
childhood simply incapable of making any choices. Third, how is the
trust to be enforced and by whom? The representative may be presumed
to have a duty to choose as the child would choose if able. If rights
are correlative with duties then someone other than the representative
and the child must be in a position to enforce or waive this duty.
Could this be the state or its representative?
If the will theory can meet these formidable challenges it can accord
rights to children who are not then a straightforward
‘test-case’ for determining which theory of rights is
correct. Moreover, the will theorist can make two further points.
First she might accept (6)—that rights and duties are
correlative— but deny or at least significantly modify
(5)—that adults have duties to protect the important interests
of children. She could say that the duties that are rightly specified
under (5) are not the duties that correlate with rights. This is just
to say, as all rights theorists will repeatedly say, that rights do
not exhaust the moral domain. What we must do because others have
rights against us is not everything we must morally do. (6) asserts
that for each and every right there is a correlate duty. It is not the
claim that for each and every duty there is a correlate right. So we
should, as adults, ensure that the interests of children are protected
and promoted. It does not follow that they have rights against us.
Second a will theorist might accept (5) and (6) as they stand but say
that the rights which correlate with these duties are possessed not by
the children but by adults who are in the best position to protect the
children. Thus even if the duties adults have in respect of children
do correlate with rights it does not follow that the rights in
question are held by those whose interests they protect. Indeed it
might be argued that it does not matter whether the rights are
possessed by those whose interests they protect. Does it really
matters whether the rights that correlate with adult duties to
children are held by the children or by those who would act as best
they could for the children? (Steiner 1998, 261).
This review of the will and interest theory has simply examined the
issue of whether the denial of children’s rights can be thought
of as a test case for the probity of the will theory. There may of
course be other considerations that tell against the will theory and
in favour of the interest theory; or the converse.
Grant that on either account of what it is to have a right children
could, in principle, be the holders of rights. Ought children to have
rights? And, if so, what rights should they have? Note that the rights
can be moral or legal. Children do have rights in law (under the UN
Convention most notably). These need not be accepted as moral rights.
However someone could believe that the best way, on balance, to
protect the interests of children is by continuing to accord them the
legal rights they have under something like the Convention. Someone
might also believe that children should have legal rights but not
those they are currently accorded. Conversely, if children do have
moral rights, these need not be enshrined in law, although there would
evidently be a strong presumption that they should. In the first
instance the question is whether children should have moral rights. If
they should then there would be a good case for thinking that these
should be legally protected rights. 
Those who claim that children should have all the rights that adults
presently have are called ‘liberationists’ to be discussed
in the next section and include Holt, Farson and Cohen (Farson 1974;
Holt 1975; Cohen 1980). We can distinguish real from rhetorical
liberationists. The latter are those who see the demand for equal
rights for children as a means both of drawing attention to the
discrimination that children suffer by comparison with adults in their
treatment and for improving their condition. A rhetorical
liberationist does not actually believe that children should be the
equals of adults. Rather he thinks that claiming as much is the best
way of advancing their interests. A real liberationist does view
children as the equals of adults. Then there are those who think that
children should have some but not all of the rights which adults have.
Finally there are those who think that children should not have any
rights. Or, put less brusquely, they are sceptical, for theoretical
and political reasons, about attributing rights to children. Their
case is made in three ways. The first is to assert what liberationists
deny, namely that children are not qualified as adults are to have
rights. The second is to argue that the ascription of rights to
children is inappropriate because it displays a misunderstanding of
what childhood is, what children are like, or what relationships
children stand in to adults. The third is to argue that,
notwithstanding their lack of rights, children can be assured of
adequate moral protection by other means.
Let me take the first claim first. The question of qualification is
the question of whether children have the requisite capacity for
rights. On the will theory of rights the relevant capacity qualifying
children for possession of rights is that of the ability to choose.
But there is a more general issue of capacity that is in dispute
whatever theory of rights is defended and that follows from attention
to the fact that rights have a content. Each right is a right to do,
to be or to have something. Arguably only those rights can be
possessed whose content can be appropriately attributed to their
owners. A right to free speech cannot properly be possessed by an
entity incapable of speech. One conventional way to think of rights in
terms of their content is to distinguish between freedom rights
(rights to choose, such as to vote, practise a religion, and to
associate) and welfare rights (rights that protect important interests
such as health).
Children in general lack certain cognitive abilities—to acquire
and to process information in an ordered fashion, to form consistent
and stable beliefs, to appreciate the significance of options and
their consequences. They also lack certain volitional
abilities—to form, retain and act in the light of consistent
desires, to make independent choices. Children are not unique amongst
humans in this respect. Those adults who are seriously mentally
impaired are also disqualified in this sense. Which is of course just
to say that these adults are childlike. Children are unique in the
following regard. Not all humans are seriously mentally impaired, but
all humans were once children. Thus every one of us was, during our
early years, not qualified to be a holder of rights even if now we are
so qualified.
It is worth distinguishing – as Schapiro (1999, 2003) does
– between two ways in which a child is, relative to an adult,
incapable. Schapiro argues that childhood is a ‘normative
predicament’ wherein the child is in a state of nature, lacking
any independent will whereby she might authoritatively and in her own
voice order her desires. She is an ‘instinctual wanton’.
On her account the capacities a child lacks are not those of making
good choices, but those of making any choices as such.
A child’s incapacity, in the senses indicated above, would seem
to disqualify them from having liberty rights. Someone incapable of
choosing cannot have a right whose content is a fundamental choice.
If, as some maintain, all human rights are best interpreted as
protecting human agency and its preconditions, then it would follow
that those incapable of agency, such as young children, should not be
accorded human rights (Griffin 2002). On the other hand it could be
maintained that whilst children lack agency they certainly have
fundamental interests meriting protection and thus at least have
welfare rights (Brighouse 2002). Moreover it can be important to
recognise that children become beings capable of making choices and
that rights may be attributed in recognition of this gradual
development (Brennan 2002).
The second claim that may be made in denying rights to children is
that the ascription of rights to children is inappropriate because it
displays a misunderstanding of what childhood is, of what children are
like, or of what relationships children do or ought to stand in to
adults. This claim comes in various forms.
On one view we should start our thinking about what morally we owe to
children by specifying our obligations as adults to them
(O’Neill 1988). There certainly exist what are called perfect
obligations. These are obligations that are either owed to all
children or to some specified set of children. They are perfect in
that it is completely specified whom they are owed to and what is owed
to them. We all are obliged not to maltreat any child and parents have
a particular duty to care for their children. But then there are
imperfect obligations which are those of caring for children to whom
we do not, as parents for instance, have specific obligations. All
adults owe these but they are not owed to all children (how could they
possibly be?) nor is it specified what precisely is owed to them (this
will depend on circumstances).
Perhaps then we can agree that we are all under a duty to prevent the
abuse of children. But clearly we cannot, as individuals, each act to
stop every child being abused. Moreover what we ought to do—for
instance, by reporting suspected cases of abuse—will depend on
the circumstances, and also on what is in place by way of particular
institutions and laws to deal with child abuse.
Crucially whilst perfect obligations correlate with rights, imperfect
obligations do not. This means that anyone who starts and finishes
thinking about what morally is owed to children in terms of their
rights is unable to capture what imperfect obligations express. Yet
this is to miss much of what is most important about the way in which,
morally, we should as adults stand in relation to children. For the
fulfilment of these imperfect duties of care and concern is what
centrally protects and promotes the lives of children as children.
Thinking ethically about children’s lives in terms of their
putative rights is to misperceive what is of central importance and
value in these lives.
One possible response to O’Neill’s argument is as follows
(Coady 1992). She does not deny that perfect obligations correlate
with rights. Thus to the extent that we do have perfect obligations to
children they do have corresponding rights. Yet O’Neill denies
that imperfect obligations correlate with rights. But why should we
think that? The imperfect obligations are fundamental ones. They are
not supererogatory, that is beyond duty. Adults must show
consideration and kindness to children in general. So why cannot
children claim such kindness and consideration from adults as their
right? O’Neill does say that when imperfect obligations are
institutionalised—when, for instance there are laws and
institutions specifying who should act and how to detect and prevent
child abuse—there are created positive special obligations to
which correspond positive rights. But she adds that the obligations
of, say, the social worker exceed the positive obligations associated
with her job. However this is true of all our obligations, whether
perfect or imperfect. A parent can have positive, that is legally
recognised and sanctioned, duties to her child. Yet her perfect
obligations to her children are not exhaustively specified by what the
law requires of her.
O’Neill’s argument does not rely on any specification of
the content of the obligations that might be owed by adults to
children. Rather it is about the structure of our moral reasoning in
respect of children, and the priority—false in the
argument’s view—that is given to rights. As an argument it
thus bears some comparison with a view that expresses general
scepticism about rights in the context of adult-child relations and
which emphasises the particular character of the family (Schrag 1980;
Schoeman 1980). This view draws attention to the quality and nature of
the relationships within a family. These are marked by an especial
intimacy and by deep, unconditional love between its members. One can
grant that many families do not conform to this ideal and yet
acknowledge that when the family does conform to the ideal it is a
distinctive, and distinctively valuable, form of human
association.
What arguably follows from this ideal of the family is the
inappropriateness of asserting or claiming rights. For to do so would
be to subvert and ultimately destroy what constitutes the family as
the distinctive form of human association it is. Appeal is being made
here to a familiar and oft-drawn distinction between two ways in which
individuals engaged in a common enterprise or bound together in some
enduring association can be assured of their beneficent, or at least
minimally good, treatment of one another. One way is by the
recognition—in law or custom or shared morality—of rights
that all individuals can claim, or by rules of justice—similarly
and generally recognised—which provide an assurance of fair
treatment. Another way is by reliance on the dispositions or attitudes
that the individuals bound together have—spontaneously and
naturally—towards one another. Thus, for instance, if each is
motivated by general benevolence in respect of all then no one has any
need to claim or assert what is due to him as of right or rule. In the
case of the family, it is argued, neither justice nor benevolence
suffices but love does. Of course children may have rights against
those who are not family members (a right, for instance, that their
school teachers provide them with information and skills). Some rights
are held against particular individuals. Others, including the most
important ones, are held against everyone, including parents and other
family members
A further and quite distinct allegation is that not only is there no
need for any such claims, but that allowing them to be made will
erode, and in due course destroy, the dispositions and attitudes that
rendered the need for rights and rules of justices unnecessary in the
first place. This further claim is an influential one in the general
critique communitarianism makes, within political philosophy, of what
is characterised as a rights-based and individualistic liberalism
(see, for instance, Sandel 1982, 32–5). In the context of the
family the claim is that granting its members rights will subvert and
bring about the end of the love between them that made rights
superfluous in the first place.
The arguments considered thus far have appealed to the role that
rights generally do and should play in our moral lives. A further
argument considers what would actually follow from granting rights to
children (Purdy 1992). The argument is that we need as adults to have
acquired certain traits of character if we are to be able to pursue
our goals and lead a valuable life. To acquire these traits it is
essential that we not be allowed as children to make our own choices.
Granting children the liberty to exercise rights is destructive of the
preconditions for the possibility of having fulfilling adult lives.
The central, and empirical, premise in this argument is that children
do not spontaneously and naturally grow into adults. They need to be
nurtured, supported, and, more particularly, subjected to control and
discipline. Without that context giving children the rights that
adults have is bad for the children. It is also bad for the adults
they will turn into, and for the society we share as adults and
children.
The defence of the view that children should not, as the liberationist
asserts, have all the rights that adults have has rested on the claims
that, first, children lack the capacities that qualify adults for the
possession of rights, and, second, that talk of children’s
rights does not capture the truth about their lives or about the
family or encourages a destructive permissiveness that has poor
consequences for adults and their society. The third step in defence
of the denial of rights to children is to provide reassurance that
such a denial is not bad for children.
One can thus maintain that rights do not exhaust the moral domain.
There are things we ought to do which do not correspond to the
obligations we have as the correlates of rights. As adults we should
protect and promote the welfare of children. It need not follow that
they have rights against us. 
But does not talk of the rights of children nevertheless still serve a
political or rhetorical function by reminding of us of what must be
done for them? Might not such talk also serve as a critique of the
extent to which we, as adults, may maintain children in an artificial
condition of dependence and vulnerability, denying them the
opportunity to make their own choices? Are not children one of the
last social groups to be emancipated as others—women,
blacks—already have been, and is not the language of rights the
appropriate mode in which to campaign for that emancipation? The reply
(O’Neill 1988, 459– 463) is that such talk about rights
talk misses what is distinctively different about children as a group.
This is that childhood is not a permanently maintained status
associated with oppression or discrimination. It is rather a stage of
human development which all go through. Moreover the adults who deny
that children do have rights may nevertheless also believe that it is
their duty to ensure that the children for whom they have care do pass
from childhood into adulthood.
The first claim in the defence of the denial of rights to children is
that children are disqualified by virtue of their incapacity to have
rights. Liberationists dispute this. Liberationists can allow that the
key to the appropriateness of giving or not giving rights to children
turns on capacity (Cohen 1980 ix). They will argue, however, that
children are not disqualified from having rights by virtue of their
lack of a capacity that adults do have. Note that on this view
children are entitled to both welfare and freedom rights whereas those
who concede that children lack the latter in virtue of a certain
incapacity can still insist that they ought to have welfare rights
where such an incapacity is not relevant. There are two respects in
which this liberationist case might be modified or qualified. The
first is in its scope. The liberationist might claim that all children
are qualified to have rights, or she might claim only that some
children are so qualified. The latter is the more plausible position
in view of the fact that the very young infant is evidently
incapacitated. Indeed some liberationists seem to recognise as much
even whilst they insist that every child should have rights (Farson
1974, 31, 172, and 185). If the scope of the liberationist claim is
thus limited it does not amount to the view that no line dividing
human rights holders from humans who lack rights should be drawn.
Rather it is the view that such a line has been drawn in the wrong
place.
A second possible qualification of the liberationist view is that
giving rights to children will play an important part in their
acquiring the qualifying capacity. It is not thus argued that children
are capable now and are illegitimately denied their rights. It is
rather that they will only—or at least will more readily or will
at an earlier stage—acquire that capacity if given their rights.
The denial of rights to children is, on this account, one significant
element in a culture that serves artificially to maintain children in
their childlike state of dependence, vulnerability, and immaturity.
Again the qualification can concede that children of a very young age
are not capable enough to have rights, and will not acquire that
capacity even if given rights. Yet it insists that the denial of
rights to children of a certain age on account of their alleged
incapacity is simply self-confirming. They cannot have rights because
they are incapable but they are incapable only because they do not
have these rights. 
One plausible version of the claim refers to the facts of experience.
Children, or at least children of a certain age, may not differ
markedly from adults in respect of their cognitive and volitional
capacities. They may be as capable as older humans of making their own
minds up about what to do and be as independent in their resolution to
act on their choices. But they may simply not have had as much
experience of the world as their adult counterparts. Being thus
naïve and inexperienced in the ways of the world they will not be
as able, that is as qualified, as older (and wiser) humans are to make
sensible choices. Grant that such a lack of experience can be
attributed to a lack of opportunities to exercise choice. If such a
lack of opportunity is in turn attributable not simply to not having
been around for as long but to a denial of the freedom to make their
own choices, then there is a powerful case for liberty rights being
extended, even if cautiously, to these young people.
There are different ways in which the liberationist claim about
capacity—whether qualified or not—can be made. One is by
defending a ‘thin’ definition of capacity. For example it
may be said that children can make choices if what this means is
expressing preferences. Of course the response is that the ability to
choose, thus minimallydefined, is indeed possessed by children (even
fairly young children) but it is not a capacity sufficient to qualify
for rights ownership. What is needed for that is more than simply the
ability to express or communicate a desire; what is needed is an
ability to understand and appreciate the significance of the options
facing one, together with independence of choice. After all the animal
who moves from one feeding bowl to another may be said thereby to
‘choose’ the food in the latter bowl. But the animal does
not have a general capacity of choice sufficient to qualify it as a
holder of liberty rights.
Liberationists might move in the other direction and argue that the
capacity which qualifies adults to have rights is in fact not a
capacity that most, or perhaps any, adults actually possess. Thus it
will be said that no adult fully understands the nature of the choices
she faces, nor is she consistent in her beliefs and desires, nor is
she really independent of the influences of her environment and peers.
Whether the liberationist urges a ‘thin’ definition of
capacity—which the child satisfies as much as the adult—or
argues that on a ‘thick’ definition of capacity neither
adult nor child qualifies as capable, the point is the same. This is
that the alleged differences between children and adults in respect of
a qualifying capacity are not sufficient to warrant the ascription of
rights to the latter and their denial to the former.
One way then to charge that age is an arbitrary means of
distinguishing those qualified and those not qualified to have rights
is that there is, in fact, no real division of capacities. (Cohen
1980, 48) However another way to make the charge of arbitrariness in
turns on the idea that dividing lines as such—‘any’
lines—are arbitrary. Thus, either it will be said that this age
is the wrong dividing point or that using any age is wrong. The first
objection may concede that there is a better age to be used, just as
the second objection may concede that there is a way, better than
using age, to mark the division. The initial and obvious reply to the
second objection is that age as such is not the issue but rather the
reliable correlation of age with the acquisition of those capacities
that qualify a person for the attribution of rights. Some
liberationists may thus not dispute that there should be a threshold
age—one beyond which adult rights are acquired—but think
that the conventional or orthodox threshold is fixed too late.
Liberationists may also simply deny that there should be any threshold
on the grounds that there just is no difference between children and
adults in respect of their respective capacities for any threshold age
to mark. This version of the arbitrariness claim concedes that if age
functions as a threshold it does so only inasmuch as it reliably
correlates with the acquisition of capacities which are necessary
qualifications for the possession of rights. In sum, the arbitrariness
claim amounts either to the denial that the acquisition of the
specified capacities does correlate with the threshold in question or
to the denial that there is any age at which the capacities are
acquired.
Setting aside this version of the arbitrariness claim what remains of
the charge that ‘[a]ny line which uses age to distinguish people
with rights from people without can be shown to be arbitrary’?
There are two ideas. The first is that although the threshold of age
does serve to mark a difference within the class of human beings it is
being human as such which is important. Or, relatedly, what is being
distributed, namely rights, is so important that all humans should
have them. It is being human which should make the difference not
being of a certain age. Rights are too important to be denied to some
humans on account of their (lesser) age and given to others on account
of their (greater) age.
The reply is simple. Being human does matter and it is precisely
because they are human beings, albeit young ones, that children are
entitled to be treated in ways that non-humans may not. not. However
it is rights that are being distributed and to that end a threshold
age does mark a significant point. Although having rights is better
than not having them, those who lack rights do not lack any moral
status whatever. Children are acknowledged to be humans and yet to be
young humans.
However, it may still be insisted that a threshold age does not mark a
significant enough difference. A 40-year-old differs greatly from a
4-year-old. Someone who is 18 years and 1 month does not differ
greatly from someone who is 17 years and 11 months. It is
understandable that the 40-year-old should have rights whereas the
4-year-old should not. But this is not the case for the latter
pairing. This is a point about the extent to which real differences
between classes are displayed by the members of each class at the edge
of these classes. The reply will be that the criticism concedes a
difference between being too young to have rights and being old enough
to have them. These differences are not arbitrary. Moreover a
threshold has to be fixed. The fact that there may not be
significant—or significant enough—differences between the
members of the two classes being distinguished at the edges of each
class is the price one pays for having to operate with a
threshold.
But is this price one that has to be paid? The complaint is that age
does not always reliably correlate with competence. Thus using age may
risk unfairly penalising some who are in fact competent just as it may
risk unfairly rewarding some who are in fact incompetent. Moreover the
penalties and rewards in question—lacking or possessing
rights—are far too important to run such risks. Why then should
one not take each individual on her own and determine whether or not
she is qualified be have rights?
The problems with the suggested use of a test are various. First,
there is the sheer administrative scale of its employment in such a
case as human rights. Second, there is the problem of agreeing a
determinate procedure for testing. How exactly are we to examine
someone in respect of their competence to possess rights? Third, there
is the problem of fairness. Any test must not unfairly disqualify some
group of putative rights-holders by, for instance, having a bias in
the testing procedure which, in effect, discriminates against that
group. Fourth, the administration of any official test—and
especially one whose passing yields such important goods—is
subject to the risks of corruption or of misuse for the
self-interested ends of those administering it. Again this can not be
true of the use of age as a threshold. To summarise, these problems
attaching to the use of a test are large and insuperable. The charges
of arbitrariness can be argued to be false or overstated. Children do
differ from adults in respect of their competence to possess rights. A
threshold of age may be the appropriate way to register that
difference. One should, thus, acquire rights only on reaching a
certain age. However, two riders to this summary are appropriate.
First, different rights may be acquired at different ages. After all
it is plausible to think that the capacities needed for, and
qualifying a person to possess, different rights are themselves
different. More particularly, different rights would seem to require
different degrees of competence. Liberty rights entitle their
possessors to make choices, and the matters in respect of which
choices are made differ in their complexity, importance, and
consequential impact. Those who are allowed to choose require greater
or lesser amounts of maturity, independence, and deliberative
proficiency in order to be able to make these different kinds of
choice. The decisions to marry, consume alcohol, serve in the armed
forces, undertake paid labour, vote, buy goods in a shop, travel
unaccompanied, and open a bank account seem to presuppose different
levels of understanding and autonomy. Assuming that these levels are
progressively acquired at different ages it makes sense to accord the
corresponding rights not all at once but in stages.
Second, there should be an ordered but consistent acquisition of
rights. If children are assumed to display the competence required for
one kind of right, they should not be refused another kind of right
which presupposes the same or even a lesser degree of ability. It
would not make sense, for instance, to deny a young person the right
to refuse medical treatment but allow them to choose to die in the
armed services of their state.
The liberationist may make one last move. He may concede that children
do lack the capacities that are a prerequisite for the possession of
rights. However he can suggest that children should be permitted
‘to borrow the capacities of others to secure whatever it is we
are entitled to’ (Cohen 1980, 56). Child agents would advise
their clients with a view to ensuring that the child’s right is
properly exercised. There are, however, various problems with this
move. Most of these exactly parallel those discussed earlier that
beset the idea of entrusting the choices of a child to a
representative. First, who are to be the advisers? These may be
selected by some fact, such as their biological kinship or their
socially recognised role of guardianship, but this fact does not
ensure that they will be the best advisers. A parent is not, by the
mere fact of parenthood, qualified to give her children the best
advice. On the other hand there is unlikely to be any clear fact of
the matter as to who is the best adviser or what is the best advice.
Indeed the various adults who might best advise a child could well
give conflicting advice. Second, how is one to determine what should
guide the advice? Is it what the child would herself choose if
competent to choose or what is in the best interests of the child? The
problems with understanding either determination will be discussed in
Section 7. Third, is the child still free to act or not on the advice
given? If the child is not so free then the role of the adviser is a
strictly paternalist one. The ‘adviser’ is simply in a
position to supplant the child’s choice as to what is best for
herself with her own choice as her adviser. If on the other hand the
child is free to reject the adviser’s advice then the child is
free to do what she wants anyway. This is so even though it has been
conceded that she is not competent to recognise what is in her best
interests. In this case the role of adviser is beside the point.
One needs only to ‘borrow’ what one does not have. Not
using what could be borrowed leaves one with the lack—and its
consequences—that made the borrowing necessary. On the other
hand if a child can distinguish good from bad advice then the
borrowing is unnecessary. The child can give as good advice to herself
as would be given to her by an adviser. But then no adviser is needed
and this is precisely what Cohen denies.
If children can have at least some rights, what rights should they
have? One important reason for asking, and for giving a satisfactory
answer to, this question is a concern that the child’s moral
status should be adequately secured and protected. Some, like Onora
O’Neill, believe that this is assured by discharging our
obligations as adults to children. One can consistent believe both
that there are things we ought not to do to children and that children
do not have rights. Yet as human beings ought children to have the
basic rights that humans have? 
Since children are humans they are surely entitled to the basic human
rights. But there are some rights possessed by adults which children
cannot possess. This is a view defended by Brennan and Noggle (Brennan
and Noggle 1997). The rights which adults possess are
‘role-dependent rights’. These are rights associated with
particular roles, and possession of the relevant right is dependent on
an ability to play the role. Thus doctors have rights that their
patients do not, and car-drivers have rights that those who have not
passed their driving test do not. This argument is interesting not
least because it does not provide, in respect of their rights, a
fundamental distinction between adults and children. After all some
adults could conceivably possess no more than the basic rights
possessed by children since they might have none of the abilities
required to play any of the roles associated with the role-dependent
rights.
However it is not obvious that children do have the basic human rights
that adults have. Central amongst these rights is that of
self-determination, that is the right to make choices in respect of
one’s own life. This right is the basis of derivative rights to
marry, have sex, choose one’s work, purse a course of education,
and so on. But it is just this right that is normally denied to
children, and it seems that Noggle and Brennan do deny, in effect,
that children have this right. If parents can, as Brennan and Noggle
think they may, overrule a child’s life-choice it is hard to see
how nevertheless the right of choice does not vanish (Brennan and
Noggle 1997, 16–17). If one adult were to deny that another
adult could choose as she wished it would be natural to describe this
as a denial of the second adult’s right of choice.
To say that children do not have all the basic human rights that
adults do is not to deny them their status as humans. After all it
makes sense to insist that children have – as humans – a
basic right to life. Yet it also makes sense, as suggested, to say
that children do not have an adult right of self-determination. It is
controversial to say that children are ‘persons’, since,
following John Locke, this term denotes those possessed of moral
agency and capable of being responsible for their actions. Weaker or
stronger conceptions of ‘personhood’ would lead to the
inclusion or exclusion of humans at various ages from the category of
person. However it is not controversial to state that children are
human, and in saying this to insist that they are entitled to a
certain moral regard
Most who believe that adults have rights which children do not have
make the cut between liberty and welfare rights. Feinberg
distinguishes between rights that belong only to adults (A-rights),
rights that are common to both adults and children (A-C-rights), and
rights that children alone possess (C-rights) (Feinberg 1980). Thus a
common position is that the A-rights include, centrally, the liberty
rights, and that the A-C-rights include, centrally, the welfare
rights. To repeat, liberty rights are rights of choice (how and
whether to vote, what to say publicly, whether to practise a religion
and which one, which if any association to join, and so on) whereas
welfare rights protect important interests (such as health, bodily
integrity, and privacy).
What might be included in the C-rights? Feinberg distinguishes between
two sub-classes of C-rights. There are, first, those rights which
children possess in virtue of their condition of childishness.
Although Feinberg does not further divide this first sub-class of
C-rights this can be done. There are the rights children have to
receive those goods they are incapable of securing for themselves, and
are incapable of so doing because of their dependence upon adults.
These goods might include food and shelter. There are, second, the
rights to be protected against harms which befall children because of
their childlike vulnerability and whose particular harmfulness is a
function of a fact that they befall children. These harms might
include abuse and neglect. Note that some adults might be argued to
merit the same degree of rights-based protection on account of their
childlike vulnerability and dependence. Finally, there are goods that
children should arguably receive just because they are children. The
most central, and contentious, example is a child’s right to be
loved. This is not an A-C-right but it is arguably a C-right, and
indeed is cited by many as a C-right (MacCormick 1976, 305). Various
declarations of children’s rights include such a right and a
respectable case can be made to meet the various objections normally
raised against its attribution (Liao 2015).
Most of these C-rights can be termed ‘protection’ rights
since, they seek to provide protection for children. Further they do
so because the state or condition of childhood calls forth and
requires this protection. We should be careful to distinguish
protection from provision or welfare rights. Children, along with
adults, have welfare rights but the content of these will differ
between children and adults. It will do so because of the particular
form that children’s needs and circumstances take. Thus grant
that both children and adults have a welfare right to health care. In
the case of children but not that of adults paediatric care and
treatment is appropriate. But that fact is no different in its
significance from the fact that amongst different adults the proper
form of health care should vary in line with their various
disabilities, diseases, and circumstances.
The second sub-class of C-rights are those which Feinberg
characterises as ‘rights-in-trust’ and which he thinks can
be resumed under the single title of a ‘right to an open
future’. These are the rights given to the child in the person
of the adult she will become. They are the rights whose protection
ensures that, as an adult, she will be in a position to exercise her
A- and A-C-rights to the maximal or at least to a very significant
degree. They keep her future open. Such rights impose limits on the
rights of parents, and also impose duties on the part of the state to
protect these rights. 
A couple of things are worth noting about these rights-in-trust.
First, Feinberg refers to these C-rights as ‘anticipatory
autonomy rights’, which might suggest that they are only
A-rights-in-trust. But he also speaks of rights-in-trust of class C as
protecting those future interests a child will have as an adult. This
implies that they are also anticipatory welfare rights (Feinberg 1980,
126–7). Hence this sub-class of C-rights ensures that the adult
can later exercise both her A-rights (liberty) and her A-C-rights
(welfare).
Second, there is the question of how open a child’s future
should be. Some interpret the demand for an education for an
‘open future’ as requiring individuals to acquire
‘to the greatest possible extent’ the capacity to choose
between ‘the widest possible variety of ways of life’
(Arneson and Shapiro 1996, 388). They have pointed out several
objections to such a ‘maximising’ interpretation. It may
not be possible to quantify in a determinate fashion the number of
options open to a future adult. Furthermore some fulfilling life
choices are only available at the expense of denying the child a
number of otherwise possible choices. For instance, a child
intensively trained to realise his considerable innate musical
abilities may be unable to pursue careers that would have been open to
him in the absence of such a dedicated education. The following
further criticisms can be added. Requiring that a child be brought up
to be able eventually to choose between as many options as possible
may impose unreasonable burdens on parents. It also seems implausible
to think that a child suffers if she is denied one or even several
possible insignificant further options beyond some threshold number of
choices. Is it really harmful to a child that she does not learn to
play all of the orchestral instruments and is thereby denied the
opportunity to pursue a solo career in those she does not? Finally
some future options are surely morally base or in some other respect
without value (Mills 2003).
Feinberg does sometimes talk only of the harms of closing off
significant life choices. Yet he does also on occasion employ the
language of maximisation. ‘[Education] should send [the child]
out into the adult world with as many open opportunities as possible,
thus maximising his chances for self-fulfillment’. (1980, 135;
see also 151). However it seems much more plausible to suggest that a
child should have enough autonomy to be able to make reasonable life
choices. The preconditions of autonomy are both internal (a capacity
to think for oneself, to acquire and appreciate relevant information,
and a volitional ability to act independently) and external (the
provision of a range of feasible and valuable options). In respect of
both conditions it is perfectly possible to have a good sense of what
counts as adequate autonomy, even if there is no clear bright line
marking the point of sufficiency.
Closely related to Feinberg’s idea of
‘rights-in-trust’ is Eekelaar’s idea of a
child’s ‘developmental’ rights (Eekelaar 1986).
These are the rights of a child to develop her potential so that she
enters adulthood without disadvantage. Whereas Feinberg attributes the
rights to the child’s adult-self, the child holding them only in
‘anticipatory’ form, Eekelaar attributes the rights to the
adult’s child-self. Arguably this makes no difference since the
child and the adult are one and the same person. Although this is a
metaphysically contentious claim (Parfit 1984) grant that child and
adult are merely distinct temporal stages of a single individual.
Whether each temporal stage of the person has the same interest in the
child developing into an adult is a further issue which will be
considered shortly.
However child and adult do stand in an asymmetrical relationship to
one another in a way that does not seem to be true of the different
temporal stages of the same adult. After all adult Smith can now
exercise her liberty rights in such a fashion that at a later time she
is not able to exercise them and her welfare rights, to the same
degree as she can now. Smith can, for instance, choose now to enter
into a slavery contract or to engage in a dangerous sport that risks
death or serious disability. A child, on the other hand, is denied the
right to make choices that will fetter the adult exercise of her
rights. This is justified by three thoughts. First, a child, unlike an
adult, simply lacks the ability to make considered choices and should
not have liberty rights. An adult can make unwise choices but is
presumed to possess a general minimal capacity which the child lacks
to make wise choices. Second, what is done or not done in childhood
affects the whole of one’s later life and does so in a way that
is largely irreversible. Third, a life in which choices can be made is
more valuable than one in which they cannot. So the preconditions for
the possibility of such a life should be secured. That is just to say
that the child must allow for the possibility of becoming its adult
self.
However consider the case of a child who will not develop into an
adult, say someone who is suffering from a terminal disease that will
prevent her living beyond the age of majority. Such a child lacks
developmental rights. Or rather she has them but her circumstances do
not allow for their protection. However, she does still have welfare
and protection rights whose correlate duties can be discharged. The
child has an interest in not suffering harm and in enjoying a certain
standard of life even if she never lives beyond her childhood.
When, for instance, we provide a child with health care or protect her
from abuse we not only thereby serve her immediate interests as a
child but we also ensure that she will grow into a mentally and
physically healthy adult. At its simplest a child’s welfare
right not to be killed is a precondition of the very possibility of
there being a future adult with any rights at all. Even the education
of a child can be represented as not merely of instrumental worth to
the future adult but of value to the child here and now. A child has
an interest now in learning things and does so independently of what
this might later mean for her future adult self. (Coady 1992, 51).
What kind of adult does her childhood self have an interest in
developing into? The answer to this question is important not least
for indicating appropriate constraints on any parental upbringing.
There is a very influential and recognisably liberal view of what sort
of adult a child has an interest in developing into. This is an
autonomous individual, one able independently to evaluate and to
choose as appropriate its own ends. On the liberal view a child is not
autonomous but can with the proper upbringing become autonomous. This
view is most directly contrasted with a conception of the individual
as equipped with a set of values and beliefs, authoritatively acquired
during its childhood as a result of its upbringing, and not open to
revision, or at least not open to any substantial revision. However an
emphasis upon the capacity to revise one’s ends may be at the
expense of a deeper understanding of autonomy as a capacity rationally
to adhere to some ends (Callan 2002).
Returning to the case of the child with the terminal illness. She will
not develop into an adult. Can we say of anybody that she has an
interest, as a child, in developing into an adult, an interest that is
frustrated by her terminal condition? Or is there an interest in only
being a child and never becoming an adult? Grant that the child-Q and
the adult-Q are two stages of one and the same individual. Could we
speak of a conflict between the present interest of child-Q in staying
a child and the future interest of adult-Q in child-Q developing into
her later adult self? The latter interest seems perfectly
straightforward. However it is at least controversial whether
everybody does have an interest in growing up. Work on the putative
goods of childhood can be used to argue that childhood as such has a
value that adulthood does not, with the further questions arising of
whether the former value exceeds the latter and of whether they can be
compared at all (Gheaus 2015; Hannan 2018). It has has been argued
that it would be better for human beings never to have been born
(Benatar 2008). Even if this is not a general truth it may be true of
some humans that not growing into adulthood and ceasing to exist is
better than becoming an adult. This might be true, for instance, of
somebody facing the prospect of a life of unrelieved, extreme pain and
misery. Could there be an interest—even without such a
prospect—in being forever child?T
Such an interest cannot be physically satisfied in this world. It is
satisfied in the fictional world of Peter Pan but the author of that
fantasy, J.M. Barrie, clearly deprecates his eponymous hero’s
infantile desire to escape the realities of the world (Barrie 1995).
If we mean only by the imagined interest that of remaining childish
then it is hard to see how any individual in our world could, if
rational, have such an interest. It is one thing to be a child forever
in a child’s world as Peter Pan is. It is quite another to
remain a child in our adult world. Childhood is something best
appreciated by the child. It is also something that needs to be left
behind. In the words of Paul, ‘When I was a child, I spoke as a
child, I understood as a child, I thought as a child: but when I
became a man I put away these childish things’ (I Corinthians
13:11).
If children are not thought to have the A-rights, and, chiefly, do not
have the liberty rights to choose for themselves how to conduct their
lives, nevertheless they are not morally abandoned to their own
devices. In the first place it is a standard principle of child
welfare law and policy that the ‘best interests’ of a
child should be promoted. Article 3.1 of the United Nations Convention
on the Rights of the Child states that ‘In all actions
concerning children, whether undertaken by public or private social
welfare institutions, courts of law, administrative authorities or
legislative bodies, the best interests of the child shall be a primary
consideration’ (United Nations 1989). 
Second, Article 12.1 of the Convention asserts that, ‘States
Parties shall assure to the child who is capable of forming his or her
own views the right to express those views freely in all matters
affecting the child, the views of the child being given due weight in
accordance with the age and maturity of the child’ (United
Nations 1989).
Section 8 discusses the right to be heard. This section discusses the
best interest principle, henceforward the BIP. The principle has been
given different explicit formulations. Indeed it should be noted that
the principle’s possible definitions vary in at least two
important dimensions: what is being given weight, and how much weight
it is being given. Thus we may speak of a child’s ‘best
interests’ or simply of a child’s ‘interests’
or ‘welfare’. The former is the more familiar version of
the principle and it is this understanding of the principle that will
be discussed. The difficulties with this maximising interpretation
will be considered in due course.
As to the weight of the principle the distinct terms
‘paramount’ and ‘primary’ have been employed,
along with either the definite or indefinite article, to qualify the
consideration that should be given to a child’s (best)
interests. There are therefore at least four possible weightings: (a)
the paramount; (b) a paramount; (c) the primary; (d) a primary. A
fifth—that a child’s (best) interests should merely be
‘a consideration’—is otiose. Some consideration
should obviously be given to a child’s interests. The question
however is how much. The distinction between ‘paramount’
and ‘primary’ may be understood as follows. A
consideration that is paramount outranks and trumps all other
considerations. It is, in effect, the only consideration determinative
of an outcome. A consideration that is ‘primary’ is a
leading consideration, one that is first in rank among several. But
although no considerations outrank a primary consideration there may
be other considerations of equal, first rank. Furthermore a leading
consideration does not trump even if it outranks all other
considerations. A primary consideration is not the only consideration
determinative of an outcome.
So it should be evident that (a) and (b) are equivalent, and that the
real contrast is between a paramount consideration that trumps all
others and a primary one that need not. In effect the interesting
choice is between (a) and (d). That is, one between a child’s
(best) interests being the only consideration and their being an
important but not the sole consideration. Indeed a debate took place
as to which of these two versions should be included within the UN
Convention on the Rights of the Child with the weaker formulation
being eventually adopted (Alston 1994 12). 
We can speak either of ‘a’ child or, more generally, of
‘children’. There is a difference between considering how
in some matter the child most directly concerned is affected and
considering how any policy or action in respect of that one child may
also have consequences for other children. Indeed we might consider
how any policy or action at all has implications—even if very
indirect and attenuated—for all children. However, it is
plausible to construe a use of ‘children’ within a
formulation of the BIP as requiring us to attend to the impact of a
policy, practice, or activity upon those young persons most obviously
and directly affected. The BIP’s origins are to be found in
custody disputes where the law had to make a determination in respect
of a couple’s children. Even if there were several children the
court had to decide in respect of each individual child what was the
most appropriate course of action. The provenance of the BIP shows
itself in the continued use of the singular term
‘child’.
There is a still further question of how we should understand the
scope of the best-interests principle. The BIP has operated in at
least two important domains (Kopelman 1997a). One is in the medical
context when determining which option should be selected for an ill or
diseased child. The second is in custody disputes following the
separation or divorce of the child’s guardians. Here, where
there is unresolved argument as to who should now raise the child, the
court must decide. However, beyond these two specified domains, the
BIP has also been given broader application in respect of all policies
and laws affecting children. This is certainly what the UN Convention
Article 3.1 appears to require.
There are at least two kinds of difficulty in accepting the BIP (for a
summary of various criticisms see Kopelman 1997b). The first of these
concerns the import of the principle, the second concerns how we
should interpret ‘best interests’. Each will be considered
in turn. As to its import the BIP is, in the first instance, a
maximising maxim. It requires that the best shall be done for a child
and not simply that good or enough must be done. One must act
‘so as to promote maximally the good’ of the child
(Buchanan and Brock 1989, 10).
In some contexts where the BIP operates there appears to be a
determinate number of options, and perhaps even only a pair of
options. This seems to be the case in custody disputes and medical
decision-making. In this context the better option is the best. By
contrast in the area of general policy affecting children there seem
to be very many different possibilities. Yet even with custody and
medical decisions we can expand the range of possible options. Thus
what might be best for the child is not that she is cared for by
either of the parents claiming custody, but that she is adopted by
someone else entirely. Again, what might be best for the child is not
that she receive the medical treatment on offer rather than not do so,
though it may well be better that she does. What is best is that she
is treated by the most skilled medical personnel within the finest
medical facility, with no expense spared, and so on.
But then the obvious criticism of the BIP is that it is unfeasibly
demanding of agencies charged with the care of children. Should we
really demand that our law and policy makers do the best for children
rather than charge them with doing enough for children? We do not, it
seems, require parents to promote their children’s best
interests. Nor should we. Indeed the standard principles of child
welfare policy, even when they include a version of the best-interests
maxim, do not stipulate that a child’s parents shall do more
than ensure that the child receives a threshold of care. Beyond that
parents are not normally required maximally to promote their
child’s interests, and indeed they have considerable discretion
as to how they raise the child. So the BIP is not best interpreted as
a maximising principle. We should do so much for a child; we should
not be obliged to do everything that in principle we might do.
A second problem of the import of the BIP is that it does not, as it
stands, take account of the interests of others. In the first place I
might be able to improve the situation of child A but only at the cost
of worsening that of child B. Every child should be considered of
equal value. Yet we may not be able to promote the interests of every
child to the same degree. The BIP directs courts, social workers or
medical practitioners in some case to promote the interests of a
particular child. This should not be done by treating the interests of
any other child who might be affected as having no value or a lesser
value than those of the particular child attended to. Yet, as with
adults there are questions of what fairness requires in balancing the
interests of the different children affected by any decision or state
of affairs. It would not be reasonable to expect that parents should
view the interests of their own children as having the same weight as
that of other children. It is reasonable to ask policy makers and care
professionals to do so.
In the second place we cannot be required to promote the best
interests of a child over and above, and without regard to, the
interests of any relevant adult. It might be in the best interests of
a child that her guardian give up every waking minute to her care. But
no adult should have to sacrifice her own welfare for that of her
child. The BIP should thus be interpreted so as to give at least equal
consideration to the interests of any adults affected by policies and
actions promoting the child’s welfare.
The second set of difficulties surrounding the BIP concern the
interpretation of ‘best interests’. One way to understand
this phrase is by reference to what a child would choose for herself
under specified hypothetical circumstances. We could call this the
‘hypothetical choice’ interpretation of the BIP. The other
way to understand ‘best interests’ is simply through
offering an account of what is, as a matter of fact, best for the
child, an account which is distinct from and independent of the
child’s desires, actual or hypothetical. Let us call this the
‘objectivist’ interpretation of the BIP. Each
interpretation will now be examined in turn.
The ‘objectivist’ interpretation of the BIP is beset by a
number of difficulties. Some urge that what is best for any child is
necessarily indeterminate. There certainly is no fact of the matter in
this regard for we must attach values to the options and their
outcomes in respect of any choice of action towards a child. However
it will be said that independently of questions of value we cannot,
with certainty, determine what is best for a child. We cannot in
practice make complete and accurate assessments of what will be the
outcome of each and every policy option that we might adopt in respect
of a child (Mnookin 1979). How can we know with certainty whether this
child will flourish if raised by this set of parents rather than by
some others in an alternative setting? Even where we are seeking to
rank the outcomes of the options within a simple custody dispute
between mother and father things may prove impossibly difficult. After
all, any number of things may happen if the child is in the
mother’s custody, and the same is true if the child is given to
the father. The BIP is indeterminate even where there are only two
possible decisions to be made (Elster 1989, 134–139).
This difficulty can be spelled out in the following fashion. Imagine
that indeterminacy afflicts each of the four conditions of a full
decision procedure (Parker 1994, 29–31). For a decision to be
made the possible options must be known, the possible outcomes of each
possible option must be known, the probabilities of each possible
outcome occurring must be known, and the value of each outcome must be
known. Independently of the uncertainty in respect of the last
condition—value of the outcomes—there is uncertainty in
respect of the other three conditions. This is probably true. However,
it is not clear why the problem is one that is especially or uniquely
true of policies affecting children. Any political or legal
determination is going to face such indeterminacy in the specification
of choices and their outcomes.
Of course once we put values back into the equation there is,
arguably, clear indeterminacy. Moral pluralists will hold that it is
not possible to rank as better or worse different kinds of life. Each
realises its own distinctive but strictly incommensurable set of human
excellences. How then can we say that there is a best life for a child
to grow into, rather than a range of equally possible yet incomparable
lives?
The pluralist claim is not directed uniquely at the case of children.
The value of some at least of the lives of adults, are for the
pluralist, strictly incomparable. Grant that the pluralist claim is
false and assume that there is for each and every child a uniquely
best life that it could be brought to lead. There is a still further
difficulty. We do happen to disagree in our basic values. Indeed it is
a commonplace of contemporary moral and political philosophy that
equally sincere, conscientious, and reasonable individuals espouse
fundamentally different, and frequently conflicting, views about
morality. There is what John Rawls has termed the ‘fact of
pluralism’ (Rawls 1993, xvi-xvii). As a society we may be able
to agree about what is a poor, neglectful or abusive upbringing, but
we are likely to be in irresolvable disagreement about what
is‘good’, even what is ‘better’, parenting
(McGough 1995, 375). We just cannot agree what is in a child’s
best interests. This is important for a further reason. An education
or upbringing shapes the values of the emerging adult. Whether the
adult’s life goes better or worse will depend crucially on how
she evaluates her life in the light of these values. Educators and
parents in acting for a child’s best interest are also making a
difference to the kind of adult thereby formed, and, in consequence,
to the goodness of the life she will lead.
The fact of extensive disagreement about what is best for children, or
for a child, is often set in the context of broader cultural
disagreements about morality in general. It is said that the BIP is
subverted, or at least rendered deeply problematic, by the existence
of these deep and pervasive cultural disagreements (Alston (ed.)
1994). Care is needed. The statement ‘what is best for a child
is different in different cultures’ is ambiguous. In the first
place, the phrase ‘in different cultures’ may be
interpreted as meaning something like ‘in different
circumstances’. Most moral philosophers will acknowledge that a
universal moral principle that all are agreed upon can nevertheless
have differential application in differently specified circumstances.
Here we do not dispute what in general terms is best for a child. But
we do recognise that what it is best to do for any individual child
will depend on the particular conditions in which that child finds
itself.
On the other hand what is meant by the statement ‘what is best
for a child is different in different cultures’ may be that
there is no general agreement across cultures about what is best for a
child. Each culture has its own understanding of what is in a
child’s best interests. There is a BIP specific to each culture.
What culture A thinks is best for any child is best for any
child. What culture B thinks is best for any child—even
though it contradicts what culture A thinks best—is also what is
best for any child. Moral relativism, in some form, has its defenders
but its attendant problems are well documented.
If the claim ‘what is best for a child is different in different
cultures’ is a report of cultural difference—what each
culture believes to be best for its children differs—then it is
still consistent with the BIP having a single universal content. What
is best for children is the same whatever the culture, and allowing
for the variation in application of the same principle to different
contexts. It is just that some cultures do not adhere to the BIP in
this form. However things are clearly not that simple. It is one thing
to acknowledge in principle that there must be a single BIP; it is
quite another to find agreement on what that principle is. The
discussions surrounding the formulation of international conventions
of human rights have been notoriously beset by significant, and
culturally based, differences of moral and political outlook. The
United Nations Conventions on the Rights of the Child was no different
(LeBlanc 1995).
Even within single cultures which share a broad understanding of what
is in a child’s best interests there will nevertheless be some
measure of disagreement. For instance, within Western societies there
are continuing disputes about whether it is morally proper to smack a
child.
By contrast with an ‘objectivist’ interpretation of the
BIP what is best for a child can be understood in terms of a
child’s hypothetical choices. Strictly speaking a hypothetical
choice interpretation of the BIP amounts to a distinct principle. It
is one Buchanan and Brock define as that of the ‘substituted
judgement’—‘acting according to what the incompetent
individual, if competent, would choose’ (Buchanan and Brock
1989, 10). However it is natural to think that what is best for
someone is what they themselves would choose if fully informed and
deliberating fully rationally. Thus a striking and influential thought
in this context is that we choose what is best for the child if we
choose for the child as the child would choose for herself if the
child were adult. For instance John Rawls thinks the following
formulation defines the acceptable paternalism of a guardian’s
treatment of his child: ‘We must choose for others as we have
reason to believe they would choose for themselves if they were at the
age of reason and deciding rationally’ (Rawls 1999, 183). This
apparently simple formulation is in fact susceptible of three quite
different interpretations, each of which brings with it its own
problems. In each case we are seeking to specify the adult person who
chooses for the child.
We might first mean that we should choose for this child as the
particular adult the child will become would choose. However this does
not determine a unique choice for, crucially, the nature of the
particular adult that the child will become depends on the choices
that are made for it whilst a child. We can conceive of each of the
different adult selves the child might develop into approving,
respectively, of the different choices made for its childhood
self—choices which were responsible for the development of these
different selves. Let us take a very basic example. Should we allow
the child to go off and play football with his peers, or require him
to attend his violin lessons? The child who is allowed to play
football becomes a well-paid sportsman who, retrospectively, approves
of the decision to free him from music lessons which hampered his
ability to develop his footballing skills. On the other hand the child
who is made to practise his violin progresses to a fulfilling solo
career. This adult—by contrast with the footballer he did not
become—approves of the enforced musical education away from
football that allowed him to have such a career.
The second sense we might give to the phrase ‘choose for the
child as the child would if adult’ is by thinking of the
situation in which the choice confronts the child, and then choosing
as an adult would. The person who chooses for the child is any adult.
This will serve well enough for some choices where there is no doubt
as to what a rational adult would choose. In classic adult-child
paternalistic scenarios we are not unclear or undecided about what we
as adults should do. Would a rational adult choose to stick her hand
in the fire, walk out into the traffic, eat whatever was placed in
front of her? However if the adult is confronted with other sorts of
choices the answer is far less clear. Faced with our imagined choice
between playing football and a music lesson how would the adult
choose? This of course is wholly indeterminate since different adults
will presumably choose differently in the same situation. The adult
who prefers football to music will choose the former; the adult who
prefers music will choose otherwise.
This leads us then to the third possible interpretation. The adult
person who chooses for the child is an adult analogue of the child.
This is not the child’s future adult self, which as we have seen
is indeterminate, but this child made into an adult version of itself.
That is, we do not imagine this child developing in the future into
its particular adult self. Rather we imagine a mature or grown-up
version of this child now making choices. This interpretation however
will still not work. The adult version of the child is one with
childish beliefs and desires filtered out. But, in the first place, it
is not clear what remains of the child in any choice situation
rendered hypothetical in this fashion. For the child just is someone
who has these childish beliefs and desires. What is it to be a child
if not to think and want as a child does? Second, it is entirely
indeterminate what should replace these beliefs and desires.
These varying interpretations of what it is to choose for a child as
an adult would, and their attendant difficulties, display the problems
of construing the best interests of a child in terms of the
hypothetically adult choices the child would make. The problems are in
the last analysis due to the following basic fact. In the cases of
adults paternalistically choosing for other adults, and where the
paternalism is warranted by a temporary failure of reason, we can have
a determinate sense of how the adult would have chosen in the absence
of the failure. If she had known that the bridge was unsafe she would
have chosen not to cross it. If she was not persuaded by the influence
of the drug to think she could fly she would not have decided to jump
off the tall building. And so on.
However in the case of children we cannot cash out these hypothetical
conditionals. We do not know what a child would choose if possessed of
adult rational powers of choice because what makes a child a child
just is its lack of such powers (its ignorance, inconstant wants,
inconsistent beliefs, and limited powers of ratiocination). At the
same time we cannot ask how an adult would choose if in the
child’s situation just because an adult would not be in that
situation, or would not be in a child’s situation. We must, it
seems, choose for a child because a child cannot choose for itself,
and we must choose what is best for a child not what some imagined
adult version of the child would choose for itself.
The putative possession by a child of a right to an ‘open
future’ together with the imperative to promote any
child’s best interests raises the question of what, if anything,
is wrong with the transmission to a child of cultural values. These
are those values by which the child’s parent lives and which may
also help to define the identity of a community. Article 2 of the
UNCRC accords the child a right to non-discrimination on various
grounds including ‘ national, ethnic or social origin’ and
Article 30 recognises that a child belonging to an ‘ethnic,
religious or linguistic’ minority ‘shall not be denied the
right, in community with other members of his or her group, to enjoy
his or her own culture, to profess and practise his or her own
religion, or to use his or her own language.’
Yet for many liberals there is a tension between the recognition of
such rights and the requirement that a child not be inducted into a
community in such a manner that his or her future adult choices are
constrained. The main way in which this is set out is by means of an
emphasis upon a liberal ideal of an autonomous life, one in which an
individual is able both to form his or her own conception of the good
life to lead and is not prevented – by external social
circumstances or the actions of others – from being able to lead
the preferred life.  Often the target that is juxtaposed to such
a liberal ideal is the values of religious minorities. The Supreme
Court judgment that prompted Joel Feinberg’s defence of a
child’s right to an ‘open future’, and which has
been extensively discussed is Wisconsin v. Yoder (1972). This
exempted the Amish community from the requirement to keep their
children in school to the age others are so required in the interests
of maintaining that community’s identity. Arneson and Shapiro in
response contrast  ‘religious traditionalist’ and a
‘secular worldly’ ways of life, seeing an education for
the latter as the best preparation for an open future (Arneson and
Shapiro 1996).
The problem with this approach is that the preferential treatment
– in the way that children are schooled – is both
discriminatory and may violate the central precept of liberal
neutrality, the requirement that the state not, in its law and
policies, favour any conception of the good (See the entry on
Perfectionism in Moral and Political Philosophy). Moreover, some
liberals will argue that the character traits and dispositions of
autonomy, for instance steadfastness of character, are best taught by
being raised in adherence to a particular way of life, such as one of
religious faith (Callan, 2002; Burtt 1996).
Liberals may escape the charge of violating the principle of
neutrality by arguing that a liberal society requires that its
citizens be motivated by a sense of justice and an ability to
participate effectively within democratic institutions. This
requirement is satisfied only if children are brought up in certain
values and are able, when adults, to make maximally autonomous
choices. In this manner the promotion of autonomy and an open future
can be seen as an indirect consequence of a necessary education in
those civic capacities that are the necessary precondition of stable
and sustainable liberal institutions.
The tension that is broached by a child’s right to an open
future is given a clear and provocative reading in Matthew
Clayton’s book (Clayton 2006). He argues that parents may not
‘enroll their children into comprehensive doctrines’, in
other words bring them up to believe in general truths about the best
way to lead a life, whatever the provenance of those truths. Thus his
view is broader than a critique of a religious education. But at the
same time it would indict the vast majority of conscientious parents
seeking to bring up their children as they see best.
His defence of this view relies on a claimed analogy between the
exercises of political and of parental power. The former is only
legitimate on liberal grounds in the absence of any appeal to the
correctness of some comprehensive doctrine. Clayton thinks that the
similarities between the two exercises of power are sufficiently
strong and robust for parental conduct to be constrained by the same
liberal principle of legitimacy.
In response it may be argued that the two domains of power are not
analogous. It may also be suggested that there is a morally relevant
difference between parents setting out to enrol their children in a
comprehensive doctrine and children coming to share such a doctrine as
a consequence of sharing their life with their parents (Archard 2002).
Indeed if the institution of the family as an essentially intimate and
private community of adults and children can be defended and if,
further, adults have a protected right to lead their lives by the
light of their preferred conception of the good, then such unintended
enrolment is inevitable.
It is of course a further question of whether certain communal values
violate liberal values other than autonomy – such as equality.
It would be wrong then to rear boys and girls in gendered stereotypes
that perpetuate inequality and discrimination.
The right to be heard is a valuable right. What makes it valuable is
both that there is a point to making one’s views known and,
further, that making one’s views known makes a difference. It
matters to me that I can speak out on political questions. It matters
also, and probably more, if what I say leads to the changes I favour.
Correlatively it is true both that I do not want to be silenced and
that I do not want the statement of my views to be ineffectual. As a
further general point it is clear that there will always be some
issues on which it is more important that I be allowed to speak and
that what I say about these issues carries weight in determining
outcomes. Those are the issues that matter to me, and the more they
matter the more important it is that I have the freedom to speak about
them and be heard. On one account since children’s views should
not be ‘authoritative’, that is determinative of what is
done, they have only a ‘consultative’ role (Brighouse
2003). They may influence an outcome by, most obviously, providing
those who do make the decisions affecting a child’s interests
with a clearer picture of what in fact is in those interests. On
another account encouraging and according a weight to the expression
of children’s views—even where this is unlikely to affect
outcomes in line with the views’ content—is valuable just
because the child is capable of expressing a view and deserves to be
listened to (Archard and Skivenes 2009).
How is it with the child’s right to be heard? It will be
important for the child to be listened to. But it is also important
that the child is heard in the sense that her views are given due
consideration and may influence what is done. Note that the
child’s right to be heard on matters affecting its own interests
is a substitute for the liberty right to make one’s own choices.
The right to be heard is only a right to have the opportunity to
influence the person who will otherwise choose for the child. The
power to make those choices resides with the adult guardian or
representative of the child. All the child retains is the right to try
to motivate that adult to choose as the child herself would choose if
she was allowed to.
Article 12.1 of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the
Child not only accords the child the right freely to express its views
on matters affecting the child. It also, and crucially, gives the
child an assurance that these views will be given ‘due weight in
accordance with the age and maturity of the child’. Great
emphasis is now placed on what are termed a child’s
‘participation rights’ as opposed to his or her
‘protection rights’. The latter, as the name suggests,
protect the child from violent, abusive, cruel or exploitative
treatment. ‘Participation rights’ by contrast, give the
child some entitlement to be the agents of their own lives. Article
12.1 provides a crucial underpinning justification for such rights.
There are problems in understanding how practically to implement such
rights (Ang et al, 2006). There are also theoretical issues in making
precise sense of what a right such as that enshrined in Article 12.1
might mean. The celebrated British legal judgement in the Gillick case
(Gillick [1986]) provides a useful guide. This judgement has been
extensively discussed, and it has also been highly influential in
matters relating to the consent of children to medical treatment.
The Gillick judgement arose from the dissatisfaction of a mother with
the failure of her local health authority to withdraw an advisory
circular to the area’s doctors. This advised doctors that they
could counsel and inform young girls under the age of 16 about sexual
matters as well as provide them with contraception, and that they
could do this without the consent of the child’s parents. The
mother, Victoria Gillick, went to court to have the circular declared
unlawful. The final judgement by the British House of Lords was that
the circular was not unlawful. A key issue, relevant to the present
discussion, concerned the proper relationship between the
child’s right to decide for itself and the parent’s right
to decide for the child.
In deciding in favour of the health authority one of the Law Lords,
Lord Scarman, made a statement crucial to his finding and one that has
subsequently been much cited. It is worth reproducing:
I would hold that as a matter of law the parental right to determine
whether or not their minor child below the age of 16 will have medical
treatment terminates if and when the child achieves a sufficient
understanding and intelligence to enable him to understand fully what
is proposed. (Gillick [1986] 186, 188–9)
Let me now discuss various issues that arise. First, what does it mean
for a child to get to a particular point in their development? On what
could be called the threshold interpretation once a child has achieved
a certain level of competence her views as to what shall happen to her
have a determinate weight, either amounting to a liberty right of
choice (on a strong version) or (on a weak version) being counted in
the balance against her parents’ views and the state’s
judgement of her best interests. On what could be called the
proportionality interpretation the child’s views progressively
increase in weight as she gains a greater competence to choose for
herself. They increase up to the acquisition of a full liberty right
of choice.
Second, on either the threshold or the proportionality account we need
a measure of that ability that marks the threshold or is simply
progressively acquired. How much intelligence and understanding, for
instance, is sufficient? In the first place this measure must be taken
independently of any judgement of what is in the child’s best
interest. That a child would choose what is taken to be in her best
interests is at most evidence that she does have sufficient
intelligence and understanding of the relevant issue. Her making such
a choice is not a necessary condition of her having the requisite
ability. Similarly the making by a child of a poor choice is not
conclusive evidence of her general incapacity to choose for herself.
Wise adults can occasionally make stupid decisions just as fools
sometimes get it right.
In the Gillick judgement Scarman required of the child that she
manifest an understanding of the ‘nature’ of the
contraceptive advice offered and ‘also have a sufficient
maturity to understand what is involved’ (Gillick [1986] 189).
We can distinguish here a number of possible elements. There is,
first, knowledge of certain facts. A child, for instance, knows that a
contraceptive acts to prevent conception that might otherwise result
from sexual intercourse. Another child, by contrast, could simply be
ignorant of or unable to comprehend the facts of reproduction. There
is, second, an understanding of what follows for the child from an act
or its omission. Thus failure to use a contraceptive could lead a
young person who had sexual intercourse to become pregnant. These two
understandings together constitute knowledge of the
‘nature’ of the act. Finally there is what arguably comes
with ‘maturity’ which is the ability to appreciate the
significance both of an act or its omission and of the relevant
consequences. It is one thing to know what it is to become pregnant,
and another to understand what that means. This latter understanding
involves realising that pregnancy brings in its wake physical changes,
that any resultant birth leaves a young person with a child to care
for, and so on. Scarman even insisted that the child would need to
have an appreciation of the ‘moral and family’ questions
involved.
Third, it is important in measuring a child’s competence against
that in respect of which he or she is expressing a view to distinguish
between the complexity and the seriousness of the matter. A simple
choice—for instance that between only two options such as
whether or not to have a life-saving operation—may nevertheless
be portentous, having enormous and far-reaching consequences. It may
thus require much greater appreciation of what is involved than a more
complex decision, one that ranges over many possibilities. Yet the
latter kind of choice—consider choosing a five-course meal from
a very large menu—is far less serious in its consequences. In
short, the difficulty or complexity of a choice should not be confused
with its importance or significance for the child.
Fourth, the English courts at least have detected a fundamental
asymmetry between refusing and choosing to have treatment. A competent
adult has a right both to choose to have treatment and to refuse it.
Should this not also be the case with a competent child? A 15-year-old
who wants to have a particular operation against her parents’
wishes and even contrary to the best judgement of her doctors may be
judged competent and thus have her wishes respected. However the
English courts in a series of judgements after Gillick have argued
that matters are somehow different when it is a case of a child
refusing an operation. 
Of course there is no inconsistency if a refusal requires a greater
degree of understanding and appreciation of the issues than a positive
acceptance. But where the choice is a simple disjunction it is hard to
see how this can be the case. Are not the issues at stake the same for
both disjuncts? If the courts believe that an obligation to act in the
best interests of the child trumps one to respect the wishes of a
competent child it needs to be shown why this obligation does not have
force in all circumstances. Why would a court not deny treatment to a
child it does not believe in her best interests when it judges her
competent to choose? If a child is competent then she is in all
significant and relevant respects the equal of an adult and should be
able both to choose and to refuse treatment.
Three final comments on the child’s right to choose are in
order. First, what is deemed to be in the child’s best interests
is evidence for but not finally determinative of a judgement as to the
competence of the child. Nevertheless balancing a child’s right
to be heard against a child’s right to have its best interests
promoted is difficult. Second, it is arguably enough to show a
child’s competence that a child understands the nature of the
act. After all no more is needed for an adult’s consent to be
informed. In the law of contract adults need only to know what they
are signing up to. They do not need a full appreciation of the
contract’s significance and of its import for their future
lives. Third, Gillick competence as specified is very demanding.
Indeed there are many adults who in making their choices fail to
display the maturity and ‘understanding of what is
involved’ that is dictated as necessary for the child. Why then
should a child have to display a competence that many adults lack both
in general and in particular cases?
One important, indeed central, manner of understanding the moral
status of the child is by questioning whether or not children have
rights. It is normally thought that according to the
‘will’ theory of rights children cannot have rights,
whereas according to the ‘interest’ theory they can. It
is, however, at least possible on the ‘will’ theory that
children could have rights, albeit ones that are exercised by trustees
or representatives. 
Child ‘liberationists’ claim that children have all the
rights that adults do. Others deny this, either believing that
children have no rights or believing that children have only some of
the rights which adults possess. Those who believe children have no
rights deny that children are qualified as adults are to have rights.
They further argue that the ascription of rights to children manifests
a misunderstanding of what children are like and of the nature of
family relationships. Those who deny children all or some of the
rights possessed by adults nevertheless believe that children, as
humans, have a certain moral status that ought to be protected.
Those who say that drawing a line between adults and children in
respect of their possession of rights is arbitrary may mean different
things. To deny that different capacities are progressively acquired
at different ages is implausible. To insist that drawing a line as
such is wrong ignores the point of doing so, and recourse to the
alternative of a competency test is not appropriate or practicable. On
the standard view children have welfare but not liberty rights,
whereas adults have both. Adults also have the right that their
childhood selves shall grow up to be adults of a certain sort.
Children do not have an interest in remaining in childhood.
The best-interest principle should arguably have only limited
application. It is not possible unambiguously to interpret the best
interests of a child in terms of a hypothetical adult self, and any
objective interpretation will be the subject of contested views. A
child’s right to be heard in matters affecting its interests is
a substitute not a complement to the right of choosing for herself,
and the Gillick competence which qualifies a child to exercise its
rights of decision-making is arguably stringently defined.