With trigrams and hexagrams as symbols of the “three
potencies”, the starting point of Yijing philosophy is
the acceptance of human finitude. On the one hand, the “three
potencies” highlight the limits of human beings in shaping the
natural environment. On the other, they empower human beings to pursue
their goals if they are willing to adapt to the natural environment.
For instance, in Xici (one of the “Ten Wings”),
the authors point out that in the oracles there were encouraging words
such as “auspicious” (ji) and “without
blame” (wujiu), and stern warnings against
“calamity” (xiong), “blame”
(jiu), “regret” (hui) and
“remorse” (lin) (Xici I: 3, 7). These
contrasting prognostications highlight the harsh reality of human
existence. In some incidents, the wind of luck is on our side;
whatever we do seems to go well. But in other incidents, we are
clearly out of luck: no matter how hard we try, we are doomed to
failure.
To elucidate what they mean by the harsh reality of human existence,
the Xici authors identify the period when hexagrams were used
in divination. They write:
The Changes came into use in the period of middle antiquity.
Those who composed the Changes had fear and anxiety.
(Xici II: 7; WB: 345, with modifications)
Here, the Xici authors link the popularity of hexagram
divination to the momentous transition when the mandate of heaven
(tianming)—the power to rule China—was abruptly
passed from the Shang family to the Zhou family. To highlight the
importance of divination in assuaging human fear, the Xici
authors coin two terms—fear (you) and anxiety
(huan)—to describe the different states of human
apprehension of uncertainty. To further clarify what fear and anxiety
mean, the Xici authors write:
The time at which the Change came to the fore was that in
which the house of Yin [Shang] came to an end and the way of the house
of Zhou 周 was rising, that is, the time when King Wen and the tyrant
Zhou 紂 were pitted against each other. This is why the hexagram
statements of the book so frequently warn against danger. He who is
conscious of danger creates peace for himself, he who takes things
lightly creates his own downfall. (Xici II:11; WB: 352, with
modifications)
Directly linking the popularity of hexagram divination to the epic
battle between the last ruler of Shang (King Zhou) and the first ruler
of Zhou (King Wen), the Xici authors see hexagrams as stern
warnings against danger and downfall. In these warnings, hexagrams
provoked fear by reminding readers—typically, those involved in
government—of the disastrous consequences of bad decisions and
reckless moves (such as the tyrant Zhou’s brutality that led to
the downfall of the Shang). They also instilled anxiety by calling
attention to the vulnerability of human beings and the randomness in
human fate (such as the sudden fall of the Shang and the unexpected
rise of the Zhou). Whether provoking fear or instilling anxiety, the
effect of hexagram divination is the same. It forces readers to
reflect on their arrogance, complacency and self-indulgence. It shocks
them to look for ways to come to terms with contingency and
serendipity. Above all, it directs attention to the dark side of human
existence such as disease, deformation, degeneration, and death
(Redmond & Hon 2014: 128–139).
For the Xici’s authors, it did not matter whether
danger and downfall happened in the political realm or in one’s
body. The truth of the matter is that human beings have little control
of their fate. At the same time, the Xici’s authors
also sought to console nervous readers, assuring them that if they
learnt to read hexagrams properly, they will discern the pattern
behind incessant changes. They write:
The Changes is a book from which one may not hold aloof. Its
dao [i.e., pattern] is forever changing—alternating,
movement without rest, flowing through the six empty places [of a
hexagram]; rising and sinking without fixed law, firm and yielding
transform each other. They cannot be confined within a rule; it is
only change that is at work here. They move inward and outward
according to fixed rhythms. Without and within, they teach caution.
They also show care and sorrow and their causes. Though you have no
teacher, approach them as you would your parents. (“Xici”
II: 7; WB: 348–49, with modifications)
Seen in this light, the 64 hexagrams are no longer oracles. They
become symbols of the constant movements in the universe and the
ceaseless changes in one’s life. More important, they point to
the intricate networks of factors or forces—from near to far
away, from simple to complicated, from visible to invisible—that
shape movements and changes.
Take, for instance, Qian ䷀ (The Creative #1). The line
statements depict the six yang lines as a dragon in various
positions—a “hidden dragon” in line one at the
bottom, an “emerging dragon” in line two, a
“wavering dragon” in line four, a “flying
dragon” in line five, and an “arrogant dragon” in
line six at the top (see
 Appendix 5).
 In addition, the line statements suggest a correspondence between the
dragon’s position and a proper course of action: the
“hidden dragon” should avoid taking aggressive action, the
“emerging dragon” and the “flying dragon”
should seek help from “a great man”, the “wavering
dragon” should take flight over the depths despite the danger
and apparent risks, and the “arrogant dragon” will regret
being stubborn and excessively confident. But, as a hexagram,
Qian is ambiguous. On the one hand, in five of its six lines,
the tone seems to be upbeat, projecting an impression of an incessant
progress from a hidden dragon to an emerging dragon, a wavering dragon
and finally a flying dragon. On the other hand, the progression is
abruptly cut short by the downfall of an arrogant dragon. Like a Greek
tragedy, the rapid fall of the arrogant dragon suggests hubris,
highlighting the danger of excessive human pride in making strenuous
efforts to pull oneself up. 
In Tuan (another piece of the “Ten Wings”), the
authors emphasize the importance of mounting of the six dragons of
Qian in a timely fashion (shi cheng liu long) (for a
translation of the Tuan statement, see WB: 370–72). By
mounting of the six dragons in a timely fashion, the Tuan
authors mean two things. First, they view the six lines of
Qian as constantly changing their positions. Even if one
strictly follows the incremental progress from a hidden dragon (the
first line) to an emerging dragon (the second line) to a flying dragon
(the fifth line), upon reaching the top (an arrogant dragon), one must
go back down to a hidden dragon and to start all over again. Second,
the Tuan authors suggest readers choose a dragon most
suitable to them, such as to assume the position of a hidden dragon
when starting a new business or beginning a new career, to act like an
emerging dragon after receiving recognition from peers or bosses, to
be like a wavering dragon when making crucial transition in career or
location, to be like a flying dragon when everything seems to be
flourishing, and last but not least, to avoid becoming an arrogant
dragon when everything looks perfect but a decline is imminent. 
In short, the Tuan authors urge readers to view Qian
metaphorically as a spatial-temporal grid to reflect on their
surroundings, to look for alternatives, and to anticipate dangers and
pitfalls. As such, Qian becomes a symbol of the ever-changing
universe. It is particularly helpful when we are at a critical
juncture of our lives. At that moment—one may say, the
Yijing moment—we feel especially vulnerable and
fragile, because we are reminded of the confluence of factors that
shape our lives and the dangers of making a wrong decision. On the
other hand, Qian also suggest that we act decisively to
“mount the six dragons in a timely manner”. Once we mount
the six dragons, we become part of the great flow of the universe. We
may be a hidden dragon or an arrogant dragon when we enter the great
flow, but as we are swept along by the current, we should find our
position, our rhythm, our trajectory. In the end, the key point is not
when and how we enter the great flow of the universe, but what we
become and what we achieve after we join the great flow.
In the “Ten Wings”, different authors offer different
strategies for individuals to find their roles in the great flow of
the universe. For instance, the Shuogua authors suggest that
a person should focus on the 8 trigrams as symbols of the unfolding of
the universe, such as Gen ☶ representing mountain,
Li ☲ representing fire, Kan ☵
representing water, and Zheng ☳ representing thunder
(for a summary of the main argument of Shuagua, see WB:
356–65). Like the “Five Agents” (metal, wood, water,
fire, and earth), the eight trigrams graphically denote the basic
elements of the universe that produce the myriad things. The
Shuogua authors also propose that we think of the 8 trigrams
as symbols of directions, strategically placed in the
east-south-west-north grid. With the cosmic grand scheme in mind, the
Shuohua authors urge us to find solace in the rises and falls
in human life.
Whereas the Shuogua authors focus on the 8 trigrams, the
Xugua authors pay special attention to the sequence of the 64
hexagrams (for a full translation of Xugua, see Lynn 1994:
103–110). In rationalizing the hexagram sequences, the
Xugua authors match the order of hexagrams with key moments
of human evolution, beginning with the construction of a primitive
community to the establishment of a patrilineal family structure based
on gender distinctions and matrimony. Later, the patrilineal family
structure is further expanded into a complex socio-political system
based on the distinctions between kings and officials, and rulers and
ruled. While this process of development seems inevitable,
occasionally the Xugua authors call attention to challenges
and obstacles in maintaining a stable community. They identify moments
where the socio-political order is corrupt (Kui #38 and
Jian #39) or disintegrated (Huan #59). Because of
the danger of corruption and disintegration, the Xugua
authors emphasize the need for renewing the socio-political order by
replacing corrupt leaders (Ge #49) and re-structuring the
entire system (Ding #50). Nevertheless, occasional
interruptions do not interfere with or slow down the steady progress
of humankind. Based on this epic saga, the Xugua authors
place the fortune and misfortune of individuals in the longue
durée of human evolution. Accidents, irritant behaviors,
unexpected occurrences, and unplanned actions are absorbed and
rationalized in the onward march of humankind.
If one just reads the Shuogua and the Xugua,
divination does not seem to have a role in decision making. One makes
decisions based on either the confluence of cosmic forces or the
longue durée of human evolution. But in the
Xici, divination is important. In fact, an extended passage
is devoted to discussing how to perform divination with 50 yarrow
stalks (Xici I: 8, more about it later). In addition, the
Xici authors identify divination as one of four ways to use
the hexagrams: (1) to use the hexagram statements and line statements
as warnings against danger and downfall; (2) to use the changes in
trigrams and hexagrams to understand the ceaseless changes in the
natural realm and the human realm; (3) to use hexagram images to
enhance rulers’ authority; (4) to use divination to provoke
inquirers to think more deeply about their choices (Xici I:
9; WB: 314). Based on these four-fold uses of hexagrams, the
Xici authors highlight the broad appeal of the
Yijing. It can be a book of “wisdom”
(zhi) for those who are interested in pondering the causes
and patterns of change; it can be a book of “kindness”
(ren) for those who are interested in improving the political
order; it can be a book of “life” (riyong) for
those who just want to live, overcome obstacles, and make fewer
mistakes (Xici I: 4; WB: 298). These three
approaches—the cosmological, the political, and the
existential—formed the bases for Yijing commentators to
philosophize change. Over the two thousand years after the
canonization of the Yijing in 125 BCE, commentators developed
three distinct views toward change—the cosmology of change, the
ontology of change, and the moral-metaphysics of change.
Rulers of the Han dynasty (206 BCE–220 CE) were obsessed with
building an eternal empire, a humanly-made system that not only
mimicked the recurrent pattern of the universe but also responded
proactively to the ebb and flow of cosmic forces (Pines 2009, 2012).
This everlasting structure was stable and flexible, massive and
specific, synchronizing human activities for the unfolding of the
universe. Its goal was to merge the natural and human realms, such
that the two became one and the same (Loewe 1994, 2005; Wang 2000).
Known as correlative cosmology, the purpose behind this fusion of the
natural and human realms was to focus attention on “the mutual
responsiveness of heaven and humanity” (Queen 1996: 1–53).
This mutual responsiveness of nature and humankind was based on two
assumptions. First, the cosmos is orderly and stable. Its orderliness
and stability are shown in the regular succession in time, such as the
four seasons, the twelve months, the 365¼ days. Second, the
same orderliness of the natural world is found in the human realm in
the forms of life cycles, the rhythm of work and rest, and the rise
and fall of family fortunes. Despite the vicissitudes on the surface,
the natural and human worlds are balanced, systematic and predictable.
They are perfect mirrors of each other, such that when one moves, the
other responds.
The goal of correlative cosmology was not to develop a comprehensive
understanding of the universe. Rather, it was to legitimize the
transition “from the concept of imperial sovereignty based on
might into the need to support a claim to rule with intellectual
sanctions” (Loewe 1994: 121–41). Thus, the emperor was
said to be the crucial link between the natural and human realms. In
fact, according to the Han scholar Dong Zhongshu (ca. 195–105
BCE), the Chinese character for king (王) reflected the solemn
responsibility of the emperor (symbolized by the vertical stroke in
the middle) for connecting the three potencies ☰: heaven
(tian), earth (di) and humankind (ren)
(Redmond & Hon 2014: 159–61). As such, the emperor was
indeed the Son of Heaven (tianzi) who was omnicompetent,
omnipotent and omniscient (Loewe 2011; Queen 1996).
To support absolutism, Han commentators transformed the
Yijing into a cosmological manual reflecting the ebb and flow
of cosmic forces. They earnestly reorganized the hexagram sequence to
match the cosmic rhythm, demonstrating that the natural and human
realms are one and the same. Although most of the writings of the Han
commentators are lost, in an 8th-9th century
text, Zhouyi jijie (A Collection of Explanations on the
Changes of Zhou Dynasty) edited by Li Dingzuo, we have
glimpses of the ambition of the Han commentators who spent their lives
fathoming the cosmos and ordering the world (R. Smith 2008:
57–88).
For instance, Jing Fang (77–37 BCE) created the Hexagrams of
Eight Palaces (ba gong gua): Qian ䷀,
Kun ䷁, Zhen ䷲, Xun ䷸,
Kan ䷜, Li ䷝, Gen ䷳,
Dui ䷹. These eight palace hexagrams are the doubles of
the eight trigrams. For Jing, each of these palace hexagrams leads a
group of seven hexagrams. For example, Qian ䷀ leads
䷫, ䷠, ䷋, ䷓, ䷖, ䷢, ䷍.
In this new alignment of hexagrams, there is both a steady increase or
decrease of the yin and yang cosmic forces, and the
the hidden power of the two forces even when they are dormant (for the
new sequence of 64 hexagrams based on eight palaces, see Nielson 2003:
3).
Another new sequence of hexagrams was the “waning and waxing
hexagrams” (xiaoxi gua) perfected by Yu Fan
(164–233). Representing the ebb and flow of the yin and
yang cosmic forces, the “waning and waxing
hexagrams” go as follows:
Fu ䷗[24]→
Lin ䷒[19] →
Tai ䷊[11] →
Dazhuang ䷡[34] →
Guai  ䷪[43] → Qian 
䷀[1] →
Gou ䷫[44] →
Dun ䷠[33] →
Pi ䷋[12] →
Guan ䷓[20] →
Bo ䷖[23] →
Kun ䷁[2] (back to Fu)
When reading from Fu to Qian, the yang
force gradually increases while the yin force decreases. When
reading from Gou to Kun, the yin force
increases while the yang force decreases. As a system, the
twelve hexagrams are continuous. When the series ends with
Kun, it begins anew with Fu (Nielson 2003:
275–76).
By developing these new hexagram sequences, the Han Yijing
commentators wanted to achieve two goals. First, they freed themselves
from the original sequence of the 64 hexagrams that was, to them,
incoherent and inconsistent. To the Han commentators, the problem of
the original sequence was its failure in lining up hexagrams in
accordance with their graphic images. By creating new sequences, the
Han scholars were able to match perfectly the hexagram images with the
ebb and flow of cosmic forces (Redmond & Hon 2014: 159–163).
Second, with the new sequences, the Han commentators were better
equipped to synchronize the hexagrams with the lunar calendar, showing
a direct correspondence between the ebb and flow of the cosmic forces
and the cycles of life in human society (R. Smith 2008: 62–77).
For instance, the “waning and waxing hexagrams” were
assigned to represent months in the lunar calendar: Fu
䷗ (the eleventh month), Lin ䷒ (the twelfth
month), Tai ䷊ (the first month of the following year),
Dazhuang ䷡ (the second month), Guai ䷪
(the third month), Qian ䷀ (the fourth month),
Gou ䷫ (the fifth month), Dun ䷠ (the
sixth month), Pi ䷋ (the seventh month), Guan
䷓ (the eighth month), Bo ䷖ (the ninth month),
and Kun ䷁ (the tenth month) (Nielson 2003:
275–76). The same could be done for the hexagrams sequence based
on the eight palaces. By matching the new sequence of the 64 hexagrams
with 12 months, the Han commentators allotted eight months to four
hexagrams and four months to eight hexagrams (Nielson 2003: 5).
To Han commentators, while the new hexagram sequences highlighted
certainty in the universe’s self-renewal, each hexagram
represented the possibility of coping with the changing environment.
These differing functions addressed a fundamental question in ruling a
huge empire: How to formulate flexible policies while keeping a
semblance of unity and uniformity? To give themselves flexibility in
interpreting hexagrams, the Han commentators created new interpretive
strategies. One common strategy called for linking one hexagram to
four hexagrams. Take, for instance, Qian ䷀ (The
Creative, #1). To interpret the hexagram, one can link it to its
opposite, Kun ䷁ (The Receptive, #2), known as
“laterally linked hexagrams” (pangtong) (Nielson
2003: 185–88). In addition, Qian can also be read along
with its preceding hexagram and following hexagram in accordance with
the sequence of the “waning and waxing hexagrams”. So,
Qian can be read in relation to Guai ䷪
(Resolution, #43), its antecedent, and Gou ䷫
(Encounter, #44), its posterior. And then, within a hexagram, one can
also create “interlocking trigrams” (hugua or
huti), that is, using four or five of the hexagram lines to
form two new trigrams (Nielson 2003: 111–14). In the case of
Qian, it is not possible to create “interlocking
trigrams” due to all six lines being yang. But in other
cases, the “interlocking trigrams” are significant in
deciphering the meaning of a hexagram. Take, for instance, Ge
䷰ (Radical Change, #49). Its second, third, and fourth lines
form a Sun trigram ☴ and its third, four, and fifth
form a Qian trigram ☰ Combining Sun and
Qian forms Gou ䷫ (Encounter, #44)
Another strategy of expanding the scope of interpretation was to turn
a hexagram into a different one by transposing some of its lines.
Known as “changing the positions of hexagram lines”
(yiwei), this strategy allowed Han scholars to introduce
other hexagrams when having problems interpreting a hexagram. For
instance, Tai ䷊ (Peace, #11) can become Jiji
䷾ (Ferrying Complete #63) by transposing its second line (a
yang) and its fifth line (a yin). Likewise,
Dazhuang ䷡ (Great Strength, #34) can turn into
Xu ䷄ (Waiting, #5) by switching its fourth line (a
yang) and its fifth line (a yin). Much more
versatile than other methods, the transposition of hexagram lines gave
Han commentators the liberty to inject a broad range of alternatives
when interpreting a hexagram.
Thus, by giving themselves flexibility in interpreting hexagrams, the
Han commentators reaffirmed the orderliness, stability and
predictability of the cosmic and human realms. They transformed the
Yijing into a cosmological manual to match the rhythm of
cosmic forces. In doing so, the Han commentators suppressed and
externalized the human fear of uncertainty. They suppressed fear by
focusing attention on the repeated rhythm of the universe, as
evidenced by the seasonal changes and the passage of time from month
to month. They externalized fear by concentrating on the grand scheme
of the universe’s renewal that did not seem to give room to
uncertainty or rupture. More important, by matching the cosmic realm
with the human rhythm, they created an illusion that the
Yijing was a ruler’s playbook to fathom the cosmos and
order the world (Ch’en 1986: 798–801; R. Smith 2008:
62–88).
But the fall of the Han dynasty in 220 CE reveals a fundamental
problem of correlative cosmology, namely, human beings are incapable
of fully discerning the cosmic pattern, nor can they completely apply
the cosmic pattern to human affairs. Even if they tried to mimic the
cosmic rhythm in governing the human world, the human world is far too
complicated for anyone to handle. In the following seven hundred
years, Yijing scholars retreated from fathoming the cosmos.
Instead, they turned their attention to ordering the human world and
looked for its deep structure.
The major figure who started this turn to the human world was Wang Bi
(226–249). Born six years after the collapse of the Han dynasty,
Wang Bi was thrown into a situation in which there seemed to be few
certainties in life. With China divided into three separate
kingdoms—the Wei, the Shu, and the Wu—there was widespread
disorder in the country. When everything was in ruin, fewer and fewer
people followed the Confucian precepts of honesty, loyalty and filial
piety. Instead, trickery, usurpation and pragmatic calculation became
the accepted strategies for survival. Apparently, Wang Bi’s
experience after the collapse of the Han dynasty brought him face to
face with fear and anxiety—the two recurrent themes in the
Yijing (Hon 2010).  Before his premature death at
the age of 23, Wang wrote a commentary on the Yijing along
with a commentary on the Laozi. Attached to his
Yijing commentary, the Zhouyi zhu (A Commentary
on the Changes of Zhou Dynasty), were
seven essays in which he discussed how to read the classic. In these
essays (rendered as “General Remarks on the Changes of the
Zhou” by Richard John Lynn, see Lynn 1994: 25–39), he
revisited themes that had been discussed in the Xici,
including what a hexagram symbolizes and what the six lines of a
hexagram tell us about human existence. In these essays, he presented
a notion of change that was completely new.
First and foremost, unlike the Han commentators, Wang Bi did not
consider the hexagram sequence as important. Instead, he regards each
of the 64 hexagrams as a discrete situation. Furthermore, he points
out that the uniqueness of each hexagram is succinctly summarized in
Tuan (one of the “Ten Wings”), such as
Zhun ䷂ (Difficulty at the Beginning #3) discusses the
difficulty when someone starts an endeavor, Meng ䷃
(Youthful Folly, #4) focuses on how a teacher hone his or her skills
in teaching; Xu ䷄ (Waiting #5) suggests a pause to
reflect on one’s precarious situation (“Ming Tuan”,
Lynn 1994: 25–27). As such, readers do not have to strictly
follow the hexagram sequence in reading hexagrams. They can pick and
choose hexagrams that appear to directly address questions in mind. No
matter which hexagrams they pick, the key point is to see a hexagram
as a field of action where different forces or players interact.
Thus, for Wang Bi, the purpose of reading hexagrams is to reflect on
one’s situation (“Mingyao tongbian”, Lynn 1994:
27–29). The six lines of a hexagram—even a bad one like
Gu ䷑ (Ills to Be Cured, #18)—offer options to
respond to a situation. They represent the room to maneuver within a
system or the possibilities of altering an existing power structure.
Precisely in this juncture that exists between what is already
configurated and what can be changed, Wang Bi sees the fluidity of
human affairs. With proper action, one can turn what appears to be a
failure into a blessing. Conversely, lacking appropriate action, one
can make what appears to be flourishing into a disaster.
For this reason, Wang Bi does not find the inauspicious hexagram
Sun ䷨ (Diminution, #41) terribly frightening (Lynn
1994: 387–96). Judging from its hexagram image and line
statements, Sun suggests a situation where those who are high
up take advantage of those who are in lower positions, or those who
are physically strong victimize those who are weak. Yet, despite the
injustice denoted in the hexagram, Wang Bi believes there is still
room for optimism. “Supreme good fortune” will come, he
declares, if someone finds ways to benefit the public. Similarly, the
“oppressions” in hexagram Kun ䷮ (Impasse,
#47) are avoidable (Lynn 1994: 428–37). Judging from its line
statements, Kun is hopeless. All of its six lines are plagued
with some form of oppression: the first line is buried under a barren
tree, the second line is burdened with excessive drinking and eating,
the third line is caught in rocks, the fourth line is locked in a
golden carriage, the fifth line is bullied by a man with purple knee
bands, and the sixth line is wrapped by creeping vines. Yet Wang Bi
argues that by making the right decision one can reverse what seems to
be an oppressive situation into an opportunity for growth and
advancement.
By stressing human agency and activism, Wang Bi sees hexagrams as
pointers, directing our attention to the source of human creativity
and ingenuity. As pointers, hexagrams and hexagram lines serve
different functions. While a hexagram connotes a field of action, the
six hexagram lines stand for the six players (or the six options) in
that field of action (“Minggua shibian tongyao”, Lynn
1994: 29–31). Symbolizing the whole, a hexagram represents a web
of relations governing the actions and interactions of the six
players. Symbolizing the parts, hexagram lines represent what the six
players can or cannot do to advance their interests. Hence, in reading
hexagrams, Yijing readers are constantly reminded that every
aspect of human life, big or small, is governed by the part-whole
relationship. To cope with change, Wang Bi asserts, we must find out
the part-whole relationship in each given situation—be it in
family, society, or a solitary quest for spiritual communion with
nature.
In his comments on the Xici I:9 (preserved by Han Kangbo
[332–380]), Wang Bi explains this intricate relationship between
part and whole. Originally a passage about divination, Xici
I:9 begins with a discussion of selecting a hexagram by counting 50
yarrow stalks. Known as “the number of Great Expansion”
(dayan zhishu), the selection includes a step wherein the
diviner separates the 50 yarrow stalks into two piles: (a) a group of
49 stalks that will be used to select a hexagram, and (b) an unused
stalk that will be set aside in the rest of the divination procedure
(for a translation of this passage, see WB: 310–315). Wang Bi
views the group of 49 stalks as you (Being) and the unused
stalk as wu (Non-Being). He said,
After expanding the numbers of Heaven and Earth, we find that the ones
that are of benefit to us number fifty, and of these we actually use
forty-nine, thus leaving one unused. Although this one is not used,
yet through it the use of the other numbers becomes readily possible,
and, although this one is not one of the numbers, yet through it the
other numbers are formed. As this one represents the supreme ultimate
of change, the other forty-nine constitute the ultimate of numbers.
Non-being [wu] cannot be brought to light by means of
non-being [wu] but must take place through being
[you]. Therefore, by applying ourselves constantly to this
ultimate among things that have being [you], we shall surely
bring to light the primogenitor from which all things derive. (Lynn
1994: 60–61, with modifications)
In the studies of Neo-Daoism of the Wei-Jin period (220–589),
scholars usually consider you (Being) and wu
(Non-being) as a dichotomy, either as a contrast between the totality
of the universe (Dao) and the myriad things, or as a
differentiation between the principle governing the generation and
regeneration of the universe (li) and the manifestations of
that principle in the activities of animate beings (Chan 1963 [1969:
314–324]; Graham 1959; Schipper 1982 [1993: 192–208]).
This dichotomy may be accurate in discussing Neo-Daoism in general and
Wang Bi’s commentary to the Laozi in particular. But in
Wang Bi’s Yijing commentary, he sees you
(Being) and wu (Non-being) as co-dependent (Tang 2015:
51–59; Wagner 2003: 83–147; Yu 2007: 116–148,
204–240). He argues that the one unused stalk symbolizes
wu (Non-being), and the forty-nine used stalks stand for
you (Being). On the one hand, you depends on
wu because the forty-nine yarrow stalks become useful only
when they are utilized in casting a hexagram. On the other hand,
wu cannot fulfill itself without you because there
is no way to perform a divination without the 49 yarrow stalks. As
wu, the practice of divination gives unity and coherence to
the act of throwing of the 49 yarrow stalks. As you, the act
of throwing the 49 yarrow stalks makes divination possible.
One may argue that Wang Bi’s reading of hexagrams limits the
Yijing to concrete human affairs. Unlike the Han
commentators, Wang Bi had little interest in cosmology and rejected
any attempt to match the cosmic realm with the human realm. But in
seeing hexagrams as pointers revealing the co-dependence of part and
whole, substance and function, Wang Bi reminds us that the
Yijing is meant to be read metaphorically. In focusing on
hexagrams as pointers—pointing toward something hidden, implicit
and yet fundamental—he avoids the mistake of the Han
commentators who turn the Yijing into a copious system of
signs to document the multifarious changes in the universe. To him,
the Han scholars’ attempt is futile because they do not accept
the basic tenet of the Yijing—the limits of human
knowledge (“Ming Xiang”, Lynn 1994: 31–32).
Wang Bi’s Yijing commentary became the standard for
interpreting the classic throughout mid-imperial China. Its august
status was confirmed by the state-approved Zhouyi zhengyi
(The True Meanings of Changes of the Zhou
Dynasty) edited by Kong Yingda (574–648). Throughout the
Tang dynasty (618–907) and the Song dynasty (960–1126),
knowledge of Wang Bi’s Yijing commentary was tested in
civil service examinations. Its longevity as the standard
Yijing commentary indicated consensus among the Chinese elite
that attention must be paid to solving the pressing problems in the
country rather than building an eternal empire that mimicked the
cosmic rhythm (Hon 2004, 2005; R. Smith 2008: 89–139).
However, while Wang Bi criticized the Han commentators for being
overly ambitious in blending the natural and human realms, he was also
overly ambitious in using human reason to discern the hidden principle
of human affairs. Whereas Han commentators suppressed and externalized
the human fear of uncertainty, Wang also suppressed and externalized
the same fear. In viewing hexagrams as fields of action, he suppressed
the fear by absorbing it into part-whole relations in human affairs.
By turning hexagrams into pointers, he externalized the fear by
connecting it to a search for the principle of change in the rises and
falls of human life. In the end, both the Han scholars and Wang Bi
were hubristic in assuming they were omniscient.
In contrast, Zhu Xi (1130–1200)—a key figure of the
Cheng-Zhu School of Neo-Confucianism of late imperial
China—argued that the “original meaning”
(benyi) of Yijing was divination. On the surface of
it, Zhu Xi’s argument seemed redundant. It had been well-known
that the first two layers of the classics were oracles originating
from the Western Zhou period. But Zhu Xi’s point was that for
more than a thousand years since the canonization of the
Yijing, the classic had never been read properly as a
divination manual. For this reason, Zhu Xi believed that the true
meaning of Yijing lay in the imagery of the 64 hexagrams. To
distinguish the 64 hexagrams from the “Ten Wings”, Zhu Xi
created two separate categories in his commentary, the Zhouyi
benyi (The Original Meaning of the Changes
of the Zhou Dynasty). One category was
the “classic” (jing) which covered the 64
hexagrams; the other the “commentarial materials”
(zhuan) which included the “Ten Wings”. With
these two categories, Zhu made clear that the “Ten Wings”
were at best supplementary materials in understanding the
hexagrams.
Underlying his view was a different understanding of the formation of
the Yijing. Unlike other Yijing commentators, Zhu
did not see the classic as an evolution from divination to philosophy.
For him, the sixty-four hexagrams are the foundation of the
Yijing because they are symbols of the constant changes in
the natural and human worlds. This pictorial depiction of
transformation—started by Fu Xi and completed by King Wen and
the Duke of Zhou—was later turned into a discussion of cosmology
and morality by Confucian scholars. As a result, the Yijing
ceased to be a pictorial description of the awesome and awe-inspiring
transformation in the universe; it became merely another text (like
the Book of Poetry and the Book of History in the
Confucian canon) that taught morality to kings, nobles and government
officials (Hon 2008).
By privileging Fu Xi’s hexagrams over Confucius’s
“Ten Wings”, Zhu Xi wanted to achieve two goals. First, he
underscored the importance of divination as a method of
self-cultivation. For him, divination is not a superstitious act of
seeking guidance from a supernatural power. Rather, it is an enriching
experience of encountering the unknown and unfathomable. In the
process of divination, one faces the multiple forces that shape human
life, and thereby becomes aware of the opportunities and resources for
improving one’s situation. As Joseph Adler observes, divination
is “a way of learning” to Zhu Xi because it helps learners
“‘respond’ (ying) to
‘incipient’ change (chi), both in external events
and in the mind” (Adler 1990: 190). Second, by focusing on the
visual imagery of the hexagrams, Zhu Xi saw the Yijing as
significantly different from other Confucian classics. Rather than
limiting to kings, nobles and government officials, the
Yijing appeals to a broad audience who, literate or
illiterate, are concerned with uncertainties in life (Hon 2011).
For this reason, Zhu Xi emphasized the ambiguity of line statements.
To highlight their ambiguity, he divided the line statements into two
separate utterances: a summary of the image of the hexagram line
(xiang), and a prognostication based on a careful
consideration of the image of the hexagram line (zhan). By
dividing a line statement into two parts, Zhu Xi turns a line
statement into a dialogue between the oracle’s calling to
attention and the reader’s response. In this hermeneutical
circle, nothing is certain or preordained. The conversation can lead
in many directions, sometimes predictable and sometimes
unpredictable.
On the surface of it, like Wang Bi, Zhu Xi appears to use the
Yijing to provoke readers to reflect on their surroundings.
However, there is one fundamental difference. For Zhu Xi, a reading of
the Yijing does not necessarily answer all questions or solve
all problems. Rather, it heightens the reader’s sensitivity to
the uncertainty and serendipity of human existence. For instance,
Ge ䷰ (Radical Change, #49) and Ding ䷱
(The Cauldron, #50) are known for highlighting the anxiety and fear in
a drastic political change. In Ge, the reader is encouraged
to lead a revolt against a tyrant ruler who is causing harm to the
public. To underscore the urgency of addressing the political crisis,
the revolt is compared to the renewal of lives in seasonal changes; it
is paired with the pivotal event of the Shang dynasty being replaced
by the Zhou dynasty. Above all, it is described as a timely
intervention in human affairs to restore order for the benefit of the
masses (for a translation of Ge, see WB: 189–192).
While Ge advocates a regime change, Ding demands the
restoration of political order immediately following the revolt.
Graphically, the six lines of Ding ䷱ resemble a
cauldron—the bottom line represents the legs of the cauldron;
the second to fourth lines symbolize the belly of the cauldron; the
fifth line denotes the ears of the cauldron, and the top line suggests
the bar that carries the cauldron from place to place. Thus, the
reader is encouraged to clean the cauldron to make food, or, in the
aftermath of a regime change, to immediately re-establish the
political order (for a translation of Ding, see WB:
195–97).
For centuries, the Yijing’s commentators heeded the
Xugua authors’ advice to read Ge and
Ding together as two phases of a regime change (see WB: 635,
641). While Ge discusses the destructive phase of toppling an
old regime, Ding refers to the constructive phase of
rebuilding the political order. The two hexagrams jointly call
attention to the danger of political corruption, the fear of a tyrant,
and the anxiety of losing control amid political upheaval. More
important, the two hexagrams highlight the importance of making the
right decision amidst power struggles. For this reason, through the
centuries, Ge and Ding received special attention
from commentators who were interested in political philosophy (see,
for instance, Wang Bi’s commentary in Lynn 1994:
444–59).
For Zhu Xi, however, there was no need to connect Ge with
Ding. Instead, he sees them as separate situations where
readers can ask different questions and express different concerns.
For him, the anxiety and fear in the Yijing appear not in the
hexagram sequence, but in the dialogue between the oracle and the
reader. To downplay the political connotations of these two hexagrams,
Zhu Xi stresses the intensity of the oracle-reader dialogue. Take, for
example, the hexagram statement of Ge which seems to suggest
the possibility of “the disappearance of remorse”
(huiwang) after political change. For Zhu, there is no way to
tell whether “the disappearance of remorse” is possible
without considering the reader’s situation. If the reader is
doing the right things, then remorse will automatically disappear. But
if the reader is making a mistake, remorse will remain. Hence,
“the disappearance of remorse” is provisional; whether the
oracle will come true rests in reader’s motive, sincerity and
action. Similarly, “the disappearance of remorse” in the
fourth line of Ge is provisional as well. Traditionally, the
fourth line is read as a leader ready to lead a political change. For
Zhu Xi, the fourth line does not look like a situation ripe for
political change. Rather, he sees “the disappearance of
remorse” as a warning against rushing to make drastic changes
(Hon 2008).
Likewise, Zhu Xi does not see in Ding a roadmap to form a new
regime. Instead, he sees each line of Ding as a separate
situation challenging the Yijing reader. For instance, in the
first yin line, Zhu Xi is not worried about the line’s
peripheral position. Rather, he is interested in the prognostication
(zhen) which indicates that the line is “without
remorse” (wujiu). In his comments, Zhu Xi focuses on
the subtle meaning of “without remorse” and urges the
reader to be positive about the future. He tells the reader that
“without remorse” is a result of the first line’s
determination to come back from behind and its will to succeed despite
its humble position (Hon 2008).
Ultimately, for Zhu Xi, all the Yijing oracles are
provisional. Their goal is to provoke thought, command attention, and
above all, make readers aware of the contingency of human existence.
By highlighting fear and anxiety in reading hexagrams, Zhu Xi
incorporated the Yijing into his Neo-Confucian
project—an endeavor, he hoped, that would lead to the triumph of
the pure and perceptive “mind of the Dao”
(daoxin) over the perturbed and perverse “human
mind” (renxin). To develop a Confucian
moral-metaphysics, Zhu Xi turned to the split second of decision
making as a battle ground of one’s moral cultivation. In that
split second, Zhu Xi claimed, the human mind is deeply torn between
“the mind of the Dao” and “the human
mind”, and between “the heavenly principle”
(tianli) and “human desires” (renyu)
(Adler 2014; Tu 1985: 131–48). In this mental battle, the
Yijing reader is put into a moral-metaphysical journey. The
hexagrams give the readers hope without losing sight of the immense
challenge of overcoming mishaps and failure. They promise success if
readers find the means to tame their searching minds and to counter
the distractions in their lives. Above all, they give spiritual depth
to the readers’ moral struggle, turning it into a battle ground
between following the dictates of the flesh, or elevating oneself to
form a “trinity with heaven and earth”.
In this way, Zhu Xi opened the Yijing to a wide range of
audience. By focusing on divination and the symbolism of the 64
hexagrams, Zhu Xi made the Yijing relevant to readers who
might not be well educated. While it remained a canonical text, it was
transformed into “a book of life” for common people who
struggled daily to make the right decision between the purity of
“the heavenly principle” and the perversion of
“human desires” (Hon 2012). From the Ming dynasty
(1368–1644) to the Qing dynasty (1644–1911), Zhu
Xi’s interpretation of the Yijing was promoted by the
imperial government. It was included in the state-approved
Yijing commentaries, the Zhouyi daquan (The
Compendium of Cheng Yi’s and Zhu Xi’s Commentaries on the
Changes of the Zhou Dynasty) of the Ming
dynasty, and the Zhouyi zhezhong (Balanced Annotations of
the Changes of the Zhou Dynasty) of the
Qing dynasty.
On the surface, these three approaches—the cosmology of change,
the ontology of change and the moral-metaphysics of
change—appear to steadily narrow the scope of philosophizing
change. They seem to continuously move away from the cosmos to the
human world, and from the human world to an individual’s moral
cogitations. One may even say that in this narrowing of the scope, we
see a retreat from the empirical to the intellectual, and from the
objective to the subjective.
Yet, in their own ways, these three approaches offer answers to the
human fear of uncertainty that was characteristic of divination in
early China. Whether performed with yarrow stalks, coins or by
cracking the bones of oxen, divination in early China was an attempt
to calm the nerve and soothe the mind, giving inquirers the courage to
make decisions at the crossroads of their lives (Allan 1991; Gotshalk
1999; Marshall 2001; Raphals 2013, Redmond 2017; Shaughnessy 1992
[1997]; K. Smith 1989). On the other hand, the three approaches give
hope to readers by transforming the hexagrams into symbols to discuss
the human role in the unfolding of the universe (Cheng 2003; Cheng
& Ng 2009; Redmond & Hon 2014: 140–57; R. Smith 2008:
31–48). Together, they make three arguments:
These three arguments are succinctly summarized into the “three
meanings of change” (yi you san yi) in Qian
Zuodu (Opening up the Regularities of Hexagram Qian) of
the Eastern Han (25–220): (1) the multifariousness in change
(bianyi), (2) the constancy in change (buyi), and
(3) at ease with change (yijian) (Nielson 2003:
301–302, 304–305; R. Smith 2008: 78–79).
If we use these three meanings of change to compare the three
approaches, the first two focus primarily on finding the constancy in
change (buyi) and thereby assuring us that everything is
predictable. By contrast, the third pays special attention to
incessant change (bianyi) and urges us to live with
uncertainty and serendipity (yijian). If indeed
fear—especially the fear of the uncertain future—is the
fundamental tenet of the Yijing, the third approach is most
honest. Rather than suppressing or externalizing the fear of
uncertainty, the third approach faces the fear squarely with humility
and candidness. More important, it brings the struggle with the fear
of uncertainty to everyday life, particularly in the split second when
we make decisions. 