The concept of citizenship is composed of three main elements or
dimensions (Cohen 1999; Kymlicka and Norman 2000; Carens 2000). The
first is citizenship as legal status, defined by civil, political and
social rights. Here, the citizen is the legal person free to act
according to the law and having the right to claim the law’s
protection. It need not mean that the citizen takes part in the
law’s formulation, nor does it require that rights be uniform
between citizens. The second considers citizens specifically as
political agents, actively participating in a society’s
political institutions. The third refers to citizenship as membership
in a political community that furnishes a distinct source of
identity.
In many ways, the identity dimension is the least straightforward of
the three. Authors tend to include under this heading many different
things related to identity, both individual and collective, and social
 integration.[5]
 Arguably, this is inescapable since citizens’ subjective sense
of belonging, sometimes called the “psychological”
dimension of citizenship (Carens 2000,
 166),[6]
 necessarily affects the strength of the political community’s
collective identity. If enough citizens display a robust sense of
belonging to the same political community, social cohesion is
obviously strengthened. However, since many other factors can impede
or encourage it, social integration should be seen as an important
goal (or
 problem[7])
 that citizenship aims to achieve (or resolve), rather than as one of
its elements. As we will see, one crucial test for any conception of
citizenship is whether or not it can be said to contribute to social
integration.
Relations between the three dimensions are complex: the rights a
citizen enjoys will partly define the range of available political
activities while explaining how citizenship can be a source of
identity by strengthening her sense of self-respect (Rawls 1972, 544).
A strong civic identity can itself motivate citizens to participate
actively in their society’s political life. That distinct groups
within a state do not share the same sense of identity towards
‘their’ political community (or communities) can be a
reason to argue in favour of a differentiated allocation of rights
(Carens 2000, 168–173).
As we will see, differences between conceptions of citizenship centre
around four disagreements: over the precise definition of each element
(legal, political and identity); over their relative importance; over
the causal and/or conceptual relations between them; over appropriate
normative standards.
Discussions about citizenship usually have, as their point of
reference, one of two models: the republican or the liberal. The
republican model’s sources can be found in the writings of
authors like Aristotle, Tacitus, Cicero, Machiavelli, Harrington and
Rousseau, and in distinct historical experiences: from Athenian
democracy and Republican Rome to the Italian city-states and
workers’ councils.
The key principle of the republican model is civic self-rule, embodied
in classical institutions and practices like the rotation of offices,
underpinning Aristotle’s characterization of the citizen as one
capable of ruling and being ruled in turn. Citizens are, first and
foremost, “those who share in the holding of office”
(Aristotle Politics, 1275a8). Civic self-rule is also at the
heart of Rousseau’s project in the Contrat Social: it
is their co-authoring of the laws via the general will that makes
citizens free and laws
 legitimate.[8]
 Active participation in processes of deliberation and decision-making
ensures that individuals are citizens, not
 subjects.[9]
 In essence, the republican model emphasizes the second dimension of
citizenship, that of political agency.
The liberal model’s origins are traceable to the Roman Empire
and early-modern reflections on Roman law (Walzer 1989, 211). The
Empire’s expansion resulted in citizenship rights being extended
to conquered peoples, profoundly transforming the concept’s
meaning. Citizenship meant being protected by the law rather than
participating in its formulation or execution. It became an
“important but occasional identity, a legal status rather than a
fact of everyday life” (Walzer 1989, 215). The focus here is
obviously the first dimension: citizenship is primarily understood as
a legal status rather than as a political office. It now
“denotes membership in a community of shared or common law,
which may or may not be identical with a territorial community”
(Pocock 1995, 37). The Roman experience shows that the legal dimension
of citizenship is potentially inclusive and indefinitely
extensible.
The liberal tradition, which developed from the 17th
century onwards, understands citizenship primarily as a legal status:
political liberty is important as a means to protecting individual
freedoms from interference by other individuals or the authorities
themselves. But citizens exercise these freedoms primarily in the
world of private associations and attachments, rather than in the
political domain.
At first glance, the two models present us with a clear set of
alternatives: citizenship as a political office or a legal status;
central to an individual’s sense of self or as an
“occasional identity”. The citizen appears either as the
primary political agent or as an individual whose private activities
leave little time or inclination to engage actively in politics,
entrusting the business of law-making to representatives. If the
liberal model of citizenship dominates contemporary constitutional
democracies, the republican critique of the private
citizen’s passivity and insignificance is still alive and
well.
Republicans have problems of their own. First and foremost is a
concern, often repeated since Benjamin Constant, that their ideal has
become largely obsolete in the changed circumstances of the
“grands États modernes” (Constant
1819).  Aiming to realize the original republican ideal in the
present context would be a disaster, as was the Jacobins’
attempt during the French revolution (Walzer 1989, 211). Today’s
citizens will not be Romans: first, the scale and complexity of modern
states seem to preclude the kind of civic engagement required by the
republican model. If an individual’s chances of having an impact
as an active citizen are close to nil, then it makes more sense for
him to commit himself to non-political activities, be they economic,
social or familial. His identity as citizen is not central to his
sense of self and politics is only one of his many interests (Constant
1819, 316). Second, the heterogeneity of modern states does not allow
the kind of “moral unity” and mutual trust that has been
projected onto the ancient polis, qualities deemed necessary
to the functioning of republican institutions (Walzer 1989, 214). But
if ancient virtue is irrecoverable, the republican model may still act
today as “a benchmark that we appeal to when assessing how well
our institutions and practices are functioning” (Miller 2000,
84). In essence, this involves a reformulation of the model,
questioning some of its original premises while holding onto the ideal
of the citizen as an active political agent.
Instead of opposing the two models, we could reasonably see them as
complementary. Political liberty, as Constant pointed out, is the
necessary guarantee of individual liberty. Echoing Constant, Michael
Walzer considers that the two conceptions “go hand in
hand” since “the security provided by the authorities
cannot just be enjoyed; it must itself be secured, and sometimes
against the authorities themselves. The passive enjoyment of
citizenship requires, at least intermittently, the activist politics
of citizens” (Walzer 1989, 217). There are times when
individuals need only be “private citizens” and
others when they must become “private citizens”
(Ackermann 1988). But can we expect passive spectators of political
life to become active citizens should the need arise? This is no easy
question and may explain why Constant ended his famous essay by
insisting that the regular exercise of political liberty is the surest
means of moral improvement, opening citizens’ minds and spirits
to the public interest, and to the importance of defending their
freedoms. Such habituation underpins their capacity and willingness to
protect their liberties and the institutions that support them
(Constant 1819,
 327–328).[10]
Since the 1970s, feminist theorists have sharply criticized the
republican and liberal models’ shared assumption of a rigid
separation between the private and the public spheres. Their critique
has provided the impetus to the development of alternative conceptions
of politics and citizenship.
In its classical formulation, the republican conception sees the
public/political sphere as the realm of liberty and equality: it is
there that free, male citizens engage with their peers and deliberate
over the common good, deciding what is just or unjust, advantageous or
harmful (Aristotle Politics, 1253a11). The political space
must be protected from the private sphere, defined as the domain of
necessity and inequality, where the material reproduction of the
polis is secured. Women, associated with the ‘natural
world’ of reproduction, are denied citizenship and relegated to
the household.
Feminists have criticized this rigid division as mythical since both
the separation itself and the radically unequal conception of the
household that it presupposed “were clearly the outcome of
political decisions made in the public sphere” (Okin 1992, 60).
If the division ostensibly made it possible for citizens to engage
with each other as equals, feminists doubt whether it ever was the
ideal way of achieving this goal. Hence Susan Okin’s question to
republicans: “Which is likely to produce better citizens,
capable of acting as each other’s equals? Having to deal with
things part of the time — even the ‘mundane’ things
of daily life? Or treating most people as things?”
(Okin 1992, 64–65). An egalitarian family is a much more fertile
ground for equal citizens than one organized like a school for
despotism (J.S. Mill); if this means that the political space cannot
remain insulated from the world of things, there’s no great
loss.
The liberal model, for its part, gives primacy to the private sphere.
Political liberty is seen in instrumental terms: the formal rights of
individuals secure the private sphere from outside interference,
allowing the free pursuit of their particular interests (Dietz 1998,
380–81). But the neutral language of Lockean egalitarian
individualism hides the reality of women’s subjection:
“woman’s sphere” can be read as “male
property” since wives are described as naturally subordinated to
their husbands. Here as well, the division between private and public
has prevented women from gaining access to the public (Pateman 1989,
120; Dietz 1998, 380–81; Okin 1991, 118).
Since the public and private “are, and always have been,
inextricably connected” (Okin 1992,69), the upshot of the
feminist critique is not simply to make models of citizenship
inclusive by recognizing that women are individuals or to acknowledge
that they too can be citizens. Rather, we must see how laws and
policies structure personal circumstances (e.g. laws about rape and
abortion, child-care policies, allocation of welfare benefits, etc.)
and how some ‘personal problems’ have wider significance
and can only be solved collectively through political action (Pateman
1989, 131). This does not make the distinction irrelevant and the
categories collapsible. But it does mean that the boundaries between
public and private should be seen as a social construction subject to
change and contestation and that their hierarchical characterization
should be resisted.
If we discard the abstractions that characterize both the classical
and the liberal conceptions, the citizen sheds his “political
lion skin” (Pateman 1989, 92 quoting Marx 1843) and appears as
“situated” in a social world characterized by differences
of gender, class, language, race, ethnicity, culture, etc. To accept
that politics cannot and should not be insulated from
private/social/economic life is not to dissolve the political, but,
rather, to revive it since anything is as political as citizens choose
to make it. As we will see now, this contextualized conception of the
political has informed much of the criticism aimed at the universalist
model of citizenship and has inspired the formulation of a
differentialist alternative. 
The universalist or unitary model defines citizenship primarily as a
legal status through which an identical set of civil, political and
social rights are accorded to all members of the polity. T.H.
Marshall’s seminal essay “Citizenship and Social
Class” is the main reference for this model, which became
progressively dominant in post-World War II liberal democracies.
Marshall’s central thesis was that the 20th
century’s expansion of social rights was crucial to the working
class’s progressive integration in British society (Marshall
 1950).[11]
 Similar stories were told in other Western democracies: the
development of welfare policies aimed at softening the impact of
unemployment, sickness and distress was fundamental to political and
social stability. The apparent success of the post-war welfare state
in securing social cohesion was a strong argument in favour of a
conception of citizenship focused on the securing of equal civil,
political and social
 rights.[12]
The universalist model was aggressively targeted at the end of the
1980s as the moral and cultural pluralism of contemporary liberal
societies elicited increasing theoretical attention. Scepticism
towards the universalist model was spurred by concerns that the
extension of citizenship rights to groups previously excluded had not
translated into equality and full integration, notably in the case of
Afro-Americans and women (Young 1989; Williams 1998). A questioning of
the causal relation assumed between citizenship as a uniform legal
status and civic integration followed.
Critics argued that the model proves exclusionary if one interprets
universal citizenship as requiring (a) the transcendence of
particular, situated perspectives to achieve a common, general point
of view and (b) the formulation of laws and policies that are
difference-blind (Young 1989). The first requirement seems
particularly odious once generality is exposed as a myth covering the
majority’s culture and conventions. The call to transcend
particularity too often translates into the imposition of the majority
perspective on minorities.  The second requirement may produce
more inequality rather than less since the purported neutrality of
difference-blind institutions often belies an implicit bias towards
the needs, interests and identities of the majority group. This bias
often creates specific burdens for members of minorities, i.e. more
inequality.
Critics of this (failed) universalism have proposed an alternative
conception of citizenship based on the acknowledgment of the political
relevance of difference (cultural, gender, class, race, etc.). This
means, first, the recognition of the pluralist character of the
democratic public, composed of many perspectives, none of which should
be considered a priori more legitimate. Second, it entails
that, in certain cases at least, equal respect may justify
differential treatment and the recognition of special minority
rights.
Once these two points are conceded, the question becomes when, and for
what reason, the recognition of particular rights is either justified
or illegitimate. This discussion is necessarily context specific,
focusing on concrete demands made by groups in particular
circumstances, and shies away from easy generalizations. It has led to
an array of publications covering issues ranging from the fate of
‘minorities within minorities’ to how tolerant liberal
societies should be of illiberal groups,
 etc.[13]
But the model of differentiated citizenship has generated its own
share of criticisms and queries, particularly with regards to the
overall effects of its implementation. Critics focus on its impact on
the possibility of a common political practice. Consider Iris
Young’s vision of a heterogeneous public where participants
start from their “situated positions” and attempt to
construct a dialogue across differences. This dialogue requires
participants to be ‘public-spirited’ — open to the
claims of others and not single-mindedly self-interested. Unlike
interest group pluralism, which does not require justifying
one’s interest as right or as compatible with social justice,
participants are supposed to use deliberation to come to a decision
that they determine to be best or more just (Young 1989, 267). While
welcoming Young’s conception of the democratic public, one may
doubt that the policies and institutions associated with a
differentiated model of citizenship would either motivate or enable
citizens to engage in such dialogue.
This analysis is tied to a wider literature on the virtues required of
citizens in pluralist liberal democracies and on ways to favour their
development. Stephen Macedo (1990), William Galston (1991), and Eamonn
Callan (1997), among others, have all emphasized the importance of
public reasonableness. This virtue is defined as the ability to listen
to others and formulate one’s own position in a way that is
sensitive to, and respectful of, the different experiences and
identities of fellow citizens, acknowledging that these differences
may affect political views. But how and where does one develop this
and related virtue(s)? If a differentiated model of citizenship simply
allows individuals and groups to retreat into their particular
enclaves, how are they to develop either the motivation or the
capacity to participate in a common forum?
One immediately understands political philosophers’ continued
interest in education over the last twenty years. If we want citizens
of diverse societies to develop the ‘right’ attitudes and
dispositions, should we not encourage a common education, school them
in a curriculum that teaches respect for difference, while providing
the necessary skills for democratic discussion across these
differences? If so, should we not resist demands for separate schools
or dispensations for minorities? How flexible should public schools be
towards minorities if the goal is to make them feel welcome and ensure
that they do not retreat into parochial institutions? (Callan 1997;
Gutmann 1999; Brighouse 2000, 2006)
Critics of differentiated citizenship have also argued that policies
that break with difference-blind universalism can only weaken the
integrative function of citizenship. If embracing multicultural and
minority rights means that citizens lose their sense of collective
belonging, it may also affect their willingness to compromise and make
sacrifices for each other. Citizens may then develop a purely
strategic attitude towards those of different backgrounds. As Joseph
Carens puts it: “From this perspective, the danger of […]
differentiated citizenship is that the emphasis [it] place[s] on the
recognition and institutionalization of difference could undermine the
conditions that make a sense of common identification and thus
mutuality possible” (Carens 2000, 193). Critics of Aboriginal
demands for self-government rights have pressed this concern with
force (Cairns, 2000).
In addressing these and similar queries, Will Kymlicka and Wayne
Norman have broadly distinguished between three types of demands:
special representation rights (for disadvantaged groups),
multicultural rights (for immigrant and religious groups) and
self-government rights (for national minorities) (Kymlicka and Norman
1994; Kymlicka, 1995, 176–187). The first two are really demands
for inclusion into mainstream society: special representation rights
are best understood as (temporary) measures to alleviate the obstacles
that minorities and/or historically disadvantaged groups face in
having their voices heard in majoritarian democratic institutions.
Reforming the electoral system to ensure the better representation of
minorities may raise all sorts of difficult issues, but the aim is
clearly integration into the larger political society, not
isolation.
Similarly, the demands for multicultural rights made by immigrant
groups are usually aimed either at exemption from laws and policies
that disadvantage them because of their religious practices or at
ensuring public support for particular education and/or cultural
initiatives to maintain and transmit elements of their cultural and
religious heritage. These should be seen as measures designed to
facilitate their inclusion in the larger society rather than as a way
to avoid integration. It is only claims to self-government rights,
grounded in a principle of self-determination, that potentially
endanger civic integration since their aim is not to achieve a greater
presence in the institutions of the central government, but to gain a
greater share of power and legislative jurisdiction for institutions
controlled by national minorities.
Addressing such demands through a simple reaffirmation of the ideal of
common citizenship is not a serious option. It may only aggravate the
alienation felt by members of these groups and feed into more radical
political projects, including secession. Further, to say that
recognition of self-government rights may weaken the bonds of the
larger community is to suppose that these bonds exist in the first
place and that a significant proportion of national minorities
identify with the larger society. Yet such assumptions are often
overly optimistic. If these bonds do not exist, or remain quite weak,
what is needed is the construction of a genuine dialogue between the
majority society and minorities over what constitutes just relations,
through which difference can be recognized. The hope is that such
dialogue would strengthen, rather than weaken, their relationship by
putting it on firmer moral and political grounds (Carens 2000,
197).
This broadly positive assessment of the effects of differentiated
citizenship on civic integration is increasingly being questioned. On
the one hand, left-leaning authors have complained that multicultural
politics make egalitarian policies more difficult to achieve by
diverting “political effort away from universalistic
goals” and by undermining efforts to build a broadly based
coalition supporting ambitious policies of redistribution (Barry 2001,
325). On the other hand, events like September 11, the Mohammed
cartoons affair (2005, see Klausen 2009), riots in the banlieux
of Paris (2005), London (2011) and Stockholm (2017), as well as a
series of terrorist attacks in Europe have led to a backlash against
multicultural policies. The belief that demands for multicultural
rights are really demands for inclusion in the larger society has been
thrown into doubt, notably in the case of Muslim immigrants.
To allay fears about the supposed trade-off between cultural
recognition and redistribution, supporters of multiculturalism cite
the lack of empirical studies establishing a negative correlation
between the adoption of multicultural policies and a robust welfare
state (Banting and Kymlicka 2006, Banting 2005). Further, claims that
the push for multicultural policies diverts energies, time and
resources from the struggle for redistributive policies assume that
the pursuit of justice is zero-sum, seemingly a false generalization.
On the contrary, it can be argued that: “the pursuit of justice
in one dimension helps build a broader political culture that supports
struggles for justice in other dimensions” (Kymlicka 2009). In
the same vein, to claim that paying attention to issues of cultural
recognition tends to warp our sensitivity to economic injustice is to
assume that we can only be sensitive to one dimension of injustice at
a time. But it is equally plausible that sensitivity to a particular
type of injustice may favour, rather than hinder, sensitivity to other
injustices.
In response to concerns about social and civic unity, liberal
democracies have introduced a series of policies aimed at better
securing the integration of immigrants: requiring minimal linguistic
proficiency in the majority language as a condition of citizenship or
banning religious symbols from public schools. These policies have
sometimes been heralded as signalling the development of a
‘muscular liberalism’ (Former British PM David Cameron,
quoted by Joppke 2014) as an alternative to multiculturalism. They
have been hotly debated from the perspective of factual efficacy as
well as from a normative perspective. The introduction of
‘citizenship tests’ for resident immigrants, in
particular, has led to a vigorous debate among normative theorists:
under what conditions and in what form can they be justified? Some,
like Joseph Carens (2010a) have argued that they are basically unjust,
no matter what form they take. If one understands membership in a
society to flow from long-term residence, as Carens does, then any
test that “prevents a full member of a society from becoming a
citizen unjustly deprives her of an entitlement to citizenship”
(Mason 2014, 143). Other theorists have taken a more positive view of
the tests: seeing them as an incentive for immigrants to acquire basic
knowledge of liberal-democratic principles, as well as the political
institutions and history of the host country. As such, they also serve
as an “implicit statement of the nation’s political
values” (Miller 2016, 138). On this view, as long as certain
conditions are met, so that the tests are neither too difficult nor
too expensive and give applicants the possibility to take them again
if they fail, etc., then there is nothing really objectionable to them
(though the empirical question of their efficacy remains open). In
contrast, tests that purport to ‘weed out’ immigrants who
do not share ‘our’ liberal values are generally held to be
incompatible with liberal principles. This has led some theorists to
question how ‘muscular’ can liberalism really be (Joppke
2014). 
A number of liberal democracies have responded to the upsurge of
terrorist acts by introducing legislation that gives the state the
power to withdraw the citizenship of those convicted or suspected of
terrorist
 activities.[14]
 Given the principle recognized in international law that no one
should be left stateless, these legislations usually apply only to
citizens holding dual or multiple citizenships. Denationalisation is
sometimes described in this context as “extending the
functionality of immigration law in counter-terrorism” (Macklin
2015, see also Barry and Ferracioli 2016). Though states cannot deport
their own citizens, denationalisation allows them to first withdraw
citizenship and then deport. These legislations raise a number of
normative issues. Firstly, they seem to contradict the basic idea that
citizenship is a right, not a privilege (Gibney 2013, Macklin 2015).
Secondly, since they weaken the security normally attached to the
status of citizen, they can be described as demoting citizenship
“to another category of permanent residence” (Macklin
2015). Thirdly, it is argued that by targeting only dual (or multiple)
citizens, the new legislations treat them as second-class citizens
(Gibney 2013, 653). In contrast, other theorists insist that that the
particular nature of terrorist crimes (akin to acts of war against the
state) warrants this kind of response (Schuck 2015; Joppke 2015).
Concerning the worry that the legislations discriminate against dual
citizens, the response is that the difference in treatment between
mono-citizens and dual citizens is justified, since the consequences
of denationalisation are also very different in each case. Individuals
holding a single citizenship are the only ones facing statelessness as
a consequence of denationalisation (Barry and Ferracioli 2016). Where
participants in the debate find common ground is in their shared
criticism of the specific form that some legislations have taken, most
notably the 2006 British Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act. In
the wake of the 7 July 2005 Tube bombing in London, the new Act
relaxed the standard for deprivation present in the 2002 legislation
(the “vital interests of the state”test) with a much
weaker and vague standard: that the individual’s holding
citizenship is “not conducive to the public good” (quoted
by Gibney 2013, 650). Whether this, or any such measure, has any
significant deterrent effect is very much open to question. 
Worries about the ability and willingness of Muslim immigrants to
integrate into Western liberal democracies explain a persisting
interest in reflecting on the complex relations between the secular
liberal political cultures dominant in the West and religion. Research
has focused on the difficult question of religion’s place in the
public sphere (Parekh 2006, Laborde 2008, Brahm Levey and Modood 2009,
Modood 2013) as well as on the place afforded to women in traditional
religious conceptions, more specifically in Islam. Does the
accommodation of religious sensitivities come at the price of a
weakening of women’s rights? What is the right balance between
the principle of sexual equality affirmed in constitutional
democracies and the respect of religious
 liberty?[15]
The debate between supporters and critics of differentiated
citizenship centres on the model’s supposed effect on civic
integration. It is assumed that democratic citizenship, properly
construed, can indeed function as a significant lever of integration.
The idea is that citizenship as a set of civil, political and social
rights and as a political practice can help generate desirable
feelings of identity and belonging. This statement hides significant
disagreement over how to characterize the relation between citizenship
and nationality. Some consider that citizenship’s capacity to
fulfil its integrative function depends on, and feeds upon, the prior
existence of a common nationality while others counter that, under
conditions of pluralism, nationality cannot function as a suitable
focus of allegiance and identity. The collective identity of modern
democratic states should rather be based upon more abstract and
universalistic political and legal principles that transcend cultural
difference. This debate brings to the fore differing assessments of
the role that citizenship can play in contemporary societies
characterized by a high degree of complexity and internal
diversity.
Liberal nationalists like David Miller have argued that only specific
forms of political practice can produce high levels of trust and
loyalty between citizens (Miller 2000, 87). The political activities
of the citizens of Athens or of Rousseau’s ideal Republic
presumed face-to-face relations of cooperation that favour the growth
of such sentiments. The scale and complexity of modern states have
made the kind of political practice envisaged by Rousseau and
described by Aristotle at best marginal. Citizens do not meet under an
oak tree to formulate the laws; they are basically strangers and
citizens’ involvement in the politics of representative
democracies is episodic and diluted. Politics in this context cannot
be expected to play a central role in most individuals’ lives;
something else must generate the trust and loyalty necessary to the
functioning of a political community. Historically, it is the nation
that has allowed large numbers of individuals to feel a sense of
commonality, setting them apart from others and making solidarity
among strangers possible.
Postnationalists do not dispute the key role played by the nation in
making republican politics possible in large modern states. They agree
that reference to a common nationality allowed the political
mobilization of their inhabitants, calling on their shared descent,
history or language. But democracy’s association with the
nation-state is contingent rather than necessary. And this, it is
argued, means that democratic politics can, in principle, free itself
from its historical moorings. Postnationalists claim that this
dissociation is not only possible, but necessary for moral and
pragmatic reasons (Habermas 1998, 132).
On the one hand, the historical balance sheet of the nation-state
reveals a legacy of oppression of minority cultures within and
cultural, political and economic imperialism outside its borders. On
the other hand, the acknowledgment of the nation-state’s
(growing) internal diversity and sensitivity to the injustice of
forced assimilation undermine its ability to continue playing the role
it fulfilled in the 19th and early 20th
centuries. Imposing the majority culture upon minorities may simply
make it more difficult for them to identify with the nation-state and
weaken its legitimacy.
In conditions of pluralism, therefore, the majority culture cannot
serve as the grounding of a shared identity. It must be replaced by
universalistic principles of human rights and the rule of law, which
do not, it is argued, imply the imposition of a particular majority
culture on minorities. Each political community develops distinctive
interpretations of the meaning of these principles over time, which
become embodied in its political and legal institutions and practices.
These in turn form a political culture that crystallizes around the
country’s constitution and makes those principles into a
‘concrete universal’. This embedding of democratic and
liberal principles in a distinctive political culture can, in turn,
give rise to what Jürgen Habermas has called a
“constitutional patriotism”, which should replace
nationalism as the focus of a common identity. In countries that have
achieved a strong national consciousness, the political culture has
long been entangled with the majority culture. This
“fusion”, argues Habermas, “must be dissolved if it
is to be possible for different cultural, ethnic, and religious forms
of life to coexist and interact on equal terms within the
same political community” (Habermas 1998, 118).
The thrust of the argument is that democratic political practice can
provide a sufficient stimulus to integration in complex democratic
societies, and is indeed the only one properly available to them.
There is no need for a background consensus based on cultural
homogeneity to act as a ‘catalyzing condition’ for
democracy to the extent that the democratic political process,
involving public deliberation and decision-making, makes “a
reasonable political understanding possible, even among
strangers.” Democracy, as a set of procedures, can secure
legitimacy in the absence of more substantive commonalities between
citizens and achieve social integration. Since it is not wedded to
particular cultural premises, it can be responsive to changes in the
cultural composition of the citizenry and generate a common political
culture (Habermas 2001a, 73–74). Habermas’s position,
then, gives pride of place to the democratic process and to the
political participation of citizens, which play a key role in securing
social integration: “In complex societies, it is the
deliberative opinion- and will-formation of citizens, grounded in the
principles of popular sovereignty, that forms the ultimate medium for
a form of abstract, legally constructed solidarity that reproduces
itself through political participation” (Habermas 2001a,
76).
But the democratic process can fulfil its role only if it achieves a
certain level of output legitimacy: appropriate levels of solidarity
are sustainable only if basic standards of social justice are
satisfied (Habermas 2001a, 76). If it is to remain a source of
solidarity, citizenship has to be seen as a valuable status,
associated not only with civil and political rights, but also with the
fulfilment of fundamental social and cultural rights (Habermas 1998,
118–119).
For most liberal nationalists, this seems like putting the cart before
the horse since a successful welfare state, they argue, is possible
only if citizens already enjoy high levels of mutual trust and
loyalty. Welfare policies suppose that we make sacrifices for
anonymous others who differ from us in terms of their ethnic origin,
religion and way of life. But in democracies, redistributive policies
can be sustained only if they enjoy strong levels of public support.
This support is dependent on a sense of common identity that
transcends difference and motivates citizens to share their revenues
with people whom they do not know, but to whom they feel related by
common bonds. This sentiment implies reciprocity: the expectation
that, in times of need, one could also benefit from the solidarity of
fellow citizens (Miller, 1995; Canovan, 1996).
Liberal nationalists and other critics of the postnationalist position
go on to argue that freeing the liberal democratic state from its
historical moorings is neither possible, nor necessary. They recognize
that the link between liberal democracy and the nation is historically
contingent rather than necessary or conceptual while adding that this
does not mean that they can or should be dissociated (Miller 1995,
29–30; Kymlicka 2003). Calling for the separation of a
country’s political culture from the majority group’s
culture is easier said than done. While it may be comparably easy to
discard the most egregious forms of fusion, if there is the political
will to do so (for instance, by de-establishing the Anglican church in
the case of England), any political culture will be ethically
patterned in ways that are difficult for members of the majority to
appreciate. Expressions such as “cutting the umbilical
cord” or “dissolving” the fusion overstate the
extent to which a political culture may be disengaged from the
background culture. This is not necessarily cause for alarm, it is
argued, since the nation need not be construed in ways that exclude
minorities. Nationhood can be understood in sufficiently
‘thin’ terms to accommodate minorities while being
‘thick’ enough to generate appropriate sentiments of
solidarity, loyalty, and trust.
There are different versions of this thin understanding of nationhood.
What they all share is the downplaying of substantive commonalities of
descent, culture and religion to the benefit of political and legal
principles and
 institutions.[16]
 Still there are variations: David Miller defends a conception of
public culture that goes beyond the political to cover social norms
(such as honesty in filling tax returns) and may include certain
cultural ideals (for instance, “religious beliefs or a
commitment to preserve the purity of the national language”
(Miller 1995, 26)) while Kymlicka argues that an appropriately thin
conception of nationhood also discards assumptions that “members
of the nation should share the same […] life-style”
(Kymlicka 2003, 273).
These differences notwithstanding, both conceptions are affirmed as
inclusive since they describe national identity as flexible and open
to change. Once immigrants are citizens, they can participate in the
collective conversation by which citizens debate and constantly
reinterpret the nation’s identity. What immigrants are required
to display is a “willingness to accept current political
structures and to engage with the host community so that a new common
identity can be forged” (Miller 1995, 129). They are expected
“to speak a common national language”, “feel loyalty
to national institutions” and “share a commitment to
maintaining the nation as a single, self-governing community into the
indefinite future” (Kymlicka 2003, 273).
Given the thin version of national identity they propose, one might
conclude that liberal nationalists are not that far from the
constitutional patriotism of Jürgen Habermas. After all, both
positions seem to give the central role to a common political culture.
The distance separating them becomes clear when we look at the
political implications of their respective views, like when evaluating
the prospects of the European Union. Liberal nationalists are often
sceptical towards the European experiment while postnationalists are
firm
 supporters.[17]
 This difference flows from their respective conceptions of what makes
and sustains a political culture as a source of integration. For
liberal nationalists, continuity is essential: a political culture
derives much of its strength from an anchoring in the history and
narrative of a distinct political community extending backwards and
forwards in time. They are sceptical of political voluntarism and,
more specifically, towards what can be achieved through formal
political institutions. Democratic procedures alone, divorced from a
richer background, can neither generate nor sustain a robust political
culture or a sense of common identity.
In contrast, postnationalists like Habermas consider that the
democratic process is crucial. The postnationalist conception gives
greater weight to political practice and to the legal and political
institutions that sustain it rather than their cultural and historical
moorings. This explains Habermas’s militant support of the
European project and, more specifically, his belief that adopting a
constitution could have a “catalytic effect” on the
process of constructing a ‘more perfect Union’ (Habermas
2001b, 16).
For the better part of the last century, conceptions of citizenship,
despite many differences, have had one thing in common: the idea that
the necessary framework for citizenship is the sovereign, territorial
state. The legal status of citizen is essentially the formal
expression of membership in a polity that has definite territorial
boundaries within which citizens enjoy equal rights and exercise their
political agency. In other words, citizenship, both as a legal status
and as an activity, is thought to presuppose the existence of a
territorially bounded political community, which extends over time and
is the focus of a common identity. In the last twenty years, this
premise has come under close scrutiny. A host of phenomena, loosely
associated under the heading ‘globalisation’, have
encouraged this critical awakening: exploding transnational economic
exchange, competition and communication as well as high levels of
migration, of cultural and social interactions have shown how porous
those borders have become and led people to contest the relevance and
legitimacy of state sovereignty.
Three questions are particularly salient. First, the intensification
of migratory movements from poorer to richer countries in the context
of growing inequalities between North and South has led some authors
to contest the state’s moral right to choose its members by
selectively closing its borders. Second, what R. Bauböck calls
the “mismatch between citizenship and the territorial scope of
legitimate authority” (Bauböck 2008, 31) has prompted a
growing questioning of the acceptability of the different rights
accorded to citizens and non-citizens living within the same state.
But if we question the tight association between the territorial
state, citizenship and rights, are we not weakening the very
institutional framework that makes citizenship a meaningful practice?
This question raises a third set of issues as it assumes that the
democratic nation-state is the only institutional context in which
citizenship can thrive. This is contested by those who claim that
citizenship can be exercised in a multiplicity of ‘sites’
both below and above the nation-state.
Does the political community have the moral right to decide who
can/cannot become a citizen or mustn’t we recognize the right to
free movement? Much of the philosophical debate has turned around two
issues: firstly, on the nature of our obligations towards people from
impoverished countries who seek better lives for themselves and their
families; secondly, on the moral status of political communities and
their supposed right to protect their integrity by excluding non
 members.[18]
One way of characterizing our obligation to strangers insists that,
absent any relations of cooperation, common humanity is our only bond.
It is argued that only a rather weak, imperfect or conditional duty of
assistance can be inferred from such a premise. This duty limits the
basic right of the political community to distribute membership as it
wishes without, in any way, displacing it. Individuals have a duty to
assist strangers in urgent need if they can provide assistance without
exposing themselves to significant risk or cost. At a collective
level, the implications are more considerable as political communities
have greater resources and can consider a broader range of benevolent
actions at comparably negligible cost. The principle of mutual aid may
justify redistribution of membership, territory, wealth and resources
to the extent that certain states have more than they can reasonably
be said to need (Walzer 1983, 47). In this framework, redistributive
policies remain, however, entirely dependent on wealthier
countries’ understanding of their needs and of the urgency of a
stranger’s situation. There is no obligation to give equal
weight to the interests of non-members.
Institutionally, this position supports what the Geneva Convention on
the Status of Refugees (United Nations 1951) calls the principle of
“non refoulement”: signatory states are not to
deport refugees and asylum seekers to their countries of origin if
this threatens their lives and freedom. It can also support claims in
favour of increasing the number of immigrants admitted into richer
countries, depending on how the latter evaluate the potential effects
on their own interests.
Critics contend that our obligations towards migrants and
asylum-seekers go well beyond this and call for a policy of open
borders and/or deny the state’s right to decide alone who
exactly, and how many people, may enter its territory. Three basic
strategies are employed: the first consists of arguing that freedom of
movement is a fundamental human right. For example, some have argued
that any theory recognizing the equal moral value of individuals and
giving them moral primacy over communities cannot justify rejecting
aliens’ claims to admission and citizenship. As Joseph Carens
demonstrated in an early article, this argument applies to the three
main strands of contemporary liberal theory: libertarianism (a
la Nozick), Rawlsianism and utilitarianism (Carens 1987). If we
give the principle of moral equality its full extension, the
distinction between citizen and alien is morally arbitrary, justified
neither by nature nor achievement. When evaluating border and
immigration policies, the equal consideration of the interests of all
affected (be they aliens or citizens) is required. Political
communities cannot decide whether they can afford to accept refugee
claimants or prospective immigrants simply according to their
understanding of their own situation, needs and interests.
Consideration of consequences (e.g. in terms of public order, the
sustainability of welfare policies, the potential effects of a brain
drain in developing countries, etc.) is not prohibited; what changes
radically is how we are to evaluate them. Institutionally, this would
doubtless lead to substantial changes in the immigration and refugee
policies of most Western democracies.
A second strategy advocated by Arash Abizadeh (2008) relies on the
principle of democratic legitimacy, holding that the exercise of
coercive power is legitimate “only insofar as it is actually
justified by and to the very people over whom it is
exercised” (41). Since a regime of border control subjects both
citizens and non-citizens to the state’s coercive use of power,
“the justification for a particular regime of border control is
owed not just to those whom the boundary marks as members, but to
nonmembers as well”
 (45)[19].
 The upshot to this argument is that, contrary to a long-held
assumption, no democratic state has the right to unilaterally control
its own borders, but must either allow freedom of movement or, at the
very least, give voice to prospective immigrants when formulating
border policy. The latter condition would itself lead to significant
changes in immigration policies in the Western world, since jointly
controlled borders would presumably be more porous as well. 
The third strategy is less direct. To the extent that states do not
satisfy their moral obligations to guarantee the universal human right
to security and subsistence through international redistributive
policies, they have a moral obligation to admit those wishing to
enter. Here the idea of open borders is an instrumental, rather than
intrinsic, moral principle: it is a means towards achieving global
distributive justice (Bader 1997). The advantage of this line of
argument is that it faithfully reflects a central motivation for open
borders: the outrage provoked by the huge inequalities between North
and South and rich countries’ role in perpetuating this
situation. This strategy, if successful, would establish specific
rights for people from poorer countries towards the North, and not
simply a broadly framed right to free movement, to be
‘equally’ enjoyed by individuals of rich and poor
countries alike.
To be convincing the argument must show: firstly, that severe global
poverty requires immediate action; secondly, that it is a matter of
justice, not charity. To that effect, it is crucial to show that the
extreme poverty of some countries is not simply the result of
endogenous factors (e.g. bad governance; corrupt political culture,
etc.), but is linked to a global political and economic order that
systematically produces an unjust distribution of resources and
political power, which rich northern countries, as its main
beneficiaries, are in no hurry to
 reform.[20]
 The third step in this schema purportedly shows that justifications
of restrictive immigration policies premised on ethico-political
claims lose much of their force in the context of profound
international inequalities and injustice. Proponents claim that
regulating immigration in order to preserve the integrity of the
political community is a legitimate goal only if duties of
international distributive justice are satisfied (Tan 2004, 126,
referring to Tamir 1992, 161). The argument’s upshot is that
“[r]ich Northern states have a double moral obligation to
seriously fight global poverty and to let more people in” (Bader
1997, 31).
Both supporters and critics of (more) open borders agree that liberal
democratic political communities have a moral status and are worth
preserving. They disagree over what exactly is worthy of protection
and how much weight should be given to securing their integrity
(however it is defined) relative to our duties of international
justice.
The division of the world into states is arguably justifiable on
functional grounds, to the extent that states appear as “first
approximations of optimal units for allocating and producing the
world’s resources” (Coleman and Harding 1995, 38). If we
think that states matter simply as local units of efficient production
and distribution, then this would be the main consideration when
evaluating immigration policies. Public order arguments would still
matter, likewise claims pertaining to a society’s economic
capacity to secure its material reproduction, but not arguments
relating to its cultural integrity or way of life. Unless, of course,
the capacity of states to act as efficient units of production and
distribution is linked to their being distinctive political
communities with a particular culture of shared meanings worth
preserving.
Over thirty years ago, Michael Walzer defended such a view, based on
the idea that “distributive justice presupposes a bounded world
within which distribution takes place” (Walzer 1983, 31). Since
the goods to be divided, exchanged and shared among individuals have
social meanings that are specific to particular communities, it is
only within their boundaries that conflict can be resolved and
distributive schemes judged either just or unjust. The crucial
assumption here is that the “political community is probably the
closest we can come to a world of common meanings. Language, history,
and culture come together […] to produce a collective
consciousness” (Walzer 1983, 28). Politics itself, moreover, as
a set of practices and institutions that shape the form and outcome
that distributive conflicts take, “establishes its own bonds of
commonality” (Walzer 1983, 29). To reject political
communities’ right to distribute the good of membership is to
undermine their capacity to preserve their integrity. It is to condemn
them to become nothing more then neighbourhoods, random associations
lacking any legally enforceable admissions policies. The probable
result of the free movement of individuals would be “casual
aggregates” devoid of any internal cohesion and incapable of
being a source of patriotic sentiments and solidarity. In a world of
neighbourhoods, membership would become meaningless. The upshot of
this is that we should recognize the political community’s right
to regulate admission with a view to securing its cultural, economic
and political integrity.
Walzer’s position, notably his choice of analogies, has been
extensively
 discussed.[21]
 His assumption that sovereign states constitute communities of shared
meanings appears particularly shaky. Most often, existing states
incorporate various political communities that are themselves
internally pluralistic: linguistically, culturally and ideologically.
In such cases, one would be hard pressed to identify the community
whose integrity is at stake. Indeed, few states correspond to the
picture Walzer envisages as the appropriate context for distributive
justice.
This is not to say that political communities are merely functional
units. As Habermas argues, if the communitarian position appears
irrelevant in the face of the complexity and internal diversity of
modern societies, it reminds us that modern states are a
“political form of life” that cannot be “translated
without remainder into the abstract form of institutions designed
according to general legal principles”. As forms of life, they
include “the politicocultural context in which
universalistic principles must be implemented, for only a population
accustomed to freedom can keep the institutions of freedom
alive” (Habermas 1996, 513). Here, Habermas refers yet again to
his distinction between the political culture, which develops around
universalistic constitutional principles, and the wider, background
culture. It is the integrity of the former, not the latter that must
be preserved: immigrants should be expected to integrate into the
political culture of their new country, which means more than simply
embracing abstract liberal-democratic principles. They must
“willingly engage” with the particular form that these
principles take in a given society with its own specific history.
Given that they come from different cultures, newcomers will bring
distinct perspectives to the interpretation of the political
constitution and may well affect its future development. But to the
extent that their contribution can be understood as part of the
democratic conversation, rather than as a conversation stopper, one
cannot justify stricter limits to immigration on such
 grounds.[22]
 What presumably can be argued is that the capacity of the polity to
integrate newcomers in the political culture should be considered when
setting admissions policies.
Liberal nationalists like Will Kymlicka make a similar argument: they
claim that liberal egalitarian aims such as equality of opportunity
and solidarity stand a much better chance of being realized in the
context of a strong national culture, defined as a “societal
culture” involving a “common language and social
institutions” (Kymlicka 2001,
 259).[23]
 All things being equal, maintaining and strengthening such cultures
serves a vital interest of individuals and liberal egalitarians should
not strive for fully open borders. But does this mean that our
interest in a strong national culture outweigh our duty to pursue
international justice? From a liberal egalitarian perspective, the
answer is clearly no. The right of political communities to protect
their integrity stands only under conditions of rough international
equality. Under such conditions, limits to immigration would not cause
substantial harm, but “would only reserve for the nationals of a
country what aliens already have in their own country — namely,
the chance to be free and equal citizens within their own national
community” (Kymlicka 2001, 271). Under the present situation of
radical inequality, however, restrictive policies of immigration allow
richer countries to “hoard an unfair share of resources”
and cannot be squared with the principle of the moral equality of
persons, which requires that “we care equally about the
well-being of all individuals, wherever they are born, and however
little we interact with them” (Kymlicka 2001,
 271)[24].
Kymlicka doesn’t say how we should interpret his conclusion as
pertains to present policies of immigration: must we demand that the
borders of Western democracies be opened until they honour their
duties of international
 justice?[25]
 Should we rather underscore their dual moral obligations to fight
global poverty and allow in more immigrants? (Bader 1997) Or, since
global poverty and injustice are the problems, wouldn’t it be
better to address them directly and see them as our first moral
priority (Pogge 1997)? As Kok-Chor Tan remarks, the argument should be
understood as supporting “the primacy of international justice,
rather than as a claim about how to prioritize public policies and
goals”. This primacy implies “that national projects of
well-off nations lose their legitimacy if these nations are not also
doing their fair share as determined by their duties of justice”
(Tan 2004, 129). Whether or not liberals should concentrate on
reforming the international system as Thomas Pogge has urged or fight
for both greater international distributive justice and more open
borders as Veit Bader advises is a matter of strategy. The two
prescriptions are by no means incompatible; insisting on the
illegitimacy of restrictive immigration policies under current
conditions may be a way to put rich countries on the spot and prod
them to accept their moral responsibilities towards the world’s
poor (Goodin 1992, 8).
Should one infer from the preceding discussion that citizenship is
“hard on the outside and soft on the inside” (Bosniak
2006, 4) with the border representing a firm line between those who
are part of the community of equal citizens and those who remain
outside? The short answer is no. International migration produces what
Bauböck calls a “mismatch between citizenship and the
territorial scope of legitimate authority” with “citizens
living outside the country whose government is supposed to be
accountable to them and inside a country whose government is not
accountable to them” (Bauböck 2008, 31). To resident aliens
who live within a specific community of citizens, the border is not
something they have left behind, it effectively follows them inside
the state, denying them many of the rights enjoyed by full citizens or
making their enjoyment less secure (Bosniak 2006).
One way to address this mismatch is to reconsider how entitlement to
citizenship is determined. In a world characterized by significant
levels of migration across states, birthright citizenship —
acquired either through descent (jus sanguinis) or birth in
the territory (jus soli) — may lead to counterintuitive
results: while a regime of pure jus sanguinis systematically
excludes immigrants and their children, though the latter may be born
and bred in their parents’ new home, it includes descendents of
expatriates who may never have set foot in their forebears’
homeland. On the other hand, a regime of jus soli may
attribute citizenship to children whose birth in the territory is
accidental while denying it to those children who have arrived in the
country at a very young age.
The stakeholder principle (or jus nexi) is proposed as an
alternative (or a supplement) to birthright citizenship: individuals
who have a “real and effective link” (Shachar 2009, 165)
to the political community, or a “permanent interest in
membership” (Bauböck 2008, 35) should be entitled to claim
citizenship. This new criterion aims at securing citizenship for those
who are truly members of the political community, in the sense that
their life prospects depend on the country’s laws and policy
choices.
If the stakeholder principle alleviates the mismatch, it does not
question the tight association between rights, citizenship, territory
and authority. For some, it is precisely this association that should
be questioned since it contradicts the increasing fluidity of the
relations between individuals and polities in a globalized world. This
context is thought to necessitate more than a friendly amendment to
current principles of citizenship allocation: it requires the
disaggregation of rights, commonly associated with citizenship, from
the legal status of
 citizen.[26]
 This process is thought to have already begun in contemporary
democracies since, as noted above, many of the civil and social rights
associated with citizenship are now extended to all individuals
residing in the state, notwithstanding their legal status. Political
rights to participation should likewise be extended to resident
noncitizens, and perhaps even to those “noncitizen
nonresidents” who have fundamental interests that are affected
by a particular state (Song 2009).
The emergence of human rights instruments at the international and
transnational levels has lent some credibility to the perspective of a
deterritorialization of rights regimes and the possibility of securing
a person’s basic rights irrespective of her formal membership
status in a given polity. In this context, it is not in virtue of our
(particular) citizenship that we are recognized rights, but in virtue
of our (universal) personhood.
Over and above diverging assessments of the empirical plausibility of
such unbundling, some authors highlight the risks involved and contest
its desirability. Stable citizenship regimes “promote internal
redistribution and support co-governance”. “[B]y
encouraging the dissolution of the bundle of benefits and protections
that currently attach to citizenship, proponents of the unbundling
vision will also begin to fuel an alternative discourse as well
– one that urges the privatization and fragmentation of
citizenship, and that implies less collective responsibility for the
well being of members” (Shachar 2009, 67).
The debate over voting rights, in particular, is complex and covers
both external (extending voting rights to nonresident citizens) and
internal voting (expanding the franchise to resident non-citizens).
Theorists with sympathies to the social membership thesis (arguing
that residence over time in a specific territory is the key to
membership in a society) or to the stakeholder conception of
citizenship usually consider that long-term residence in a country
should be the basis for the allocation of democratic rights. The
argument may cover not only migrants who qualify for permanent
resident status, but also those who have entered illegally in the
country (Carens 2010b, 2013) as well as temporary migrants, in
particular ‘guest workers’ who are often denied any access
to citizenship (Lenard 2015). On this view, safety from deportation
and the entitlement to the state’s protection when abroad is
what distinguishes citizens from resident noncitizens. Citizenship
rights are understood as extra-territorial (“they follow the
citizen rather than the territory”) while voting rights are best
understood as territorial (Lenard 2015,
 131).[27]
Though some states do extend voting rights to resident noncitizens at
the local
 level[28],
 it is the growing extension of voting rights to nonresident citizens
over the last decades that is particularly striking (Pogonyi 2014). It
shows the persistence of a conception of membership premised on
understanding the nation-state as a historical community of citizens
with common values and shared ethno-cultural traits. On this view,
voting rights are not understood territorially, but follow the citizen
when she settles outside of her home country. Though one can
understand some of the pragmatic reasons that often motivate certain
states in recognizing voting rights to expatriates (e.g. acknowledging
and encouraging their continued contribution to the home country
through payment of remittances), normative theorists have been mostly
critical of this phenomenon (see especially Lopez-Guerra 2005). In
particular, the policy followed by certain states in the former
socialist federations (USSR and Yugoslavia) of recognizing voting
rights to co-ethnics residing in territories integrated in
neighbouring independent states, as well as the more recent decisions
by states like Hungary and Romania to extend voting rights to
trans-border ethnic kin populations, should alert us to the dangers to
regional stability that the “re-ethnicization of
citizenship” involve (Joppke 2005, cited by Pogonyi 2014).
Moreover, where the electoral system is not designed to limit the
potential political impact of the nonresident electoral body, external
voting may effect the “resident constituency’s right to
democratic self-determination” (Pogonyi 2014, 135-136).
As we have seen in the preceding section, the nation-state’s
sovereignty is often understood as an impediment to global justice.
Its capacity to deal with economic, social and environmental problems
that increasingly cut across borders is also questioned. Under such
circumstances, should the sovereign, territorial state still be seen
as the necessary institutional context for justice and democracy?
Should we not explore possibilities beyond its boundaries? 
Such questioning has sparked at least two responses from theorists of
citizenship. ‘Voluntarists’ insist on the need to rethink
democracy and citizenship beyond the nation-state, proposing schemes
to extend democratic politics to the regional and global
 levels.[29]
 ‘Sceptics’, on the other hand, argue that democratic
citizenship requires a bounded territorial space, in which citizens
see themselves as part of a common demos. At the heart of
this debate is the contested meaning of democratic political agency
and its conditions, which must be clarified if the debate is to get
anywhere.
Citizenship as legal status is what makes global citizenship
conceivable, since there is no limit to the potential extension of
rights, while the political dimension of citizenship presupposes a
concept of political community that is richer but more limited (Cohen
1999, 249). The sceptics consider that citizenship at the global level
entails a weakening of its political dimension, a waning of its
democratic character. The voluntarists respond that transnational
political citizenship is not an oxymoron if we rid ourselves of the
blinkers inherited from the past. Both sceptics and voluntarists
acknowledge that meaningful citizenship cannot simply be legal in
nature. It’s their assumptions about the political dimension of
democratic citizenship and its background conditions that set them
apart.
We will examine two versions of this disagreement. In the first,
disagreement centres upon the basic conditions of democratic political
agency rather than on its meaning. This is a crucial issue since how
we define these conditions can limit the potential extension of the
political community. In the second, the disagreement is over the
meaning of democratic agency itself. To what extent should political
agency be understood as a form of collective agency? Should we
characterize political action as a common practice, which requires
that citizens be in a relation of interaction and mutual awareness, or
can we define it as primarily individual?
Supporters of global democracy reject the conventional identification
between demos, territory and citizenship. In their view,
citizenship is not a set of practices and rights that need to be
anchored in a particular demos defined by specific
territorial boundaries. On the contrary, citizenship is ideally
exercised in a multiplicity of ‘sites’, situated at
different levels of governance: local, national, regional and global.
Global democrats sketch a multilayered, global democratic order in
which no single layer or site is dominant (Pogge 1992, 58, Young 2000,
266). This scheme implies a ‘vertical’ dispersal of power
above and below existing sovereign states, which are stripped of their
centrality. This would give less of an incentive for conflicts over
power and wealth within and between states, “‘thereby
reducing the incidence of war, poverty, and oppression’ and
environmental degradation” (Kuper 2004, 30, quoting Pogge 1992,
102–105).
Voluntarists would balance this dilution of state power by
strengthening certain global regulatory regimes in areas like peace
and security, human rights, the environment, trade and finances, etc.
These regimes would set down general rules “regarding that small
but vital set of issues around which peace and justice call for global
co-operation” (Young 2000,
 267).[30]
 A set of global institutions would be needed to ensure the
application of these rules; though voluntarists are quick to point out
the importance of democratic principles — consent,
self-determination and autonomy — and their institutional
implications (Pogge 1992, 64).
The formal political institutions and procedures envisaged are largely
familiar: representative assemblies based on elections and referenda.
Such institutions would exist at each level of the multilayered
scheme: local, national, regional and global. Following the European
Union model, continent-wide parliaments are envisaged, as well as a
reformed general assembly of the United Nations. At the informal
level, voluntarists insist on the need for globally active
organizations of civil society, welcome the emergence of a
transnational public opinion and call on global agencies such as the
World Trade Organization and the International Monetary Fund to commit
themselves to basic principles of publicity.
Global democrats assume that the extension of democracy beyond the
limits of the nation-state is neither conceptually nor practically
impossible. Their response to claims that scale constitutes a major
obstacle is twofold: first, they put the principle of subsidiarity at
the front and centre of their institutional scheme (Held 2005, 14;
Pogge 1992, 65–66); second, they insist that robust democratic
politics is truly possible only at the local level. In existing, large
nation-states, representative institutions are already far removed
from ordinary citizens, who feel largely disempowered and disaffected
(Young 2000, 270–271). Since the multilayered scheme they
propose involves significant decentralization from the national to the
sub-national level, the argument runs that global democracy would, in
fact, translate into more, rather than less, ‘real’
democracy. It would serve to increase the ability of citizens to
participate effectively in shaping the policies that concern them
directly (Pogge 1992, 64; Young 2000, 269). But no matter how
forcefully the principle of subsidiarity is applied, the global
democratic project would still entail the implementation of global
principles and standards (e.g. (re)distributive principles, human
rights standards) that would rely on coercive enforcement agencies
(Benhabib 2004, 113). Given this reality, the democratic legitimacy of
political institutions above the level of the state is an issue that
cannot be avoided.
Sceptics of global democracy have worked to identify basic background
conditions to democratic institutions and procedures while showing
that they cannot be satisfied beyond a certain threshold. Their
argument is empirical, rather than conceptual. A common language is
one plausible candidate put forward by Will Kymlicka. He insists that
linguistic/territorial political associations are the primary forum
for democratic participation, rather than higher-level political
associations that cut across linguistic lines, because democratic
politics is essentially “politics in the vernacular”
(Kymlicka 1999,
 121).[31]
 Even in cases where average citizens are conversant in one or more
foreign language, they rarely have the level of fluency necessary to
participate in political debate in a language other than their own:
only a select few have the ability and opportunity to acquire and
sustain the necessary language skills. Political debate in
multilingual settings is essentially an elitist pursuit.
In fact, political discussions require a higher degree of fluency than
what is needed for business transactions or tourism: “political
communication has a large ritualistic component, and these ritualized
forms of communication are typically language-specific. Even if one
understands a foreign language in the technical sense, without
knowledge of these ritualistic elements one may be unable to
understand political debates” (Kymlicka 1999, 121). If he is
right, the hope that English’s emergence as a new lingua
franca in Europe and globally could overcome the linguistic
obstacles that impede the development of transnational democratic
politics are overstated (Van Parijs 2005). English’s growing use
may be enough to increase mutual understanding between individuals,
but it is unlikely that it could become a transnational vernacular
allowing democratic politics to transcend national
 boundaries.[32]
Most voluntarists and sceptics rely on the same implicit view of
democratic political agency: citizens are political agents through
their participation in institutions and practices that require
significant interaction and mutual awareness. In this sense,
democratic political agency appears collective rather than individual.
Yet this leaves the door open to the sceptics’ objections. If we
believe that formal and informal democratic institutions like
Parliaments and the public sphere require relatively high levels of
horizontal communication between citizens, the existence of a common
language appears a necessary condition to democratic agency. This, in
turn, sets limits to the potential extension of the political
community. Schemes that call for the “institutionalization of
national and transnational forms of public debate, democratic
participation, and accountability” (Held 2005, 18) for
democracy’s global extension appear misguided.
It might be argued, however, that the development of transnational
advocacy networks shows that the sceptics’ criticisms are
overstated. These networks are proof that it is possible for
individuals to exercise political agency in forums other than those
provided by democratic states and that the absence of a common
vernacular does not impede participation. Global democracy becomes
thinkable once we focus on the development of transnational civil
society rather than on the transposing of representative institutions
at the global level. In response, it should be noted that such
networks coalesce around a common ideology or conception of the good
(e.g. the environment; rights of indigenous peoples, critique of
neo-liberal forms of globalisation, etc.), which serves as a
functional equivalent to a common vernacular. More important, these
networks are composed of voluntary associations organized around
shared interests and cannot stand as a surrogate for the political
community per se, which acts as the addressee of claims made
by the organisations and groups of civil society.
Which political community or communities can act as the addressee of
claims made by organisations of transnational civil society? If one
answers national political communities and their formal institutions,
one agrees with Kymlicka that: “the weak transnationalism of
advocacy networks is predicated on, even parasitic on, the ongoing
existence of bounded political communities” (Kymlicka 2003,
291). Surely, we cannot point to a constituted cosmopolitan political
community, which as yet does not exist and, if the sceptics are to be
believed, has very little chances of ever coming into existence. If
this is right, then the organisations of an emerging transnational
civil society can offer possibilities of political agency for certain
committed individuals and groups, but they do not offer a solution to
the problem posed by the extension of democratic citizenship to the
global
 level.[33]
There is another version of the global democratic project, however,
that involves an individualist conception of democratic political
agency. Here citizens can engage in significant political activities
that do not require high levels of interaction and cooperation between
them. This is a position developed by Andrew Kuper (2004). It
involves, first, that we abandon the conception of democratic
legitimacy implicit in deliberative, participatory and republican
conceptions of democracy, which all attempt to maintain a broadly
Rousseauian understanding of legitimacy: laws are legitimate only if
citizens can see themselves, somehow, as their coauthors. Kuper
suggests that we discard this vision of democratic legitimacy in
favour of one focusing on the responsiveness of the political system
as a whole. The central issue becomes whether this system is made to
act “in the best interests of the public, in a manner responsive
to them” (Kuper 2004, 75 quoting Pitkin 1967). On this view, the
vertical, rather than horizontal, dimension of communication is of
overarching importance: individual citizens must have access to
relevant information about what various authorities are doing, there
must exist institutional channels through which they can pressure
authorities and let them know their views on proposed policies. Doing
so does not require that they “act together with high levels of
mutual awareness” (Kuper 2004, 127); they can exercise these
capacities individually, via specific agencies. Responsiveness is also
a dimension of democratic legitimacy favoured by some empirical
scientists, referring to the responsiveness of representatives to the
opinions, preferences and concerns of citizens communicated via
various agencies. It is measured, however, through statistical
correlation in which public opinion is the dependent variable and
policy output is the independent variable (for an overview see Page
(1994)). 
In contrast to the vertical and sometimes causal picture of
citizenship depicted in responsiveness, one could insist, as does
Bernard Manin, that meaningful political agency in a representative
democracy requires that citizens be capable of learning what their
co-citizens think about important policy issues or events independent
of the authorities. Horizontal communication between citizens appears
as a necessary condition to their being capable of political action
(Manin 1997,
 170–171).[34]
 The thing that makes citizens political agents is their capacity to
act independently of authorities and this ability, in turn, depends on
whether they regularly act and communicate together, even if this
interaction is often mediated through institutions like the electronic
media.
Despite their many differences, the conceptions of citizenship
discussed in the preceding sections share the idea that citizenship
supposes a certain kind of agency, one that involves the
individual’s capacity to reflect on his/her subjective good as
well as on the good of the whole. And this has long been associated,
in the Western tradition, to a complex discursive capacity that only
human beings are thought to possess. Following Aristotle:
The capacity for rational agency has long functioned as a threshold
condition for citizenship. In Aristotle’s Politics, for
example, the exclusion of women and slaves from citizenship is based
on an account of their souls as lacking the appropriate kind of
rationality. The long history of the extension of citizenship to
groups previously excluded did not change this basic understanding. It
involved instead the recognition that the newly included (e.g. women,
workers, descendants of former slaves) did, in fact, satisfy the
threshold condition.
Contemporary democratic and republican theories often rely on an ideal
picture of the citizen as actively involved in the political life of
the community. This encompasses a vast array of activities and
practices, including voting in elections, canvassing, participating in
public deliberation, demonstrating against government decisions or
policies, etc. These activities all presuppose the capacity for a
certain kind of agency, one that relies heavily on rational,
discursive abilities. This common view sits uncomfortably with the
fact that many individuals — in some cases because of deep
cognitive disability — do not have these capacities. Though they
may be members of the society, can they — truly — be
citizens? From Locke to Rawls, the answer has been overwhelmingly
negative, confining these individuals to the category of wards (Arneil
2009 and 2016, Pinheiro 2016, Clifford Simplican 2016). Though society
may have the responsibility to ensure their welfare, they can have no
say in its definition, and are fated to remain society’s passive
beneficiaries.
Over the last forty years, disability advocates and scholars have
contested this view of the disabled, insisting that they should be
seen and treated as citizens, not as wards. In the last few years,
some philosophers and political theorists have rallied to this view
and questioned the conception of agency presupposed in the common view
of democratic citizenship as unduly exclusionary (Nussbaum 2006,
Arneil 2009, Arneil and Hirschmann 2016). Building on the work of
disability theorists, Sue Donaldson and Will Kymlicka (2011, 2016)
have argued further that if we accept — as we should —
that a capacity for complex discursive agency is not necessary for
citizenship, then we should also recognize domestic animals as
co-citizens since they qualify as members of
 society.[35]
Donaldson and Kymlicka define agency as “self-willed or
initiated action that carries an expectation of efficacy”
(Donaldson & Kymlicka 2016, 180, fn 16). On this view, agency does
not require discursive rationality and individuals with deep cognitive
disability as well as domestic animals can be described as agents. The
scope of agency is conceptualized into two parts: micro (the capacity
to have a say over every day choices) and macro (the capacity of
individuals to shape the “fundamental dimensions of their
lives” (Donaldson & Kymlicka 2016, 180)). In Zoopolis
(2011), this macro dimension of agency was described more explicitly
in political terms, referring to a capacity for political
participation. To the extent that individuals act in ways that can be
construed as expressing approval, acquiescence or dissent with the
laws and regulations that affect them, they can be described as acting
politically and as displaying a form of democratic agency.
The absence of linguistic agency creates specific challenges since
both individuals with deep cognitive disability and domestic animals
are “dependent on others to support and interpret their
participation” (Donaldson & Kymlicka 2016, 176). They can be
agents only with the help of others, who have discursive rationality,
and with whom they share relations of trust. The latter can help
structure or ‘scaffold’ meaningful choices for the former
and interpret their expressions.
Accepting that instances of “dependent agency” can count
as political participation supposes that we abandon the binary between
independent and dependent forms of agency as well as the belief that
only the former counts as the right kind of agency when it comes to
citizenship. This should not be too difficult to do if we are willing
to recognize that “[w]e are all interdependent, relying on
others to enable and sustain our (variable and contextual) capacities
for agency” (Donaldson & Kymlicka 2011, 107). This is not to
claim that we are all the same, but to argue in favour of replacing
the binary between “an autonomous, rational agent” and
“his or her opposite, the ‘disabled’” “with a
gradient scale in which we are all in various ways and in different
degrees both dependent on others and independent” (Arneil 2009,
234).
Donaldson and Kymlicka’s argument becomes less convincing when they
attempt to illustrate with concrete examples what they mean by the
political participation of domestic animals. In some of the examples
they use, the humans involved appear as the real agents of the actions
described while animals come across as the objects of their masters’
agency (Donaldson & Kymlicka 2011, 112-116; Hinchcliffe 2015). In
response to this criticism, Donaldson and Kymlicka have conceded the
weakness of some of their examples while maintaining the possibility
of finding better ones. More interestingly for our purposes, they
insist that: “capacities for agency are embedded in ongoing
social relations amongst responsive, reflexive, and interdependent
selves, not located in a threshold individual capacity for rational
reflection and public deliberation” (Donaldson & Kymlicka
2015, 331). If we accept that people with deep cognitive disability
and domestic animals are members of society, then the right question
to ask is not whether they meet the threshold condition of discursive
rationality and can be recognized as citizens. Rather, we should
enquire about the kind of spaces in which their political agency could
be expressed as well as look for the mechanisms through which their
citizenship could be enacted. In short, instead of defining who can be
a citizen according to whether or not an individual or group can
function in the existing spaces of citizenship (i.e. whether they can
participate in elections or militate for political parties), we should
create distinct spaces that are commensurate to the capacities of all
those who possess rights of citizenship.
Donaldson and Kymlicka’s main objective is to secure the rights
of animals against the terrible and unjust consequences of human
beings’ ‘lordship’ over them. From the perspective
of democratic theory, the upshot of their argument is mixed. On the
one hand, it may offer a promising response to the persisting
complaints about the alleged incompetence of ‘ordinary’
citizens in contemporary mass democracies (Brennan 2016) by
stimulating our institutional imagination to create better spaces of
citizenship for everyone. On the other hand, extending the definitions
of political participation and democratic agency to cover the actions
of domestic animals may also weaken the very significance of
democratic citizenship.
Our survey of contemporary discussions has highlighted important
differences over each of the three dimensions of citizenship. As a
legal status, citizenship remains the keystone of contemporary
conceptions: its normative core is the principle that citizens shall
enjoy equal rights, although most would now agree that, in certain
circumstances, equal consideration of individuals’ interests may
justifiably result in differential treatment from the state. This
broad agreement on principle leaves ample room for disagreement over
the particulars, as witnessed by the recurring debates over
affirmative action and minority rights. But such discussions have
become a hallmark of contemporary liberal societies, and our legal and
political discourses are well equipped to handle them. The deeper
worry, which new forms of political violence have made more acute,
centres upon achieving a proper balance between the recognition of
difference and the affirmation of common principles to which all
citizens adhere.
How robust an identity can citizenship provide in complex and
internally diverse societies? There is a tension here that is
difficult to resolve: our awareness of the pluralist nature of
contemporary societies leads us to underscore the importance of
general legal and political principles (democracy, human rights, rule
of law) rather than the traditional emblems of nationality: common
history and culture. Postnationalists, in particular, emphasize the
role of democratic political practice in securing social integration.
Yet, the complexity and scale of contemporary liberal societies tend
to make this practice less significant in the lives of most citizens,
a fact reflected in declining levels of participation in formal
political institutions. Are we not expecting too much from democratic
political practice under current circumstances?
This question brings us face to face with the difficult issue of
citizens’ political agency, which has long been central to
debates between liberals and republicans. Whether we understand
democracy in terms of civic self-government (republican version) or as
the ability to exercise control over government (liberal version), it
is not easy to determine how, and through what institutional
mechanisms, citizens can exercise meaningful political agency in
complex societies. This difficulty is epitomized in the debate over
transnational citizenship. Although global citizenship is conceivable
first and foremost as a legal status securing a number of fundamental
human rights, most authors agree that it should not be strictly legal
in nature and must have a significant political dimension. One senses,
however, a distinct malaise when it comes to identifying appropriate
normative standards and locating the institutions through which these
could be approximated.
In the end, our dismissal of the
encyclopédiste’s interest in distinguishing
subject and citizen may have been too hasty. If being a citizen in a
liberal-democratic political community is to mean something more than
the status of legal subject, we must be ready to state what
this “more” entails. This stubborn blind-spot of theories
of citizenship leads us to some of the most difficult issues
pertaining to the very possibility of democracy in the contemporary
world.