Historically, the use of coercion by powerful actors has been of great
concern to philosophers and legal theorists. Detailed attention to
understanding the concept coercion, however, is a relatively
recent phenomenon. One effect of this discrepant attention is that it
is sometimes difficult to determine what precise meaning earlier
writers intended in their discussions of “coercion,” as
well as to decide whether “coercion” captures something
different from or related to other frequently used terms, such as
violence, compulsion, punishment,
force, or interference. A brief survey of a few
notable thinkers suggests that coercion has commonly been understood
as a use of a certain kind of power for the purpose of gaining
advantages over others (including self-protection), punishing
non-compliance with demands, and imposing one's will on the will of
other agents. The kind of power needed for these functions is the sort
that states and other forceful or violent agents possess. One of the
clearest, most important uses of coercion has been understood to be
the state's enforcement of law, either through direct uses of force or
through punishments meted out to lawbreakers. The state's use of
coercion is thought to be licensed in particular for the sake of
preventing private acts of violence or coercion, as well as for
punishing the failure to keep agreements. These public uses of
coercion are thought justified because they make possible private
cooperation and peaceable coexistence among people not linked by ties
of affection or blood.
Although one could start earlier, Aquinas offers a picture of what
might be regarded as the traditional, canonical understanding of
coercion, its importance, and consequences. Discussion of coercion
(sometimes also described as “compulsion”) recurs in the
Summa Theologica under several headings. In a discussion of
necessity and the will, he notes that when we speak of necessity, we
mean “that which must be” (Aquinas, ST, I.II Q6
A6). There are various ways something may be necessary. Coercion, he
says, is a kind of necessity in which the activities of one agent
— the coercer — make something necessary for another
agent.  The “necessity of coercion” is that in which
“a thing must be, when someone is forced by some agent, so that
he is not able to do the contrary” (ibid.). Such
necessity is “altogether repugnant to the will,”
(ibid.) meaning that what is done because of coercion is not
done voluntarily.  To say that something is voluntary, for Aquinas,
implies that it follows from or is in accord with one's inclinations;
in contrast, coercion is linked with the notions of violence and the
involuntary.
For Aquinas, the law and the government bear a special relationship to
the use of coercion/compulsion. In a discussion of the nature of
(human) law, Aquinas claims that “the notion of law contains two
things: first, that it is a rule of human acts; secondly, that it has
coercive power” (Aquinas, ST, I.II Q96 A5). This power
is identified with the ability of rulers to use force and violence
against their subjects: “the governor of a city has perfect
coercive power: wherefore he can inflict irreparable punishments such
as death and mutilation” (Aquinas ST, II.II Q65
A2). The law, Aquinas suggests, must use “force and fear”
in order to restrain those who are “found to be depraved, and
prone to vice, and not easily amenable to words,” so that they
will “desist from evil-doing, and leave others in peace,”
as well as become “habituated in this way,” and
“virtuous” (Aquinas, ST, I.II Q95 A1). This power
is not available for anyone to use: Aquinas argues that the coercive
function should be “vested in the whole people or in some public
personage,” and not allowed to private parties (Aquinas,
ST, I.II Q90 A3). He does allow, however, that some parties,
such as the head of a household (“an imperfect
community”), must be able to use an “imperfect coercive
power, which is exercised by inflicting lesser punishments, for
instance by blows, which do not inflict irreparable harm”
(ibid.).
Aquinas also supports the common view that at least some coercion
affects the coercee's responsibility or blameworthiness for what he
does as a result of coercion. He holds that one is not to be blamed
for things done non-voluntarily. Insofar as violence undercuts the
voluntariness of one's doings, as suggested above, one is not to be
blamed for them. Violence appears able to coerce in two ways: when
used directly against one's body (“a man may be dragged by
force: but it is contrary to the very notion of violence, that he be
dragged of his own will” (Aquinas, ST, I.II Q6 A4));
and when used in a way that disables one's will (“the will can
suffer violence, in so far as violence can prevent the exterior
members from executing the will's command” (Aquinas,
ST, I.II Q6 A4)). Interestingly, however, the
 threat[1]
 of violence that causes one to act from fear, or to avoid that
violence, does not make an act involuntary, on Aquinas'
understanding. So only some uses of violence to hinder another's
actions have the effect of exempting the person targeted from blame
for things done as a result of
 violence.[2]
These three modern-era thinkers differ in innumerable ways in their
philosophical and ethical views, though they seem to hold surprisingly
similar views of the nature of coercion and its role in the function
of justice and the state. Hobbes's fame as a political theorist
derives at least in part from the central role he gives to coercion as
a necessary part of a state's function. Noticing that many contracts
require one party to perform one's obligations before the other party
acts, Hobbes suggests that such first performance would be irrational
if one has no means to secure the subsequent performance of one's
bargaining partner.
Interestingly, Hobbes seems to share Aquinas' view that acting
from fear does not undercut the voluntariness of one's acts, as he
famously asserts that “covenants extorted by fear are
valid,” at least if it is a covenant needed to secure one's life
and no sovereign authority prohibits the making of such a covenant
(Hobbes 1651, Ch. 14).
More generally, the very possibility of establishing justice and
injustice depends on the possibility of coercing subjects to abide by
their covenants.
Hobbes thus holds that coercion is essential to both the justification
of and function of the state or commonwealth. In fact, it is a law of
nature that we seek the protection of the Leviathan's coercive powers
in order to exit the perilous conditions of the state of nature.
It is perhaps presumptuous to discuss Locke's views on
coercion, since he very rarely uses the term “coercion” or
its
 variants.[3]
 But even though he seldom speaks of coercion, he believes like Hobbes
that the function of the state is intimately tied to its role in
securing individuals against those who would kill, injure or rob
them.
Locke, more so than Hobbes, is wary of the power of the sovereign,
but is less anxious about conditions in the state of nature. One reason
for this reversal of concern, he suggests, is that sovereigns are more
potent oppressors than ordinary inhabitants of the state of nature, due
to the ability of sovereigns to organize force and violence.
Because individuals cannot reasonably give up power to an unchecked
sovereign, Locke also holds that an agent's ability to possess
and use that power effectively depends in many ways on the rightness of
that agent's use of power.
In particular, Locke seems to suggest that a system of property
rights cannot be enforced by the state if it renders others unable to
secure their own economic survival. One is entitled to the protection
of what one has labored to create so long as, with respect to land and
other natural resources, “there is enough, and as good, left in
common for others” (Locke 1823 [1689], Sec. 27). This
“Lockean proviso,” as Nozick called it (Nozick 1974, p.
175 ff), creates a sort of baseline condition against which
the acceptability of any set of coercive arrangements can be judged. So
for Locke, more than for Hobbes, the power of the sovereign rests on
the consent of those governed — not only for its justification,
but also for its stability against revolution, about which Locke was
clearly more sanguine than Hobbes.
Kant also gives considerable attention to the importance of coercion
for guaranteeing rights of citizens, though he says little that would
explain what he means by his use of the term. Kant's only
prominent discussion of coercion occurs in his Doctrine of
 Right,[4]
 a treatise on the nature of law. Kant thinks there are two sorts of
“incentives” to follow the law: ethical and
juridical. The ethical (i.e., rational) incentive to follow
the law is the motive of duty. But since the wills of some people are
determined pathologically — that is, by inclinations and
aversions, rather than by duty — there needs also to be a way to
get such persons to follow the law as well, through such means as
aversion to punishment (Kant 1996 [1797], 20 [AK 6, 219]). Coercion
is then a tool the law uses to get the lawless to respect the rights
of others whether they want to or not. He associates it with the
executive authority of the state's ruler, and the ruler's use of
punishment in conformity with the law. Kant makes clear that coercion
counts as a hindrance to freedom, in which respect it is similar to
all violations of a person's rights. But coercion can be used to
prevent other rights violations, and thus may be justified on the
grounds that it counts as a hindrance to a hindrance to freedom.
“Right and authorization to use coercion therefore mean one and
the same thing” (Kant 1996 [1797],  26 [AK 6, 232]). 
 Kant's views on the necessity of coercion for the existence of
right differ from those of Hobbes and Locke, but he is in general
sympathetic to the idea that states require the ability to use coercion
in defense of the equal freedom of their subjects. Without such
coercive abilities, one can have “private right,” but that
is no more than the rights one has in the state of nature, which are by
no means secure.
So Kant, like Hobbes and Locke, sees it as a necessity for people to
establish a state with coercive powers in order to achieve justice.
With respect to his thinking about coercion, Mill is most famous for
his views, in On Liberty, about what coercion is not fit to
do: namely, be used to regulate people's behavior for their own
good. Like his predecessors and his mentor Jeremy Bentham, Mill
associates coercion with the state's powers to punish
lawbreakers. But Mill seems in general to take a more expansive view of
what coercion amounts to than did those surveyed above, appearing to
treat the terms “coercion” and “interference”
as much the same thing in On Liberty. In stating the thesis of
that work, Mill writes,
In treating coercion expansively, Mill apparently intended to
capture a number of different ways in which powerful agents could
exercise constraining power on others besides the use of force,
violence, and threats thereof. So, for instance, Mill suggests that the
potency of legal penalties often resides more in the stigma they attach
than the actual punishments they apply. Concerning laws against
unpopular views, Mill writes,
Thus Mill decries “the despotism of custom,” as a force
seemingly more potent than that of governments, in that it is able to
hold back whole civilizations for centuries (Mill 1909–14 [1859], Ch.
2).
By contrast with Hobbes, Locke, or Kant, Mill recognizes that the
power of civil institutions is frequently on a par with the power of
the state, and treats the potential for coercion by these other
institutions as similarly a matter of concern. For instance, in
thinking about the institution of marriage, Mill writes,
And in looking at the circumstances of child labor in his day, he
noted,
Thus Mill's understanding of coercion appears to treat a wider
array of powers as potential means of coercion than did earlier
thinkers.
With the advent of analytic approaches to philosophy and law in the
20th Century, philosophers and legal theorists began to give more
explicit elaboration to what “coercion” means, and how it
relates to other concepts. In the period prior to 1969, there were of
course some differences among theorists, but there seems to be a
mainstream view of coercion that is more or less continuous with the
view found in Aquinas and Hobbes/Locke/Kant (and some of the views of
Bentham and Mill). This view identifies coercion with the use of force
or violence, as well as to threats of the same. For instance, Hans
Kelsen explains the nature of law by saying,
Kelsen goes on to count as coercive acts such things as detaining
those suspected of crimes, detaining for protective custody, detaining
of the insane, detaining in internment camps potential enemies of the
state, and the confiscation or destruction of property (Kelsen 1967
[1934], 40–41).
J. R. Lucas puts a slightly different cast on a similar thought,
emphasizing the importance of a technique by which one agent (e.g., the
state) can assure that its decisions are implemented.
[I]mprisonment is the paradigm form of coercion.… Even if it
were not regarded as a penalty, it would still be effective in
frustrating the efforts of the recalcitrant to prevent a judicial
decision being implemented (Lucas 1966, 60).
If there is a single, continuous thread that runs through the
various thoughts about coercion surveyed above, I believe it could be
identified as Lucas suggests with a concern for the ability of some
agents to implement and enforce decisions about the activities of
others. With the possible exception of Mill, who allows for a greater
range of coercive methods than the others surveyed, this general idea
seems to capture what one might have said was essential in the concept
of coercion as pre-modern and modern political theorists employed it,
by name or (in the case of Locke) by function.
Beginning in 1969, a spate of short articles were published on
coercion. The earliest of significance was Robert Nozick's
“Coercion.” It was followed shortly by a collection of
essays by political philosophers published in a volume of the
Nomos series, focused on coercion (Pennock and Chapman 1972).
These articles were in turn followed by an outpouring of responses and
original discussions of coercion that continued throughout the 1970s
and 80s. The influence of these early discussions of coercion remains
strong. So it is useful to begin thinking about contemporary treatments
of coercion by looking at how these early articles framed the
topic.
Nozick's essay was by far the most influential of these early
works. Besides being first, his essay established a framework for
thinking about coercion which provided an intuitively compelling
picture of how coercion works. Nozick analyzed coercion by offering a
list of necessary and sufficient conditions for judging the truth of
the claim that P coerces Q. Somewhat simplified, he
argued that P coerces Q if and only if:
Many theorists adopted this framework explicitly or implicitly, and
it has influenced almost all subsequent analytic philosophical
discussions of the topic. Subsequent sections will address the aspects
of Nozick's analysis which have received the most attention and
debate. The remainder of this section will highlight more quickly some
of the less noticed ways that Nozick's analysis framed subsequent
discussions. In particular, it sketches out how this analysis differs
from the more traditional understanding of coercion, as seen in the
classical political theorists above. In short, Nozick's account
diverges from the more traditional approach in that (1) it associates
coercion only with proposals (e.g., conditional
 threats[6]),
 and excludes direct uses of force or
 violence[7];
 (2) it insists that coercion takes place only
when the coercee acquiesces to it; and (3) it makes coercion explicitly
dependent on the coercee's choice to take or not take a specific
action A, and mandates that a judgment about coercion must
refer to facts about the coercee's psychology, such as her
assessment of the consequences A-ing in light of the
coercer's proposal. The overall effect of these differences is to
focus the analysis of coercion on how the coercee is affected by it,
rather than on what the coercer does, and what is required for him to
do it successfully. (See Anderson 2008b.)
One significant departure from the traditional approach to coercion
is that Nozick limits his discussion of coercion to techniques that
influence or alter the will of the coercee, by altering the intentions
or dispositions of the coercee. Such coercion usually takes the form of
a conditional threat (or sometimes a conditional offer). Though a few
subsequent writers, like Michael Bayles (Bayles 1972; and Gunderson
1979, following Bayles) and Grant Lamond (Lamond 1996 and 2000), have
accepted direct force as equally a means of
 coercion,[8]
 Nozick's restriction of the
topic to the use of threats — that is, coercion that operates
through the will of the coercee — has been the much more
frequently accepted view, whether explicitly or implicitly.
There are good reasons to treat coercion via the will and direct force
or constraint applied to the body as two methods of a single kind of
activity. First, though direct force is usually unsuited to get an
agent to perform a specific action, both are well suited to preventing
an agent from taking a variety of actions, with direct force or
constraint often being more decisive. Second, the two techniques are
often used hand-in-hand. For instance, police officers will shackle
and manhandle someone in custody who refuses to cooperate when given
instructions to move or stay still. Also, prison inmates are coerced
into remaining there by a combination of penalties for attempting
escape along with physical obstacles that limit the feasibility of
doing so. So using both techniques is often part of one and the same
activity aimed at affecting or constraining what an agent will do
(sometimes by affecting what she can do) (Anderson 2008a and
2010). Of course, under direct force, it will usually be true that the
coercee does not act, but rather is acted upon, as H. J. McCloskey
puts it (McCloskey 1980).  However, from the coercer's perspective,
it may be just as well, in enforcing his decisions, to prevent the
coercee from acting at all as it would be to induce her to choose not
to act.
Nozick's framing indicates that coercion is necessarily
successful: if the coercee does not act as demanded, then there is no
instance of coercion. At most, it seems, there is an instance of
attempted coercion. One might say that Nozick builds a “success
condition” into his analysis of coercion. Others have disagreed
with the success condition, though Nozick's is apparently a
majority view. (Those who agree include McCloskey 1980; Gorr 1986;
Murray and Dudrick 1995; Berman 2002; one who disagrees is Carr
1988). The disagreement seems to be over whether to identify instances
of coercion with one or the other of the two faces mentioned at the
outset: that is, to identify it with a kind of behavior by the coercer
(which may or may not be successful), or to identify it with specific
events in the life of the coercee (namely, those that alter or
constrain her activities). Several authors, picking up on the
disagreement, have suggested that we might distinguish coercion from
coerciveness, associating the former with completed, successful
attempts, and the latter with qualities of the attempt itself (Lamond,
2000).
Of course, if the coercee defies the coercer, there is no coerced
action to investigate, nor any question to answer about responsibility for
such an action. There is also reason to doubt that what the coercer did
in such cases rises to meet the bar at which we should consider it
coercive. (If a threat is trivial, we would likely resist saying that
an agent was coerced by it even if she acts to prevent its execution.)
On the other hand, it may be unwise to make a categorical distinction
between cases in which coercion succeeds and cases where it fails: the
difference between them on some occasions may be nothing more than what
mood the coercee happened to be in at the time. Since the coercer has
the final and definitive say over whether he will engage in coercive
activity (and who will be engaged by it), it may make more sense to
identify our phenomenon of interest with a certain form of activity by
the coercer, admitting that such activity may or may not result in any
further noticeable consequences. (The would-be coercer may of course be
bluffing, and the prospective coercee may call the bluff; this would
not, by itself, give reason to deny that we have here an instance of
the technique under study.)
Finally, Nozick frames his analysis with respect to some particular
action A taken or not taken by the coercee. The connection of
coercion to a specific action taken or foregone has seemed natural to
almost all subsequent commentators, even though it raises some
problems of which at least Nozick himself seems to have been aware. In
the short detour that is the second section of his essay, Nozick poses
questions of the following sort: If P coerces Q into
doing A, and B and C are the only ways to
do A, does P coerce Q into doing B
(assuming that is the means Q chose)?  Similarly, if
P coerces Q into not doing A, and
A is a necessary precursor to B, does P
coerce Q into not doing B? Does it matter whether
Q was already aiming/hoping/expecting to do B? More
generally, if as a result of prior acts of coercion by P, an
act A is no longer possible for Q (perhaps
Q doesn't think about it at all), has P coerced
Q into not A-ing? Nozick broaches
questions of these sorts, but leaves them aside without much mention
of their significance (See Nozick 1969, 445–47). Taken seriously,
however, they would force some significant revisions to the way
theorists have analyzed coercion. They show that there may be
difficulties in identifying coercion strictly with actions taken or
foregone, since it may be impossible to determine just what actions
this description includes.
More generally, Nozick's analysis emphasizes the alteration in
the coercee's choice of actions which results from the way the
coercer's proposal affects her reasons for acting. While this is
certainly a plausible approach for distinguishing coerced from
uncoerced acts, it puts the focus on how the coercee perceives her
situation; it is only via this reflection that it takes into account
how the coercer is able to create this perception. That is, it leaves
the standard sorts of means (force, violence, perhaps even economic
deprivation) that coercers use out of the account, and instead treats
all kinds of alterations to the coercee's costs and benefits to
acting as possible indications of coercion. While this more ecumenical
approach to coercion may succeed in encompassing ways of coercing that
the traditional theories would leave out, it creates a difficult
challenge for the theory to distinguish coercive from non-coercive
proposals. It is not surprising, therefore, that these are the issues
that have been the focus of most subsequent theorizing on the
subject.
Since Nozick's essay, theorists have frequently treated the
making of a conditional threat as an essential factor in coercion. The
largest single effort expended in analyzing coercion has been devoted
to making sense of such threats, and determining their relationship to
coercion. Some, however, have questioned the linking of coercion with
threats, and suggested that conditional offers too can be coercive.
Both conditional threats and conditional offers can be said to be
proposals, where the distinction between them is their relationship to
some baseline representing the coercee's situation prior to the
proposal: compared to the baseline, threats worsen the coercee's
situation, while offers do not. In this and the next two sections,
we'll examine some of the issues involved here. In Section 2.5
we'll consider some approaches to coercion that attempt to escape
from a “baseline” analysis of threats and offers.
Most will recognize the connection of coercion with threats as a
matter of common sense: armed robbers, mafias, the parents of young
children, and the state all make conditional threats with the
intention of reducing the eligibility of some actions, making other
actions more attractive by comparison. Note, however, that offers may
also be made with the same general intention as coercive threats: that
is, to make some actions more attractive, others less so. Consider the
basic structure of a conditional threat by P that attaches
undesirable consequences C to some action A by
Q:
This proposition has the same structure as an ordinary offer by
P to do something Q desires if Q agrees to
pay for it, but not otherwise.  Conversely, any ordinary offer has the
same structure as a threat. This suggests that any proposal whatever
may be read as a threat or an offer, depending on the relationship
between the proposal and some specifiable external
factors. (“Your money or your life” might equally be
proposed by a back-alley robber or a pharmaceutical company; in one
case it's a robbery, in the other case it may be a life-saving offer.)
The idea that threats coerce while offers don't is frequently thought
to be connected to the fact that threats propose to make their
recipient worse off than she would have been otherwise. If so, we are
required to specify how we should pick out and assess the relata in
this comparison, which is trickier than it may at first
appear. Consider first the question of what aspect of the proposal is
relevant for this comparison; and then second what relevant comparison
case (usually called the “baseline”) should be used.
Any bi-conditional proposal can be analyzed into a conjunction of two
component simple conditionals, both of which must be true if the
bi-conditional itself is true. However, only one of the two
conditionals will have its antecedent satisfied (depending on what
Q chooses to do), and will thus govern what comes about as a
consequence.  If the proposal is to have a motivational effect on its
recipient, it will be because the recipient prefers that one of the
two possible consequents be realized — either that P
brings about C, or that P does not bring about
C — so we may suppose that it is the difference in
Q's valuation of these consequents that motivates (if
anything does) Q to act in response to P's
proposal. (If the agent is indifferent between the two states, we may
consider the proposal to be an offer, but too unattractive an offer to
tempt one to accept it.) So we look to the conditional containing the
less-preferred consequent, and compare it to the baseline in order to
see whether P's proposal makes Q worse off than she
would be in the relevant alternative state of affairs. (The following
analysis slightly modifies the analysis in Gorr 1986, 391–397;
and Berman 2002, 
 55–59.[9])
So, for instance, an armed robber issues a proposal to a passerby
that amounts to the following conditionals:
(b) if she hands them over, he will not.
The passerby prefers the consequent in (b), so we compare the
conditional (a) to the baseline. Normally, one faces no harm if one
keeps one's valuables. So the first conditional makes the
passerby worse off than she would normally be, thus turning the
robber's proposal into a threat.
By contrast, consider the offer of a salesman who proposes to a
customer the following:
(d) if she does not pay X, he provides no vacation package.
Assuming the customer would prefer having the vacation package to
not having the vacation package, the second conditional contains the
less preferred consequent. But receiving no free vacation is quite
normal, so one is no worse off when the second conditional is operative
than under normal circumstances. Hence the salesman is making only an
offer, not a threat.
(Some have discussed “throffers,” which are proposals
that make one better off than normal under one conditional, worse off
than normal under the alternative conditional. On the above analysis,
throffers will be included among the threats because the conditional
containing the less-preferred consequent makes one worse off than one
normally would be.)
This analysis works well enough for most purposes. Since we quite
often know what's normal and what's not, threats and offers
are usually easily distinguished. Difficulties arise, however, when
this is not the case.
Nozick explains the idea of the baseline by calling it the
“normal or natural or expected course of events” (Nozick
1969, 447). But all of these terms are ambiguous, in that they have
normative (or “moral”) and non-normative (e.g.,
“predictive”) uses. Frequently, the normative and
predictive uses will point to the same state of affairs as the course
of events that is indicated. However, the extensions of the normative
and non-normative uses will sometimes differ, thus requiring a theorist
to choose one or the other in order to determine whether a particular
communication counts as a threat or an offer, and is therefore coercive
or not.
Nozick offers two of the best known cases in which the normative and
non-normative baselines would appear to diverge. Here's one of
them (Nozick 1969, 
 450–51):[10]
Q prefers not to be beaten, so we look to the conditional
Since P beats Q regularly, this conditional's
becoming operative makes Q no worse off than what Q
finds normal or expected (statistically speaking). So P's
proposal amounts to an offer, not a threat, on this way of
understanding of what's normal. Yet we would reasonably hold that if
Q elects to escape a beating by doing A,
Q's choice is made in response to a threat of a beating, and
is thus coerced.
The slave case demonstrates an ambiguity in our thought about
“what is normal” (or “what is expected”).
Although the slave is typically beaten and predicts he'll be
beaten based on past history, we expect on moral grounds that people
are not beaten for no reason. Given the moral sense of what is normal,
the slave owner's proposition amounts to a threat, thus
validating our sense that the slave is coerced into doing A.
Especially in contexts of entrenched injustice, the “moral”
and “predictive” baselines may diverge, forcing us to
choose between them.
Actually, any number of different possible baselines might be
constructed for judging whether a proposal makes one better or worse
off than the baseline. There are different ways of making a prediction;
there are different “moral” standards; there are also ways
of taking into consideration what the recipient of the proposal would
want. So divergences among the many possible baselines may be more
common than we might at first suspect. This requires us to find a way
to choose among the possibly diverging baselines. Nozick, for instance,
proposes that when the “predictive” and the
“moral” baselines diverge, we turn to the preferences of
the recipient of the proposal, and use the baseline he prefers. In the
slave case above, Nozick reasonably supposes that the slave would
prefer that “normal” meant “moral”; in which
case the slave would not be beaten even if he did not do A. By
comparison to this baseline, the slave-owner's proposal is a
threat, not an offer.
Some theorists have noticed that what the proposal recipient wants
to happen may differ from both the moral and predictive baselines.
Michael Gorr, for instance, argues that if preferences are important
when the baselines diverge, “it is unclear why they should be
less so in cases where the two baselines coincide.” Hence he
favors an account that “makes the subject's preferences a
controlling factor in all cases” (Gorr 1986,
398–399; see also Rhodes 2000). The difficulty with this suggestion,
however, is that it's very difficult to craft constraints on what
preferences will count for how things go; people can want others to do
or omit doing almost anything. Suppose we agree it is normal in both
the moral and predictive senses for workers who shirk to be fired, and
for customers who refuse to pay utility bills to have their electricity
cut off. Of course, workers and customers would likely prefer to get
paid for nothing, and to get their electricity for free. Compared to
these baselines, proposing to fire or to cut off electricity to someone
amounts to going out of one's way to attach undesirable
consequences to some (non‑)action A. On Gorr's
criteria, it would appear, both of these threats count as coercive
threats, yet both seem to be parts of ordinary, non-coercive commerce
based on offers and
 acceptances.[11]
 At any rate, it is difficult to see how a
fully preference-based baseline account can avoid seeing coercion in a
vast array of situations where our pre-theoretic views would deny
it.
Those who opt for a moralized baseline approach seem to offer a more
plausible approach. The most prominent of these theorists has been Alan
Wertheimer, whose book Coercion sets the current standard and
starting point for continued scholarship in this
 area.[12]
 Since only threats coerce, but
not all threats do, he provides a two-pronged test for whether a
proposal constitutes a coercive threat (Wertheimer 1987, especially
chs. 2, 12, and 14). The proposal constitutes a threat if the
proposer indicates that, if his demand is denied, he will make the
recipient worse off than the recipient ought to be. (In particular,
Wertheimer believes that this is frequently best understood as a
question of whether the proposer proposes to violate the
recipient's rights (Wertheimer 1987,
 217).)[13]
 Yet the mere
fact that something threatens one is not sufficient to ground a claim
that it coerces anyone; the threat may be wrongful but also trivial. So
Wertheimer requires that the choice forced upon the coercee be such
that she has no reasonable choice but to succumb. This too requires a
contextually specific, moralized judgment, Wertheimer thinks. One
might, for instance, be supported in a claim that a threatened beating
left one “no choice” but to sign a contract; the same might
not be said about a choice to commit murder.
Wertheimer's approach is developed and defended by surveying
legal reasoning in the U.S. and its common-law tradition with respect
to such matters as contracts, criminal responsibility, plea bargains,
blackmail, and consent to searches and medical procedures. His work has
been influential among many who have tried to determine what the law
should say about various coercive phenomena, and Wertheimer himself has
offered further applications of his theories in subsequent work,
including a book on consent to sexual relations (Wertheimer 2004).
Wertheimer's moralized account and moralized theories of coercion
more generally raise some difficulties for understanding how there
could be “justified coercion,” such as law enforcement, in
that they tend to associate uses of coercion with immoral action. Some
of these difficulties are considered in Section 3.4 below.
While the dominant strand in recent theory has associated coercion
with threats, and denied that offers can be used to coerce, this sharp
differentiation of these two sorts of proposals has come in for some
criticism. The parallel structure of conditional threats and
conditional offers has led some to deny that there is a deep
distinction to be made between them. Others have focused on the role of
both in the broader political and economic context, and found that
these broader conditions make coercive offers a live possibility.
Dealings in capitalist markets are often highly exploitative;
governments often condition the provision of ordinary benefits on the
satisfaction of unrelated demands (such as making highway funding
conditional on states' passing particular laws). Given the
potency such offers possess, one might suspect that there are many
offers that one cannot reasonably refuse, possibly reflecting great
imbalances in power or prior historical injustices between the
bargaining parties. (See, for instance, O'Neill 1991; and
Berman 2001.)
Of those who have argued that threats and offers can both be used
coercively, David Zimmerman has been most prominent (Zimmerman 1981;
others who have argued offers can coerce include Frankfurt 1988
[1973]; Held 1972; Lyons 1975; Van De Veer 1979; Benditt 1979;
Feinberg 1986; Stevens 1988; for criticism of Zimmerman, Held, and Stevens, see
Alexander 1981; Bayles 1974; and Swanton 1989, respectively). Retaining
the baseline-approach to coercion found in Nozick, Zimmerman urges
that in setting a baseline for judging a proposal, we should take into
account the possibility that the proposal maker is actively hindering
the coercee from obtaining a situation for herself that would be
better than the situation the coercer proposes. So, for instance, if a
person is destitute on an island, and someone proposes to employ this
person for a life-sustaining pittance, this proposal may count as an
offer, since it is an improvement over the “pre-proposal”
situation. But if the person is destitute and unable to obtain better
conditions only because the employer actively prevents the person from
leaving the island (say, by preventing the building of boats),
Zimmerman suggests the offer should be regarded as coercive.  That's
because the appropriate baseline for evaluating the proposal is the
state of affairs that the recipient would face in the absence of
special interference by the proposal maker. (In the present case, this
might be the situation the island inhabitant would face were she able
to build a boat and return to the mainland.) If relative to this
baseline the offer is less favored, then it should count as coercive,
Zimmerman thinks.
Do such offers coerce? The dispute between those who say offers can
coerce, such as Zimmerman, and those who insist only threats coerce may
be more verbal than real. While Zimmerman, for instance, would label
the offer itself coercive, what appears to do the coercing here is
whatever means were or are being used to keep the recipient of the
offer from reaching a better bargaining state. If the offering party
here has created the conditions that make even very unattractive offers
still the best available, then the coercion, if there is any, seems to
be vested in the offerer's actions that prevent the recipient
from improving her situation or finding better offers elsewhere.
Zimmerman grants that even if the offering party does not cause the
recipient to be in the position she's in, we may still want to
criticize such offers. In these cases, the offer-maker may be guilty of
engaging in exploitation, though not coercion. When one party
is in a much stronger bargaining position than another, the stronger
party sometimes uses its advantage to keep for itself most or all of
the gains to be had from cooperative interaction between the parties.
So employers who are in a stronger bargaining position than their
employees may exploit them by paying them a small fraction of the value
their labor contributes to the production of goods for the employer.
This is especially feasible when one party has a relative monopoly
position with respect to some valuable good (say, employment
opportunities). So, reconfiguring Zimmerman's results somewhat,
we might retain the exclusive connection between threats and coercion
by saying that offers made from a position of superior bargaining
strength are very likely to be exploitative; and that sometimes
coercion is used to create or maintain one's bargaining
advantages.
Not all, however, would accept that the coerciveness of a large
differential in bargaining power depends upon its causal origins. Joan
McGregor, for example, gives an analysis of such offers in an account
that eschews the baseline approach. She argues, “the
‘better off’/‘worse off’ distinction ignores
the power relationships that occur when there are radically disparate
bargaining strengths” (McGregor 1988–89, 24). To assess the
coerciveness of something like an economic transaction, one must
instead attend to the relative strengths of the bargaining positions
between parties involved. “[C]oercion involves exercising power
over another; in the market, it involves exercising superior bargaining
power” (McGregor 1988–89, 25). At least two of the conditions
for having bargaining power sufficient to coerce another are that the
weaker party is dependent in some way on the stronger party
(e.g., there are no other options or potential exchange partners), and
the stronger party has influence over whether some significant
evil occurs to the weaker party (such as loss of life, health,
security) (McGregor 1988–89, 34). If in addition the stronger party
decides to take advantage of these conditions, then this is not just
exploitation but coercion. While the details of her account of
bargaining strength may raise difficulties, her attempt to incorporate
a measure of the coercer's power into the account of coercion
seems a useful if relatively under-explored approach.
The need to establish a baseline is generated by a need to
distinguish threats from offers as a central criterion of coercion.
Threats and offers are both proposals put to the coercee, aiming to
influence her behavior, and distinguished with respect to how they
affect what is normal for the coercee. There are two main ways in which
some theorists have diverged from the baseline-style account that
Nozick proposed, each of these ways admitting of both moralized and
non-moralized versions. Instead of distinguishing threats and offers
from what's normal for the agent, we might instead see threats as
applying a special sort or degree of pressure on the coercee's
will. Or, we might move away from focusing on the coercee's will
as the locus of coercion, and instead look at the powers, intentions,
and activities of coercers. A “coercer-focused” account
seeks to determine what is special about coercive actions, rather than
trying to distinguish coerced from non-coerced actions.
One way to identify coercive threats is by looking for a distinctive
way that pressure can affect a coercee's will. Sometimes, a use
of threats conditioned on the agent's activities may affect not
just the coercee's choice but also her ability to choose at all.
Under severe psychological pressure, faced with grave dangers or
significant evils, people sometimes react in ways that diverge from (or
at least do not follow from) their more rational, considered desires.
Harry Frankfurt seems to make this effect a requirement for something
to count as coercive, saying “A coercive threat arouses in its
victim a desire — i.e. to avoid the penalty — so powerful
that it will move him to perform the required action whether he wants
to perform it or considers that it would be reasonable for him to do
so” (Frankfurt 1988 [1973], 78). Frankfurt has several reasons
for insisting on this strong requirement, but perhaps most central is
his view that coercion must have such an overbearing effect if it is to
override the coercee's moral responsibility for acting
(Frankfurt 1988 [1973], 75–76). However, if one treats such
overburdening as a sufficient condition for coercion, then this again
lends support to the view that some offers — irresistible ones
— will also turn out to be coercive. Though the fact that
Q's will was overborne would seem compatible with the claim that
Q has been coerced, few besides Frankfurt have taken such overburdening
to be a necessary condition for coercion to take
 place.[14]
Short of generating psychological compulsion, one might hold that
coercion involves the imposition of an option which no one could
reasonably refuse to take. Several have tried to characterize such
situations in a way that neither reduces to a form of psychological
determinism, nor implicitly invokes baseline comparisons. For instance,
Mark Fowler argues that “coercion generally involves the prima
facie immoral imposition of practical imperatives by use of
threats” (Fowler 1982, 330). While this approach must be
supplemented with further details (including, perhaps, a resort to a
baseline to distinguish threats from offers), its principal
contribution is its reliance on “practical imperatives.”
Fowler suggests that we need to see coercion in relation to our
understanding of how practical reason works. When we say that the
coercer leaves the coercee “no choice,” we don't
necessarily mean that the coercee is literally unable to choose, but
that for the coercee to choose otherwise than the coercer demands would
be contrary to practical reason (Fowler 1982, 331).
The normative approach Fowler favors links this criterion to a
Kantian account of autonomy, and suggests that the test of a coercive
threat is that it violates the coercee's autonomy. This would
appear to produce a mismatch between our pre-theoretic understanding of
coercion and the cases that will satisfy Fowler's conditions
— for instance, giving someone a false “warning”
arguably violates her autonomy, but this seems different than coercion.
Yet if there is a way to make sense of the notion of imposing a
practical imperative, this seems a useful element of an account of
coercion.
Joel Feinberg identifies coercion with a special degree or kind of
pressure imposed on the coercee's will, but avoids connecting
pressure to a normative judgment. His account is tailored to cases
where the coercer seeks to obtain a token of “consent” to
some harmful or dangerous activity from the coercee, but it could
easily be generalized to cover other sorts of coerced activities. His
account starts by offering a helpful description of the role of the
coercer, stipulating that the coercer:
“gives some evidence of the credibility of the threat”;
and
“has actively intervened in [the coercee's]
option-network, to acquire control of the relevant option-switches; in
particular he can close tight the conjunctive option that consists of
[the coercee's] noncompliance with the demand and [the
coercee's] avoidance of the threatened unwelcome
consequences” (Feinberg 1986, 198).
 [15]
These stipulations are useful supplements to the Nozickian-style
account, in that they require the coercer to demonstrate his power, and
to actively use it to create the situation facing the coercee, in
particular by preventing the coercee from finding ways to avoid the
forced
 choice.[16]
The bulk of Feinberg's account focuses, however, on how
coercive proposals can generate pressure on the coercee's will
that, if not irresistible, is sufficiently strong to make the
coercee's choice unfree. This account avoids a reliance on
baselines because it makes the coercee's judgment of the
frightfulness, unwelcomeness and pressure involved in the threat the
key criterion for determining whether it coerces. Feinberg goes on to
give a detailed discussion of how one might compare the pressures
involved when coercers issue various sorts of demands coupled with
various sorts of threats, suggesting ways of calculating the
“total coercive burden” a threat creates for a coercee.
Feinberg's account generates a number of apparently troubling
results. For one thing, it will allow that extremely tempting offers
are coercive if they create pressure similar to that associated with
coercive threats; the only thing that seems to count is how much
pressure one feels to act. It will also treat people with non-standard
preferences or fears (say, a dire fear of being patted on the back) as
having been “coerced” by threats to do what are,
objectively speaking, trivial things (Feinberg 1986, 212).
A different way of understanding coercion moves away from focusing
on its impact on the coercee. Some approaches, like McGregor's
noted above, look for coercion in the coercer's taking advantage
of certain sorts of power differentials between coercer and coercee.
Others identify coercion with the making of threats, but seek to
distinguish threats from offers in ways that avoid reference to a
baseline, and instead look at the qualities of the coercer and his
activities. Mitchell Berman, following Vinit Haksar, has argued for an
approach the crux of which holds that immoral coercive threats propose
to do something that would be immoral to do if carried out. (See
Berman 2002; Haksar 1976.) (Berman does not, it appears, offer a
definition of coercion per se, but only of wrongful
coercion.) Grant Lamond focuses instead on the coercer's
intentional attempt to use pressure to alter the activities of the
coercee, where that pressure comes from an intention to deliberately
set back the interests of the coercee. (See Lamond 1996 and 2000.)
Because McGregor's, Berman's and Lamond's ways of
capturing coercion attend to the coercer's actions and
intentions, they avoid the need to distinguish coercive from other
proposals based on specific effects on the coercee. (For that reason,
they could also reject the “success” condition on coercion
found in Nozick's and most subsequent accounts of coercion.)
Scott Anderson, drawing upon some remarks of J. R. Lucas (1966), takes
a different tack, and associates coercion with the use of an ability
some agents have to enforce their decisions about what another will or
will not do, “where the sense of enforceability here is
exemplified by the use of force, violence and the threats thereof to
constrain, disable, harm or undermine an agent's ability to act”
(Anderson 2010,  6).  Anderson requires that the coercer engage in
activity either to create a power differential between himself and the
coercee (say, by taking up arms), or else draw upon some existing
differential between agents of the sorts to which coercer and coercee
belong (say, policeman and citizen, respectively).  This
“enforcement approach” suggests that uses of these sorts
of powers are distinctive, and thus can be used to pick out
long-standing threats (such as the criminal law) as coercive, even if
it is difficult to identify specific actions that they alter.
Although some writings on coercion might appear to aim principally
for conceptual clarification, theorists of coercion more often aim to
answer questions that have practical import for ethics, judicial
decisions, political or legal theory, and social policy. Some of the
most common implications of claims about coercion are explored below.
The four subsections here (on responsibility under coercion, the
wrongfulness of coercion, its effect on freedom, and its political
implications) overlap in a number of ways, so divisions among these
sections are somewhat artificial. The divisions here foreground one or
another aspect of the topic at a time, but do not indicate that these
aspects are easily separable or can be usefully isolated from the other
aspects of the topic.
There is no single, widely agreed upon theory that explains when an
agent is or is not responsible for something that happens in the world.
Judgments of responsibility are normative, and may depend on other
normative facts specific to the particular sort of action or practice
in question. For instance, facts that might limit one's
responsibility for signing or violating a contract might fail to limit
one's responsibility for killing someone. So the effect of
coercion or its kin (duress, extortion) may differ depending upon the
sort of action for which one seeks to limit one's responsibility,
or upon the moral context in which one acted. Nonetheless, a few
central cases and some general tendencies can be given with some
confidence.
There are two traditional sorts of grounds on which an agent's
responsibility might be truncated or attenuated because he was coerced.
The first is by virtue of being excused for his action; the second is
by virtue of his action's being justified. The exact
understanding of this distinction is under continuing dispute, but here
is one way of understanding its most salient points. One may be
excused, in whole or in part, for an action performed
under coercion if that action (or its consequences) was beyond
one's control or willpower to prevent, or if that action (or its
consequences) was unintentional. This latter condition might obtain if,
for instance, one acquiesces under coercion to do something
intentionally (like driving a car), but in so doing one does something
else unintentionally (like helping a murderer escape). One is
justified in acquiescing to coercion if one's action (or
its consequences) is morally required, or is morally permissible under
the circumstances even if the action will foreseeably result in harm to
others. (One obvious category of actions that carry such justifications
are those taken to disable an attacker in self-defense or the defense
of others.) Inconveniently, neither sort of justification engages
smoothly with most recent theories of coercion that may be used to
determine agent responsibility for acts performed under coercion.
Most questions about coercion's effect on responsibility arise
in cases of coercion via conditional threats. When an agent is
confronted by a threat, one ground on which her acquiescence may be
excused is if the threat causes a total breakdown in her will. Like
other incapacities, this can affect her responsibility for actions
taken because she was truly unable to do otherwise. (This excuse may
lead to questions about how the agent became vulnerable to suffering
such a breakdown in agency; but in such cases she may be responsible
for her weakness of character, though perhaps not for her action.)
Excuse may also be invoked when the coerced person acts in ignorance or
if the harm she causes is unintentional (excuses which are available
regardless of whether one is coerced). But many people are able to
react deliberately and rationally in response to coercive threats. So
it seems that most cases of diminished responsibility under coercion
will appeal to justification rather than excuse.
Some accounts of coercion apply a moralized test to the
coercee's situation, holding that one may avoid responsibility
for an act taken under coercion if the coercer's proposal is such
that one “is entitled to yield to [the coercer's] proposal
and then be released from the normal moral and legal consequences of
[one's] act” (Wertheimer 1987, 267). Such a moralized
test might be the best theorists can do, but it requires a theory
separate from that which explains the coerciveness of the proposal to
begin with. (For instance, Wertheimer's theory has two
“prongs”: the first prong decides whether a particular
proposal is coercive; it's the second prong which then determines
whether a coercive proposal, once made, does indeed coerce someone in
the sense that it affects her responsibility for acquiescing). Although
there are some specific moralized or normative tests one might use to
decide responsibility for action under coercion, it is unclear that any
of them is robust enough to handle more than a fraction of the
 cases.[17]
One test of responsibility that might be proposed would limit the
responsibility of someone acting under coercion if she acts in a way
that minimizes the total amount of harm (invoking the
“lesser-evil principle”). So, for instance, we might deny
that a person is responsible for choosing to injure another to avoid
being killed, but hold her responsible if she chooses to kill someone
to avoid being injured herself. Though this principle is intuitively
plausible, we clearly do not accept it in other, non-coercive contexts.
For instance, we do not permit one to snatch a spare kidney from one
individual to save the life of another. Although we might add
conditions to this test to make the limitation of one's
responsibility harder to obtain, and therefore more in line with our
intuitions, it remains unclear that there is any well-formed moral
principle of this sort that would cover all cases equally well.
Instead of a moral test, one might propose a psychological test, on
which acquiescing to a coercer's demands in a way that harms
others is justified if the net value of doing so is sufficiently great
to the coercee. Roughly speaking, this is Feinberg's approach,
taken up by Murray and Dudrick as well. (See Feinberg 1986; and Murray
and Dudrick 1995.) The point of such a standard is to recognize that
some pressures on the will are too much to bear, without implying that
in such cases it is literally impossible for the coercee to make
choices because of an overborne will. The difficulty with this approach
is that it lets the degree of inducement alone justify one's
yielding to it. A number of causes other than coercion can create
extreme inducements to do harm to others; consider what some have done
for fame, wealth, or love. Because most would be reluctant to accept
that even extraordinarily tempting offers limit one's
responsibility for yielding to them, the magnitude of the inducement by
itself seems not to suffice to explain our judgments of responsibility.
Although we might add other conditions to restrict the limiting effect
on responsibility exclusively to threats and not offers, if the
justification lies in the pressure on the will, then it would seem one
might have the same justification for yielding to temptation that one
has for acquiescing to a mortal threat. (Note that some tempting offers
have life or death riding on them.)
Law is sometimes required to make judgments about actions performed
under necessity due to exigent circumstances. Sometimes persons harm
the interests of others in order to save themselves or others from
death or serious injury from causes beyond their
 control.[18]
 Coercion,
however, presents a more complicated set of issues for making judgments
of responsibility than do cases of natural necessity. Coercion involves
a strategic and dynamic interaction between two agents — coercer
and coercee — and the standard used to judge the coercee's
responsibility for acting under coercion can affect that strategic
situation. The principles by which we judge a coercee's
responsibility for acquiescing to coercion may affect whether it is
rational or productive for a would-be coercer to attempt coercion in
the first place. (By comparison, in cases of bad luck and natural
disaster, the situation is simpler because the behavior of the weather,
unlike the behavior of coercers, is unaffected by the incentives facing
those who might be pressured into acting under its power.) If we are
permissive in limiting the responsibility of coercees, this will make
acquiescing to coercion a more reasonable option; if instead we are
stingy in limiting responsibility for harms caused under coercion,
coercees may be much less likely to acquiesce to a coercer's
threats. But if a (would-be) coercer knows that a potential victim will
be unyielding to his threats, then coercion becomes a less productive
or reasonable means to use. So in choosing a principle that justifies
coercees in acquiescing under coercion, we need to take into account
that this principle may alter the dynamic between coercer and coercee
in ways that may in turn affect the rationality and fruitfulness of
using coercion.
There are, however, some cases in which coercion may alter an agent's
responsibility for what happens as a result of coercion that don't
raise the difficulties noted above. If, like some older ideas about
coercion, we count uses of direct physical interference among the
means of coercion, then in some cases it is comparatively easy to see
how coercion can affect an individual's responsibility for things done
or not done because of coercion. If one is restrained, incapacitated
by violent means, or denied essential means to achieve a purpose, then
it may be fairly obvious why one has an excuse for not doing otherwise
than one did (See Anderson 2010). Relying on the principle of “ought implies
can,” when one cannot do something, this provides a good excuse
for why one is not responsible for failing to do it. Related questions
may arise about how one came to be incapacitated; for instance, if one
fails to care for one's children, and seeks to be excused for this
neglect because one was incarcerated, we may want to know why one was
incarcerated before crediting the excuse.  Nonetheless, there will be
some cases where the answers to these questions will show that the
coercee played no role in his own incapacitation, and is therefore not
to be held responsible for things the coercer caused him to do or not
do.
Similarly, it is worth noting that there are some cases in which
coercees may be justified, and not just excused, for acquiescing to
threats, even if they do so calmly and deliberately. This sort of
justification can be granted when the coercer has structured an
coercee's situation in such a way that the coercee's will
becomes essentially redundant to the outcome. If, for instance, a
bouncer is able to remove a patron from the bar whether she likes it or
not, then if the bouncer threatens to do so, her walking out of the bar
in response to such a threat may be regarded as no more voluntary than
her being carried out by force. When a coercer has the power to enforce
his decision regardless of what the coercee chooses to do, this may
provide the coercee a justification for failing to engage in an
exercise in
 futility.[19]
In the next section, we'll consider how coercion is thought to
impinge upon freedom, something that raises obvious ethical
implications in its own right. So consideration of these sorts of
ethical issues will be postponed until there. The present section looks
at certain more basic questions about whether coercion is intrinsically
wrong, and what else might be wrong with it besides its effect on
freedom or autonomy.
There has been considerable debate over the question of whether
coercion is intrinsically wrongful. There seem to be three categories
in which answers to this question might fall: coercion is intrinsically
wrongful; it is prima facie or pro tanto wrongful,
though it may be justified by further facts; and it is intrinsically
morally neutral, though some uses of it may be wrongful because of
specific facts about them. Differences in understanding what is
wrongful about it may account for these different positions.
One is most likely to accept the first view, that coercion is
intrinsically wrongful if one defines coercion as some sort of
violation or threatened violation of the coercee's rights.
Wertheimer's account seems to accept such a view, as does Cheyney
Ryan's arguments for a normative conception of coercion. (See
Wertheimer 1987; Ryan 1980.) This close tie between coercion and
immoral action captures a number of intuitions we have about coercion,
reflecting also a lot of ordinary language. People often associate
uses of coercion with injustices done to themselves or others. This
tie also provides a sharper division between coercive and non-coercive
activity than might otherwise be found: if an activity is morally
unobjectionable, then it is ipso facto not coercive. Of
course, if identifying coercion requires a prior moral judgment, then
one will need to be able to make such judgments reliably in order to
be able to identify coercion reliably. But this suggests an objection
to this view of coercion's wrongfulness: there are some situations in
which the coerciveness of an action appears obvious even though it may
be difficult or impossible to ascertain its rightfulness or
wrongfulness (this objection goes doubly for the next proposal,
viz., that coercion is prima facie or pro
tanto wrongful). Thus some (e.g., Zimmerman 2002) have resisted
making judgments of coercion depend on prior moral judgments. The
Wertheimer/Ryan view also generates a categorical distinction between
different possible uses (and users) of the same technique: if the
mafia threatens to destroy your property if you fail to pay protection
money, this threat will count as coercive; but if the just,
well-regulated state threatens to confiscate your property unless you
pay taxes, this threat is arguably not coercive, on this view. Some
difficulties stemming from this implication will be noted in the next
section.
The second view, that coercion is prima facie or pro
tanto immoral, is probably the most commonly held view. Yet it is
difficult to find and describe the immoral factor in coercion that will
then suffice to explain its wrongfulness when not rebutted, while
avoiding the miscategorization of cases. Here are two recent attempts
at such a description.
One suggestion holds that it is the wrongness of the act threatened
that makes the use of such a threat a wrongful act itself. Mitchell
Berman has argued that when a coercer threatens to do something, the
rightness or wrongness of the use of such a threat to coerce depends on
whether it would be rightful or wrongful for that agent to carry
through with that threat (Berman 2002). Berman's account of
wrongful coercion thus apparently relies on a principle of inference
that holds that if it is wrong to do A, then it is wrong to
threaten to do A, and vice versa. While this
principle would seem to get support from a lot of particular cases,
it's not clear that it holds in all cases. At least sometimes it
appears appropriate to threaten to do something which would be wrong to
carry out (nuclear deterrence is sometimes thought to be like this; see
Section 4.1 below). And sometimes it may be wrongful to threaten what
it would be right to carry out (blackmail and extortion are sometimes
thought to include such cases). In general, making a
conditional threat allows for considerable ethical complexity
because a threat can amount to nothing more than a bit of
communication, yet in some circumstances such communication is
tantamount to an act of considerable violence, with similar
consequences. In fact, making a conditional threat is often a more
troublesome and ethically problematic act than making a plain,
unconditional
 threat.[20]
 Unfortunately, the ethical complexities
involved in the making of conditional threats have been little explored
to date by those more centrally interested in
 coercion.[21]
 (For criticism of and an alternative to Berman's approach, see Anderson 2011.)
A second suggestion holds that there's something special about
the coercer's intention vis-à-vis the coercee that makes
coercion frequently problematic. Grant Lamond suggests that the
wrongness of wrongful coercion derives from the fact that it involves a
“proposal deliberately to impose a disadvantage on another”
(Lamond 2000, 49). “The distinctive wrong involved in
[coercive conditional] threats is to propose to take an action
because it is unwelcome to the recipient, i.e., because he
does not want it done” (Lamond 1996, 228). It is thus the
coercer's intention to harm or disadvantage the coercee (or to
propose to do so) that creates coercion's special burden of
justification (though Lamond does not suppose such justifications are
particularly difficult to find). But it isn't clear either that
when one proposes to harm another that one thereby intends to
bring about any harm (one could be
 bluffing).[22]
 More importantly, it's
also unclear that all intentions to impose disadvantages are even
prima facie in need of justification. Unless we accept that
all activities are prima facie unjustified absent specific
justifications, it requires an argument to show that disadvantaging
another person is itself something that always must clear a hurdle to
count as justified. Certainly some kinds of disadvantage require
special justification, but some may not. One might, for instance,
intend to disadvantage one's social rival by arranging to have
him seated between two dreary bores at a dinner party. While perhaps
not nice, it seems to require no special moral justification for this
action (or the threat of this action) to be ethically permissible. We
might say that so long as one respects the rights of others (a set as
rich as one likes), one needs no special justification to act towards
them as one likes. And surely no one has the right that no one else
will ever act for the sake of disadvantaging one. If this is the case,
then the mere intention to disadvantage someone, perhaps conditionally,
does not suffice to violate her rights.
The ethics of coercion, when this is understood to be a morally
neutral means to the coercer's purposes, have been little
explored in the contemporary literature, at least as a distinct
subject. It is of course true that many ways of coercing someone are
dangerous, damaging, and (when used by private parties) unlawful. But
the fact that coercion is a necessary tool, even for just governments
in well-ordered societies, gives some reason to suppose that the ethics
of coercion depend principally on a set of discrete factors in its use,
rather than on its intrinsic qualities. These factors include why and
how it is used, who uses it, against whom, in what circumstances, and
what other means were possible instead. Coercion is no ordinary means.
But it's unclear why we should say that it is intrinsically (even
prima facie or pro tanto) immoral, instead of simply
noting that it is a very potent means, prone to abuse, and something
that deserves ethical scrutiny whenever it is used.
Some choices are said to be made freely, others unfreely, or
involuntarily. More generally, people may be said to live more freely
or less freely, depending on facts such as the range and quality of
choices open to them, the extent to which they are immune to
interference from outside powerful parties, or the extent to which
they can pursue options of deep significance to
them. Autonomy seems to be a special type of freedom which,
insofar as it differs from the above types, is used to refer to an
inner state of orderly self-directedness. Coercion has been thought to
be inimical to at least some of these types of freedom, perhaps all,
and also to have deleterious impacts on the special type we call
autonomy.
If coercion includes uses of direct force against a person's
body, it is clear enough how it can constrain most kinds of freedom
(though not necessarily how it can affect autonomy). But as Aquinas
long ago noted, it's unclear why coercion in the form of threats
should be thought to be in tension with freedom. As Craig Carr puts the
worry, “if at least some instances of coercion involve making
choices, and if being able to make one's own choices is part of
what it means to be free, in what sense (if any) is coercion
antithetical to freedom?” (Carr 1988, 59). Certainly many
instances of coercion make one's choices less appealing than they
would be otherwise, or reduce the quality of the compossible options
one has available. But it does sound somewhat odd to say that one is
less free just because one's choices have become less appealing,
or some options for action have fallen off the menu of choices. Is
there a sense we can give to the claim that one is less free because of
coercion?
Let us consider first a type of freedom associated with the range
and quality of actions open to a person. One gets an intuitive idea of
this sort of freedom in comparing the situation of a prison inmate to
that of someone outside prison. Someone confined to a cell around the
clock has less freedom than does someone who is able to move about as
she wills, interact with others in a variety of ways, and choose from a
broad variety of activities (at least if she has available sufficient
means to pursue them). We might be tempted to say that the
unincarcerated person has more and better choices of
actions. But several difficulties get in the way of making such a
comparison precise. We lack a precise way to enumerate actions, which
seems necessary if we are to count them or compare their number. The
incarcerated and unincarcerated both have indeterminately many
different things they can do, each can do only perform some small range
of those actions at any one time. (It's even likely that the
incarcerated person can do some things the unincarcerated
 person
 can't.[23])
So it is probably more helpful to focus on the greater quality and
desirability of the actions open to the unincarcerated person. Being
confined to a jail cell takes away one's freedom at least in part
because it denies one the necessary means to pursue many other
activities that would ordinarily be desirable. But we also have no good
means for reckoning the value of different actions interpersonally. So
even this comparison is hard to make in a robust, defensible
 fashion.[24]
With some threats, it seems an interpersonal comparison is
unnecessary. When the gunman demands one's money or one's
life, one goes from being able to have both to being unable to have
both. What were compossible goods have now become incompossible, and a
valuable option (e.g., keeping one's money) has become
essentially foreclosed. So freedom is decreased.
Focusing locally on the coercee's situation, such analysis
seems reasonable enough. However, it is possible that some general
threats, made against a group of people, may make the individuals in
the group more rather than less free. Consider the threats that are
part of laws against stealing. The state may threaten to jail those who
steal, which (let us assume) makes it incompossible both to steal and
to retain one's freedom. The possibility of a stable system of
private property, however, would seem to depend on the existence of
such laws which prohibit the wanton expropriation of the goods of
others. If such a regime is in fact valuable, then the threat to
incarcerate thieves may both reduce people's freedom with respect
to one sort of action (by making stealing incompossible with remaining
unincarcerated), while enhancing it with respect to others (by making
it possible to accumulate, use, and trade private property). For
another example, notice that the ability to make enforceable contracts
with others greatly enhances one's abilities to gain through
cooperation, but that it relies precisely on the fact that contracting
parties give up certain seemingly compossible benefits (say, gaining
the goods of another while failing to fulfill one's half of the
bargain).
Craig Carr suggests that we can grapple with the complexities here
by noticing that many social interactions are regulated by conventions
that arise from particular sorts of interpersonal relationships. So,
for instance, a sports team is managed by a coach, who may
“threaten” to pull a player out of the game unless he
sticks to the game plan. But this threat does not, we may agree, lessen
the player's freedom in any interesting sense (Carr 1988,
62). Given the nature of sports, the roles of players and coaches, and
the necessity of organization in making the team and sport possible,
Carr suggests that when such threats are licensed by the appropriate
conventions, then there is no reason to suppose that they impinge on
freedom. It may be difficult in many cases to decide just what
conventions are appropriate and controlling in a situation, but it
seems reasonable to suppose that something like Carr's analysis
is helpful in understanding the relationship between threats and
freedom in conventional contexts.
There's a different way of thinking about freedom that is
political in nature. This is the way of thinking that some (e.g.,
Pettit 1996) have associated with civic republicanism, in which
freedom amounts to being undominated by another agent. One is dominated
by another if it is continually possible for another party to step in
and impose his will on one's choices (even if the dominant party
rarely finds it useful to do so). Freedom from domination differs from
the previous sort in that one who is subject to the domination of
another may in fact have a wide variety of valuable choices open to
her. The sense in which she is unfree is that her choices must always
be made with an eye towards retaining the favor of those in a position
to interfere with her choices. Conversely, one may be undominated by
anyone else, yet lack (for various reasons) many of the different
valuable options that might be available to some who are highly subject
to the power of others (e.g., adolescent children of wealthy parents,
or prisoners in minimum-security facilities).
Coercion is one method by which a powerful agent can exercise and
maintain his dominance over another. When one has the power needed to
credibly threaten another, one can use that power to impose one's will
on her regarding many choices (Anderson 2010). This power may give one
the ability to dominate another in Pettit's sense, since it can be
used arbitrarily to alter or constrain another's activities, even if
it is in fact used only rarely. If one's threats are sufficiently
credible, and if meeting one's demands is not devastating in itself,
one may be able to leverage one's powers to influence many of the
activities of others, while only rarely being required to expend one's
powers in enforcement. Malignant governments and mafias are frequently
able to maintain control over sizeable populations through threats and
intimidation, though they may only infrequently interfere directly in
the activities of others. If one's powers and wishes are well enough
known through past demonstrations, one may even be able to avoid
making many overt threats while still getting one's way.
This raises a question about whether the use of coercion requires or
implies that the coercer is in a position of dominance over the
coercee. While most would likely accept that one can coerce without
having such dominance, this may be a rarer and more curious scenario
than it at first appears. It is true that virtually anyone can state a
claim that has the form of a threat against another, and it is also
true that many agents can issue credible threats that are nonetheless
bluffs — that is, can threaten without possessing the power that
is advertised. Nonetheless, the possibility and usefulness of issuing
threats depends in general on the likelihood that such threats can be
executed successfully, without the coercer suffering a cost comparable
to that of the coercee. Also, it would seem that for coercion to be
possible, one must be in a position to do more than trivial damage to
the coercee's interests; otherwise, one might be said to use
coercion when one threatens, e.g., to quit one's minimum-wage
fast-food job if one's employer doesn't raise one's
wage to match what one could make at the restaurant across the street.
Moreover, coercers frequently need to craft and adapt their threats to
the specific vulnerabilities of the coercee. Gideon Yaffe has nicely
expressed this aspect of the relationship between the coercer's
power and their ability to affect one's freedom:
If a coercer lacks the power needed to do these things, it may be
irrational for the coercer to execute his threat if defied, and hence
frequently irrational for the coercee to accede to it. So unless the
coercer or coercee is irrational (and the other perceives him as such),
or unless one is deceived about the other's relative power (or
rationality), coercion requires some significant differential in power
between coercer and coercee for it, in general, to be a rational,
useful technique. So even if a just state does not dominate its
citizens in Pettit's sense of exercising its power over them
arbitrarily, it still must be capable of such dominance if it is to be
able to keep order against those who would otherwise defy its
commands.
As the historical section of this entry suggests, the relationship
between states, law, and coercion has been a subject of vast discussion
throughout Western philosophical history. Many of the most pressing
issues belong to a discussion of states and law rather than to a
discussion of
 coercion.[25]
 However, some theorists have attempted to
draw some fairly revisionist lessons about politics and law from their
theoretical discussions of coercion. This work is worth consideration
here, since their conclusions may impact how we understand the nature
of coercion, and its place in law and politics.
As noted above, there are a number of accounts of coercion that insist
that coercion is a violation of right, or otherwise normatively
defective, of which Alan Wertheimer's Coercion is the most
prominent. But if coercion is necessarily immoral action, then it is
hard to explain how an act of coercion could count as
justified.[26]
Among other implications, this view is in apparent contradiction with
the traditional approach to coercion which treats states as
paradigmatically, even necessarily users of coercion. As William
Edmundson has pointed out (and as Nozick 1969, had noticed), if the
state is justified in punishing wrongdoers, then when it threatens to
do so, it does not threaten to make them worse off than they ought to
be (Edmundson 1995 and 1998, chs. 4–6). Hence on an approach to
coercion that insists it is immoral activity, the state's use of
police powers to enforce the law is not coercive.
Could this be right? It hinges, first, on whether one accepts a
moralized analysis of coercion; if one can give a non-moralized account
of coercion, then the grounds for the claim are much more tenuous. It
would also seem to depend on whether the moral evaluation of the
coercer's action is an “all things considered”
judgment, or merely a pro tanto one. While the
government's use of coercion may be all-things-considered morally
benign, the threat of jailing someone may count as pro tanto
wrong in a way that, say, paying a reward is not. If so, then even on a
moralized account we may suppose that government coercion requires
special justification before it can be accepted. Wertheimer, Haksar,
Lamond, and Oberdiek, for instance, seem to find no problem accepting
that there is “justified coercion” — that is, acts
which are coercive on a moralized theory of coercion (baseline or
otherwise), yet which are ultimately justified by other considerations
(Oberdiek 1976; Haksar 1976; Wertheimer 1987; and Lamond 2000 and
2001). Edmundson, however, argues that such a view is unmotivated and
not required by a moralized theory, properly understood. If he is
right, then the uses of what are normally thought of as coercive
techniques do not call for special scrutiny if they are constrained to
the support of just, procedurally sound law.
Edmundson's criticism of the canonical view of the state as
coercive reveals a deeper root to some disagreements over coercion. In
effect, Edmundson provides a reason to question how special or
important coercion really is. Coercion may make some actions necessary,
but human beings in any natural world will be constrained by
necessities of many sorts: the physical limits of our bodies in our
environments, and our needs for things such as nourishment, shelter,
protection, and even perhaps community, recognition, and love. To be
coerced adds to or alters in some ways what it is necessary for one to
do. But being subject to a coercive set of laws might also provide one
greater opportunities or freedom from necessity, as arguably the
criminal law does, at least if well-drafted and
 enforced.[27]
 If just laws
provide us protection from wrong-doers while leaving us at liberty to
take any morally justifiable act (assuming here that the criminal law
prohibits only unjust acts), then the law's threatened use of
force against lawbreakers may not merit any special scrutiny. We might
instead regard it as a shifting, regularization, and rationalization of
the necessities to which human beings are anyways subject. Edmundson
and those he disputes with can all agree that coercion used for illicit
ends is a matter of moral significance and a cause for special scrutiny
and opposition. What Edmundson shows is that moralized approaches to
coercion make it hard to see why the technique itself and the agents
who can use it are especially worthy of our attention.
One might thus object to moralized accounts on the grounds that we
have reason to track and scrutinize uses of this technique whether
performed well or badly, justly or unjustly. This is because when an
agent has the power to coerce willy nilly, as the state does, it is up
to such an agent to decide what purposes it will use its powers for.
Natural necessities are typically predictable, stable requirements on
our actions, persisting without regard to us as individuals. By
contrast, powerful agents are not necessarily predictable, stable, or
indifferent to us as individuals. Rather, they can target and direct
their powers to suit their purposes. Of course we hope that they are
constrained by justice, but even mostly just governments are likely to
enact bad laws or have rogue elements within them. Hence there is value
in having a concept to pick out the sort of technique used in law
enforcement, forced migrations, mafia protection rackets, back-alley
robbery, and the training of some recalcitrant children, since one and
the same state might use the same tools and techniques to engage any or
all of these sorts of activities, with only the whim of the leader or
parliament to decide which it shall be.
A slightly less radical, though still revisionist claim about the
coerciveness of law, holds that the coerciveness of law resides in its
claim to a right to use (or authorize the use of) enforcement power.
Drawing a distinction between the state and its apparatuses on the one
hand, and the law on the other, Grant Lamond argues that the
coerciveness of law should not be thought to depend on the fact that
the state has such things as police departments and prisons as its
enforcement mechanisms. Rather, he argues that the coerciveness of law
resides in its claim to a “right to authorize the
enforcement of [its subjects duties, responsibilities,
etc.]… It is not that legal duties are sanction-based, nor that
every law must ultimately be linked to coercive measures, but that law
claims the right to back up its directives with force”
(Lamond 2001, 55). He later clarifies this view to point out that
the law claims indeterminate authority to enforce its
dictates.
Lamond's aim in making this distinction is to clarify what he
sees to be several possible confusions. First, he argues that the
law's coerciveness need not depend directly on the state's
own enforcement apparatus; the state might use vigilantes, private
contractors, or other private means for this
 function.[28]
 Moreover, he aims to limit
law's responsibility for coercive acts to just those that it in
fact authorizes: extra-legal uses of coercion by the state should not
be chalked up to law's coerciveness. He also argues that some of
the coercive enforcements that law uses are not themselves uses of
force; instead, one might confiscate bank accounts or take away rights
in non-tangible property (such as intellectual property protections) as
means to pressure subjects to comply with the law. Lamond holds that if
such interventions exert sufficient pressure on the will of those
considering a particular option, such that they change course, then
they may be counted as coercive, even if they do not involve the threat
or imposition of sanctions conditioned on the activities of the people
governed (Lamond 2000, 56–57). Lastly, like Edmundson, he aims to
downplay the supposed role that coercion plays in our appreciation of
the law, holding that many of law's functions do not depend
specifically on its function of authorizing (or not authorizing)
enforcements on the subjects. “It is easy to exaggerate the role
of coercion in maintaining the efficacy of the legal system, and to
overestimate its capacity to sustain efficacy” (Lamond 2001,
57).
Lamond's claim about law's coerciveness stems from a
number of considerations, but undoubtedly one is his understanding of
the nature of coercion itself, which was discussed in Section 2.5
above. Whether or not his account of coercion is tenable, what Lamond
says about why law is coercive generates independent difficulties. Even
if the law claims to authorize the enforcement of its subjects'
duties, it is not clear why the mere claiming of such
authorization would suffice to make the claiming coercive. The laws of
a state may well provide for and instruct agencies or mechanisms to
serve as its enforcers (e.g., police, vigilantes, or robots); but if
these enforcers quit, or are bought/killed/shut off, the coerciveness
of the law will quickly evaporate. If, for instance, the army decides
to side with the protestors rather than the government, the law loses
its force in a hurry, no matter how legitimate. Moreover, were a
private association or other institution to “lay claim” to
use such indeterminately bounded enforcement powers, what would
determine whether in fact they ended up being coercive is whether
in fact they managed to engage in enforcement activities through
agencies or mechanisms similar to those that states regularly use, or
so Lucas points out. (Lucas 1966, 61–2) A church, for instance,
might even leverage its threats with claims about the final disposition
of one's mortal soul. But this sort of claim to reward and punish
does not give the church the ability to coerce, at least as this
concept is usually understood in political contexts.
Some have argued directly that law does not require coercive backing
in order to count as law (e.g., Raz 1975), holding that what is
instead important is that law is made by the appropriate authority
(see also Oberdiek 1976).  Responding to Joseph Raz, Edmundson, and
Lamonde, inter alia, Ekow Yankah defends the traditional view
connecting law and coercion, contending that “Legal norms must
be ultimately enforceable by coercion to be included in the core
concept of the law” (Yankah 2008, 1198). After developing
his own non-moralized conception of coercion, Yankah argues that law
requires not only authority but the ability to compel obedience.
There are, after all, many different possible normative systems, for
example religious ones, that claim to have moral authority to command
obedience, but law is distinctive among them because it has the
possibility to compel compliance with the edicts of justified
authorities.  Countering Raz's view that coercion might be merely
instrumentally needed, Yankah asserts, “the inability of any
structure to even theoretically compel [a lawbreaker] to obey would
cast serious doubt on the system's claim to be the law” (Yankah,
2008, 1236).
If in fact law must be backed by coercion to be law, and if, as
follows from this, states will necessarily and legitimately use
coercion against their citizens, then this may place a particular
justificatory burden on the state and its citizens. Christopher
J. Eberle sees that “justificatory liberalism” (which he
associates with the work of liberals such as Rawls, Charles Larmore,
Robert Audi, and Gerald Gaus) rightly puts the justification of
coercion as its central mission. “The claim that respect
requires public justification provides a basis for the central
component of the justificatory liberal's ethic of citizenship: the
norm of respect imposes an obligation on each citizen to discipline
herself in such a way that she resolutely refrains from supporting any
coercive law for which she cannot provide the requisite public
justification” (Eberle 2002, 12, emphasis omitted; see also
Gaus 2010). But along with this obligation, the necessity of state
coercion is argued to put citizens of a single state in a kind of
relationship to one another that differs from their relationship to
those outside their state. Michael Blake argues along these lines to
conclude that a duty to promote economic equality as a matter of
justice “is a plausible interpretation of liberal principles
only when those principles are applied to individuals who share
liability to the coercive network of state governance” (Blake,
2002, 258).
Thomas Nagel reasons likewise to a similar conclusion, and extends it
to justify the exclusion of immigrants from a
state. “Immigration policies are simply enforced against the
nationals of other states; the laws are not imposed in their name, nor
are they asked to accept and uphold those laws. Since no acceptance is
demanded of them, no justification is required that explains why they
should accept such discriminatory policies, or why their interests
have been given equal consideration. It is sufficient justification to
claim that the policies do not violate their prepolitical human
rights” (Nagel 2005, 129–30). Against this view, the use of
coercion to exclude non-citizens from a state has been argued to
violate basic rights (Huemer 2010) and principles of democratic
theory (Abizadeh 2008; for objections and replies, see Miller 2009
and 2010; and Abizadeh 2010). As the next section will further
illustrate, the coercion beyond a state's borders is a contentious
issue.
Theories of coercion can have significant implications in a number
of different particular ranges of application, falling roughly into two
categories: domestic and international. These categories may also be
regarded as the sub-legal and super-legal uses of coercion. This
section gives a brief discussion of the questions in these areas, and
what these areas add to thought about coercion.
Questions of coercion arise in numerous different judicial contexts,
including judgments of responsibility and/or culpability for torts and
crimes. We may, for instance, want to know whether an illegal action
has been performed voluntarily, or whether one has been coerced by
another party into performing it. Many uses of coercion are also
criminal, and so judgments about coercion may come into deciding
whether, for instance, a rape, extortion, or blackmailing has occurred.
Contracts, marriages, waivers of responsibility, and evaluations of
varying sorts are considered void if made because of coercion.
Confessions, “guilty” pleas, and testimony are to be
discounted if given under coercion.
Outside of specifically judicial contexts, questions about coercion
may arise, either with respect to shaping public policy, or for the
sake of measuring social progress. For instance, we may want to know
whether and under what circumstances workers are coerced into working,
either in particular jobs, or in general. It may also be of interest to
know whether sexual harassment in workplaces or schools is coercive,
for purposes of justifying a legal response to it. Those who design
medical and other human-subject-based experiments need to be able to
determine whether their subjects participate freely or under coercion.
More generally, market economic transactions are thought to add to
overall welfare (economic efficiency), but only if they are performed
freely, which includes their not being coerced. The possibility of
relying on ballots, survey data and other communications will also
depend on whether such responses are given free from coercion.
These questions are raised almost exclusively in contexts where
there is already in place a functioning legal authority possessing
coercive enforcement powers. The existence of such an ordering force
has a significant effect on the ability of other agents in society to
use and to detect specific uses of coercion, as well as other,
non-coercive means of getting people to do things. When a generalized
mechanism for ensuring compliance with law is in place, other entities
− legal, corporate, and informal − can establish rules
governing the use of various sanctions, disabilities, and rewards, and
expect these to have certain effects. (For helpful discussion here, see
Lucas 1966, 61.) For instance, merchants and customers engage in
commerce, exchanging goods, because they are prevented from simply
taking those goods by force, fraud, theft, etc. Sometimes the
interactions between agents in a sub-legal context will overstep the
boundaries between the voluntary and coercive, and thus render the
actions of one party non-voluntary. But all such judgments here are
made within a background context of laws that govern quite generally
how persons may behave towards one another. And the coercive
enforcement of those laws makes possible meaningful distinctions
between coerced and uncoerced activity in all of the other parts of
social life governed by the rule of law.
Compared to the domestic context, the international context is
usually a much less clearly or justly ordered place. Although it is
possible to identify and analyze uses of coercion here, there are
difficulties in some of the main sorts of cases that both enrich and
complicate thought about coercion. Several factors contribute to these
difficulties, including the typically much greater power of the agents
involved; the much weaker epistemic position they typically occupy
vis-à-vis the motives, abilities, and intentions of other
actors; the complexity and (sometimes) irrationality of the actors
involved; and the lack of any central coercive authority to provide the
basis for predictable, just, and enforceable rules for the conduct of
such large, powerful agents. Given these difficulties, it can be hard
to say much that is useful about international coercion. However a few
specific topics are worth discussing briefly to show the issues that
arise here.
Although less prominent as a topic now than it was before the
collapse of the Soviet Union, a large and useful philosophical
literature has developed around the questions of the justice and
efficacy of various strategies for avoiding both nuclear war as well as
subjection to nuclear blackmail/extortion. The questions here are
tremendously difficult to address sensibly, in part because the stakes
of the policies and decisions at issue are so high and novel that they
are almost beyond comprehension. Although nuclear threats appear
superficially to be similar in structure to ordinary coercive threats,
several facts set them apart. For one thing, the morality and
rationality of such threats are significantly more complicated than in
most ordinary cases of coercion. As Gregory Kavka puts it,
there's a “paradox of deterrence” which holds that it
is potentially morally proper to threaten to use MCWs even though it is
arguably immoral to actually use them for any reason (including in
executing that threat) (Kavka 1978). This violates a plausible
principle that holds that it is wrongful to intend to do what it would
be wrongful to do (the “wrongful intentions principle”).
Moreover, even though it may be morally proper to threaten such use,
Kavka argues that no rational, morally motivated person could form the
proper intention needed to make a credible threat of such use.
Subsequent writers have argued over whether in fact these paradoxes
hold as Kavka suggests. (See, e.g., Dworkin 1985; Wasserstrom 1985;
Kroon 1996.) The moral issues in deterring nuclear war and the use of
MCWs more generally are of central importance, and depend little if at
all on our understanding the nature or ethics of coercion, per
se (Hardin 1986). But, looking in the other direction, issues
around deterrent threats involving MCWs do tell us some things about
the nature of coercion.
There is a general and acknowledged difficulty in explaining how
coercion by threat is possible: if the coercee defies the demand backed
by the threat, it is typically irrational, because futile, for the
coercer to go ahead and execute his threat. In some cases, this problem
is solved by the fact that the coercer gains reputational benefits by
executing the threat, or the coercer enjoys a sufficient advantage in
power that executing the threat may be a relatively trivial matter for
him. But coercion is a different and much more complicated matter when
executing a threat is much more costly to the coercer than is the mere
making of the threat. The threat of massive retaliation in response to
a nuclear attack is a paradigmatic example of a kind of threat that
would be irrational to execute after the associated demand is defied
— if, for instance, one has already been the victim of
one's opponent's first-strike. For this reason, the ability
to make such a threat credibly requires more than a simple intention
and ability to execute the threat, but rather a whole system that
effectively removes decision from the process (by, say, building
redundancy and automation into it). So, it would appear that nuclear
deterrence cannot be an ordinary species of coercion, since the coercer
cannot remain at liberty with respect to whether or not it will execute
the threat. (For the difference this makes, see DeRose 1992.)
Nuclear deterrence thus pushes to the forefront consideration of two
facts that recent philosophy of coercion tends to obscure: one, the
deep connection between the credibility of one's threats and the
demonstrable ability and willingness to execute them; and two, the
dynamic or strategic nature of coercive interactions. If execution of a
threat would be irrational, then the coercer must use some technique to
precommit to its execution, or else demonstrate irrationality (or
something like it) so as to make the threat credible (see Schelling
1956). The dynamic aspect of coercion comes out in the fact that the
rationality and morality of one actor's choices depends on what
the other actor (would) choose to do in response to them; and
consequently the rationality/morality of the latter actor's
choices may depend on that of the former actor's choices. While
it is difficult to see through to a satisfactory account of such
matters, it is important to keep these difficulties in mind in
theorizing about how coercion works.
Terrorism is often associated with coercion, but of the reasons to
doubt the justifiability of terrorism, its coerciveness is perhaps one
of the lesser ones. Much more important is the fact that terrorism
typically, though not always, targets innocents and non-combatants. So
most philosophical effort on terrorism has gone towards arguing about
whether such targeting of innocents is ever morally acceptable, and if
so, under what conditions.
If thinking about the coerciveness of terrorism helps at all, it is
perhaps by bringing out some ways in which terrorism differs from more
standard forms of coercion, and why these differences may make it more
problematic, rather than less. (For discussion of these matters, see
Waldron 2004). Terrorism aims at affecting the psychological workings
of one or more people (often, a large part of society), though not
necessarily in the way that coercion by threat does. There are
differences of the aim, means, and powers involved. The aim of
terrorism is often less specific than the aim of coercion. While those
who use terror tactics may have a specific policy change or end result
in mind, sometimes the end is, at least initially, simply to create
chaos, fear, and panic on the part of those terrorized. It may also be
to provoke a retaliatory response, or to enact revenge on or to make a
statement about the worth of one's enemy. When terrorism is used
instrumentally, with a change in action desired, terror tactics often
differ from ordinary coercion in that those targeted by the harms or
violence are typically distinct from those whose action the terror user
hopes ultimately to influence. Terrorism works by generating a sort of
psychological response among those who are targets or potential targets
of the attacks, typically with the aim of putting pressure on their
political leaders or representatives to quell the chaos or anxiety of
the affected public. As for the power involved, terrorism might be a
tactic of an agent who possesses overwhelming power, but frequently
those who engage in terror tactics lack the sort of power that is
needed to genuinely overpower the resistance of their target (in
contrast to the way that police, say, can overpower the resistance of
virtually any criminals they manage to arrest). If not for such
weakness, they could simply impose their will on their targets instead
of using terrorism.
In fact, the comparative weakness of some who use terror means that
they frequently need to engage in repeated acts of violence in order to
establish their credibility with respect to any subsequent demands and
threats they might make. It is unlikely that a group will be able to
gain acquiescence to its demands by threatening to use terror tactics
if it has not already engaged in such activity. But while the use of
terror often betrays a relative weakness, those who use it also often
rely on stealth, geographic dispersion, and choices of soft targets,
making their attacks both very difficult to prevent (at least in ways
that are consistent with significant openness in one's own
society), as well as very difficult to retaliate against.
Although relations between those with unequal economic power are
often said to be coercive, this claim is more accurate in some cases
than in others. The claim may be accurate in referring to many
interactions between agents from the richer, developed world and agents
from the poorer, less developed world. But in addition to the fact of
disparities in wealth, even if they are alterable, something further is
required to show that these relations are indeed coercive. After all,
many interactions between rich and poor have at least the veneer of
being freely agreed upon economic exchanges. Sometimes, the
coerciveness of these relationships resides not so much in the economic
exchanges themselves as in the way these exchanges are premised on and
supported by more traditional forms of coercion.
Thomas Pogge's work can be mined for suggestions as to how we
might recognize coercion in the relations between richer and poorer
parts of the world. (See Pogge 2002, esp. chs. 4 and 8.) Three general
suggestions emerge. First, Pogge holds that the historical uses of
power, both economic and military, by developed nations, have given
rise to a global institutional framework which imposes and enables the
unjust exploitation of poorer peoples by the world's more
powerful actors. Here, we can look to paradigmatic types of coercion,
such as war and invasion, coupled with economic leverage created by
control over institutions such as the World Bank and International
Monetary Fund, to see how this framework has been created and
maintained. Colonialism and military interventionism, past and present,
have continuing impacts on which countries have the power to dictate
terms of trade and international relations to others. This
“institutional order,” which is “implicated in the
reproduction of radical inequality,” owes its existence to
“the developed countries [who], thanks to their vastly superior
military and economic strength, control these rules and therefore share
responsibility for their foreseeable effects” (Pogge 2002,
199–200).
A second way coercion is active in creating global poverty and
inequality is in the repressive means used by some autocrats to
maintain power over their own poor subjects in underdeveloped
countries. These autocrats benefit from the recognition of wealthier
countries as the arbiters of what happens to the natural resources in
the territories they govern. By suppressing the inhabitants of these
territories and keeping them pliant, rulers are able to trade and sign
agreements on their behalf with the countries and corporations of the
rich nations. These transactions frequently denude poorer countries of
valuable resources and dispossess people of their land and rights,
while the autocrats rake in profits and commissions from these
exchanges. They can then use this wealth to purchase the weapons and
armies needed to maintain power. Richer countries and institutions play
a crucial role in this process by both recognizing these rulers as
legitimate bargaining authorities on behalf of their peoples, and also
by seeking to enforce the bargains that these autocrats strike against
subsequent governments and against the people themselves. As Pogge
points out, when a multinational corporation buys the rights to
something in one of these autocratically governed countries, “the
purchaser acquires not merely possession, but all the rights and
liberties of ownership which are … protected and enforced by all
other states' courts and police forces” (Pogge 2002,
113).
A third respect in which global poverty may be seen as coercive is
by comparing the actual conditions of the world's poorest
residents to a minimal moral baseline needed to make acceptable any
institution of coercively enforced property rights. According to this
moral baseline, any institution is coercive if it leaves some destitute
because of their uncompensated exclusion from the world's natural
resources. This follows, as Locke seems to suggest, from the fact that
no one would rationally and voluntarily agree to a bargain such as that
(Pogge 2002, 202). “[T]he affluent states are therefore
violating a negative duty of justice when they, in collaboration with
the ruling elites of the poor countries, coercively exclude the poor
from a proportional resource share” (Pogge 2002, 203).
The interest in linking the persistence of global poverty to
coercion is suggested in the preceding quotation. Pogge argues that
such poverty is not merely a natural fact, but is something that the
wealthier parties in the world, who reap rewards from their domination
of the poorer parts of the world, have a negative duty to redress. That
is, by showing that these arrangements are not just unfair but are
unfairly and coercively imposed by one party against another, Pogge
believes that a stronger case can be made for the richer countries and
institutions to alter the institutional structure of global economic
relations. These grounds even justify paying compensation to the worst
off for their involuntary exclusion from the natural resources that
underlie the prosperity of the rest of the world.