Colonialism is not a modern phenomenon. World history is full of
examples of one society gradually expanding by incorporating adjacent
territory and settling its people on newly conquered territory. The
ancient Greeks set up colonies as did the Romans, the Moors, and the
Ottomans, to name just a few of the most famous examples. Colonialism,
then, is not restricted to a specific time or place. Nevertheless, in
the sixteenth century, colonialism changed decisively because of
technological developments in navigation that began to connect more
remote parts of the world. Fast sailing ships made it possible to
reach distant ports and to sustain close ties between the center and
colonies. Thus, the modern European colonial project emerged when it
became possible to move large numbers of people across the ocean and
to maintain political sovereignty in spite of geographical dispersion.
This entry uses the term colonialism to describe the process of
European settlement and political control over the rest of the world,
including the Americas, Australia, and parts of Africa and Asia.
The difficulty of defining colonialism stems from the fact that the
term is often used as a synonym for imperialism. Both colonialism and
imperialism were forms of conquest that were expected to benefit
Europe economically and strategically. The term colonialism is
frequently used to describe the settlement of North America,
Australia, New Zealand, Algeria, and Brazil, places that were
controlled by a large population of permanent European residents. The
term imperialism often describes cases in which a foreign government
administers a territory without significant settlement; typical
examples include the scramble for Africa in the late nineteenth
century and the American domination of the Philippines and Puerto
Rico. The distinction between the two, however, is not entirely
consistent in the literature. Some scholars distinguish between
colonies for settlement and colonies for economic exploitation. Others
use the term colonialism to describe dependencies that are directly
governed by a foreign nation and contrast this with imperialism, which
involves indirect forms of domination.
The confusion about the meaning of the term imperialism reflects the
way that the concept has changed over time. Although the English word
imperialism was not commonly used before the nineteenth century,
Elizabethans already described the United Kingdom as “the
British Empire.” As Britain began to acquire overseas
dependencies, the concept of empire was employed more frequently.
Imperialism was understood as a system of military domination and
sovereignty over territories. The day to day work of government might
be exercised indirectly through local assemblies or indigenous rulers
who paid tribute, but sovereignty rested with the British. The shift
away from this traditional understanding of empire was influenced by
the Leninist analysis of imperialism as a system oriented towards
economic exploitation. According to Lenin, imperialism was the
necessary and inevitable result of the logic of accumulation in late
capitalism. Thus, for Lenin and subsequent Marxists, imperialism
described a historical stage of capitalism rather than a
trans-historical practice of political and military domination. The
lasting impact of the Marxist approach is apparent in contemporary
debates about American imperialism, a term which usually means
American economic hegemony, regardless of whether such power is
exercised directly or indirectly (Young 2001).
Given the difficulty of consistently distinguishing between the two
terms, this entry will use colonialism as a broad concept that refers
to the project of European political domination from the sixteenth to
the twentieth centuries that ended with the national liberation
movements of the 1960s. Post-colonialism will be used to describe the
political and theoretical struggles of societies that experienced the
transition from political dependence to sovereignty. This entry will
use imperialism as a broad term that refers to economic, military,
political domination that is achieved without significant permanent
European settlement.
The Spanish conquest of the Americas sparked a theological, political,
and ethical debate about the use of military force to acquire control
over foreign lands. This debate took place within the framework of a
religious discourse that legitimized military conquest as a way to
facilitate the conversion and salvation of indigenous peoples. The
idea of a “civilizing mission” was by no means the
invention of the British in the nineteenth century. The Spanish
conquistadores and colonists explicitly justified their activities in
the Americas in terms of a religious mission to bring Christianity to
the native peoples. The Crusades provided the initial impetus for
developing a legal doctrine that rationalized the conquest and
possession of infidel lands. Whereas the Crusades were initially
framed as defensive wars to reclaim Christian lands that had been
conquered by non-Christians, the resulting theoretical innovations
played an important role in subsequent attempts to justify the
conquest of the Americas. The core claim was that the “Petrine
mandate” to care for the souls of Christ’s human flock
required Papal jurisdiction over temporal as well as spiritual
matters, and this control extended to non-believers as well as
believers.
The conversion of the native peoples, however, did not provide an
unproblematic justification for the project of overseas conquest. The
Spanish conquest of the Americas was taking place during a period of
reform when humanist scholars within the Church were increasingly
influenced by the natural law theories of theologians such as St.
Thomas Aquinas. According to Pope Innocent IV, war could not be waged
against infidels and they could not be deprived of their property
simply because of their non-belief. Under the influence of Thomism,
Innocent IV concluded that force was legitimate only in cases where
infidels violated natural law. Nonbelievers had legitimate dominion
over themselves and their property, but this dominion was abrogated if
they proved incapable of governing themselves according to principles
that every reasonable person would recognize. The Spanish quickly
concluded that the habits of the native Americans, from nakedness to
unwillingness to labor to alleged cannibalism, clearly demonstrated
their inability to recognize natural law. This account of native
customs was used to legitimize the enslavement of the Indians, which
the Spanish colonists insisted was the only way to teach them
civilization and introduce them to Christianity.
Some of the Spanish missionaries sent to the New World, however,
noticed that the brutal exploitation of slave labor was widespread
while any serious commitment to religious instruction was absent.
Members of the Dominican order in particular noted the hypocrisy of
enslaving the Indians because of their alleged barbarity while
practicing a form of conquest, warfare, and slavery that reduced the
indigenous population of Hispaniola from 250,000 to 15,000 in two
decades of Spanish rule. Given the genocidal result of Spanish
“civilization,” they began to question the idea of a
civilizing mission. Bartolomé de Las Casas and Franciscus de
Victoria were two of the most influential critics of Spanish colonial
practice. Victoria gave a series of lectures on Indian rights that
applied Thomism to the practice of Spanish rule. He argued that all
human beings share the capacity for rationality and have natural
rights that stem from this capacity. From this premise, he deduced
that the Papal decision to grant Spain title to the Americas was
illegitimate. Unlike the position of Pope Innocent IV, Victoria argued
that neither the Pope nor the Spaniards could subjugate the Indians in
order to punish violations of natural law, such as fornication or
adultery. He noted that the Pope had no right to make war on
Christians and take their property simply because they were
“fornicators or thieves.” If this were the case, then no
European king’s dominion would ever be safe. Furthermore,
according to Victoria, the pope and Christian rulers acting on his
mandate had even less right to enforce laws against unbelievers,
because they were outside of the Christian community, which was the
domain of Papal authority (Williams 1990).
Despite this strongly worded critique of the dominant modes of
justifying Spanish conquest, Victoria concluded that the use of force
in the New World was legitimate when Indian communities violated the
Law of Nations, a set of principles derivable from reason and
therefore universally binding. At first it might sound contradictory
that the Indians’ supposed violation of the natural law did not
justify conquest but their violation of the Law of Nations, itself
derived from natural law, did. Victoria emphasizes that the Law of
Nations is binding because “there exists clearly enough a
consensus of the greater part of the whole world” (391) and
because the principles benefit “the common good of all.”
This distinction seems to rely on the assumption that other principles
usually associated with natural law (such as the prohibitions on
adultery and idolatry) only affect those who consent to the practices,
whereas violations of the Law of Nations (e.g. prohibitions on
peaceful travel and trade) have consequences for those who do not
consent. Ultimately, Victoria’s understanding of the Law of
Nations led him to defend the practice of Spanish colonialism, even
though he emphasized that warfare should be limited to the measures
required to attain the legitimate objectives of peaceful trade and
missionary work. Within Victoria’s critique of the legality and
morality of Spanish colonialism was a rationalization for conquest,
albeit a restrictive one.
The legitimacy of colonialism was also a topic of debate among French,
German, and British philosophers in the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries. Enlightenment thinkers such as Kant, Smith and Diderot were
critical of the barbarity of colonialism and challenged the idea that
Europeans had the obligation to “civilize” the rest of the
world. At first it might seem relatively obvious that Enlightenment
thinkers would develop a critique of colonialism. The system of
colonial domination, which involved some combination of slavery,
quasi-feudal forced labor, or expropriation of property, is
antithetical to the basic Enlightenment principle that each individual
is capable of reason and self-government. The rise of anti-colonial
political theory, however, required more than a universalistic ethic
that recognized the shared humanity of all people. As suggested above,
the universalism of Thomism proved to be a relatively weak basis for
criticizing colonialism. Given the tension between the abstract
universalism of natural law and the actual cultural practices of
indigenous peoples, it was easy to interpret native difference as
evidence of the violation of natural law. This in turn became a
justification for exploitation.
Diderot was one of the most forceful critics of European colonization.
In his contributions to Raynal’s Histoire des deux
Indes, he challenges the view that indigenous people benefit from
European civilization and argues that the European colonists are the
uncivilized ones. He claims that culture (“national
character”) helps to inculcate morality and reinforces norms of
respect, but these norms tend to dissipate when the individual is far
from his country of origin. According to Diderot, colonial empires
frequently become the sites of extreme brutality because the colonists
are far away from legal institutions and informal sanctions and this
weakens the habits of restraint, exposing natural man’s full
instinct for violence (Muthu 2003).
Diderot also challenges the dominant justifications for European
colonialism. Although he grants that it is legitimate to colonize an
area that is not actually inhabited, he insists that foreign traders
and explorers have no right of access to fully inhabited lands. This
is important because the right to commerce (understood to encompass
not only trade but also missionary work and exploration) was used as a
justification for colonization by Spanish thinkers in the sixteenth
and seventeenth century. Emblematic of this approach was
Victoria’s conclusion that an indigenous people could not
exclude peaceful traders and missionaries without violating the Law of
Nations. If the native peoples resisted these incursions, the Spanish
could legitimately wage war and conquer their territory. Diderot
specifically challenges this view, noting that the European traders
had proven themselves “dangerous as guests.” (Muthu 2003:
75)
Before enlightenment thinkers could articulate a compelling critique
of colonialism, they had to recognize the importance of culture and
the possibility of cultural pluralism. The claim that all individuals
are equally worthy of dignity and respect was a necessary but not
sufficient basis for anti-imperialist thought. They also had to
recognize that the tendency to develop diverse institutions,
narratives, and aesthetic practices was an essential human capacity.
The French term moeurs or what today would be called culture
captures the idea that the humanity of human beings is expressed in
the distinctive practices that they adopt as solutions to the
challenges of existence.
The work of enlightenment anti-imperialists such as Diderot and Kant
reflects their struggle with the tension between universalistic
concepts such as human rights and the realities of cultural pluralism.
The paradox of enlightenment anti-imperialism is that human dignity is
understood to be rooted in the universal human capacity for reason.
Yet when people engage in cultural practices that are unfamiliar or
disturbing to the European observer, they appear irrational and thus
undeserving of recognition and respect. Diderot’s solution was
to identify particularity as the universal human trait. In other
words, he emphasized that human beings all share similar desires to
create workable rules of conduct that allow particular ways of life to
flourish without themselves creating harsh injustices and cruelties.
(Muthu 2003: 77) There are infinite varieties of solutions to the
challenges posed by human existence. Societies all need to find a way
to balance individual egoism and sociability and to overcome the
adversities that stem from the physical environment. From this
perspective, culture itself, rather than rationality, is the universal
human capacity.
Unlike many other eighteenth and nineteenth century political
philosophers, Diderot did not assume that non-Western societies were
necessarily primitive (e.g. lacking political and social organization)
nor did he assume that more complex forms of social organization were
necessarily superior. One of the key issues that distinguished critics
from proponents of colonialism and imperialism was their view of the
relationship between culture, history and progress. Many of the
influential philosophers writing in France and England in the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries had assimilated some version of
the developmental approach to history that was associated with the
Scottish Enlightenment. According to the stadial theory of historical
development, all societies naturally moved from hunting, to herding,
to farming, to commerce, a developmental process that simultaneously
tracked a cultural arc from “savagery,” through
“barbarism,” to “civilization.”
“Civilization” was not just a marker of material
improvement, but also a normative judgment about the moral progress of
society. (Kohn and O’Neill 2006)
The language of civilization, savagery, and barbarism is pervasive in
writers as diverse of Edmund Burke, Karl Marx, and John Stuart Mill.
It would therefore be incorrect to conclude that a developmental
theory of history is distinctive of the liberal tradition;
nevertheless, given that figures of the Scottish Enlightenment such as
Ferguson and Smith were among its leading expositors, it is strongly
associated with liberalism. Smith himself opposed imperialism for
economic reasons. He felt that relations of dependence between
metropole and periphery distorted self-regulating market mechanisms
and worried that the cost of military domination would be burdensome
for taxpayers (Pitts 2005). The idea that civilization is the
culmination of a process of historical development, however, proved
useful in justifying imperialism. According to Uday Mehta, liberal
imperialism was the product of the interaction between universalism
and developmental history (1999). A core doctrine of liberalism holds
that all individuals share a capacity for reason and self-government.
The theory of developmental history, however, modifies this
universalism with the notion that these capacities only emerge at a
certain stage of civilization (McCarthy 2009). For example, according
to John Stuart Mill (hereafter Mill), savages do not have the capacity
for self-government because of their excessive love of freedom. Serfs,
slaves, and peasants in barbarous societies, on the other hand, may be
so schooled in obedience that their capacity for rationality is
stifled. Only commercial society produces the material and cultural
conditions that enable individuals to realize their potential for
freedom and self-government. According to this logic, civilized
societies like Great Britain are acting in the interest of
less-developed peoples by governing them. Imperialism, from this
perspective, is not primarily a form of political domination and
economic exploitation but rather a paternalistic practice of
government that exports “civilization” (e.g.
modernization) in order to foster the improvement of native peoples.
Despotic government (and Mill doesn’t hesitate to use this term)
is a means to the end of improvement and ultimately
self-government.
Mill, a life-long employee of the British East India Company,
recognized that despotic government by a foreign people could lead to
injustice and economic exploitation. These abuses, if unchecked, could
undermine the legitimacy and efficacy of the imperial project. In
Considerations on Representative Government (1861), Mill
identifies four reasons why foreign (e.g. European) peoples are not
suited to governing colonies. First, foreign politicians are unlikely
to have the knowledge of local conditions that is necessary to solve
problems of public policy effectively. Second, given cultural,
linguistic, and often religious differences between colonizers and
colonized, the colonizers are unlikely to sympathize with the native
peoples and are likely to act tyrannically. Third, even if the
colonizers really try to treat the native peoples fairly, their
natural tendency to sympathize with those similar to themselves (other
foreign colonists or merchants) would likely lead to distorted
judgment in cases of conflict. Finally, according to Mill, colonists
and merchants go abroad in order to acquire wealth with little effort
or risk, which means that their economic activity often exploits the
colonized country rather than developing it. These arguments echo
points made in Edmund Burke’s voluminous writings assailing the
misgovernment in India, most notably Burke’s famous Speech on
Fox’s East India Bill (1783). Recent scholarship, however, has
challenged the view of Burke as an opponent of imperialism. Daniel
O’Neill has argued that Burke was a staunch supporter of the
British Empire in the eighteenth century (2016). According to
O’Neill, Burke’s defense of empire was ideologically
consistent with his conservative opposition to the French Revolution.
Mill’s solution to the problem of imperial misgovernment was to
eschew parliamentary oversight in favor of a specialized
administrative corps. Members of this specialized body would have the
training to acquire relevant knowledge of local conditions. Paid by
the government, they would not personally benefit from economic
exploitation and could fairly arbitrate conflicts between colonists
and indigenous people. Mill, however, was not able to explain how to
ensure good government where those wielding political power were not
accountable to the population. In this sense, Mill’s writing is
emblematic of the failure of liberal imperial thought.
Nineteenth century liberal thinkers held a range of views on the
legitimacy of foreign domination and conquest. Alexis de Tocqueville,
for example, made a case for colonialism that did not rely on the idea
of a “civilizing mission.” Tocqueville recognized that
colonialism probably did not bring good government to the native
peoples, but this did not lead him to oppose colonialism since his
support rested entirely on the way it benefited France. Tocqueville
insisted that French colonies in Algeria would increase France’s
stature vis-à-vis rivals like England. Colonies would provide
an outlet for excess population that caused disorder in France.
Tocqueville also suggested that imperial endeavors would incite a
feeling of patriotism that would counterbalance the modern centrifugal
forces of materialism and class conflict.
Tocqueville was actively engaged in advancing the project of French
colonization of Algeria. Tocqueville’s first analysis of French
colonialism was published during his 1837 electoral campaign for a
seat in the Chamber of Deputies. As a member of the Chamber of
Deputies, Tocqueville argued in favor of expanding the French presence
in Algeria. He traveled to Algeria in 1841 composing an “Essay
on Algeria” that served as the basis for two parliamentary
reports on the topic (Tocqueville 1841). Unlike the more naïve
proponents of the “civilizing mission,” Tocqueville
admitted that the brutal military occupation did little to introduce
good government or advance civilization. In an apparent reversal of
the four-stages theory of the Scottish Enlightenment, he acknowledged
that “we are now fighting far more barbarously than the Arabs
themselves” and “it is on their side that one meets with
civilization.” (Tocqueville 1841: 70) This realization, however,
did not imply a critique of French brutality. Instead, Tocqueville
defended controversial tactics such as the destruction of crops,
confiscation of land, and seizure of unarmed civilians. His texts,
however, provide little in the way of philosophical justification and
he dismisses the entire just war tradition by stating, “I
believe that the right of war authorizes us to ravage the
country.” (Tocqueville 1841: 70). In Tocqueville’s
writings on Algeria, the French national interest is paramount and
moral considerations are explicitly subordinate to political
goals.
Tocqueville’s analysis of Algeria reflects little anxiety about
its legitimacy and much concern about the pragmatics of effective
colonial governance. The stability of the regime, he felt, depended on
the ability of the colonial administration to provide good government
to the French settlers. Tocqueville emphasized that the excessive
centralization of decision-making in Paris combined with the arbitrary
practices of the local military leadership meant that French colonists
had no security of property, let alone the political and civil rights
that they were accustomed to France. Tocqueville was untroubled by the
use of martial law against indigenous peoples, but felt that it was
counterproductive when applied to the French. For Tocqueville, the
success of the French endeavor in Algeria depended entirely on
attracting large numbers of permanent French settlers. Given that it
was proving impossible to win the allegiance of the indigenous people,
France could not hold Algeria without creating a stable community of
colonists. The natives were to be ruled through military domination
and the French were to be enticed to settle through the promise of
economic gain in an environment that reproduced, as much as possible,
the cultural and political life of France. After a brief period of
optimism about “amalgamation” of the races in his
“Second Letter on Algeria” (Tocqueville 1837: 25),
Tocqueville understood the colonial world in terms of the permanent
opposition of settler and native, an opposition structured to ensure
the economic benefit of the former.
Recent scholarship has also drawn attention to the writings of less
canonical figures (Bell 2016). In Mr. Mothercountry, Keally
McBride (2016) focuses on the career of James Stephen and uses new
archival research to explore the gap between the practice of colonial
administration and the ideal of the rule of law. In Alibis of
Empire: Henry Maine and the Ends of Liberal Imperialism, Karuna
Mantena (2010) challenges the idea that liberal notions of progress
and civilization played a central role in the justification of
Victorian empire. Mantena shows that the work of Victorian legal
scholar Henry Maine played an important role in the shift toward a new
culturalism that emphasized the dangers and difficulties of trying to
civilize native peoples. 
In recent years, scholars have devoted less attention to the debates
on colonialism within the Marxist tradition. This reflects the waning
influence of Marxism in the academy and in political practice.
Marxism, however, has influenced both post-colonial theory and
anti-colonial independence movements around the world. Marxists have
drawn attention to the material basis of European political expansion
and developed concepts that help explain the persistence of economic
exploitation after the end of direct political rule.
Although Marx never developed a theory of colonialism, his analysis of
capitalism emphasized its inherent tendency to expand in search of new
markets. In his classic works such as The Communist
Manifesto, Grundrisse, and Capital, Marx
predicted that the bourgeoisie would continue to create a global
market and undermine both local and national barriers to its own
expansion. Expansion is a necessary product of the core dynamic of
capitalism: overproduction. Competition among producers drives them to
cut wages, which in turn leads to a crisis of under-consumption. The
only way to prevent economic collapse is to find new markets to absorb
excess consumer goods. From a Marxist perspective, some form of
imperialism is inevitable. By exporting population to resource rich
foreign territories, a nation creates a market for industrial goods
and a reliable source of natural resources. Alternately, weaker
countries can face the choice of either voluntarily admitting foreign
products that will undermine domestic industry or submitting to
political domination, which will accomplish the same end.
In a series of newspaper articles published in the 1850s in the
New York Daily Tribune, Marx specifically discussed the
impact of British colonialism in India. His analysis was consistent
with his general theory of political and economic change. He described
India as an essentially feudal society experiencing the painful
process of modernization. According to Marx, however, Indian
“feudalism” was a distinctive form of economic
organization. He reached this conclusion because he believed
(incorrectly) that agricultural land in India was owned communally.
Marx used the concept of “Oriental despotism” to describe
a specific type of class domination that used the state’s power
of taxation in order to extract resources from the peasantry.
According to Marx, oriental despotism emerged in India because
agricultural productivity depended on large-scale public works such as
irrigation that could only be financed by the state. This meant that
the state could not be easily replaced by a more decentralized system
of authority. In Western Europe, feudal property could be transformed
gradually into privately owned, alienable property in land. In India,
communal land ownership made this impossible, thereby blocking the
development of commercial agriculture and free markets. Since
“Oriental despotism” inhibited the indigenous development
of economic modernization, British domination became the agent of
economic modernization.
Marx’s analysis of colonialism as a progressive force bringing
modernization to a backward feudal society sounds like a transparent
rationalization for foreign domination. His account of British
domination, however, reflects the same ambivalence that he shows
towards capitalism in Europe. In both cases, Marx recognizes the
immense suffering brought about during the transition from feudal to
bourgeois society while insisting that the transition is both
necessary and ultimately progressive. He argues that the penetration
of foreign commerce will cause a social revolution in India. For Marx,
this upheaval has both positive and negative consequences. When
peasants lose their traditional livelihoods, there is a great deal of
human suffering, but he also points out that traditional village
communities are hardly idyllic; they are sites of caste oppression,
slavery, misery, and cruelty. The first stage of the modernization
process is entirely negative, because poor people pay heavy taxation
to support British rule and endure the economic upheaval that results
from the glut of cheaply produced English cotton. Eventually, however,
British merchants begin to realize that Indians cannot pay for
imported cloth or British administration if they don’t
efficiently produce goods to trade, which provides an incentive for
British investment in production and infrastructure. Even though Marx
believed that British rule was motivated by greed and exercised
through cruelty, he felt it was still the agent of progress. Thus,
Marx’s discussion of British rule in India has three dimensions:
an account of the progressive character of foreign rule, a critique of
the human suffering involved, and a concluding argument that British
rule must be temporary if the progressive potential is to be
realized.
Lenin developed his analysis of Western economic and political
domination in his pamphlet Imperialism: The Highest Stage of
Capitalism (1917) (see Other Internet Resources). Lenin took a
more explicitly critical view of imperialism. He noted that
imperialism was a technique which allowed European countries to put
off the inevitable domestic revolutionary crisis by exporting their
own economic burdens onto weaker states. Lenin argued that
late-nineteenth century imperialism was driven by the economic logic
of late-capitalism. The falling rate of profit caused an economic
crisis that could only be resolved through territorial expansion.
Capitalist conglomerates were compelled to expand beyond their
national borders in pursuit of new markets and resources. In a sense,
this analysis is fully consistent with Marx, who saw European
colonialism as continuous with the process of internal expansion
within states and across Europe. Both Marx and Lenin thought that
colonialism and imperialism resulted from the same logic that drove
the economic development and modernization of peripheral areas in
Europe. But there was one distinctive element of Lenin’s
analysis. Since late capitalism was organized around national
monopolies, the competition for markets took the form of military
competition between states over territories that could be dominated
for their exclusive economic benefit.
Marxist theorists including Rosa Luxemburg, Karl Kautsky, and Nikolai
Bukharin also explored the issue of imperialism. Kautsky’s
position is especially important because his analysis introduced
concepts that continue to play a prominent role in contemporary world
systems theory and post-colonial studies. Kautsky challenges the
assumption that imperialism would lead to the development of the areas
subjected to economic exploitation. He suggests that imperialism is a
relatively permanent relationship structuring the interactions between
two types of countries. (Young 2001) Although imperialism initially
took the form of military competition between capitalist countries, it
would result in collusion between capitalist interests to maintain a
stable system of exploitation of the non-developed world. The most
influential contemporary proponent of this view is Immanuel
Wallerstein, who is known for world-systems theory. According to this
theory, the world-system is a relatively stable set of relations
between core and peripheral states. This international division of
labor is structured to benefit the core states (Wallerstein
1974–1989) and transfers resources from the periphery to the
core.
From the perspective of world-systems theory, the economic
exploitation of the periphery does not necessarily require direct
political or military domination. In a similar vein, contemporary
literary theorists have drawn attention to practices of representation
that reproduce a logic of subordination that endures even after former
colonies gain independence. The field of postcolonial studies was
influenced by Edward Said’s path-breaking book
Orientalism. In Orientalism Said applied Michel
Foucault’s technique of discourse analysis to the production of
knowledge about the Middle East. The term orientalism described a
structured set of concepts, assumptions, and discursive practices that
were used to produce, interpret, and evaluate knowledge about
non-European peoples. Said’s analysis made it possible for
scholars to deconstruct literary and historical texts in order to
understand how they reflected and reinforced the imperialist project.
Unlike previous studies that focused on the economic or political
logics of colonialism, Said drew attention to the relationship between
knowledge and power. By foregrounding the cultural and epistemological
work of imperialism, Said was able to undermine the ideological
assumption of value-free knowledge and show that “knowing the
Orient” was part of the project of dominating it.
Orientalism can be seen as an attempt to extend the
geographical and historical terrain of the poststructuralist critique
of Western epistemology.
Said uses the term Orientalism in several different ways. First,
Orientalism is a specific field of academic study about the Middle
East and Asia, albeit one that Said conceives quite expansively to
encompass history, sociology, literature, anthropology and especially
philology. He also identifies it as a practice that helps define
Europe by creating a stable depiction of its other, its constitutive
outside. Orientalism is a way of characterizing Europe by drawing a
contrasting image or idea, based on a series of binary oppositions
(rational/irrational, mind/body, order/chaos) that manage and displace
European anxieties. Finally, Said emphasizes that it is also a mode of
exercising authority by organizing and classifying knowledge about the
Orient. This discursive approach is distinct both from the materialist
view that knowledge is simply a reflection of economic or political
interests and from the idealist view that scholarship is disinterested
and neutral. Following Foucault, Said describes discourse as a form of
knowledge that is not used instrumentally in service of power but
rather is itself a form of power.
The second quasi-canonical contribution to the field of post-colonial
theory is Gayatri Spivak’s “Can the Subaltern
Speak?” (1988). Spivak works within Said’s problematic of
representation but extends it to the contemporary academy. Spivak
questions the idea of transparent subaltern speech. When well-meaning
scholars want to let the subaltern “speak for themselves”
they hope that removing the intermediary (the expert, the judge, the
imperial administrator, the local elite) will enable some authentic
truth based on experience to emerge. But experience itself is
constituted through representation; therefore denying the problem of
representation does not make it go away but only makes it harder to
recognize. The central claim of the essay is that
“representation has not withered away.” Since power is
everywhere, even in language itself, transparency and authenticity are
impossible; this means that the messy and controversial work of
interpretation is necessary. 
Aijaz Ahmad has argued that, despite Spivak’s claims to be
working within the Marxist tradition, her essays exhibit contempt for
materialism, rationalism, and progress, the core features of Marxism
(Ahmad 1997). According to Ahmad, Spivak is concerned with narratives
of capitalism rather than the institutional structures and material
effects of capitalism as a mode of production. Spivak’s sharp
criticism of movements that essentialize subaltern subjects casts
doubt on the basic premise of Marxist politics, which privileges the
proletariat as a group with shared, true interests that are produced
by the capitalist system.
Vivek Chibber (2013) and Dipesh Chakrabarty (2007) have taken up these
issues. In his influential book Provincializing Europe,
Chakrabarty argues that distinctively European concepts such as
disenchanted space, secular time, and sovereignty inform the social
sciences. When these standards are treated as universal, the third
world is seen as incomplete or lacking. Chibber challenges the
position. Chibber advances a critique of Subaltern Studies and defends
universal categories such as capitalism, class, rationality, and
objectivity. He argues that these categories need not be reductionist
or Eurocentric and that they are useful in illuminating the motivation
of political actors and the structural constraints faced by leaders in
countries such as India. 
This debate reflects a tension that runs through the field of
postcolonial studies. Although some thinkers draw on both Marxism and
poststructuralism, the two theories have different goals, methods, and
assumptions. In the humanities, postcolonial theory tends to reflect
the influence of poststructuralist thought, while theorists of
decolonization focus on social history, economics, and political
institutions. Whereas postcolonial theory is associated with the
issues of hybridity, diaspora, representation, narrative, and
knowledge/power, theories of decolonization are concerned with
revolution, economic inequality, violence, and political identity.
Some scholars have begun to question the usefulness of the concept
post-colonial theory. Like the idea of the Scottish four-stages
theory, a theory with which it would appear to have little in common,
the very concept of post-colonialism seems to rely on a progressive
understanding of history (McClintock 1992). It suggests, perhaps
unwittingly, that the core concepts of hybridity,
alterity,particularity, and multiplicity may lead to a kind of
methodological dogmatism or developmental logic. Moreover, the term
“colonial” as a marker of this domain of inquiry is also
problematic in so far as it suggests historically implausible
commonalities across territories that experienced very different
techniques of domination. Thus, the critical impulse behind
post-colonial theory has turned on itself, drawing attention to the
way that it may itself be marked by the utopian desire to transcend
the trauma of colonialism (Gandhi 1998).
Indigenous scholars have articulated a critique of post-colonialism,
noting that the concept obscures the continued existence of
settler-colonial states. One point of controversy in contemporary
Indigenous political theory literature is the extent to which it is
desirable to participate in colonial legal and political institutions
in order to transform them. At the center of this debate is the
question of whether institutional accommodation aimed towards
reconciliation advances indigenous interests or further reproduces the
conditions of domination that only perpetuate the historical
settler-colonial relationship. One group of scholars emphasizes the
politics of refusal and resurgence. In Mohawk Interruptus: A
Political Life Across the Borders of Settler States (2014), Audra
Simpson argues that the contemporary democratic practices of
recognition transform indigenous peoples from sovereign nations into
ethnic minority citizens. She suggests that the struggle for
self-government requires a politics of refusal. The problem with the
politics of reconciliation is that it remains in a system that is
guided by the logic of Western liberalism and structured by its
attendant hierarchies. Resurgence is best achieved through the
politics of refusal, which aims towards self-determination and
sovereignty through the reintegration of Indigenous culture and
customs. 
In Wasáse: Indigenous Pathways to Action and Freedom
(2005) Taiaiake Alfred argues that meaningful change to the colonial
condition requires a lasting transformation of society through
Indigenous resurgence. According to Alfred, Indigenous reintegration
cannot take place within the Western liberal framework because the
imperatives of capitalism contrast sharply with those of the
Indigenous ways of life. Therefore, liberal attempts at reconciliation
will always run counter to the self-determination efforts of
Indigenous communities. In Dancing on Our Turtle’s Back:
Stories of Nishnaabeg Re-Creation, Resurgence and a New Emergence
(2011) Leanne Betasamosake Simpson points out that rebuilding needs to
start from within, and Indigenous people require not only the
re-establishment of pre-colonial history and customs but also the
reintroduction of Indigenous traditions of governance and culture
through the oral tradition of story-telling as a framework to inform
social experience. 
Glen Coulthard expands on the theoretical framework of resurgence and
refusal in Red Skin, White Masks: Rejecting the Colonial Politics
of Recognition (2014) and presents a critical analysis of the
historical and political experiences of Indigenous people within
Canada. Coulthard argues that the current methods of reconciliation
tend to dehistoricize and neutralize acts of dispossession, violence,
and displacement of Indigenous peoples from their lands and cultures.
For Coulthard, settler colonialism is an ongoing process, not merely
the legacy of past injustices. This is evident in the unsettled land
claims, the dispossession of land, the limitations placed on
Indigenous governments, and the displacement of Indigenous ways of
life—which are tied to access to traditional territories. Rather
than relying on recognition from within the colonial-settler
relationship, Coulthard advocates for Indigenous sovereignty informed
by an intellectual, social, political, and artistic movement that
embodies a “self-reflective revitalization” of traditional
values, principles, and cultural practices.
The title of Coulthard’s book alludes to Black Skin, White
Masks (1952), the path-breaking work by Frantz Fanon. Writing in
the 1950s, Fanon challenged the abstract universalism of Western
philosophy, showing how universalism serves to structure a
hierarchical relationship between settler and colonized. Fanon’s
critical theory challenges the assumption that European notions of
progress truly advance justice and secure mutual benefit. In Black
Skin, White Masks, Fanon focuses on the development of black
consciousness by exploring the psychological alienation and
displacement caused by colonial domination. He describes a divided
self who identifies with French culture even while experiencing
exclusion from the ideals of universalism, equality, and reason.
Coulthard’s reading of Fanon sheds light on his view that
cultural recognition by the colonial state is a solution. Following
Fanon, he concludes that paternalist recognition serves to legitimize
the colonial state and further divide indigenous subjects.
Other scholars, however, argue that it is possible to achieve
successful reconciliation through democratic deliberation and
procedures. In This Is Not a Peace Pipe: Towards a Critical
Indigenous Philosophy (2006) Dale Turner suggests that the way to
undermine the power dynamics that perpetuate the conditions of
colonialism is through the participation within the legal and
political institutions of the Canadian state. Turner argues that
“word warriors,” who mediate between Indigenous
communities and legal and political institutions, should ensure the
preservation and expansion of Indigenous rights within the larger
community. Turner argues that an effective relationship between the
Canadian and Indigenous peoples will only emerge out of a dialogue
grounded in democratic presumptions of equality and respect. This
dialogue entails that Indigenous peoples, to establish claims of
cultural distinctiveness, learn how to engage within the
Canadian’s state’s legal and political discourses in more
effective ways (2006:5).
The struggle for Indigenous self-determination is not unique to
Canada. Rather, Indigenous movements towards self-determination have
emerged across North and South America, Asia, Australia, New Zealand,
and other territories. Scholars, such as Ronald Niezen (2003), Will
Kymlicka (2013), and Sheryl Lightfoot (2016), have written on the
subject of indigenous peoples’ international struggles for
individual and collective rights. International recognition-based
models have gained momentum since the 2007 United Nations Declaration
of Rights of Indigenous Peoples. Lightfoot highlights the
revolutionary potential of international movements to enable a
collective voice where local struggles may strategically coalesce on a
global platform. Acknowledging local variations, Indigenous people
have developed a movement beyond national borders that strive to
recognize the political autonomy by addressing issues surrounding land
rights and cultural distinctiveness. 