Few artistic movements have attracted so much controversy and debate
as conceptual art. By its nature, conceptual art has a tendency to
provoke intense and perhaps even extreme reactions in its
audiences. While some people find conceptual art very refreshing and
relevant, many others consider it shocking, distasteful, and
conspicuously lacking in craftsmanship. Some even simply deny that it
is art at all.  Conceptual art, it seems, is something that we either
love or hate.
 This divisive character is, however, far from accidental. Most
conceptual art actively sets out to be controversial in so far as it
seeks to challenge and probe us about what we tend to take as given in
the domain of art. In fact, this capacity to evoke argument and debate
lies at the very heart of what conceptual art sets out to do, namely
to make us question our assumptions not only about what may properly
qualify as art and what the function of the artist should be, but also
about what our role as spectators should involve. It should come as no
surprise, then, that conceptual art can cause frustration or vexation
– to raise difficult and sometimes even annoying questions is
precisely what conceptual art in general aspires to do. In reacting
strongly to conceptual art we are, in some important sense, playing
right into its hands.
The first difficulty that a philosophical investigation of conceptual
art encounters has to do with identifying the object of examination, or
at least the category of objects under scrutiny. In the words of
the art historian Paul Wood,
On a strict historical reading, the expression ‘conceptual
art’ refers to the artistic movement that reached its pinnacle
between 1966 and 1972 (Lippard
 1973).[1]
 Among its most famous adherents at its
early stage we find artists such as Joseph Kosuth, Robert Morris,
Joseph Beuys, Adrian Piper, to name but a few. What unites the
conceptual art of this period is the absorption of the lessons learnt
from other twentieth-century art movements such as Dadaism,
Surrealism, Suprematism, Abstract Expressionism and the Fluxus group,
together with the ambition once and for all to ‘free’
art of the Modernist paradigm. Most importantly, perhaps, conceptual
art of the 1960s and 70s sought to overcome a backdrop against which
art’s principal aim is to produce something beautiful or aesthetically
pleasing. Art, early conceptual artists held, is redundant if it does
not make us think. In their belief that most artistic institutions
were not conducive to reflection but merely promoted a conservative and even consumerist
conception of art and artists, conceptual artists in the mid-1960s to
the early 1970s instead tried to encourage a revisionary understanding
of art, the artist, and artistic experience.
While conceptual art in its purest form might arguably be limited to
works produced during these five or six years nearly half a century
ago, it seems overly narrow – certainly from a philosophical
perspective – to limit our inquiry to works produced during that
period alone. For although the work created during that time might
generally be conceived as more directly anti-establishment and
anti-consumerist than later conceptual art, the spirit of early
conceptual art seems to have carried on relatively undiluted into the
very late twentieth and twenty-first centuries, as witnessed by pieces
such as Tracey Emin’s Unmade Bed, Damian Hirst’s The
Physical Impossibility of Death in the Mind of Someone Living, Ai Weiwei’s Surveillance Camera, and Jake and Dinos Chapman’s Chapman Family Collection.
The highly individualised character of the intellectual exploration
that conceptual art urges us to engage in has always been such that
any attempt to pinpoint a specific common denominator other than this
general vision and approach to art, art-making and society at large
invariably fails to catch its very essence. The means of artistic
expression, we are told, are infinite and the topics available for
questioning and discussion are limitless. It belongs to the very
nature of conceptual art, then, to be – like Lewis’ Cheshire cat
– elusive and slippery. Conceptual artists, be it Joseph Beuys
or Marina Abramovic, pursue artistic originality and representation in
every possible way. For that reason, one might find oneself
obliged to replace the slightly lofty cliché according to which
there are as many definitions of conceptual art as there are
conceptual artists, with an even more extreme version of the claim,
namely, that there are as many definitions of conceptual art as there
are conceptual artworks.
Nevertheless, in the midst of this deliberately produced uncertainty
about the nature of conceptual art, a handful of characteristics and
general aims do seem to recur, and although they should not be seen as
criteria for conceptual art strictly speaking, they may be considered
tenets fundamental to (most) conceptual art.
First and foremost, conceptual art challenges our intuitions
concerning the limits of what may count as art and what it is an artist
does. It does so,
on the one hand, by postulating ever more complex objects as candidates
for the status of ‘artwork’, and, on the other hand, by
distancing the task of the artist from the actual making and
manipulating of the artistic material.
A characteristic way in which conceptual art explores the boundaries
of the artwork is by a process of questioning where the realm of the
artistic ends and that of utility begins. Continuing the tradition of
Marcel Duchamp’s readymades such as Fountain, or
Bottlerack, it sets out to overthrow our traditional
conceptions of what an art object should be made of and what it should
look like. The artwork is a process rather than a
material thing, and as such it is no longer something that
can be grasped merely by seeing, hearing or touching the end product
of that process. The notion of agency in art-making is thus
particularly emphasised. In many cases, the ‘art-making’
and the ‘artwork’ come together, because what is sought is
an identification of the notion of the work of art with the conceptual
activity of the artist. Conceptual art, politicised and influenced by
events such as the ‘May Days’ in Paris (1968), the
‘Hot Autumn’ in Italy (1969), the Vietnam War, and the
rise of feminism, promotes a rapprochement between art-making
and criticism – both artistic and social – by raising
questions about the products of artistic activities and the very
purpose of art. To use the words of Joseph Kosuth, it ‘annexes
the functions of the critic, and makes a middle-man
unnecessary.’ (Guercio 1999, 39).
As a direct result of its examination of what may properly qualify as
art, and of the markedly broad conception of what may constitute an
art object resulting from this examination, conceptual art tends
to reject traditional artistic media such as conventional painting or
sculpture. Instead, it has found itself drawn to alternative means of
expression, including performances, photography, films, videos,
events, bodies, new ready-mades and new mixed media. In a nutshell
nothing can be ruled out in principle for use as possible artistic
media, as can be seen, for example, in Richard Long’s photograph of a
line made in the grass by
 walking[2],
 Bruce Nauman’s nine minute film of the artist himself playing one note
on a violin whilst walking around in his
 studio[3], 
 Janine Antoni’s use of chocolate and soap, Marina
Abramovic’s display of an array of everyday objects, including
knives, torches and feathers, which the audience is invited to apply
directly on to the artist’s body, and Piero Manzoni’s act
of signing a woman’s
 arm[4].
The most fundamentally revisionary feature of conceptual art is the
way in which it proclaims itself to be an art of the mind rather than
the senses: it rejects traditional artistic media because it locates
the artwork at the level of ideas rather than that of
objects. Because creative process tends to be given more
weight than physical material, and because art should be about
intellectual inquiry and reflection rather than beauty and aesthetic
pleasure (as traditionally conceived), the identity of the work of art
is said to lie in the idea at the heart of the piece in question. In
the words of Kosuth, ‘[t]he actual works of art are ideas’
(Lippard 1973, 25). For conceptual art, ‘the idea or concept is
the most important aspect of the work’ (LeWitt 1967, 166). Art
is ‘de-materialised’, and in this sense held to be prior
to its materialisation in any given object. 
The claim that the conceptual artwork is to be identified with
an idea that may be seen to underlie it has far-reaching
ramifications. It not only affects the ontology of the conceptual
artwork but also profoundly alters the role of the artist by casting
her in the role of thinker rather than object-maker. Moreover, it
calls for a thorough review of the way in which we perceive, engage and
appreciate artworks. Further still, it links art so intimately to
ideas and concepts that even a principled distinction between the
domain of art and the realm of thought seems difficult to
preserve.
For all these reasons, the kind of representation employed in
conceptual artworks is best described in terms of the transmission of
ideas. In conceptual art, the representation at work can generally be
seen as semantic rather than illustrative.  That is
to say, it sets out to have and convey a specific meaning rather than
to depict a scene, person or event. Even in cases where a work makes
use of illustrative representation, conceptual art is still putting
that representation to a distinctively semantic use, in the sense of
there being an intention to represent something one cannot see with
the naked eye. Accordingly, the conceptual artist’s task is to
contemplate and formulate this meaning – to be a
‘meaning-maker’.
The philosophical concerns raised by conceptual art can be divided
into two main categories. First, there are specific questions to do
with conceptual art itself, and the claims which underpin the project
that drives it. Philosophical investigations might thus be called for
not only in relation to the internal consistency and coherence of the
project and its set goals, but also with regards to the particular
tenets outlined above. For example, what does it mean to say that
every single thing, person or event is a possible candidate for an
artistic medium and does that suggestion not render the category of
art, as we know it, redundant? 
Second, conceptual art poses philosophical problems from a wider
perspective, in so far as one might expect philosophy to provide us
with unitary accounts of the nature of art, the role of the artist, and
artistic experience. In many important respects, conceptual art
sits very uncomfortably with other, often more traditional artforms and
artworks, and this tension highlights a pressing issue for anyone
interested in the possibility of a universal theory of art. For
if there is to be one rule for conceptual art and another for all
other kinds of art, are there still good grounds for thinking of
conceptual art as a kind of art? Moreover, could not every
particular kind of artform or artwork demand a separate theory of art,
artist and artistic experience?
 If we are to sidestep such an intrinsic division between
conceptual art on the one hand, and other kinds of art on the other,
then theories concerned mainly with art that is not conceptual will
have to make many significant concessions in order to incorporate the
problematic case that conceptual artworks present. At the very least,
a compromise will have to be reached concerning what we mean by the
term ‘artwork’.
One of the over-riding concerns that beset the philosophy of conceptual
art is thus whether and, if so, why one should actively pursue unified
accounts in the philosophy of art. Whether one comes out of that
investigation embracing a broader – albeit perhaps vaguer –
set of concepts and tools than one started off with, or whether one
considers oneself forced to abandon any hope of anything but very
specific theories of art, artist, and artistic experience, conceptual
art obliges us to think about where we stand on these issues.
Philosophizing about conceptual art is, then, not merely philosophizing
about one specific artform. It is philosophizing about the most
revisionary kind of art, one that sees its own task as being profoundly
philosophical in nature. Let us now turn to five more specific
philosophical themes that conceptual art urges us to
consider.
The problem of defining art is by no means a problem for conceptual
art alone. Two principal difficulties immediately arise in the context
of any attempt to form a definition. First, the category of art is
particularly heterogeneous. Simply put, there seems to be an infinite
variety of things, or kinds of thing, that need to fall under its
jurisdiction. Second, there is great variety of opinion on what any
putative definition of art should actually consist of. 
On the standard conception, a definition is something
that provides us with necessary and sufficient conditions for some
thing x to be F, so that, for example, it is a necessary and
sufficient condition for a number to be an even number that it is (i)
an integer and (ii) divisible by two. Accordingly, a
definition of art must be capable of outlining a clear set of
conditions that must be satisfied.
There have been no shortages of attempts to define art in this
manner. Most prominently perhaps, it has been suggested that art ought
to be defined in terms of its aesthetic character, so that, roughly,
x is an artwork if and only if x gives rise to an
aesthetic experience (e.g., Beardsley 1958).  Notwithstanding the
difficulties that this particular suggestion entails (we shall return
to this in §3.3), the advent of a kind of art that is as
profoundly revisionary and difficult to classify as conceptual art
renders the attempt to provide a general definition applicable to
all art particularly complex. It is no coincidence, then,
that a neo-Wittgensteinian approach came to dominate the philosophy of
art in the late 1950s and 1960s. Drawing support from
anti-essentialist theories of language, it was suggested that art was
numbered among the various concepts that are, by their very nature,
‘essentially contested’ (Gallie 1948; see also Weitz
1956).  That is to say, some concepts – such as that pertaining
to sports, for example– simply do not allow for definitions in
terms of necessary and sufficient conditions, and art is best as
understood as one of them. In the words of Morris Weitz, art may
be
The act of proposing a definition of art thus becomes a less stringent
exercise of conceptual analysis. The alternative method proposed by
neo-Wittgensteinians such as Weitz in attempting to identify art and
explain how we are to distinguish it from non-art is the notion of
family resemblance (see Wittgenstein 1953, §66–71).
Faced with the question ‘Is X an artwork?’, what
we should do is try to detect strands of resemblance with paradigmatic
instances of an artwork. If some significant resemblance to such a
paradigmatic case is observed, we can rightly call the object of our
scrutiny a work of art.
The proposal, though interesting, is not without its own
difficulties. One problem that immediately arises relates to the idea
of resemblance itself, and the way it rapidly expands in such a way as
to render it close to useless. This is for the simple reason that
we can always find some way in which some given thing may be
said to resemble any other given thing. This kind of openness, it is
important to note, is not something that fits in with the
programme of conceptual art. Whilst conceptual art does hold that any
kind of object could be a work of art, it is not
saying that every object is a work of art. Far from it. Much
conceptual art, in exploring the boundaries between the realms of the
artistic and that of function and utility, is perceptually
indistinguishable from non-art, such as Andy Warhol’s Brillo
Boxes. In that sense, conceptual art presents a particularly
difficult case for the neo-Wittgensteinian method of
identification. After all, the only way in which Warhol’s Brillo Boxes
does not resemble any other stack of Brillo Boxes is the
sense in which the former is a work of art and the latter is not. The
notion of resemblance is clearly of little use here.
Picking up on this concern, Arthur Danto has famously suggested that
it is in fact a non-manifest relation that makes something an artwork
rather than an observable property (Danto 1981). That is to say,
artworks acquire that status in virtue of their relations to the
historical and social setting constituted by the practices and
conventions of art, our artistic heritage, the intentions of artists,
and so on — the ‘artworld’ (see also Dickie
1974).The general idea here is that artworks are generated within a
social and artistic context, and so being an artwork is a function of
certain social relations. Conceptual art reinforces the idea that art
and non-art can be perceptually indistinguishable and so cannot be
marked off from each other by ‘exhibited’ properties
 alone.[5]
Setting aside the details of such an account, one of the things
conceptual art has helped philosophers to grasp more fully is that any
successful general definition, or indeed principled theory of the
identification of art, will need to have the non-manifest properties
of artworks at its centre. It is the meaning that the artist infuses
into the work and the meaning that we as audience stand to gain from
it that contains the key to its status as art (more on this in
§3.4). To use the example of Warhol’s Brillo Boxes
again, the work of the conceptual artist seems primarily to be the
work of imbuing objects with a particular kind of meaning.
 A more promising line of enquiry has been developed by David
Davies. Taking his cue from the problems posed by conceptual art,
Davies argues that a unified definition of art can only be found if we
think of art primarily in terms of the creative process or series of
actions resulting in a material thing or other ‘focus of
appreciation’. In that sense, the artwork is primiarly
identified with the intentional acts through which it comes into being
rather than with the end-product of that process (Davies 2004). Art,
on this view, is better understood as a kind of performance than as a
manifest object. By shifting the focus of our attention in this way,
we can overcome many of the difficulties associated with defining art,
most notably that of its heterogeneity. It may be, then, that the most
enduring lesson to be learnt from conceptual art with regards to the
definition of art is not so much that a conceptual analysis of art is
completely unattainable, as that we simply have been looking in the
wrong place.
 The claim that conceptual art is to be identified less with a
perceivable object than with the meaning or idea it aims to convey,
gives rise to a host of complex ontological questions. The rejection
of traditional artistic media, together with the de-materialisation of
the art object, forces us to reconsider what seemed to be relatively
uncomplicated aspects of artistic experience. The answers to questions
such as ‘Is there in fact any one thing (or set of things) that
we must perceive in artistic appreciation?’, and ‘Is it a
necessary condition for the existence of an artwork that it have a
medium?’ suddenly become a good deal less obvious. 
In the first instance, conceptual art drives us to review the common
assumption that appropriate appreciation and engagement with an artwork
must involve a direct first-hand experience of that piece itself.
The idea here, to use Frank Sibley’s words, is that
The assumption in question is, then, that although we seem to gain
something from looking at, for example, a postcard or poster of
Leonardo da Vinci’s La Gioconda or Élisabeth
Vigée Le Brun’s Self-Portrait in a Straw Hat , a
genuine judgement about its artistic character necessitates one’s own
un-mediated perceptual experience of it. But – and herein lies
the crux of the problem for conceptual art – what if there is
nothing for us to get a first-hand perceptual experience of? In the
case of Walter De Maria’s
Vertical Earth Kilometer
 (1977)[6],
 a kilometre-long metal shaft plunged into
the surface of the earth so that only the very top is visible,
first-hand perceptual experience is simply not something that can be
had. More pertinently, what does it even mean to have a perceptual
engagement with an artwork that claims, basically, to be an idea?
Perhaps the most pressing question, however, has to do with
the extent to which we are to take conceptual art’s claim of
de-materialisation seriously. Does the de-materialisation of such
art not suggest that there is not only a rejection of traditional
artistic media in conceptual art, but an outright refutation of
artistic media in general? One possible way of making sense of this idea
is with a distinction outlined
by Davies, namely that between physical medium and vehicular
medium (Davies 2004). Crucially, a vehicular medium is said to
incorporate not only physical objects (such as paintings and
sculptures, say) but also actions, events, and generally more complex
entities. In
Davies’ words, ‘[t]he product of an artist’s
manipulation of a vehicular medium will then be the vehicle
whereby a particular artistic statement is articulated… The
vehicle may, as in the case of Picasso’s Guernica, be a
physical object, or, as in the case of Coleridge’s Kubla
Kahn, a linguistic structure-type, or, as arguably in the case of
Duchamp’s Fountain, an action of a particular
kind.’ (Davies 2004, 59). Adhering to this vehicular
medium in art, may then at least equip philosophers with a notion that
can deflate the concern of whether conceptual art, by rejecting
physical media, denies the need for all artistic media.
Clearly, conceptual art is not the first kind of art to raise
ontological concerns of this kind. After all, music and literary art,
be it traditional or avant-garde, hardly present
straightforward cases either. The question of what exactly
constitutes, say, a novel or a musical work have been widely discussed
for some time (e.g. Davies 2001; Ingarden 1973; Wollheim 1980)
Building on the suggestion that artworks such as musical pieces and
literary works are best understood in terms of universals or
‘types’, one view that has been widely discussed in the
last two decades or so is based on the idea that not only musical and
literary artworks, but all artworks, are types. More
specifically, they are to be conceived of as ‘event- or
action-types’ (Currie 1988). According to this theory, the
artwork is thus not the material thing itself but, rather, the way in
which the artist arrived at the underlying structure shared by all
instances or performances of that work. 
Whilst the general approach fostered by both Currie and Davies is
clearly congenial to some aspects of conceptual art, it might
nevertheless still be the case that further work needs to be done if
the view that artworks are basically event- or action-types is to
accommodate all art in the conceptual tradition. Further questions
include what role, if any, is played by the (set of) material thing(s)
that many conceptual artists undeniably do present us
with. What, in other words, are we to make of the object (be it a
human body or a video-recording) that is supposed to transmit the idea
which, in turn, is said to be the genuine artwork? A good
philosophical explanation needs to be given as to how the material
thing that is regularly presented to the audience is, in fact,
relevant to the artwork itself. Is the vehicular medium constitutive
of the artwork, and if so, how exactly does that square with the claim
of de-materialisation? 
Underlying the claim that we need to have a direct experiential
encounter with an artwork in order to appreciate it appropriately is
the fact that some of the properties that bear on the value of a
work can only be grasped in this way.
The properties in question here are generally aesthetic
properties, and the assumption motivating the experiential requirement
is that the appreciation of artworks necessarily involves an aesthetic
element (i.e. not necessarily beauty per se, but something
aesthetically pleasing or rewarding). 
However, one of the most distinguishing features of conceptual art,
setting out as it does to replace illustrative representation with
semantic representation, is that it does not prioritise aesthetic
experience in a traditional sense.  Conceptual art is intended as an
art of the mind: it generally appeals to matters of the intellect and
emphasises art’s cognitive rather than aesthetic
value. In the words of Timothy Binkley, traditional aesthetics is
preoccupied ‘with perceptual entities’ and this
‘leads aesthetics to extol and examine the “work of
art”, while averting its attention almost entirely from the
myriad other aspects of that complex cultural activity we call
“art” ’ (Binkley 1977, 271).
We can now see that the experiential requirement may well fail to have
any bite with regards to conceptual artworks because the artist’s aim
does not necessarily involve conferring to the work of art properties
that must be experienced directly in order to be grasped and fully
appreciated. If there is to be any kind of first-hand experiential
requirement for the appropriate appreciation of conceptual artworks,
it will perhaps be of a kind that focuses on an imaginative engagement
with the idea central to the artwork rather than a perceptual
experience of its aesthetic properties (see Schellekens 2007)
The main philosophical question highlighted by conceptual art in
this context, then, is the following: ‘Does art really need to be
aesthetic, and, if so, in what sense?’. In Binkley’s opinion, and in support of
conceptual art, one does not necessarily have to think of art in terms
of aesthetic value –whilst a lot of ‘art has chosen to
articulate in the medium of an aesthetic space’, there is
‘no a priori reason why art must confine itself to the creation
of aesthetic objects. It might opt for articulation in a semantic space
instead of an aesthetic one so that artistic meaning is not embodied in
a physical object or event’ (Binkley 1977, 273). 
However, not everyone has endorsed such a liberal view about the
separation between the aesthetic and the
 artistic[7]. 
If art does not aim at having aesthetic value, what, one might argue,
will set it apart from non-art? Which view one decides to favour on
this point may well end up being an issue about definition. If one
wishes to define art in terms of aesthetic experience, the question
finds a clear-cut answer, namely that conceptual art simply cannot be
considered a kind of art.  The down-side of that position is, however,
a whole set of difficult concerns to do with things, such as nature or
persons, that hardly qualify as art even though they invite aesthetic
experiences. If one is impressed by these worries and cannot see any
decisive philosophical reason to uphold the aesthetic view, there is
little, if anything, to block a conception of art which is not
necessarily aesthetic. One may, then, think of aesthetic value as
one kind of artistic value that, alongside with moral,
religious, political, historical and financial value, some artworks
have and others do
 not.[8]
Now, even if it is granted that art need not be aesthetic, it is still
possible to hold that conceptual art does not qualify as good
art because it does not (aim to) yield aesthetic experiences.  But
while this may be a viable position to hold in relation to the project
of conceptual art in general, it cannot be used to attack conceptual
art on its own grounds. Saying, for example, of Michael Craig-Martin’s
An Oak Tree that one cannot consider it a great work of art
because it fails to give rise to a distinctively aesthetic kind of
pleasure does not actually undermine the project. Conceptual art, as
we now know, is more about conveying meaning through a vehicular
medium than about furnishing its audiences with experiences of, say,
beauty. Any attack on this fundamental feature of conceptual art
targets not so much an individual work of art but rather finds fault
with the artistic tradition itself.
 At the most basic level of inquiry, two queries arise about
interpretation in art: (i) what ‘tools’ do we use to
interpret artworks?, and (ii) what is it we do when we interpret
artworks? In the case of conceptual art, a satisfactory answer to (i)
will most probably appeal to elements such as the narrative aids
provided by artists or curators (e.g. catalogues, titles, exhibited
explanations, labels, etc.); the appropriate mode of perception
(i.e. looking or listening); and what we know about the artwork’s and
artist’s social, historical, political or artistic context.  Depending
on the ontological status of the particular piece (if it is, say, a
ready-made or a performance), these elements can be combined in
different ways to explain our interpretative habits and
practices. 
 In addressing (ii) we will most likely need to refer to the
various mental abilities we put to use in such interpretative
exercises (e.g. imagination, empathy); and also to ask precisely what
the target of our interpretation is. This latter task is not as
unproblematic as it may seem, for it is not always clear whether it is
the object itself that should be under scrutiny, the object’s
perceptual properties (and, if so, which), the idea at the heart of
the work, or the artist’s intentions in making the piece. It seems
unlikely that the question will find an adequate answer until we find
an acceptable solution to the problem mentioned above, namely
‘Is the vehicular medium a constitutive part of the conceptual
artwork or not, and if so how?’. 
Two further philosophical questions about the notion of artistic
interpretation take on a particularly complex dimension in relation to
conceptual art. First, exactly what information is relevant in
artistic interpretation? And, more importantly, to what extent should
the artist’s intention be allowed to determine the
appropriate interpretation? Views differ widely on this topic. In
their article, ‘The Intentional Fallacy’, Wimsatt and
Beardsley famously argue in relation to the literary arts that the
only kind of evidence that is relevant to interpretation is that which
is internal to the work in question.  (Wimsatt & Beardsley
1946). An artist’s intention or design is of no interpretative
significance. Obviously, this position seems difficult to defend in
the case of conceptual art: when we are dealing with pieces such as
Warhol’s Brillo Boxes, where the internal evidence is clearly
insufficient to discern that it is an artwork in the first place, it
seems that we need to know that Warhol intended the boxes to be viewed
qua art, at the very least. 
Now, even if we do wish to defend the view that the artist’s intention
needs to be taken into account somehow in the interpretation of
conceptual art, further questions still require our attention
here. Most centrally, should the artist’s intention always be
considered the decisive factor in interpretation and
must it always be involved? Generally speaking, there are two
main strands of intentionalist positions available. On the one hand,
there is an approach which holds that the artist’s intention
determines an artwork’s meaning, and thus cannot be overlooked –
or indeed superseded – in artistic interpretation (e.g., Carroll
1992).  On the other hand, there is a view that the interpreter ought
to construct the best hypothesis concerning the artist’s actual
intention with the help of, say, the text and biographical notes, and
that this hypothesis confers meaning on the work in question (e.g.,
Levinson 1992).
 
At least at a first glance, it may seem that conceptual art presents a
stronger case for the first approach to interpretation, since the
artist’s intention is all we have to go by, quite literally, in works
such as Robert Barry’s simple statement entitled All the Things I
Know But of which I am Not at the Moment Thinking (1969) (see,
e.g., Maes 2010 and Gover 2012). Nevertheless, the question cannot be
settled quite so easily, for many conceptual artists make a point of
putting all the interpretative onus on the spectator.  How often are
we told, after all, that a specific artwork’s meaning rests entirely
in our hands; that ‘it means whatever you want it to
mean’? 
 This leads us to the second question that is especially pertinent
for a kind of art that sets out to convey an idea or meaning, namely
whether there can be more than one correct or appropriate
interpretation of an artwork. Again, several theories present
themselves as eligible candidates in relation to this problem. One
suggestion has centred around the idea that there can be a
multiplicity of appropriate or correct divergent interpretations of
one and the same artwork which cannot be reduced to one underlying
interpretation or ranked in relation to each other (e.g., Margolis
1991; Goldman 1990).  In opposition to this view, however, another
approach has it that there is in fact always a single best
interpretation which is better than any other (e.g., Beardsley 1970).
The aim of artistic interpretation is, then, in Matthew Kieran’s
words, ‘restricted to discovering the one true meaning of an
artwork.’ (Kieran 1996, 239). Whilst conceptual art certainly
seems to rest on something like the interpretative plurality of the
first view, it is not obvious how a kind of art that presents itself
as an idea can, in reality, accommodate such indeterminacy.
There are good reasons to believe that of all the questions conceptual
art gives rise to, interpretation is the most problematic from an
internal point of view. The conundrum can be put in the following
terms. If the conceptual work is the idea, it seems reasonable to
assume that artistic interpretation will consist primarily in coming
to understand that idea (which is conceded by the artist to the
artwork considered as such). In other words, if we take conceptual
art’s de-materialisation claim seriously, we are left with a notion of
interpretation which is relatively constrained to the artist’s
intention and to the claim that that intention determines the
appropriate or correct interpretation for that particular work. 
As we have seen, though, we are often encouraged by conceptual artists to
take the interpretative exercise into our own hands, so to speak, and
not be shy to use features about ourselves and our own lives as
interpretive tools. We are, in other words, asked to combine the
idea of art as idea with the claim that we can, as spectators, convey
an entirely new and fresh interpretation onto an artwork that is
nothing but an idea which, by definition, needs to be about or
concerned with something. So, if the idea is the art, then how
can my idiosyncratic interpretation of that idea be anywhere near
valid? It seems, then that in order to be coherent, conceptual
art must give up either the claim that the actual artwork is nothing
other than the idea, or the claim that the interpretative onus lies on
the viewer.
In seeking to convey a semantic representation through a vehicular
medium, conceptual art arguably aims to have cognitive – rather
than aesthetic – value. By cognitive value, what is meant
is simply the value an artwork may have in virtue of enhancing or
increasing our understanding of some topic, notion or
event. Interestingly, conceptual art seems to assume that the
aesthetic detracts from or divests art of its possible cognitive value
in such a way as to render the two kinds of value close to
mutually exclusive (Schellekens 2007).
The attempt to separate the aesthetic from the cognitive is far from a
recent investigative endeavour in philosophical circles. In the
very first section of Kant’s Critique of the Power of
Judgement, a clear-cut distinction is outlined between aesthetic
and cognitive (or ‘logical’) judgements. However, few
artistic movements have pressed these questions about the division
between aesthetic value on the one hand, and cognitive value on the
other, as scrupulously and explicitly as conceptual art. In fact,
conceptual art makes things very difficult for itself by holding that
the only kind of artistic value that is entirely legitimate is
cognitive value. 
Clearly, conceptual art is not the only kind of art that may have
cognitive value – many other artforms aim to have cognitive
value in addition to aesthetic value – and most of us
would agree that part of why we find art rewarding is precisely
because it often yields some kind of understanding. That is to say,
we read novels, look at paintings and listen to music not only because
of the pleasure it may afford, but also because it tends to make us
richer human beings, better able to make sense of the world around
us. 
Uncontroversial as this claim may seem, some philosophers have denied
that art should either have or seek to have cognitive value. Most
famously perhaps, expressivists such as Clive Bell and Roger Fry held
that art should only seek to express and arouse emotions (Bell
1914; Fry 1920). More recently, James Young has defended a view
whereby avant-garde art, like conceptual art, cannot yield any
significant knowledge or understanding (Young 2001, 77).
Young’s argument focuses on the notion of exemplification which
he locates at the heart of the only kind of semantic representation and
cognitive value that can be ascribed to artworks such as conceptual
ones. Exemplification is a form of reference to properties by
means of a sample (or exemplar). An exemplar ‘stands for
some property by [non-metaphorically, literally] possessing the
property’ (Young 2001, 72). In the case of conceptual art,
a work then exemplifies an idea or concept. So, for example, Tom
Marioni’s The Act of Drinking Beer with One’s Friends
is the Highest Form of Art
 (1970)[9]
 – a piece involving the artist and his
friends drinking beer together – is an exemplar of the idea at
the heart of the work, namely that drinking beer with one’s
friends is the highest art-form of all. This is the work’s
statement. However, as Young points out, it doesn’t follow
from the fact that something expresses a statement or has meaning that
it has significant cognitive value. In an nutshell, Young’s
claim is that all things considered, the kind of statement that
conceptual artworks and their ilk are really able to make 
are merely truisms. If conceptual art yields cognitive 
value, that is to say, it tends to be so
trivial that it barely deserves the name. 
The argument puts a finger on an experience shared by many spectators
of conceptual art who feel conned or deceived by it. Not only are
conceptual artworks not beautiful, one might object, they don’t even
tell us anything over and beyond banal clichés. What,
then, is conceptual art really good for? 
If there is to be a way out of this difficulty, we will have to take
the bull by the horns and discuss exactly what (kind of) understanding one
may gain from it. This answer will have to be cashed out in terms
of two concerns: one about the content of the knowledge, and
another about the kind of knowledge in question. First,
knowledge yielded by art can be about the artwork – not only the
techniques employed, the work’s history and tradition, and so on,
but also the meaning and thoughts that the work conveys. Second,
art can yield either propositional knowledge or knowledge by
acquaintance. Whereas the first consists of knowledge given to us
in terms of propositions and can either be concerned with the artwork
itself (e.g. knowledge ‘that it represents the Emperor
Maximilan’s  execution’)  or a reality beyond that work (e.g.
knowledge ‘that horrible things are often done in the name of
political revolutions’), the second kind of knowledge has the potential to enable one
to imagine what it would be like to be in a certain position or
situation, to empathize, to come very close to experiencing what it
would be like to have that kind of experience first-hand (e.g. what it
is like to witness the execution of a dishonoured Emperor). 
The notions of knowledge and cognitive value, whilst at the very heart
of the conceptual project, raise a manifold of important questions that
require solid and cogent philosophical answers. Perhaps
exemplification can still serve an epistemological purpose by inviting
us to engage with the issues raised by a work of art in a richer and
more imaginative way; in a way that makes us think about questions of
philosophical interest in particular way – a way that
propositions alone cannot do? Perhaps the key to conceptual
art’s value lies in a more challenging intellectual relationship
with the work, a genuine engagement with the idea in question.
Exploring this avenue may yet help us see what kind of non-trivial
cognitive value conceptual art is capable of yielding.
Many more questions centred around these five philosophical themes
remain to be examined in relation to conceptual art. With regards
to concerns about defining art, we need to address the increasing
number of worries to do with exactly how we are to distinguish art from
non-art, and indeed whether there really is a distinction (if only
conceptual) to be drawn here. That is to say, if conceptual art
is at times not only perceptually indistinguishable from non-art but it
is also the case that everything is alleged to be (part of) a potential
artwork, perhaps the inevitable outcome is that there simply cannot be
a principled distinction between art and non-art. So, does the
conceptual project lead to the end of the category of art as
such? 
From the ontological perspective, this set of concerns acquires an
even more aggressive flavour: if art should be all about putting
forward ideas and making statements, why, one might wonder, do we need
the conceptual artwork at all? Can we not merely ask the same
questions and make the same statements directly? 
In addition to these questions, the host of issues that have been
raised about interpretation, intention, appreciation and the way they
are (or should be) related have not yet been silenced. For art
that is as discourse-dependent as most conceptual art is, it is not
always clear whether there is anything more to interpreting conceptual
art than just being told what the idea in question is. And if so,
can we still call this interpretation? 
Finally, what are we to make of the relation between aesthetic and
cognitive value in conceptual art – should they be considered as
in opposition or even as mutually exclusive? If the only kind of
value that is of genuine artistic importance is cognitive value, it will be
difficult to avoid the definitional and ontological concerns mentioned
above. Also, it will call for a deeply revisionary conception of
art, one fundamentally hostile to the very notions we are probably most
used to associating with art, namely beauty and aesthetic pleasure.
Central to the philosophy of conceptual art is thus the provocative
spirit of the project under investigation – conceptual art throws
down the gauntlet by challenging us to reconsider every aspect of
artistic experience, and it may well be up to philosophy to pick it up
and address some of the questions conceptual art makes its business to
raise. Conceptual art actively aims to be thought-provoking,
stimulating and inspiring, and if only for that reason, philosophers
interested in art should not pass it by unaffected.