The traditional picture of the events leading to Bishop Tempier’s
condemnation looks something like this. On January 18, 1277 Pope John
XXI informed Stephen Tempier, Bishop of Paris, in a letter that he had
heard rumors of heresy and charged him with the task of examining
(facias inspici vel inquiri) where and by whom these errors
had been disseminated (CUP 1: 541). On March 7, 1277, Bishop Tempier
published his list of 219 theological and philosophical theses
(articuli) and of some books that were condemned. Anyone
teaching or listening to the listed errors would be excommunicated,
unless they turned themselves in to the bishop or the chancellor within
seven days, in which case the bishop would inflict proportionate
penalties (CUP 1: 543).
Since this papal letter precedes Tempier’s condemnation, it has been
generally assumed that Tempier acted on papal initiative, and moreover,
acted in an overzealous and hasty way. In his letter, the pope merely
requested Tempier to investigate rumors of false teaching, whereas the
latter responded by drawing up a list of 219 false propositions.
Furthermore, only about six weeks elapsed between the papal
instructions and Tempier’s publication of this list, a list which has
been characterized by historians as repetitious and disorderly.
Unfortunately, the chain of events leading up to Tempier’s
condemnation still is not totally clear. If Tempier, indeed, acted on a
papal mandate, it is surprising that he does not mention it in the
introduction to his syllabus of errors, but merely indicates that he
had received information from important people (Who these
“important people” may have been is a question that will be
addressed below). 
Another puzzling aspect concerning the course of events sketched
above is the papal letter “Flumen aquae vivae” of
April 28, 1277, that is, more than forty days after Tempier had
promulgated his list of condemned articles. Curiously enough, this
letter gives no indication whatsoever that the pope knew about
Tempier’s action. On the contrary, the pope grants a mandate to Tempier
to notify him, the pope, about new errors, and to inform him about the
names of the propagators of these errors, about their followers, and
about their writings. Pope John’s second letter is a further
specification of his first: he now indicates the culprits, namely
“some scholars of arts and in the faculty of theology at
Paris” (nonnulli tam in artibus quam in theologica facultate
studentes Parisius). In addition, its purpose is more focused. The
pope will use the dossier that he has requested from the bishop to
establish – with the help of an advisory committee – the nature of
the errors and to decide whether they will have to be recanted, or
condemned and whether the University of Paris will need to be
reformed.
In short, the evidence also allows another scenario, namely that
Tempier did not act on the pope’s instigation, but was already in the
process of preparing his condemnation when he received the papal letter
of January 18, 1277. In this scenario of events, the papal letter
Flumen aquae vivae crossed the letter in which Tempier
announced the condemnation.
Tempier’s condemnation is only one of the approximately sixteen
lists of censured theses that were issued at the University of Paris
during the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries. Most of these lists of
propositions were put together into systematic collections of
prohibited articles. One of the earliest of these collections of
medieval condemned articles originated towards the end of the
thirteenth century under the name of Parisian Articles or also
Collectio errorum in anglia et parisius condempnatorum.
Initially this collection consisted of twenty-two chapters presenting
the errors condemned in 1277 by Archbishop Robert Kilwardby at Oxford,
in 1241 by Bishop William of Alvernia in Paris, and in 1270 and 1277 by
Bishop Stephen Tempier in Paris (in this order).
During the fourteenth century, this Collection grew significantly,
so that, in fact, a second, augmented Collection came into existence.
All the propositions that were added to the first compilation had been
condemned in the fourteenth century at the University of Paris. It can
be seen as a collection of verdicts, which at the opening of each new
set of verdicts provides information about the parties involved and the
date. The verdicts are not motivated, nor does the collection provide
an account of the events (narratio).
The collection of Parisian Articles must have had some kind of
official status, and must have circulated among medieval scholars.
Bachelors in theology were required by oath not to maintain anything
“in favor of articles that have been condemned at the Roman curia
or in Paris.” Moreover, many medieval philosophical and
theological texts contain references to and quotations from the
“Parisian articles,” which by no means should always be
identified with Tempier’s list of condemned articles.
If one compares Tempier’s 1277 syllabus to the other lists of errors
assembled in the compilation of Parisian Articles two features stand
out, namely the anonymity of its targets and its promulgation by a
bishop. Tempier does not specify the persons behind the false views,
but merely states that the errors were disseminated by “certain
scholars at the faculty of arts.” The other condemnations,
however, all concern specific scholars whose names are explicitly
mentioned in the Collectio errorum. In addition, it is one of
the few censures in which a bishop was involved right from the start,
and not, for instance, at a later stage of the proceedings as judge of
an appeal.
In his introductory letter to the syllabus of errors, Tempier
indicates that he responded to information received from important
people (magnarum et gravium personarum crebra zeloque fidei accensa
insinuavit relatio). The allegations were that “some
scholars of arts at Paris” (nonnulli Parisius studentes in
artibus) had been transgressing the limits of their own faculty
(proprie facultatis limites excedentes). In all likelihood,
this complaint stemmed from theological circles.
In his introductory letter, Tempier also reports that he sought the
advice “not only of the doctors of Sacred Scripture, but also of
other wise men” (tam doctorum sacrae Scripturae, quam aliorum
prudentium virorum communicato consilio). From other cases of
suspect teaching we know that the task of the theologians was to
examine certain works and draw up a list of errors. In cases where a
list of alleged errors already existed, the theologians were charged
with assessing the degree of error of the listed propositions. The
theologian John of Pouilly reports that sixteen masters of theology
were Tempier’s assessors for the condemnation. One of the members of
the commission was Henry of Ghent, as he himself testifies in his
Quodlibet II. It is unknown when these masters met, but it
must have been after Henry of Ghent had become a regent master in
theology, a position that he obtained in 1276. That there were some
tensions between Tempier and the theologians is attested by Giles of
Rome, a contemporary witness of the events of 1277: he claimed that
some articles were condemned not on the basis of the advice of the
masters, but rather due to the “obstinacy of a few.” This
observation has been taken to concern Tempier, but it might also have
included some of the “wise men” who had assisted him.
The identity of these other wise men is unknown. Since, however,
they are so clearly distinguished from the theologians, they have to be
sought among the prelates. Of these, only the involvement of the
chancellor, John of Alleux, is directly substantiated by the textual
evidence: the introductory letter to Tempier’s condemnation stipulated
that offenders had to report either to the bishop himself or to the
chancellor. Other likely candidates are Simon of Brion, the papal
legate, and Ranulph of Houblonnire, Tempier’s future successor as
bishop of Paris.
In addition, mention should be made of the possible role of the
inquisitor of France, Simon du Val. On November 23, 1276 he had
summoned three ex-scholars from Paris, now residing in Liège, to
appear before his court “probably and gravely suspect of the
crime of heresy” (de crimine heresis probabiliter et
vehementer suspectos). They were Siger of Brabant, canon at Saint
Paul’s, and Goswin of Chapelle and Bernier of Nivelles, canons at Saint
Martin’s, all in Liège. At least one of them, Siger of Brabant,
was also implicated in Tempier’s condemnation (see below). Although
there is no firm textual evidence, it is tempting to speculate that the
inquisitor’s dossier concerning these three arts masters was known to
Bishop Tempier.
The condemnation of 1277 not only covered the already mentioned
syllabus of 219 errors, but also the work “De
amore” by Andreas Capellanus, a treatise on geomancy with
the incipit “Estimaverunt Indi” and the explicit
“Racionare ergo super eum, et invenies, etc.” –
which has not yet been identified – and unnamed treatises on
necromancy, witchcraft, or fortune-telling.
Of interest to historians of philosophy is the list of censured
propositions. It is unknown what method Tempier and his advisers used
to draw up their syllabus of 219 errors. Usually, it is claimed that
Tempier’s list not very well organised and “broad in scope to the
point of confusion.” However, the lack of doctrinal cohesion is
also present in other lists of the Collectio errorum, simply
because the order in which the charged errors appeared on the roll was
determined by other factors such as, for instance, the order in which
they appeared in the examined work. Shortly after 1277 the extremely
long list of 219 prohibited views was reorganized, possibly to
facilitate its use in the academic community. At the beginning of this
century, Pierre Mandonnet once again put Tempier’s articles into a new
order, numbering and distinguishing the 179 philosophical theses from
the 40 theological ones.
A very helpful summary of the condemned propositions has been
provided by John F. Wippel. The first seven of the philosophical
propositions bear on the nature and excellence of philosophy.
Propositions 8 through 12 (in the numbering of Mandonnet) have a
bearing on the knowability and nature of God. Propositions 13–15
concern divine knowledge, and 16 through 26 divine omnipotence. Many of
the articles, notably 34–61 regard the separate intelligences (angels).
Another interesting group of articles is 67–69. By condemning these
articles, Tempier endorsed God’s absolute power to do whatever he
wills. Other interesting themes that are touched in the philosophical
articles are the world’s eternity (80 through 89), the unicity of the
human intellect and its implications (117 through 133), and human
freedom and free will (151 through 166). Among the theological
articles, themes that appear are theology as a science (180–186), the
doctrine of the Eucharist (196–199), Christian morality (202–205), and
human immortality and reward and punishment in the life to come
(213–219). It should be emphasized that Tempier’s theses express
positions that cannot be maintained in light of revealed truth; for
this reason, each is followed by the qualification, “error”.
Recently, Sylvain Piron has argued that Tempier’s list of condemned
articles does exhibit an encyclopedic organization, which suggests
that Tempier had a deliberate plan. Articles 25–183 can be divided
into sub-sections which respectively touch upon the topics of God,
angels, the world, the soul, the intellect, the will, philosophy, the
will again (due to the misplacement of a rubric), and ethics. The same
global order is also present in articles 1–24. The final articles,
184–219, seem to be a miscellaneous collection. Possibly, Tempier’s
list actually consists of three separate lists.
The question of who the targets were of Tempier’s condemnation
cannot be entirely separated from the question of what views were
censured. As was mentioned above, Tempier did not identify the targets
of his condemnation, but merely indicated that it was directed against
unspecified members of the arts faculty in Paris. Even though their
names appear nowhere in the document itself (and in the rubrics of only
two of the many medieval manuscripts which have preserved Tempier’s
condemnation), Siger of Brabant and Boethius of Dacia have been singled
out as the most prominent targets of the 1277 censure.
Yet, their identification should be qualified, as becomes clear from
the results, or should one say lack of results, of the ground-breaking
study by Roland Hissette. He tried to identify the proximate background
of the 219 condemned theses. As his point of departure, Hissette took
known works by Siger and Boethius and three anonymous writings from the
arts faculty that were available in a modern edition at the time that
he wrote his study. From Hissette’s own summary of the results of his
careful examination it appears that surprisingly few of the censured
propositions could be identified with any degree of certainty in the
known works of thirteenth-century artistae. Of the 219
propositions, only 79 can be identified, with various degrees of
probability, in the works of Siger of Brabant, Boethius of Dacia, or
the three anonymous writings. Of 72 propositions the attribution is
uncertain, whereas 68 propositions could not be identified at all.
Moreover, many censured propositions that seem to have been derived
from the examined works that originated at the arts faculty in the
thirteenth century do not really represent the author’s own view, but
rather appear to be quotations or paraphrases from Aristotle,
from Arabic philosophers, or from “the philosophers”
as Hissette himself indicates.
Hissette’s examination was based on the assumption that Tempier’s
censure envisioned only teachings from the faculty of arts. The
introductory letter, however, seems to contradict this assumption.
There, Tempier draws an important distinction, which has not been duly
recognized in the scholarly literature, between propagators and views.
He accuses the members of the arts faculty of disseminating
(tractare et disputare) manifest and damned errors
(manifesti et exsecrabiles errores). The errors are specified
in the roll or leaves connected to the introductory letter (in
rotulo seu cedulis, praesentibus hiis annexo seu annexis). They
are the 219 censured propositions. Tempier does not state, however,
that the members of the arts faculty are the authors of these
errors. In his introductory letter Tempier separates the 219 censured
errors from their propagators. Only the propagators have to be sought
in the arts faculty in Paris: on pain of excommunication, they are
prohibited to dogmatize, disseminate, or sustain in any way
(dogmatizare, aut defendere seu sustinere quoquo modo) the
propositions collected by Tempier. The origin of these propositions,
however, is not stated in the introductory letter. In other words,
Tempier indicates that those artistae who were castigated for
disseminating false teachings were not necessarily disseminating their
own views. When drawing up the syllabus, Tempier and his
advisers relied on more sources, written or oral, than those that were
used by Hissette. Possibly, Tempier’s list even included earlier lists
of suspect views.
The inconclusiveness of Hissette’s study strongly suggests that
research into the proximate background of the censured propositions has
to be broadened. The directions that such research should take are
indicated, either implicitly or explicitly, by Roland Hissette, and by
other scholars such as John Wippel and Calvin Normore. Today it is
generally agreed that a considerable number of the 219 censured
propositions have a bearing on the reintroduction of pagan philosophy
into the arts faculty, and on the ensuing crisis over the relation of
faith and reason. Consequently, Greek or Arabic sources may prove to be
at the origin of a number of censured propositions, as is also
suggested in Tempier’s preface, in which he indicated that the scholars
whose errors he condemned took their inspiration from pagan writings
(cum errores praedictos gentilium scripturis muniant), 
Other propositions may well have been derived from the teaching of
theologians, such as Thomas Aquinas. In particular, John Wippel has
argued (against Roland Hissette) that Aquinas’ teaching was also
implied in Tempier’s condemnation and that some of the positions were
taken from his writings. In this respect, the oft-quoted statement from
Tempier’s introductory letter that members of the arts faculty were
transgressing the limits of their own faculty (propriae facultatis
limites excedentes) could acquire new meaning. Some members of the
arts faculty were rebuked not only for teaching suspect philosophical
views but also for teaching suspect theological views.
Another, complementary, line of inquiry has been suggested by Malcolm
De Mowbray. According to him, many of the theses may have originated
from students during disputations in the schools. Given the oral
character of these exercises, it is only natural that they are
difficult to trace in extant works from masters of arts. Evidence for
his interpretation has De Mowbray found in Boethius of Dacia’s De
aeternitate mundi, which, according to him, was meant to help students
to hold a disputation. Much of De Mowbray’s interpretation hinges on
our understanding of the Preface of Tempier’s condemnation, which
mentions some people at the arts-faculty (nonnulli Parisius studentes
in artibus) who had discussed and disputed the condemned articles in
the schools (in scolis tractare et disputare presumunt, ut eis
nescient respondere). His interpretation has been contested by Luca
Bianchi.
Tempier’s condemnation has often been depicted as the most dramatic
and significant doctrinal censure in the history of the University of
Paris, and a landmark in the history of medieval philosophy and
theology. Yet, the doctrinal significance of the condemnation has
received very diverse assessments. Since the appearance of the studies
by Pierre Mandonnet and Fernand van Steenberghen, Tempier’s
condemnation has come to be associated with the opposition between
faith and reason, caused by the introduction of newly translated
philosophical sources in the Latin West, in particular Aristotle and
his commentator Averroes. Studies which present Tempier’s condemnation
as a response to “Averroism” or to “radical
Aristotelianism,” follow this line of interpretation.
This interpretation is often associated with the view that Tempier’s
action was a symptom of an already existing opposition to rationalism,
that is, against philosophical research pursued without concern for
Christian orthodoxy. Evidence of the presence of rationalist tendencies
at the University of Paris was found in certain articles of Tempier’s
syllabus, or in the prefatory letter in which Tempier expounded his
notion of double truth. According to Tempier, some scholars maintained
that certain views were true according to philosophy, but not according
to Catholic faith, “as if there were two contrary truths, and as
if against the truth of Sacred Scripture, there is truth in the sayings
of the condemned pagans.”
The so-called theory of double truth has been the source of much
confusion. Nowadays, scholars agree that there were no medieval authors
who entertained the philosophically absurd theory that two
contradictory propositions – one derived from philosophical
investigation, the other from Christian revelation--can both be true at
the same time. Rather, Tempier’s reproach should be taken as an attempt
to ridicule the hermeneutical practice of commentators to evaluate a
doctrine (for instance Aristotle’s) from a philosophical point of
view (“philosophically speaking”) and from faith. In
reality, however, medieval scholars generally supposed that in cases of
conflict between reason and faith, the truth was always on the side of
the faith.
In more recent times, the idea that Tempier’s condemnation was a
symptom of the existence of rationalist currents at the University of
Paris, in the sense of the emergence of philosophy as an autonomous
discipline vis-à-vis divine revelation, has been further
developed by scholars such as Alain de Libera, Kurt Flasch, and Luca
Bianchi. Although there are differences in detail and in emphasis, they
view Tempier’s action as an attempt to curb the concept of philosophy
as a comprehensive doctrine of natural knowledge aimed at the
attainment of happiness here in this life, rather than after death.
Their studies about the significance of Tempier’s condemnation also
address fundamental questions about the nature of philosophy in the
Middle Ages. 
In the historiography of medieval science, the views of Pierre
Duhem, have proven to be extremely influential. Duhem believed that
Tempier, with his insistence of God’s absolute power, had liberated
Christian thought from the dogmatic acceptance of Aristotelianism, and
in this way marked the birth of modern science. Especially articles 39
and 49 played a pivotal role in his eyes. Duhem’s thesis has opened up
the historiography of medieval science as a serious academic
discipline. Yet, at the same time, no one in the field any longer
endorses his view that modern science started in 1277. Of contemporary
historians of science, Edward Grant probably comes closest to Duhem’s
vision, though his view includes many refinements and historical
materials that were unknown to Duhem.
In any case, it is clear that the condemnation did have an impact on
scholars at the university. Peter of Auvergne, for instance, wrote two
sets of questions on Aristotle’s De caelo, one of which was posterior
to Tempier’s condemnation. There, Peter of Auvergne changed his views
on such crucial issues as the world’s eternity, the animation of the
heavens and the existence of an infinite multitude.
Although Tempier’s action of March 7, 1277 is best known in the
historiography of philosophy, mention should also be made of two
additional doctrinal investigations of 1277 that are attributed to
Bishop Tempier. The first one concerned the theologian Giles of Rome,
and was concluded before March 28, 1277 with the censure of fifty-one
propositions taken from Giles’s commentary on the Sentences.
The second doctrinal inquiry was aimed against Thomas Aquinas. It was
begun after Giles’s censure, but still before March 28, 1277. According
to Robert Wielockx, the inquiry against Thomas Aquinas was never
completed. Basing his conclusions on evidence provided in a letter by
John Pecham, Wielockx claimed that during the vacancy of the Apostolic
See, sometime between May 20 and November 25, 1277, Tempier received
orders from the curia to stop his investigation.
Wielockx’s thesis of a separate process against Thomas Aquinas has
been generally accepted in the scholarly literature. However, recently
the historical evidence has been reexamined and his interpretation been
questioned by John Wippel and Hans Thijssen, the latter in the context
of a substantially revised account of the juridical procedures against
Giles of Rome.