Count Paul Yorck von Wartenburg was born in Berlin on March 1, 1835.
His grandfather was the famous Field Marshal Hans David Ludwig Yorck
von Wartenburg. (The Field Marshal's courageous signing of the
Convention of Tauroggen, originally unauthorized by the king and thus
in effect treasonous, started the Prussian War of Liberation against
Napoleon in 1813. It made the Field Marshal Yorck a national hero.)
Paul Yorck's father, Ludwig David Yorck von Wartenburg, managed
the family's estate at Klein-Oels in Silesia (near Breslau, today
Wrokław) where Paul Yorck grew up. Paul Yorck's parents were
well-connected to a number of literary, philosophical, and artistic
circles in Berlin and elsewhere. They were acquainted with Friedrich Schleiermacher,
Ludwig Tieck, Bettina von Arnim, Alexander von Humboldt, Karl August
Varnhagen, Johann Gustav Droysen, Karl Friedrich Schinkel, and Ernst
von Wildenbruch, to name but a few. The family Yorck von Wartenburg
belonged to the dominant elite in Prussia and the German Empire.
Yorck's life-long enthusiasm for history and historical reality
must be seen against this biographical background.
In 1855 Paul Yorck began his university studies in law at Bonn, but
soon moved to the university at Breslau where he also enrolled in
philosophy courses. After passing the second law exam, Yorck published
his exam essay “The Catharsis of Aristotle and Sophocles’
Oedipus of Colonus” (Yorck 1866), the only publication by him
during his lifetime. When his father passed away in 1865 Yorck took
over the management of the family estate at Klein-Oels. He also assumed
his father's hereditary seat in the Prussian Upper Chamber
[Herrenhaus] where he participated in political debates. He
took part in the Franco-Prussian war (1870–1871); and he was present at
the Proclamation of the German Empire in the Hall of Mirrors at the
Palace of Versailles in 1871. 
In the same year Yorck met Dilthey, who had been called to the
University at Breslau. They quickly became friends and Dilthey was a
frequent guest at Klein-Oels, often staying for prolonged working
holidays. The posthumously published Dilthey–Yorck
Correspondence (Yorck 1923) is an impressive testimony to this
friendship. 
From the early 1890s Yorck worked on a manuscript on Heraclitus
(Yorck 1896/97) and a book about the Stances of Consciousness and
History (Yorck
 1892–1897).[1]
Before his death, Yorck declared the two works unfinished and not ready
for publication. Published only posthumously, they are, in the words of
Karlfried Gründer (1970, 55), “sketches” of first
drafts for “great philosophical books.” Paul Yorck died at
Klein-Oels, September 12, 1897. His grandson, Count Peter Yorck, who
had studied Yorck's unfinished works, was a leading member of the
Kreisauer Circle, the German resistance cell responsible for the failed
attempt to assassinate Hitler on July 20, 1944.
When in 1923 the Correspondence between Yorck and Dilthey
(Yorck 1923) (abbreviated hereafter as CR) was published as “a
memorial” to their philosophical friendship (CR, VI), it
established Yorck not only as an equal to Dilthey and a faithful
interlocutor and eager co-worker on Dilthey's
 project(s),[2]
but also as a philosopher and keen
observer of his times in his own right.
In 1892 Yorck writes to Dilthey:
 Our time portends something
of an end of an epoch. A token of this is the disappearance of the
elemental pleasure in historical realities. The feeling that everything
passes [Gefühl der Vergänglichkeit] haunts
the world once again. (CR, p. 140)
 Dilthey clearly shares this
sentiment. In a more extensive note about the same topic Yorck writes:
It is my growing conviction that today we stand at a historical
turning point similar to the one of the 15th century. In
contradistinction to the scientific-technological progress, which
consists in increased abstraction and isolation, a new formation comes
into being because the human being in his entirety [der ganze
Mensch] once again takes a stand and faces the problems of life.
Every time it is a new stance towards life [Lebensstellung]
and a new conception of it that ushers in a new epoch, not any old
discovery or invention, even if it is of the greatest import. The
thread on which science hangs has become so long and spun ever so thin,
that now it is snapping in the face of the impetuous question: What is
truth? (CR, p. 128) 
In yet another letter, Yorck claims
that, since the Renaissance, science and knowledge—abstracted
from feeling and volition—have followed an eccentric
trajectory, in which they have lost sight of man, resulting in profound
self-alienation:
The ripple effects caused by the eccentric
principle, which ushered in a new age more than four hundred years ago,
seem to me to have become exceedingly broad and flat; knowledge has
advanced to the point of nullifying itself, and man has become so far
removed from himself that he no longer catches sight of himself.
‘Modern’ man, that is, man since the Renaissance, is fit
for the grave. (CR, p. 83)
 The general thrust of these reflections
and the language used are reminiscent of Nietzsche's descriptions
of the “uncanniest of all guests,” nihilism. In fact, it is
the usually so cautious Dilthey who, in one of his last letters to
Yorck, remarks that the true but “horrible word about the age has
been announced” by no one other than Nietzsche (CR, p. 238). There
is no reason to believe that Yorck would have disagreed.
Yorck's and Dilthey's awareness of an epochal shift,
written some twenty years before World War I, could not fail to impress
the generation of students who, in the aftermath of this European
catastrophe, their predicament exacerbated by continued economic
hardship and hyperinflation, returned to studying philosophy in the
early 1920s. This may explain why, much later, in the 1980s, Gadamer
would still speak of the enormous significance of the publication of
the Dilthey–Yorck correspondence in 1923, calling it an
“epoch-making moment” in its own
 right (Gadamer 1995, p. 8).
According to Yorck, the analysis and evaluation of the contemporary
intellectual-historical situation is integral to philosophy—all
the more so if philosophy self-reflexively grasps its ineluctably
historical nature, which in itself is one of Yorck's main
philosophical objectives. The basic idea for the historicity of
philosophy is straightforward. For Yorck, as for Dilthey, philosophy is
“a manifestation of life”
[Lebensmanifestation] (CR, p. 250), a product or an
expression in which life articulates itself in a certain way. But all
life is intrinsically historical. Life is inconceivable without its
historical development. Yorck writes:
The entire given
psycho-physical reality is not something that is, but
something that lives: that is the germ cell of historicity. And
self-reflection, which is directed not at an abstract I, but the
entirety of my own self, will find that I am historically determined,
just as physics grasps me as determined by the cosmos. Just as I am
nature, I am history. And in this decisive sense we have to understand
Goethe's dictum of [our] having lived [Gelebthaben] for
at least three thousand years. Conversely, it follows that history as a
scientific discipline exists only as psychology of history. (CR
71/72)
For Yorck, as for Dilthey, human life is incorrectly understood if
it is subsumed under the generic catch-all category of
“existence.” The first point is that human life is
inconceivable without temporal and historical development, movement,
and change; life always transcends itself, hence it never simply
“is.” The mode of being for humans is “life,”
not
 “existence.”[3]
And life, unlike existence, is intrinsically historical. Precisely this
distinction is brought home by Yorck's demand to always observe
“the generic difference between the ontic and the
historical” (CR, p. 191). The ontic is what is simply
“there” without inner life, temporality, or history. It
includes the physical entities in the world, as well as abstract
objects, numbers, essences, ideas, etc. The “ontic” is
toto caelo other than “the historical.”
Yorck's second point is that all history is a development
of human powers or human psychology, where psychology does not
mean some inert or fixed “nature,” but the constant play of
forces, the ever shifting configurations between understanding,
affectivity, and volition. (See Section 3.1 below.)
In addition, Yorck emphasizes the “virtuality” or
“effectivity” of history, i.e., the cumulative effects and
results of individual persons exerting power and influence in
transmitting the possibility and conception of life to their
descendants. Successor-generations develop their own stance towards
life in response to what they have inherited from the individuals and
generations preceding them. History is the ongoing transmission of
life's potentiality, including the transmission of power, ideas,
and material conditions.
 The child gains through the
mother's sacrifice, her sacrifice benefits the child. Without
such virtual transmission of power [Kraftübertragung]
there is no history at all. (CR, p. 155)
 Yorck does not refer to
some anonymous bio-power or power structures, as discussed in much of
contemporary philosophy, but to the authority, sacrifice, and direct
action and communication through which an individual person or groups
of persons form and shape the lives and behaviours of coming
generations. It is for this reason that Yorck insists that
“person” is the key historical category (CR, p. 109). History
is the history of historical, individual agents, projecting their power
and authority into the future. 
Since Yorck understands history as a connecting band of ideas and
conditions passed on from one person to another, and indeed from one
generation to another, his position must not be associated with
historicism. For Yorck, there is one continuous and common line of
historical life—a living syndesmos. Past generations
and past persons are not “outside” a present horizon in a
past world of their own. Rather, they live on, as it were, in their
descendents. Moreover, because of this connecting band, one can go
“backwards” by way of what Yorck calls
“transposition” (CR, p. 61), transposing oneself into the
lives of others and thus “re-enacting,” as Dilthey would
say, the positions towards life that have been lived by one's
predecessors. That life is historical means that each person is always
already outside his or her own individual “nature” and
placed within the historical connection to predecessor- and
successor-generations. For Yorck, living self-consciousness is, to use
Hegel's fortuitous phrase, “the I that is
 we and the we that is I” (Hegel 1807, p. 140).
Consequently, Yorck rejects from the start the transcendental method
in philosophy as insufficient for grasping lived historical reality.
Transcendental philosophy reduces historical life to the merely
“subjective,” which misses the genuine characteristic of
Geist, spirit or mind, namely its real, historical extension
and connection. As Yorck puts it, “the transcendental
method” merely suspends or sublates “the realm of the
objective,” but it fails to “extend the region of
Geist” (CR, p. 194). Insisting that “the
character of subjectivity does not even reach the realm of
Geist” (CR, p. 194), Yorck clearly implies that the
“realm of history” is the proper domain for Geist. It follows
that, despite his criticism of the narrow confines of transcendental
and/or subject-centred philosophy, Yorck's philosophical
conception of history is still inscribed within the confines of
Geist-philosophy. Following Hegel, who argues that everything hinges
on the understanding that “substance is
 subject” (Hegel 1807, p. 19),
Yorck agrees that
everything hinges on the understanding that “substance is
history” or “substance is historical
 spirit.”[4]
Yorck's primary category of historical life does not only
challenge transcendental philosophy as too-narrow a foothold for
philosophy. A fortiori, it also challenges the entire
metaphysical tradition, which presupposes or searches for an ultimate
objective reality (being, idea, substance, and so on), divorced from
the ground of the always shifting historical life. Yorck rejects claims
to “knowledge” sub specie aeternitatis. For Yorck,
metaphysics is a flight from the historical reality ‘on the
ground.’ By making historical life primary, Yorck effectively
aims to dismantle the predominance of Greek metaphysics, including the
modes of thought of modern science derived from it.
But Yorck is not content with just opposing metaphysics and
transcendental philosophy. Instead, he attempts to instill and to
cultivate historical awareness in philosophy itself, based on the
principle that all productions of life are as historical as life
itself. He writes: Since “to philosophize is to live,”
“there is no real philosophizing which would not be
historical” (CR, p. 251). More radical than Dilthey, Yorck calls for
the “historicization”
[Vergeschichtlichung] of philosophy:
 Just as physiology cannot abstract from physics, so
philosophy—especially if it is critical—cannot abstract
from historicity [Geschichtlichkeit]. After all, the
uncritical
Critique of Kant's can be understood historically only,
and thus be overcome. [Human] behaviour and historicity are like
breathing and air pressure—and—this may sound somewhat
paradoxical—the failure to historicize philosophizing appears
to me, in methodological respects, a metaphysical remnant. (CR,
69)
 It is therefore not surprising that, unlike Dilthey, Yorck
specifically appreciates the emphasis on historicity
 [Geschichtlichkeit][5]
in
Hegel and some of his followers, despite his rejection of Hegel's
speculative or ontical superstructure (CR,
 59).[6]
In light of the historical nature of philosophy, Yorck draws two
decisive methodological inferences. First, he rejects as too rigid and
untenable the opposition between theoretical or systematic philosophy
and the history of ideas (CR, p. 251), because, as an ongoing historical
development, philosophy always requires both a genetic and historical
clarification, as well as a systematic and theoretical account. Instead
of a mutually exclusive relation, Yorck sees a mutually productive
combination. Second, because Yorck always includes the present
situation within the domain of history, he calls for a
“critical,” and not “antiquarian,” or
quietistic mode of philosophizing (CR, p. 19). Speaking for Dilthey and
himself, Yorck argues that this critical work of philosophy lays the
groundwork for the practical intent or the historical vocation of
philosophy: 
The potential for practical application is of course
the real justification for any science. Yet mathematical
praxis is not the only kind. In practical terms, our
standpoint is pedagogical in intent, in the broadest and deepest sense
of the word. It is the soul of all true philosophy and the truth of
Plato and Aristotle. (CR, pp. 42/ 43)
In the condensed and all too general format of the
Correspondence with Dilthey, Yorck develops the practical
“application” of philosophy in only the most fragmentary
fashion. Its most important part is the actual clarification of the
contemporary situation, the determination of the given historical
possibilities, and the avenues for implementing some of them. Yorck
holds that since the Renaissance and through the works of such thinkers
as Galileo, Descartes, and Hobbes, the self-interpretation of life has
found its centre of gravity in the cultivation of the theoretical
understanding [Verstand]. The primacy accorded to theoretical
understanding and what it projects as objective, unchangeable, and
ultimate reality (metaphysical & physical) has ushered in
“the natural sciences,” “nominalism,”
“rationalism,” and “mechanism,” (CR, pp. 68, 63
& 155). But this has come at the exclusion of the full
thematization, expression, and appreciation of human affectivity
[Gefühl], including the underlying feeling of human
connectivity through a shared life in history. Blocked-out are
questions which affect the temporal, historical and personal existence
of human beings, or what Yorck once calls “existential
questions” [Existenzialfragen] (CR, p. 62), which relate to
the life-goals human beings strive after, the recognition of
dependency, and the awareness of human mortality, finitude, and death
(CR, p. 120). The relative sidelining of these aspects in the psychology
of human beings lies at the bottom of Yorck's diagnosis of the
increasing self-alienation of modern man and the crisis of his
time.
With Dilthey, Yorck attempts to highlight the “full human
being” [den ganzen Menschen] (CR, p. 157), as opposed
to the rationalistically reduced, one-dimensional individual that has
preoccupied modern philosophy and shaped modern culture. The
historicization of philosophy belongs to this project, as does the
acknowledgment of transcendence. According to Yorck, transcendence
(CR, pp. 120, 144) facilitates the withdrawal from the world in its
objective reality (as represented by thought and metaphysics). It lets
human life pivot around the personal, historical, and affective
dimension, foregrounding personal responsibility and accountability to
the transcendent God. Against the theoretical-metaphysical stance
directed at an ever present objective reality, Yorck insists on the
primacy of the personal, historical relation to the transcendent God.
Yorck's dictum “Transcendence contra metaphysics!”
expresses not only a very strong leitmotif in his philosophical
thought (CR, p. 42); it is actually the very
capstone.[7] For
this reason, Yorck has been interpreted as a religious existentialist
(Kaufmann, 1928). This sets him apart from Dilthey. Yorck's conception
of Christianity is heavily biased in favour of Luther's
theology. According to Yorck, Luther's anti-metaphysical, historical
stance towards transcendence remains a historical task for the future
development of philosophy (CR, pp. 144 & 145). 
Since Yorck frequently and conspicuously uses the term
Bodenlosigkeit [groundlessness], or bodenloses
Denken [groundless thought] to describe the one-sided
intellectualism of the scientific-technological civilization since the
Renaissance (CR, pp. 39, 103, 250, 230, 143), questions have been raised
about Yorck's preference for autochthony
[Bodenständigkeit] and the political
implications
 thereof.[8]
More than half a century after his death, three philosophical
fragments by Yorck—originally written in the last six years of
his life—were published between 1956 and 1970 (see the
Bibliography). The most important is entitled
Bewusstseinsstellung und Geschichte [“Stances of
Consciousness and History”] (abbreviated hereafter as ST). It
addresses the sources and the development of human history, providing
the philosophical underpinning and more detailed exploration of views
that Yorck had mentioned in his
Correspondence with Dilthey. The following section presents
the major points of this systematic fragment.
Yorck's main aim is to provide an analysis of the underlying
psychology of human life, which he considers the basis for all
historical development. According to Yorck, particular configurations
in the psychology of man, or stances of consciousness, determine the
dominant shape of historical epochs. In other words, certain positions
adopted on the level of “primary life” [primäre
Lebendigkeit], the stances taken by consciousness within life,
determine “historical life” [historische
Lebendigkeit] at large and can define entire epochs (ST,
p. 5; also pp. 52, 53). Therefore, Yorck speaks of the
“psychology of history” and, the “philosophic
history of philosophy” (which traces the stances of
consciousness through empirical history) (ST, p. 10).
All this is predicated on the supposition of our intuitive access to
psychological or primary life through “self-reflection”
[Selbstbesinnung]. Yorck interprets Dilthey's insight that
one cannot go beyond life to mean that one cannot surpass or transcend
“the empirical givenness of self-consciousness,” which
entails that philosophy is “empirical,” not speculative
(ST, pp. 8, 3). Evidence can only be found in self-consciousness. What
does not pass the test in one's own life cannot count as a valid
expression of life: The seat of all necessary truth is
“self-experimentation” (ST, 9, also
54).[9]
Not unlike Husserl, Yorck pursues, albeit without an elaborate set of
methodological rules, a “re-duction” of all objectivity to
self-consciousness, where self-consciousness is a living and historical
structure that cannot be restricted to knowing or any other particular
function of life. As Gadamer (1990, pp. 246–269) has pointed out,
despite his critique of transcendental philosophy, Yorck may be read as
actually expanding the transcendental focus, which traditionally used
to be on knowing, so as to include the entire gamut of human
experiences and their necessary conditions in human
life. Following Dilthey, Yorck sees human consciousness
as a living structure where the emphasis lies on its
“aliveness,” Lebendigkeit, which includes not only
outward-directed intentionality towards objectivity (representation and
volition), but also self-awareness, and self-feeling of inner life.
Close to Schleiermacher, Yorck even specifies that “the ultimate
datum” in self-consciousness is “the feeling of life”
[Lebensgefühl] itself (ST, p. 11).
According to Yorck, life is divided and articulated in itself,
namely as an ongoing process of self-differentiation relative to others
and the environment. Yorck writes:
The primary and exclusive
datum is self-consciousness, which, although divided
[dirimiert] into self and other, soul and lived body
[Leib], I and world, inner and outer, is nonetheless, polarity
[Gegensätzlichkeit] and articulateness
[Gegliedertheit] in one. But self-consciousness experiences
itself in the play and counter-play of its constitutive factors, that
is, as something alive [ein Lebendiges]. This
aliveness is the basic constitution. (ST, p. 8)
 But there is no way
that this aliveness can ever be grasped in its purity outside the
fundamental differentiation. The antithetical division in
“self” and “other” is so fundamental that one
cannot go back behind it. 
The separation [Trennung] of
self and other, I and world, soul and lived body [Leib] is
such an early separation, indeed, the first act of life, as it were,
such that these derivatives appear as absolute, autonomous, and
self-sufficient. (ST, pp. 11/12)
 Yorck concludes: “The self is
only through the other, just as the other is only through the
self” (ST, p. 11).
Yet “life” remains the primary datum for Yorck.
Reminiscent of German Idealism, particularly Hegel and Hölderlin,
Yorck understands life as “differentiated unity”
[differenzierte Einheitlichkeit] (ST, p. 38). Life
explicates itself in form of an inner division and polarity. Each
stance of life is a particular configuration of life's original
division [Urtheil or Urtheilung] (ST, p. 25). Yorck
writes:
 Observation shows that primary life manifests a double
diremption into [1] polarity [Gegensätzlichkeit] and [2]
difference [Verschiedenheit], such that the character of
polarity permeates and determines the elements of the
articulation. (ST, p. 10)
 Life articulates or expresses itself differently
in three “functions” or “comportments”
[Verhaltungen], as life is lived in [1] “feeling”
[Empfinden] or affectivity, [2] “willing”
[Wollen], and [3] “cognizing”
[Vorstellen] (ST, 32). Life is divided between the
two antithetical or opposite poles of spontaneity and dependence (ST,
p. 9), which, applied to the different comportments or functions of
life, yields [1] the tension between motivation and spontaneity in
volition, [2] the opposition in cognition between objective,
matter-of-fact representation [Sachlichkeit] and spontaneous
projection of formed images [Bildlichkeit] as the object of
knowledge, and [3] the polarity between dependence on others versus
ownness [Eigenheit] in the domain of affectivity (ST,
p. 32).
Yorck claims that the three psychological “functions” or
comportments circumscribe the fixed and unalterable “natural
ground” [Naturboden], or the parameters within which
all human history is played out (ST, p. 26). There is no history
without such fixed reference points. The economy of the three
functions is not fixed (unlike the functions as such), but is always
open to the play of shifting configurations and imbalances (ST, p. 24
& 54). More specifically, the three functions are neither
reducible to each other nor derivable from another source, making them
in effect equiprimordial. However, they stand in a variable and
inverse relationship to each other, where the relative preponderance
of one function is offset by the relative subordination of the
remaining ones, but at no time can any particular function be
cancelled out altogether (ST, p. 98). This inverse relationship,
coupled with the internal polarity within each function, accounts for
“the restlessness of primary life” (ST, p. 32). Since life
does not exist in some generality, but only as a particular
configuration or alignment of its functions, the overall
“totality” of the shape of a particular life is always
determined by a pre-dominant position of one of its functions (ST,
p. 55). This lopsidedness, which necessarily fails to express life in
its “entire
 fullness”[10]
 (ST, p. 54), results in the instability
of each particular shape of consciousness. Each real configuration of
consciousness and its particular bias to one function, as well as one
of the antithetical poles within, lends itself to a new correction, a
new stance of consciousness, which, in turn is only a particular form,
biased to a particular function, and so on. As “historical
life” is nothing other than “primary life” writ
large, Yorck holds that this inbuilt instability and restlessness in
primary life also constitutes the “engine of history” (ST,
33). (See Section 3.2 below.)
Yorck holds that two functions of life, willing and cognition, are
“eccentric;” they pursue objects that are projected outside
the felt interiority of self-consciousness (ST, p. 120). Concerning
representation or cognition, Yorck writes:
Self-reflection
reveals representation [Vorstellen] as an act of
exteriorization, as a projection, which therefore is primarily marked
by its opposition to feeling. The feature of projection, [i.e.,]
expulsion from within [innere Entfernen], being the
characteristic element of all representation, is spatialization
[Verraümlichung] as such. (ST, p. 70)
 Spatialization
is thus necessary for representation or the work of the understanding,
thought. By contrast, temporality (located in affectivity) is not at
all necessary for cognition or representation:
Thought can
abstract from temporality. Indeed, every act of thought contains
[…] an abstraction from [temporality], inasmuch as thought
involves an expropriation [of inner feeling]. By contrast, spatiality
is the precondition of all
 thought.[11]
(ST, p. 147)
 All thought is inherently spatial,
representing objects at a distance in space: “Spatiality is the
basic character of all thought” (ST, p. 119). According to Yorck,
thought or cognition may abstract from particular characters of space,
such as “direction” and “place,” but it cannot
do without the projective opening of spatiality as such (ST, p. 100). And
Yorck suggests that it is the inherent spatiality in all thought which,
within the intellectualist tradition of the West, has rendered
“space” an unsurpassable “metaphysical”
reality, or transcendental condition of reality as such (ST, p. 100).
Since thought or cognition is an achievement of life in abstraction
from temporality and feeling, space itself appears as eternal, neutral
exteriority.
Yorck emphasizes that cognition of objects in space amounts to an
act of “liberation,” because what has been
“placed” at a “psychological distance” in the
realm of an eternal, and neutral objectivity has lost its power over
the representing subject, has no impact on the person's
affectivity, and can no longer excite the feeling that everything
passes away (ST, p. 74). 
There is thus a positive correlation between cognition and volition.
Cognitive projection is already an attempt to gain a foothold relative
to “the flight of impressions, appearances, and
strivings,” and the fixation of an object in space goes hand in
hand with the search for self-constancy and
“self-affirmation” [Selbstbehauptung] (ST,
p. 66). Therefore, Yorck holds that philosophy and science, as
cognitive comportments in life, are rooted in the striving for
self-affirmation. He thus attributes an eminent ethical impetus to
them. “Freedom” and “autonomy” are the
psychological motivation for philosophy and science (ST, p. 42).
In contrast to cognition and volition, which are
“eccentric” and directed towards the “outer,”
feeling or affectivity [Gefühl or Empfindung]
is the awareness of inwardness or interiority. Yorck writes:
“The essence of the inner [des Innen] is feeling
[Empfindung]” (ST, p. 71). At the limit, feeling is
object-less and an immersion in subjective life. As Yorck explains,
feelings are only secondarily attached to objects. Pain or pleasure,
for instance, has no “representational content”
[Vorstellungsinhalt]. Yorck writes: When “I feel, I
stay within me” (ST, 71)—chez moi, bei
mir. Feeling is only minimally projective. However, since
polarity permeates all psychological functions, Yorck is quick to
recognize “a relation” to the other, for there is no
“inner” without an
“outer.”[12] 
But the centre of feeling or affectivity
is the sphere of one's own, pure interiority, not as representation,
but as something felt. Therefore, it is the actual seat of “all
things personal” [alles Persönliche], the
innermost centre of personal life (ST, p. 85). It is the
“central” and immediate pulse of life, antecedent to the
objectifications by cognition and volition (ST, p. 14). Yorck writes:
“The relation of self to feeling is more immediate” than
the subject's relation to representation (ST, p. 99). Since the
personal is something
felt in the interiority of one's life, and not something
thought or represented and projected outwards, Yorck concludes
that self-relation is not cognitive in the first place; it is not
“knowledge” (ST, p. 72). Therefore, Yorck also finds it a
misguided effort “to grasp natural and historical communities by
means of representation,” because it misses the felt personal
attachment, which alone lends reality to the historical connectivity
and relation (ST, p. 72). Already in the Correspondence, Yorck
had stated that “historical reality is a reality of feeling
[Empfindungsrealität]” (CR, p. 113).
Next, Yorck also claims that “time originates in feeling”
(ST, p. 135). But as feeling is non-projective, it follows that,
originally, “temporality” is not
“objective”[13]
 (ST, 146). Yorck distinguishes between
the feeling of transitoriness, i.e., that everything passes away
[Vergänglichkeitsgefühl] (ST, p. 33), and the
feeling or awareness of one's own mortality
[Sterblichkeitsgefühl][14]
 (ST, p. 90). Acquiescence into one's own
mortality constitutes the opposite pole to self-affirmation,
“self-renunciation” [Selbsthingabe]
(ST, p. 14), which is thus distinct from and even antithetical to the
ethical impetus in philosophy and science. Yorck argues that the
inversion of volitional and cognitive projection in feeling and its
concentration in pure, passive interiority amounts to a
“religious comportment” and the feeling of dependency (ST,
121). To the extent that the religious concentration of life in
interiority is inversely related to projective representation, Yorck
understands religious life in terms of its “freedom from the
world” or Weltfreiheit (ST, p. 81 &
112). Psychologically, freedom from the world is the precondition for
the consciousness of a world-transcendent God, or the consciousness of
transcendence (ST, p. 105). Yorck only hints at the projection
sui generis involved in transcendence. But it is a
projection that has no cognitive or volitional content, such that God
is intended without becoming “an object,” and willing
becomes a “non-willing,” albeit without loss of energy (ST,
104).
Drawing on Dilthey and Schleiermacher, Yorck argues that immediate
and indubitable reality of life is exclusively “guaranteed”
through volition and affectivity alone. Yorck writes: “That which
opposes me or that which I feel, I call real,” because I cannot
doubt what resists my will or affects my personal life, whereas it is
always possible to doubt objects neutrally represented in space outside
me (ST, p. 89). What is thought and grasped as an unchanging, stable and
self-same object in the space of thought does not affect me or solicit
a desire. For Yorck, cognition, in abstraction from feeling and
volition, is the realm of pure “phenomenality,” which is
always open to doubt in virtue of its being merely represented or
thought (ST, p. 88). Because “the category of reality is a predicate
of feeling and willing” alone (ST, p. 128), Yorck concludes that it
is an “utterly uncritical” and self-contradictory
undertaking to attempt to prove “the reality of the world”
by means of the understanding (ST, p. 129). What Yorck writes to Dilthey
in a more general vein is also applicable to this particular problem:
Thinking moves in circles and the people appear to me like flies
which always bump into the window pane when they try to get out into
the open. Someone has got to open the window, but much work and leisure
is required for
 that.[15]
According to Yorck, the characteristics of human psychology and the
economy of primary life delimit the course of history, since historical
life merely repeats or amplifies the primary stances of consciousness.
Although there is thus a natural ground for history, Yorck is at pains
to emphasize that the three psychological functions outline
“possibilities” only, without any inbuilt teleology or
fixed equilibrium, or a relation to “an unchanging
ordo” as a permanent backdrop for history (ST, p. 4).
Against such approximations of history to nature, Yorck argues for a
thoroughly historical conception of the historical: “History has
nothing of the isolation [Selbständigkeit] of the natural
[order]” (ST, p. 6), but rather, in each of its phases, history is
self-reflexively involved in its own historicity—“as the
ferment of its aliveness”—and thus opens itself to the
ever new “historical contrapposto” (ST, p. 6).
Nothing is exempt from historical change. Philosophical categories
through which the world is understood are historical products of life
and hence inextricably bound up with the historicity of humankind. For
instance, Yorck explicitly claims that the category of
“being” is itself “a result of life” (ST, p. 8).
This liberates history from all relation to an unchanging, fixed point
of reference outside historical
 life.[16]
Although Yorck provides only an unfinished sketch of the empirical
course of the history of life, he marks three decisive turning-points:
(1) The breakthrough to philosophy and science on the basis of the
dominant stance of the psychological function of representation or
cognition, primarily in ancient Greece and India; (2) the predominance
of willing in the Roman and Jewish stance towards the world; and (3)
the focal centrality of feeling and interiority in Christianity,
particular in the Reformation, i.e., Luther. Somewhat like Hegel, Yorck
holds that history unfolds through particular primary stances towards
life which then become dominant in particular
historical
 peoples.[17]
According to Yorck, in Ancient Greece consciousness displayed a
particular configuration of the primacy of cognition. For the Greeks,
the stance of consciousness towards the world is pure looking. It is
through looking that reality is understood. Affectivity (feeling) and
volition are not countenanced as functions that disclose the world
as
 such.[18]
Truth lies in the
beholding eye alone; contemplation, theoria, and intuition
take centre stage.
It is as if the clear-sighted eye is
expressed in words. On the basis of this condition of consciousness,
the function of looking [Anschauung], ocularity
[Okularität], becomes the organ of all free work of the
mind, particularly of philosophy. (ST, p. 30)
 Yorck finds evidence
for the prevalence of ocularity or the aesthetic attitude, which is
centred on plasticity [Gestaltlichkeit], in Homer, Pythagoras,
Plato, and Aristotle, among others.
Form and content constitute
the aesthetic dichotomy which governs Greek thought in its entirety,
the result of the liberation of ocularity from all other sensuality,
the aesthetic liberation, which strikes a chord in everyone who has
entered the threshold of Greek life. Looking is the essential
comportment; hence, Gestalt or Form [qualifies as] ousia
or
 substance.[19]
(ST, p. 31)
That Greek metaphysics seeks the unchangeable and impassable is the
result of the relative suppression of feeling and willing that is
latent in all cognition, which abstracts from feeling and temporality,
as well as objects of human desire (ST, p. 42). Put differently, the
structural timelessness of thought as such is intensified in
metaphysical thought where it becomes “absolute” (ST, p. 42).
Yorck emphasizes that “negation of temporality” marks
“the decisive metaphysical step” (ST, p. 66). Metaphysics
constitutes the counter-move against the feeling of temporality (that
everything passes away), as well as the liberation from the dependence
on objects desired by the will. According to Yorck, the escape from
temporality and attachment determines the entire metaphysical tradition
up to and including Hegel (because even Hegel “ontologizes”
life) (ST, p. 83). 
The breakthrough to a form of life predominantly lived through
striving and volition is, according to Yorck, characteristic of the
Jewish and Roman world. Concerning the former, Yorck writes:
Whereas the Greek, metaphysical cast of mind abstracts from
temporality, temporality is the determining element [in the Hebrew
world], as the non-aesthetic character of the Jewish way of thought is
already expressed in Genesis where time takes precedence over
space. Yet the moment of time is here placed in some metaphysical
distance, is, as it were, projected into the future, the realization of
which is the prerogative of God. Thus, the stance of consciousness is
one of hope. The messiah, who does not fulfil the law, but, rather,
delivers on the promise, is hoped for. (ST, p. 20)
 Thus, the
feeling of time is here aligned with volition and its projective
exteriorization. Relative to the Greek contemplation of the everlasting
presence of the cosmos, the intensive expectation of the future reality
in the Jewish world is “a-cosmic.” Comparing the Greek to
the Jewish world, Yorck writes:
Here, contemplative, eternal
presence; there, intense hope for an invisible futurity. Here,
knowledge and science; there, coupled with a radical devaluation of the
object of knowledge, faith as personally grown postulate. Here,
pleasant expansion and the fullness of existing objectivity; there,
formless energy directed at the reality anticipated. (ST, p. 22)
The unfinished character of Yorck's manuscript is apparent
especially in these passages, for there is no further exploration or
exposition of the Jewish world (let alone anything like a justification
for the juxtaposition of the Jewish world with the Roman period).
Yorck's comments concerning the Roman world are likewise very
sketchy at best. Although Yorck positions the Romans as a
world-historical people of the will, he does not do much more than to
refer to the popular notion of the “imperialist drive of the
Romans” (ST, p. 30). Once, in a letter to Dilthey, Yorck emphasizes
that the Roman pursuit of power locks life into pure immanence, without
temporality and transcendence: “Might is everything,” he
writes (CR, p. 120). Yorck continues by contending that the proverbial
epithet of Rome as the “Eternal City” is by no means a mere
saying. Rather, for Yorck, it captures something of the ostentatious
display of Rome's imperial power—its splendid oblivion of
time. Yorck writes: “Rome does not, just as no Roman ever does,
comprehend—death” (CR, p. 120). By way of historical
contraposition, Yorck then describes, in the same letter, the
“mute, simple crosses” scratched into the walls of the
underground Carcere Mamertino by imprisoned early
Christians. Yorck characterizes these crosses as “light-points on
the underground sky [of the prison], signs of the transcendence of
consciousness” (CR, p. 120). The immanence of a life lived for power
and might is contrasted with the interiority of a conscious feeling of
transcendence. 
For Yorck, the Christian life is the breakthrough to a fully
historical life. Unencumbered by the projection of objective knowledge
(Greek metaphysics and ocularity) and freed from the expectation of a
messiah (hope for the promised future), the Christian lives the
temporality of “absolute aliveness” [absolute
Lebendigkeit] in the depths of inwardness
or
 interiority[20]
(ST, p. 4). Since
Christian consciousness has its dominant focus in interiority and
feeling, it is free from the cognitive and volitional bonds to any
objectivity, but free for the rhythm of temporality and history. The
Christian “freedom from the world”
[Weltfreiheit] (ST, p. 81) is at the same time
freedom for history and transcendence, i.e., the
world-transcendent God, and the personal, felt relationship to him,
which is based on the personal responsibility for one's
historical life before God. Yorck writes:
Through Christianity
an essentially transcendent stance of consciousness is achieved, namely
by way of the basic factor of feeling. This is a transcendent stance,
in contradistinction to a metaphysical
 one,[21]
because feeling [Gefühl]—the
focal point of aliveness [Lebendigkeit]—is here turned
inwards, even turned against itself and hence free of all givenness
[Gegebenheit]. (ST, pp. 13/14)
 The release from cognitive
and volitional projection facilitates an inversion of life's
tendency; it leaves behind the goals of “certainty and
security” (CR, p. 143) and grounds life in the personal and
intrinsically historical relationship to God.
On the one hand, Yorck emphasizes the absolute focus on inner life and
individual conscience, and the entirely unpredictable and historical
relationship to God, this side of all objective worldly realities and
public
 opinion.[22]
The
individual person is singled out in his relationship to God. On the
other hand, Yorck also holds that the Christian inversion of the
projective tendency of life ultimately results in
“self-renunciation” [Selbstaufgabe],
which expresses the religious pole, opposite to ethical
self-affirmation through philosophy and science. But precisely through
this self-renunciation, life is lived as life, instead of
being lost in the preoccupation with that which is merely intended
through life—the objectively known and desired world. With
reference to Matthew (10:39), Yorck writes:
He who
finds his life, will lose it, he who loses it, will find it. This word
of the Lord describes the law of life itself, the basic condition of
all life. Death is a mark of life and the radical transcendence of the
deepest, the Christian standpoint postulates life as a mark of
death. (ST, p. 58)
 Yorck's well-known love for paradox here
has its definitive
 origin.[23]
Freed from the bonds to objective representation and the objective
world, Christian religion realizes the most concentrated or enhanced
form of living life as life; it is “supreme
aliveness” [höchste Lebendigkeit] and thus supreme
historicity (ST, p. 104; CR, p. 154). The Christian life is not
distracted by the aims of cognition (objectivity) or the ties to
objects of desire within the world (in the past, present, or
future). Accordingly, Yorck holds that the historical
“origin” and “supreme” manifestation of
life—fully lived as historical life—lies in
Christianity.
In his Einleitung in die Geisteswissenschaften (1883),
Dilthey had made a similar, but by no means identical, point, arguing
that “historical consciousness” first came into existence
through the Christian freedom from the outer world (the cosmos) and
the newfound centre of life in inwardness (Dilthey 1959, p. 254).
Dilthey writes:
For the Greek mind,
knowledge was the depiction [Abbilden] of something objective,
[given] to intelligence. Now [after the emergence of Christianity],
lived experience [Erlebnis] becomes the centre point of all
interests for the new communities; but this is nothing other than the
simple, inner awareness [Innewerden] of what is given to the
person in
self-consciousness. (Dilthey 1959, p. 251)
Yet Dilthey sees this as the first potential
breakthrough to a new science, the science of inner experience and the
historical disciplines, the Humanities or
Geisteswissenschaften. According to Dilthey, Augustine's
fateful dependence on Greek conceptuality made it impossible to fully
articulate the new Christian sense of inwardness and history (Dilthey
1959, p. 264).  Only through the work of Schleiermacher and Kant has
there been progress in articulating the original Christian insight
into inwardness and historicity of life (Dilthey 1959, p. 267).  Not
only does Dilthey fully accept that the meaning of the original
Christian experience is thus adequately comprehended and harnessed for
the understanding, but he also sees his own work on the logic of the
historical sciences as a continuation and fulfilment of this same
project.
By contrast, Yorck eschews all cooptation of the Christian
breakthrough to supreme historical aliveness and historicity for the
establishment of a science, fearing that this would not only
conceptualize life as something “ontic,” always present and
available for the understanding, but also ignore the vital
consciousness of transcendence, or bury it in a
new
 scholasticism.[24]
Yorck, who
always regarded Luther's work as the vital re-affirmation of the
early Christian historical life, suggests, therefore, that instead of
Kant and Schleiermacher, a return to Luther's conception of life
is the more fruitful way of safeguarding and cultivating the
breakthrough to historical life. Acknowledging this difference, Yorck
writes to Dilthey: 
You will not agree when I say that Luther
should and must be more topical to the present time than Kant, if this
present time is to have a historical future [historische
Zukunft]. (CR, p. 145)