The best way to show how Critical Theory offers a distinctive
philosophical approach is to locate it historically in German Idealism
and its aftermath. For Marx and his generation, Hegel was the last in
the grand tradition of philosophical thought able to give us secure
knowledge of humanity and history on its own. The issue for Left
Hegelians and Marx was then somehow to overcome Hegelian
“theoretical” philosophy, and Marx argues that it can do
so only by making philosophy “practical,” in the sense of
changing practices by which societies realize their ideals. Once
reason was thoroughly socialized and made historical, historicist
skepticism emerged at the same time, attempting to relativize
philosophical claims about norms and reason to historically and
culturally variable forms of life. Critical Theory developed a
nonskeptical version of this conception, linking philosophy closely to
the human and social sciences. In so doing, it can link empirical and
interpretive social science to normative claims of truth, morality and
justice, traditionally the purview of philosophy. While it defends the
emphasis on normativity and universalist ambitions found in the
philosophical tradition, it does so within the context of particular
sorts of empirical social research, with which it has to cooperate if
it is to understand such normative claims within the current
historical context.  After presenting the two main versions of this
conception of philosophy, I turn to an illuminating example of how
this cooperative relation between philosophy and the social sciences
works from the point of view of the main figures in Critical Theory
who sought to develop it: the critique of ideology, a form of
criticism which if generalized threatens to undermine the critical
stance itself as one more ideology. Even if Critical Theorists are
united in a common philosophical project, this example shows the large
differences between the first and second generation concerning the
normative justification of social criticism.
In the modern era, philosophy defines its distinctive role in relation
to the sciences. While for Locke philosophy was a mere
“underlaborer,” for Kant it had a loftier status. As Rorty
and others have put it, transcendental philosophy has two distinct
roles: first, as the tribunal of Reason, the ultimate court of appeal
before which disciplines stand and must justify themselves and
secondly, as the domain for normative questions left out of
naturalistic inquiry. In light of this ability to judge the results of
the sciences, philosophy can also organize knowledge, assigning to
each of them their proper sphere and scope. The Kantian solution
denies the need for direct cooperation with the sciences on issues
related to normativity, since these were determined independently
through transcendental analysis of the universal and necessary
conditions for reason in its theoretical and practical
employment. Echoes of the subsequent post-Hegelian criticisms of
Kantian transcendental philosophy are found in the early work of
Horkheimer and Marcuse. Indeed, Horkheimer criticizes
“traditional theory” in light of the rejection of its
representational view of knowledge and its nonhistorical subject.
Echoing Marx in The German Ideology, Horkheimer insists that
for a critical theory the world and subjectivity in all its forms have
developed with the life processes of society (Horkheimer 1972b [1992,
245]). Much like certain naturalists today, he argued that
“materialism requires the unification of philosophy and
science,” thus denying any substantive distinction between
science and philosophy (Horkheimer 1993, 34). As Horkheimer understood
the task of Critical Theory, philosophical problems are preserved by
taking a role in defining problems for research, and philosophical
reflection retains a privileged role in organizing the results of
empirical research into a unified whole.
This understanding of the relation of philosophy and the sciences
remains broadly Kantian. Even while rejecting the role of philosophy as
transcendental judge, he still endorses its normative role, to the
extent that it still has the capacity to organize the claims of
empirical forms of knowledge and to assign each a role in the normative
enterprise of reflection on historically and socially contextualized
reason. This unstable mixture of naturalism with a normative
philosophical orientation informed much of the critical social science
of the Frankfurt School in the 1930s.
According to this conception of materialism, Critical Theory could
operate with a theoretical division of labor in which philosophy’s
normative stance could criticize the embodiments of reason and
morality according to their internal criteria. At least for modern
societies, such an enterprise of “immanent critique” was
possible (see, for example, Horkheimer 1993, 39). However, Horkheimer
and Marcuse saw the skeptical and relativist stance of the emerging
sociology of knowledge, particularly that of Karl Mannheim, as
precisely opposed to that of Critical Theory. As Marcuse puts it,
“sociology that is only interested in the dependent and limited
nature of consciousness has nothing to do with truth. While useful in
many ways it has falsified the interest and goal of any critical
theory” (Marcuse 1969 152). As opposed to merely debunking
criticism, “a critical theory is concerned with preventing the
loss of truth that past knowledge has labored to attain.” Given
Critical Theory’s orientation to human emancipation, it seeks to
contextualize philosophical claims to truth and moral universality
without reducing them to social and historical conditions. Horkheimer
formulates this skeptical fallacy that informed much of the
sociologically informed relativism of his time in this way:
“That all our thoughts, true or false, depend on conditions that
can change in no way affects the validity of science. It is not clear
why the conditioned character of thought should affect the truth of a
judgment—why shouldn’t insight be just as conditioned as
error?” (Horkheimer 1993, 141). The core claim here is that
fallibilism is different from relativism, suggesting that it is
possible to distinguish between truth and the context of justification
of claims to truth.
Faced with a sociological naturalism that relativized claims to
truth and justice are necessary for social criticism, the challenge
could be answered by detranscendentalizing truth without losing its
normativity (Horkheimer 1993, 6; McCarthy, in McCarthy and Hoy 1994,
10). Indeed it is relativism that depends on an implausible and
ahistorical form of detachment and impartiality, especially expressed
in its methodological commitments to “reverential empathy and
description.” The skepticism offered by historicism and the sociology
of knowledge is ultimately merely theoretical, the skepticism of an
observer who takes the disengaged view from nowhere. Once the skeptic
has to take up the practical stance, alternatives to such paper doubt
become inevitable. Indeed, the critic must identify just whose
practical stance best reveals these possibilities as agents for social
transformation of current circumstances. As I point out in the next
section, the Frankfurt School most often applied ideology critique to
liberal individualism, pointing out its contextual limitations that
lead to reductionist and pernicious interpretations of democratic
ideals.
Despite the force of these antirelativist and antiskeptical
arguments, two problems emerge in claims made by Horkheimer and Marcuse
to underwrite some “emphatic” conception of truth or justice.
First, philosophy is given the task of organizing social research and
providing its practical aims even in the absence of the justification
of its superior capacities. A more modest and thoroughly empirical
approach would be more appropriate and defensible. Second, the source
of this confidence seems to be practical, that critics must immanently
discover those transformative agents whose struggles take up these
normative contents of philosophy and attempt to realize them. But once
this practical possibility no longer seems feasible, then this approach
would either be purely philosophical or it would turn against the
potentialities of the present. Indeed, during the rise of fascism in
the Second World War and the commodified culture afterwards, the
Frankfurt School became skeptical of the possibility of agency, as the
subjective conditions for social transformation were on their view
undermined.
It is clear that in Dialectic of Enlightenment Horkheimer
and Adorno abandoned this interdisciplinary materialist approach with
its emphasis on cooperation with the social sciences (1982, xi). Adorno
and Horkheimer did not to deny the achievements of the Enlightenment,
but rather wanted to show that it had “self-destructive
tendencies,” that its specific social, cultural and conceptual forms
realized in modern Europe “contained its own possibility of a
reversal that is universally apparent today” (Adorno and Horkheimer
1982, xiii). Since Adorno and Horkheimer planned to offer a positive
way out of the dialectic of Enlightenment at the time they wrote these
words, this reversal is by no means inevitable. Even if their specific
historical story of the emergence of Enlightenment reason out of myth
is no longer so convincing, it is not enough to say with Habermas that
The Dialectic of Enlightenment did not “do justice to
the rational content of cultural modernity” (Habermas 1987, 103). For
the positive task of avoiding the reversal of Enlightenment,
reconstructing the rational content of modernity is not enough, since
the issue is not to affirm its universalism, but its self-critical and
emancipatory capacity. If the issue is the self-correcting capacity of
the Enlightenment, two questions emerge: how is it undermined? Where do
we locate the exercise of this capacity? This is the
“Enlightenment problem,” the solution to which is twofold: to
reconstruct those human capacities that have such reflexivity built
into them and to tie the operation of Enlightenment institutions to the
conditions of their successful exercise.
Against this skeptical predicament of the first generation of Critical
Theory, it could be said without exaggeration that Habermas’s basic
philosophical endeavor from Knowledge and Human Interests
to The Theory of Communicative Action has been to develop a
more modest, fallibilist, empirical account of the philosophical claim
to universality and rationality. This more modest approach rids
Critical Theory of its vestiges of transcendental philosophy, pushing
it in a naturalistic direction. Such naturalism identifies more
specific forms of social scientific knowledge that help in developing
an analysis of the general conditions of rationality manifested in
various human capacities and powers. Thus, Habermas’s alternative sees
practical knowledge, or reason in the robust sense, as it is
“embodied in cognition, speech and action” (Habermas 1984,
10). Habermas’s calls for particular “reconstructive
sciences,” whose aim it is to render theoretically explicit the
intuitive, pretheoretical know-how underlying such basic human
competences as speaking and understanding, judging, and acting. Unlike
Kant’s transcendental analysis of the conditions of rationality, such
sciences yield knowledge that is not necessary but hypothetical, not a
priori but empirical, not certain but fallible. They are nevertheless
directed to universal structures and conditions and raise universal,
but defeasible claims to an account of practical reason. In this way,
Habermas undermines both of the traditional Kantian roles for
philosophy and brings them into a fully cooperative relation to the
social sciences. This can be seen in the clear differences between his
account of the critique of ideology, which is at once contextualist
and antirelativist but also underwrites its own normativity in ways
that Horkheimer and Marcuse’s more nearly transcendental account could
not, given the inevitable tension between philosophical ideals and the
historical conditions of current societies and their practices.
Like many other such theories, the theory of communicative action
offers its own distinctive definition of rationality. In good
pragmatist fashion, Habermas’s definition is epistemic, practical, and
intersubjective. For Habermas, rationality consists not so much in the
possession of knowledge and thus primarily concerned with the
consistency and content of one’s beliefs, but rather in “how
speaking and acting subjects acquire and use knowledge” (Habermas,
1984, 11). Such a broad definition suggests that the theory could be
developed through explicating the general and formal conditions of
validity in knowing and reaching understanding through language, and
this task falls primarily on “formal pragmatics.” As one among
many different “reconstructive sciences,” such a reconstruction
of speech is inherently normative, in the sense that it is one of the
disciplines that reconstructs a common domain: “the know-how of
subjects who are capable of speech and action, who are attributed the
capacity to produce valid utterances, and who consider themselves
capable of distinguishing (at least intuitively) between valid and
invalid expressions” (Habermas 1990, 31). The positive goal of such a
theory is not only to provide an account of rationality based on this
know-how that is rich enough to grasp uses of reason in all their
variety, yet also normative enough to be able to clarify the necessary
conditions for its practical employment as well as a critical analysis
of the “pathologies” that occur when these conditions fail to
obtain.
More than just reconstructing an implicitly normative know-how,
Habermas is clear that such reconstructive sciences have a
“quasi-transcendental” status by specifying very general
and formal conditions of successful communication. In this way, their
concern with normativity and with the abilities needed for rationality
in Habermas’s practical and social sense permits them to acquire a
critical role. Certainly, the goal of the reconstructive sciences is
theoretical knowledge: they make such practical know-how explicit. But
insofar as they are capable of explicating the conditions for valid or
correct utterances, they also explain why some utterances are invalid,
some speech acts unsuccessful, and some argumentation
inadequate. Thus, such sciences “also explain deviant cases and
through this indirect authority acquire a critical function
as well” (Habermas, 1990, 32). This authority then permits the
theory of rationality to underwrite critical claims about social and
political practices, to show how their functioning violates not only
the espoused rules but also the conditions of rationality.
Such an approach can be applied to normative features of democratic
practices. Rather than only providing a set of explicit principles of
justification and institutional decision rules, democracy is
also a particular structure of free and open communication.
Ideology restricts or limits such processes of communication
and undermines the conditions of success within them. Ideology as
distorted communication affects both the social conditions in which
democratic discussion takes place and the processes of communication
that go on within them. The theory of ideology, therefore, analyzes the
ways in which linguistic-symbolic meanings are used to encode, produce,
and reproduce relations of power and domination, even within
institutional spheres of communication and interaction governed by
norms that make democratic ideals explicit in normative procedures and
constraints. As a reconstruction of the potentially correct insights
behind Marx’s exaggerated rejection of liberalism, the theory of
distorted communication is therefore especially suited to the ways in
which meanings are used to reproduce power even under explicit rules of
equality and freedom. This is not to say that explicit rules are
unimportant: they make it possible for overt forms of coercion and
power to be constrained, the illegitimacy of which requires no appeal
to norms implicit in practices.
Democratic norms of freedom can be made explicit in various rights,
including civil rights of participation and free expression. Such norms
are often violated explicitly in exercises of power for various ends,
such as wealth, security, or cultural survival. Besides these explicit
rights, such coercion also violates the communicative freedom expressed
in ignoring the need to pass decisions through the taking of yes/no
attitudes by participants in communication. Habermas calls such speech
that is not dependent on these conditions of communicative rationality
“distorted communication.” For example, powerful economic groups
have historically been able to attain their agency goals without
explicitly excluding topics from democratic discussion but by implied
threats and other nondeliberative means (Przworski and Wallerstein
1988, 12–29; Bohman 1997, 338–339). Threats of declining investments
block redistributive schemes, so that credible threats circumvent the
need to convince others of the reasons for such policies or to put some
issue under democratic control. Similarly, biases in agenda setting
within organizations and institutions limit scope of deliberation and
restrict political communication by defining those topics that can be
successfully become the subject of public agreement (Bohman 1990). In
this way, it is easy to see how such a reconstructive approach connects
directly to social scientific analyses of the consistency of democratic
norms with actual political behavior.
This theory of ideology as distorted communication opens up the
possibility of a different relation of theoretical and practical
knowledge than Habermas has suggested so far. His approach uses formal
pragmatics philosophically to reflect upon norms and practices that are
already explicit in justifications in various sorts of argumentation or
second-order communication. Such reflection has genuine practical
significance in yielding explicit rules governing discursive
communication (such as rules of argumentation), which in turn can be
used for the purpose of designing and reforming deliberative and
discursive institutions (Habermas 1996, 230). It is easily overlooked
that such rules are only part of the story; they make explicit and
institutionalize norms that are already operative in correct language
use. Such implicit norms of well-formed and communicatively successful
utterances are not identical with the explicit rules of
argumentation.
These claims about norms raise two difficulties. First, there is a
potential regress of rules, that is, that explicit rules requires
further rules to apply them, and so on. Second, this approach cannot
capture how norms are often only implicit in practices rather than
explicitly expressed (Brandom 1994, 18–30). Here Habermas sides with
Pettit in seeing the central function of explicit norms as creating a
commons that can serve as the basis for institutionalizing norms, a
space in which the content of norms and concepts can be put up for
rational reflection and revision (Pettit 1992, Habermas 1990).  Making
such implicit norms explicit is thus also the main task of the
interpretive social scientist and is a potential source of social
criticism; it is then the task of the participant-critic in the
democratic public sphere to change them. There is one more possible
role for the philosophically informed social critic. As we have seen
in the case of ideological speech, the reconstructive sciences
“also explain deviant cases and through this indirect authority
acquire a critical function as well” (Habermas, 1990,
32).
In this section, I have discussed claims that are distinctive of the
metaphilosophy of Critical Theorists of both generations of the
Frankfurt School and illustrated the ways in which critical normativity
can be exercised in their differing models of the critique of ideology.
Critical Theorists attempt to fulfill potentially two desiderata at the
same time: first, they want to maintain the normativity of
philosophical conceptions such as truth or justice, while at the same
time they want to examine the contexts in which they have developed and
may best be promoted practically. I argued that the first generation
theorists avoided the relativism of sociologies of knowledge such as
Mannheim’s only to fall into a practical skepticism about the
feasibility of agents acting upon such norms in current contexts.
Habermas’s conception of the cooperation between philosophy and the
social sciences in rational reconstruction of practical knowledge
allows him to articulate a normative conception of “real
democracy” more fully and to develop a social scientifically informed
conception of democracy that is an alternative to current liberal
practices. This project shifts the goal of critical social inquiry from
human emancipation as such, to the primary concern with democratic
institutions as the location for the realization of ideals of freedom
and equality. The limits on any such realization may prove to be not
merely ideological: Critical Theory is also interested in those social
facts and circumstances that constrain the realization of the ideal
democracy and force us to reconsider its normative content. While such
an account of the relation between facts and norms answers the
sociological skepticism of Weber and others about the future of
democracy, it may be based on an overly limited account of social
facts.
In its initial phases Critical Theory attempted to develop a normative
notion of “real democracy” that was contrasted with actual
political forms in liberal societies. A democratic society would be
rational, because in it individuals could gain “conscious
control” over social processes that affect them and their life
chances.  To the extent that such an aim is possible at all, it
required that human beings become “producers of their [social
life] in its totality” (Horkheimer 1972b [1992, 244]). Such a
society then becomes a “true” or expressive totality,
overcoming the current “false totality,” an antagonistic
whole in which the genuine social needs and interests cannot be
expressed or developed (Jay 1984).  Such a positive, expressivist
ideal of a social whole is not, however, antiliberal, since it shares
with liberalism the commitment to rationalism and universalism. The
next phase in the development of Critical Theory took up the question
of antidemocratic trends. This development of the Frankfurt School
interpretation of the limits on democracy as an ideal of human freedom
was greatly influenced by the emergence of fascism in the 1930s, one
of the primary objects of their social research. Much of this research
was concerned with antidemocratic trends, including increasingly
tighter connections between states and the market in advanced
capitalist societies, the emergence of the fascist state and the
authoritarian personality.  Horkheimer came to see that these
antidemocratic trends gradually undermined the realization of an
expressive whole, with the consequence that “the situation of
the individual is hopeless,” that the subjective conditions for
exercising freedom and achieving solidarity were being eroded by an
increasingly totalizing social reification.
As first generation Critical Theorists saw it in the 1940s, this
process of reification occurs at two different levels. First, it
concerned a sophisticated analysis of the contrary psychological
conditions underlying democracy and authoritarianism; second, this
analysis was linked to a social theory that produced an account of
objective, large-scale, and long-term historical processes of
reification. If these facts and trends are true, then the idea of a
“true totality” is a plausible critical category. However, this
concept is ill suited for democratic theory due to a lack of clarity
with regard to the underlying positive political ideal of Critical
Theory. Finally, in reaction to these normative failures, Habermas
seeks to develop an intermediate level of analysis and a new normative
conception in the historical analysis of the emergence of the
“public sphere” (Öffentlichkeit). As his later and
more fully developed normative theory of democracy based on
macrosociological social facts about modern societies shows, Habermas
offers a modest and liberal democratic ideal based on the public use of
reason within the empirical constraints of modern complexity and
differentiation. This social theory may make it difficult for him to
maintain some aspects of radical democracy as an expressive and
rational ideal that first generation critical theorists saw as a
genuine alternative to liberalism.
Except for passages on “real democracy” as the achievement
of a rational society, many of the Frankfurt School’s writings on
democracy are concerned with developing a critique of liberal ideology
reminiscent of “The Jewish Question.” Horkheimer puts his
criticism of bourgeois negative liberty in these terms: “The
limited freedom of the bourgeois individual puts on the illusory form
of perfect freedom and autonomy” (Horkheimer 1972b [1992,
211]). Horkheimer criticizes the modern philosophical and legal subject
as abstract, detached, and ahistorical; whatever freedom and autonomy
actors have, they are best understood as “definite
individuals” whose freedom is exercised in relation others and
in historically specific societies.  The freedom of real individuals
can only be thought of in a holistic way, “in the resultant web
of relationships with the social totality and with nature.” Like
all good ideology critiques, then, this criticism of liberalism is
immanent, using the liberal norms and values against their historical
realization in specific institutions.  Nonetheless, this ideology
critique recognized that liberalism was still, as Marcuse put it, a
“rationalist theory of society.” Whatever its successor,
the new form would have to pass the normative tests that fascism and
other emerging forms of antiliberalism do not: this new unity
“would have to prove itself before the tribunal of individuals,
to show that their needs and potentialities are realized within
it” (Marcuse 1968, 7). Using Hegelian terminology, Critical
Theorists came to regard advanced capitalist societies as a
“totality,” in which the tight integration of states and
markets threatened to eliminate the space for freedom. While the
emergence of fascism is possible evidence for this fact, it is also an
obvious instance in which reliance on the internal criticism of
liberalism is no longer adequate.
The shift in the Frankfurt School to such external forms of
criticism from 1940 onwards is not confined to the fascist state. With
the development of capitalism in its monopoly form, the liberal
heritage loses its rational potential as the political sphere
increasingly functionalized to the market and its reified social
relationships. In this way the critique of liberalism shifts away from
the normative underpinnings of current democratic practices to the ways
in which the objective conditions of reification undermine the
psychological and cultural presuppositions of democratic change and
opposition. Such a society is now a “wholly false totality.” The
work of Adorno and Horkheimer in this period shows the philosophical
consequences of this shift, especially in Dialectic of
Enlightenment (1944) and The Eclipse of Reason
(1947).
One of the central claims of Dialectic of Enlightenment
concerns the “entwinement of myth and Enlightenment,” as
providing a deep historical treatment of the genesis of modern reason
and freedom and how they turn into their opposites. Rather than being
liberating and progressive, reason has become dominating and
controlling with the spread of instrumental reason. Liberal
institutions do not escape this process and are indeed part of it with
their institutionalization of self-interest and self-preservation,
tending toward a “totally administered society.” In Eclipse
of Reason Horkheimer turns this critique of instrumental reason
against liberal democracy. He argues that the liberal tradition that
Marcuse argued needed to be preserved only retained its normative force
on the metaphysical foundation of “objective reason.” However
grounded, liberalism depended on subjectivizing reason and objective
moral principles; subjects are proclaimed “autonomous” all the
while they sink into the heteronomy of market relations. The
“inevitable” tendency of liberalism to collapse into fascism
“can be derived, apart from any economic causes, from the inner
contradiction between the subjectivist principle of self-interest and
the idea of reason that it is supposed to express” (Horkheimer 1987,
21). Shorn of its objective content, democracy is reduced to mere
majority rule and public opinion to some measurable quantity. The
argument here is primarily genealogical (thus based on a story of
historical origin and development) and not grounded in social science;
it is a reconstruction of the history of Western reason or of
liberalism in which calculative, instrumental reason drives out the
utopian content of universal solidarity. Some nondominating,
alternative conception is exhibited in Horkheimer’s religiously
influenced ideal of identification with all suffering creatures or
Adorno’s idea of mimetic reconciliation with the other found primarily
in art (Horkheimer 1972a; Adorno 1973). These analyses were also
complemented by an analysis of the emergence of state capitalism and of
the culture industry that replaces the need for consent and even the
pseudo-consent of ideology.
Some of the more interesting social scientific analyses of fascism
that the Frankfurt School produced in this period were relatively
independent of such a genealogy of reason. The first is the analysis of
political economy of advanced, administered capitalist societies, with
Franz Neumann providing a dissenting view that no state can completely
control social and economic processes in the ways that might be more
consistent with Horkheimer and Adorno’s critique of instrumental
reason. Especially interesting were empirical investigations into the
“authoritarian” and “democratic” personalities, which
provided a microsociology of democratic and antidemocratic character
traits (Adorno et al. 1953). Perhaps one of more striking results of
this study is that the core of the democratic personality is a
particular emotional or affective organization: “if fear and
destructiveness are the major emotional sources of fascism, eros
belongs mainly to democracy” (Adorno et al 1953, 480). Thus, long-term
historical cultural development and macro- and micro-sociological
trends work against the democratic ideal. The sources of resistance to
these trends are increasingly found at the level of what Foucault would
call “micropolitics.”
Whatever the merits of such general historical frameworks for critical
interpretations of the present, the internal difficulty for a critical
theory is that “real democracy,” the goal of emancipatory
criticism, demands a richer set of practical and theoretical
resources, including institutional possibilities. What was needed was
an alternative conception of rationality that is not exhausted by the
decline of objective reason into subjective self-interest. This basic
problem of first generation Critical Theory has been the life-long
theme of the work of Jürgen Habermas, for whom the publicity and
more generally the public sphere (Öffentlichkeit),
occupies precisely the right conceptual space. Habermas also replaces
the expressive totality of a fully democratic society with the ideal
of “undamaged intersubjectivity” and of universal
solidarity established through “communication free from
domination.” On the social theoretical side, totality is
replaced by a conception of social complexity, which is not
necessarily false or reifying. These shifts permit a more positive
reassessment of the liberal tradition and its existing political
institutions and open up the possibility of a critical sociology of
the legitimation problems of the modern state. On the whole, Habermas
marked the return to normative theory united with a broader use of
empirical, reconstructive and interpretive social science. Above all,
this version of Critical Theory required fully developing the
alternative to instrumental reason, only sketched by Adorno or
Horkheimer in religious and aesthetic form; for Habermas criticism is
instead grounded in everyday communicative action. Indeed, he cam to
argue that the social theory of the first generation, with its
commitments to holism, could no long be reconciled with the historical
story at the core of Critical Theory: the possible emergence of a more
robust and genuine form of democracy
Habermas’s rejection of the explanatory holism of the first generation
of the Frankfurt School has both explanatory and normative
implications. First, he brings categories of meaning and agency back
into critical social theory, both of which were absent in the
macro-sociological and depth psychological approaches that were
favored in the post war period. This brings democratic potentials back
into view, since democracy makes sense only within specific forms of
interaction and association, from the public forum to various
political institutions. Indeed, Habermas’s first and perhaps most
enduring work, The Structural Transformation of the Public
Sphere (Habermas 1989/1961), traced the historical emergence of
new forms of public interaction from the intimate sphere of the
family, to coffee houses, salons, and finally to parliamentary
debates.  While linked ultimately to a narrative of its decline
through the market and the administrative state, the core of such
interaction and the critical and egalitarian potential of being part
of a public whose members address one another as equals had for
Habermas a nonideological, even “utopian” core (Habermas
1989, 88). Second, Habermas also developed an alternative sociology of
modernity, in which social differentiation and pluralization are not
pathological but positive features of modern societies (Habermas 1982,
1986). Indeed, the positive conception of complexity permits an
analysis of the ways in which modern societies and their functional
differentiation opens up democratic forms of self-organization
independently of some possible expressively integrated totality. Such
an ideal of an expressive totality and conscious self control over the
production of the conditions of social life is replaced with publicity
and mutual recognition within feasible discursive institutions.
This emphasis on the normative potential of modernity does not mean
that modern political forms such as the state are not to be criticized.
In Legitimation Crisis (1969), for example, Habermas argues
not only that the demands of advanced capitalism restrict the scope and
significance of democracy, but also that the state is “crisis
ridden” and unable to solve structural problems of unemployment,
economic growth, and environmental destruction. These crisis tendencies
open up a space for contestation and deliberation by citizens and their
involvement in new social movements. This criticism of the contemporary
state is put in the context of a larger account of the relation between
democracy and rationality. Contrary to “formal” democracy
understood as majority rule, Habermas opposes “substantive
democracy,” which emphasizes the “genuine participation of
citizens in political will formation” (Habermas 1975, 32). The
relevant notion of rationality that can be applied to such a process is
procedural and discursive; it is developed in terms of the procedural
properties of communication necessary to make public will formation
rational and thus for it to issue in a genuine rather than merely de
facto consensus.
With such an expansion of Kantian practical reason, democracy is now
grounded in the intersubjective structure of communication exhibited
in the special form of reflective and reciprocal communication and
public testing of claims to validity that Habermas calls
“discourse.” As communication about communication,
discourse emerges in problematic situations in which new solutions
must be sought in order to continue social cooperation. Democratic
institutions have the proper reflexive structure and are thus
discursive in this sense. In them, citizens deliberate as free and
equal persons, for whom the legitimacy of the decision is related to
the achievement of a “rational consensus.” That is, a
consensus is rational to the extent that it is based on a norm that
could under ideal conditions be justified to all those who are
affected by a decision. Early on Habermas called the full list of
these counterfactual conditions “the ideal speech
situation,” although later it is clear that it is meant to
provide a principled basis by which to assess the quality of
agreements reached discursively.
One philosophical purpose of such a procedural conception of
rationality is to refute value skeptics, who reduce politics to what
Weber called the struggle between “gods and demons” (Weber 1949).
Its purpose in social theory is to provide the basis for an account of
cultural rationalization and learning in modernity. In normative theory
proper, Habermas has from the start been suspicious of attempts to
apply this fundamentally epistemological criterion of rationality
directly to the structure of political institutions. As early as
Theory and Practice (1966), Habermas distanced himself from
Rousseau’s claim that the general will can only be achieved in a
direct, republican form of democracy. By failing to see that the ideal
agreement of the social contract specifies only a certain procedural
and reflexive level of justification, Rousseau confused “the
introduction of a new principle of legitimacy with proposals for
institutionalizing just rule” (Habermas 1979, 186). Indeed democratic
principles need not be applied everywhere in the same way (Habermas
1973, 32–40). Instead, the realization of such norms has to take into
account various social facts, including facts of pluralism and
complexity (Habermas 1996, 474). For Habermas, no normative conception
of democracy or law could be developed independently of a descriptively
adequate model of contemporary society, lest it become a mere ought.
Without this empirical and descriptive component, democratic norms
become merely empty ideals and not the reconstruction of the
rationality inherent in actual practices. I shall return to the
problematic relation of social facts to democratic ideals in the next
section in discussing Habermas’s account of the philosophy of critical
social science.
Another way in which this point about democratic legitimacy can be
made is to distinguish the various uses to which practical reason may
be put in various forms of discourse. Contrary to the account of
legitimacy offered in Legitimation Crisis, Habermas later
explicitly abandons the analogy between the justification of moral
norms and democratic decision-making. Moral discourses are clearly
restricted to questions of justice that can be settled impartially
through a procedure of universalization (Habermas 1990, 43ff). The
moral point of view abstracts from the particular identities of
persons, including their political identities, and encompasses an
ideally universal audience of all humanity. Although politics and law
include moral concerns within their scope, such as issues of basic
human rights, the scope of justification in such practices can be
restricted to the specific community of associated citizens and thus
may appeal to culturally specific values shared by the
participants.
There are at least three aspects of practical reason relevant to
democratic deliberation: pragmatic, ethical, and moral uses of reason
are employed with different objects (pragmatic ends, the interpretation
of common values, and the just resolution of conflicts) and thus also
different forms of validity (Habermas 1993, 1–18). Because of this
variety, democratic discourses are often mixed and complex, often
including various asymmetries of knowledge and information. Democratic
deliberation is thus not a special case of moral judgment with all of
its idealizing assumptions, but a complex discursive network with
various sorts of argumentation, bargaining, and compromise (Habermas
1996, 286). What regulates their use is a principle at a different
level: the public use of practical reason is self-referential and
recursive in examining the conditions of its own employment. Given the
social circumstances of large-scale and pluralistic modern societies,
distinctively democratic deliberation requires the “medium of
law,” so that the results of deliberation must be expressed through
law.
Habermas expresses the relevant differences among the uses of
practical reason in morality and politics as sub-principles of the
same principle of discursive justification, which he calls
“D.” D simply names a discursive procedure:
“just those norms of action are valid if all persons affected
could agree as participants in rational discourse” (Habermas
1996, 107). The moral principle “U” specifies that the
rule of argumentation for moral discourse is univeralizability
(Habermas 1990, 65–66). The more specific principle of democracy
states that “only those laws may claim legitimacy that can meet
with the agreement of all citizens in a discursive lawmaking procedure
that is itself legally constituted” (Habermas 1996, 110). He
argues that such a principle is at a different level than the moral
principle, to the extent that its aim is primarily to establish a
discursive procedure of legitimate law making and is a much weaker
standard of agreement.
Nonetheless, even this democratic principle may still be too
demanding, to the extent that it requires the agreement of all citizens
(counterfactually) as a criterion of legitimacy. Habermas admits that
in the case of cultural values we need not expect such agreement, and
he even introduces compromise as a possible discursive outcome of
democratic procedures. One way to genuinely weaken the principle would
be to substitute cooperation for consensus and the outcome of the
procedure: “a law then would be legitimate only if it could be
agreed to in a fair and open deliberative process in which all citizens
may freely continue to participate whatever the outcome” (Bohman 1996,
89). In this way, what is crucial is not the agreement as such, but how
citizens reason together within a common public sphere. The democratic
principle in this form expresses an ideal of citizenship rather than a
standard of liberal legitimacy .
The internal complexity of democratic discourse does not overcome
the problem of the application of the democratic principle to
contemporary social circumstances. As Habermas puts it,
“unavoidable social complexity makes it necessary to apply the
criteria of democracy in a differentiated way” (Habermas 1996, 486).
Such complexity restricts the application of fully democratic
justification for a number of reasons: first, it is not possible for
the sovereign will of the people by their democratic decision-making
powers to constitute the whole of society; and, second, a society
formed by merely associative and communicative means of coordination
and cooperation is no longer possible. This objection to radical
democracy is thus directed to those theories that do not figure out how
such principles can be institutionally mediated given current social
facts. Indeed, institutional mediation can overcome deficits in
communicative self-organization, in so far as they compensate for
“the cognitive indeterminacy, motivational insecurity, and the
limiting coordinating power of moral norms and informal norms of action
in general” (Habermas 1996, 323).
This approach to law has important consequences for a critical theory,
since it changes how we appeal to democratic norms in criticizing
current institutions: it is not clear exactly what the difference is
between a radical and a liberal democracy, since some of the
limitations on participation are due to the constraints of social
facts and not to power asymmetries. By insisting upon popular
sovereignty as the outcome of the generation of “communicative
power” in the public sphere, Habermas tries to save the
substance of radical democracy. The unresolved difficulty is that in a
complex society, as Habermas asserts, “public opinion does not
rule” but rather points administrative power in particular
directions; or, as he puts it, it does not “steer” but
“countersteers” institutional complexity (Habermas 1996,
chapter 8). That is, members of the public do not control social
processes; qua members of a public, they may exercise influence
through particular institutionalized mechanisms and channels of
communication.
The open question for current Critical Theory (although not all
critical theories) is then whether or not “real democracy” is
still the goal of social criticism given these putatively
“unavoidable” facts about the structure of modern society. Even
given the limits of social complexity, there is still room for
judgments of greater or lesser democracy, particularly with regard to
the democratic value of freedom from domination. For example, a
critical theory of globalization could show that the democratic
potential of modern societies is being undermined by neoliberal
globalization and denationalization of economic policy. Such a theory
sees the solution here to be the achievement of more democracy at the
international level. It is also possible that the critical use of
democratic concepts may require reconceptualizing the democratic theory
that has informed much of Enlightenment criticism in European
societies. Here critical theorists are then simply one sort of
participant in the ongoing internal work of redefining the democratic
ideal, not simply in showing the lack of its full realization.
Either way, radical democracy may no longer be the only means to
social transformation, and indeed we may, with Marcuse, think that
preserving the truths of the past, such as democratic constitutional
achievements, to be as important as imagining a new future. Given the
new situation, Critical Theory could now return to empirical social
inquiry to discover new potentials for improving democracy, especially
in understanding how it may increase the scope and effectiveness of
public deliberation. In these various roles, critical theorists are
participants in the democratic public sphere. One of the main
continuing legacies of Critical Theory has been to see that democracy
is “the unfinished project of modernity” (Habermas 1986, xi) and
its further realization and transformation a genuine goal even in
complex and globalizing societies. To do so would entail a different,
perhaps more reflexive notion of critical social inquiry, in which
democracy is not only the object of study but is itself understood as a
form of social inquiry. Critical Theory would then have to change its
conception of what makes it practical and democratic.
In the next two sections, I will discuss two aspects of this
transformed conception of Critical Theory. First, I turn to the role of
social theory in this more pragmatic account of critical social
inquiry. Contrary to its origins in Marxian theoretical realism, I
argue for methodological and theoretical pluralism as the best form of
practical social science aimed at human emancipation. Second, I
illustrate this conception in developing the outlines of a critical
theory of globalization, in which greater democracy and nondomination
are its goals. This theory also has a normative side, which is inquiry
into democracy itself outside of its familiar social container of the
nation state. In this sense, it attempts not just to show constraints
but also open possibilities. Critical Theorists have failed not only to
take up the challenge of such new social circumstances but also thereby
to reformulate democratic ideals in novel ways. I shift first to the
understanding of the philosophy of social science that would help in
this rearticulation of Critical Theory as critical social inquiry as a
practical and normative enterprise.
Such a practical account of social inquiry has much in common with
pragmatism, old and new (Bohman 1999a, 1999b). As with pragmatism,
Critical Theory came gradually to reject the demand for a scientific or
objective basis of criticism grounded in a grand theory. This demand
proved hard to square with the demands of social criticism directed to
particular audiences at particular times with their own distinct
demands and needs for liberation or emancipation. The first step was to
move the critical social scientist away from seeking a single unifying
theory to employing many theories in diverse historical situations.
Rather, it is better to start with agents’ own pretheoretical knowledge
and self-understandings. The issue for critical social inquiry is not
only how to relate pretheoretical and theoretical knowledge of the
social world, but also how to move among different irreducible
perspectives. The second step is to show that such a practical
alternative not only provides the basis for robust social criticism,
but also that it better accounts for and makes use of the pluralism
inherent in various methods and theories of social inquiry. While it is
far from clear that all critical theorists understand themselves in
this way, most agree that only a practical form of critical inquiry can
meet the epistemic and normative challenges of social criticism and
thus provide an adequate philosophical basis fulfilling the goals of a
critical theory.
The philosophical problem that emerges in critical social inquiry is
to identify precisely those features of its theories, methods, and
norms that are sufficient to underwrite social criticism. A closer
examination of paradigmatic works across the whole tradition from
Marx’s Capital (1871) to the Frankfurt School’s Studies in
Authority and the Family (1939) and Habermas’s Theory of
Communicative Action (1982) reveals neither some distinctive form
of explanation nor a special methodology that provides the necessary
and sufficient conditions for such inquiry. Rather, the best such works
employ a variety of methods and styles of explanation and are often
interdisciplinary in their mode of research. What then gives them their
common orientation and makes them all works of critical social
science?
There are two common, general answers to the question of what
defines these distinctive features of critical social inquiry: one
practical and the other theoretical. The latter claims that critical
social inquiry ought to employ a distinctive theory that unifies such
diverse approaches and explanations. On this view, Critical Theory
constitutes a comprehensive social theory that will unify the social
sciences and underwrite the superiority of the critic. The first
generation of Frankfurt School Critical Theory sought such a theory in
vain before dropping claims to social science as central to their
program in the late 1940s (Wiggershaus 1994). By contrast, according to
the practical approach, theories are distinguished by the form of
politics in which they can be embedded and the method of verification
that this politics entails. But to claim that critical social science
is best unified practically and politically rather than theoretically
or epistemically is not to reduce it simply to democratic politics. It
becomes rather the mode of inquiry that participants may adopt in their
social relations to others. The latter approach has been developed by
Habermas and is now favored by Critical Theorists.
Before turning to such a practical interpretation of critical social
inquiry, it is first necessary to consider why the theoretical approach
was favored for so long and by so many Critical Theorists. First, it
has been long held that only a comprehensive social theory could unify
critical social science and thus underwrite a “scientific” basis
for criticism that goes beyond the limits of lay knowledge. Second, not
only must the epistemic basis of criticism be independent of agents’
practical knowledge, but it might also be claimed that the correctness
of any explanation is independent of its desirable or undesirable
political effects on a specific audience. So conceived, social
criticism is then a two-stage affair: first, inquirers independently
discover the best explanation using the available comprehensive theory;
then, second, they persuasively communicate its critical consequences
to participants who may have false beliefs about their practices.
Starting with Marx’s historical materialism, large-scale
macrosociological and historical theories have long been held to be the
most appropriate explanatory basis for critical social science.
However, one problem is that comprehensiveness does not ensure
explanatory power. Indeed, there are many such large-scale theories,
each with its own distinctive and exemplary social phenomena that guide
an attempt at unification. A second problem is that a close examination
of standard critical explanations, such as the theory of ideology,
shows that they typically appeal to a variety of different social
theories (Bohman 1999b). Habermas’s actual employment of critical
explanations bears this out. His criticism of modern societies turns on
the explanation of the relationship between two very different
theoretical terms: a micro-theory of rationality based on communicative
coordination and a macro-theory of the systemic integration of modern
societies in such mechanisms as the market (Habermas 1987).
Not only does the idea of a comprehensive theory presuppose that there
is one preferred mode of critical explanation, it also presupposes
that there is one preferred goal of social criticism, a socialist
society that fulfills the norm of human emancipation. Only with such a
goal in the background does the two-step process of employing
historical materialism to establish an epistemically and normatively
independent stance make sense. The validity of social criticism does
not merely depend on its being accepted or rejected by those to whom
it is addressed. Pluralistic inquiry suggests a different norm of
correctness: that criticism must be verified by those participating in
the practice and that this demand for practical verification is part
of the process of inquiry itself.
Despite his ambivalence between theoretical and practical pluralism,
Habermas has given good reasons to accept the practical and pluralist
approach. Just as in the analysis of modes of inquiry tied to distinct
knowledge-constitutive interests, Habermas accepts that various
theories and methods each have “a relative legitimacy.” Indeed,
like Dewey he goes so far as to argue that the logic of social
explanation is pluralistic and elides the “apparatus of general
theories.” In the absence of any such general theories, the most
fruitful approach to social scientific knowledge is to bring all the
various methods and theories into relation to each other:
“Whereas the natural and the cultural or hermeneutic sciences are
capable of living in mutually indifferent, albeit more hostile than
peaceful coexistence, the social sciences must bear the tension of
divergent approaches under one roof …” (Habermas 1988, 3). In
The Theory of Communicative Action, Habermas casts critical
social theory in a similar pluralistic, yet unifying way. In discussing
various accounts of societal modernization, for example, Habermas
argues that the main existing theories have their own “particular
legitimacy” as developed lines of empirical research, and that Critical
Theory takes on the task of critically unifying the various theories
and their heterogeneous methods and presuppositions. “Critical
Theory does not relate to established lines of research as a
competitor; rather, starting from its concept of the rise of modern
societies, it attempts to explain the specific limitations and relative
rights of those approaches” (Habermas 1987, 375).
This tension between unity and plurality leads in two different
directions, one practical and the other theoretical. What might be
called the “Kantian” approach proceeds case by case, seeing the
way in which these theories run up against their limits in trying to
extend beyond the core phenomena of their domain of validity (Bohman
1991, chapter 2). This approach is not theoretical in orientation, but
more akin to “social science with a practical intent” to use
Habermas’s older vocabulary (Habermas 1971). The “Kantian” answer
is given sharpest formulation by Weber in his philosophy of social
science. While recognizing the hybrid nature of social science as
causal and interpretive, he sought explanations of particular phenomena
that united both dimensions. For example, in his Protestant Ethic
and the Spirit of Capitalism he brought the macroanalysis of
institutional structures together with the micro-analysis of economic
rationality and religious belief (Weber 1958). According to this
contrasting approach, “the relative rights and specific
limitations” of each theory and method are recognized by assigning them
to their own particular (and hence limited) empirical domain rather
than establishing these judgments of scope and domain through a more
comprehensive theory that encompasses all others.
The second approach may be termed “Hegelian.” Here theorists
seek to unify social scientific knowledge in broad comprehensive
theories that produce a general history of modern societies. But
general theories provide “general interpretive frameworks” on
which it is possible to construct “critical histories of the
present” (McCarthy in Hoy and McCarthy 1994, 229–230). Even this
account of a comprehensive theory hardly eliminates competing histories
that bring together different theories and methods. Rather than aiming
at a single best history, “Hegelian” theories of this sort are
seen as practical proposals whose critical purchase is seen in offering
a comprehensive interpretation of the present situation. They do not
rely on the criteria of a theory of rationality often appealed to in
the Kantian approach, but still seem to justify particular moral
claims, such as claims concerning justice and injustice.
Habermas wants to straddle the divide between the Kantian and the
Hegelian approaches in his social theory of modernity. Why not see
Habermas’s theory of rationality as providing both a theoretical and
practical basis for Critical Theory? Certainly, this is how Habermas
sees the purpose of such a theory (Habermas 1984, chapter 1). Yet even
if this theory of rationality has to be understood in this way, it
would still have to avoid what Rorty calls “the ambiguity of
rationality,” between its statuses as “a cognitive faculty and a
moral virtue.” For this reason, Rorty keeps them distinct. “The
epistemological notion of rationality concerns our relation to
something nonhuman, whereas the moral notion concerns our relations to
our fellow human beings” (Rorty 1996, 74). In a way similar to recent
arguments in Putnam, Habermas now more strongly distinguishes between
claims to truth and the context of justification in which they are
made, even as he also wants to reject moral realism.
The problem for the practical conception of critical social inquiry
is then to escape the horns of a dilemma: it should be neither purely
epistemic and thus overly cognitivist, nor purely moralistic. Neither
provides sufficient critical purchase. In the case of the observer,
there is too much distance, so much so that it is hard to see how the
theory can motivate criticism; in the case of the pure participant
perspective, there is too little distance to motivate or justify any
criticism at all. It is also the same general theoretical and
methodological dilemma that characterizes the debates between
naturalist and anti-naturalist approaches. While the former sees terms
such as rationality as explanans to explain away such phenomena as
norms, the latter argues that normative terms are not so reducible and
thus figure in both explanans and explanandum. The best practical
account here reconciles Rorty’s ambiguity by putting the
epistemological component in the social world, in our various cognitive
perspectives towards it that include the normative perspectives of
others. The ambiguity is then the practical problem of adopting
different points of view, something that reflective participants in
self-critical practices must already be able to do by virtue of their
competence.
This shift to “perspective taking” is already implicit in the
reflexivity of practical forms of Critical Theory. Rather than look for
the universal and necessary features of social scientific knowledge,
Critical Theory has instead focused on the social relationships between
inquirers and other actors in the social sciences. Such relationships
can be specified epistemically in terms of the perspective taken by the
inquirer on the actors who figure in their explanations or
interpretations. Seen in this way, the two dominant and opposed
approaches to social science adopt quite different perspectives. On the
one hand, naturalism gives priority to the third-person or explanatory
perspective; on the other hand, the anti-reductionism of interpretive
social science argues for the priority of first- and second-person
understanding and so for an essential methodological dualism. Critical
Theory since Horkheimer has long attempted to offer an alternative to
both views.
Habermas and other Critical Theorists rightly call
“technocratic” any social inquiry that only develops optimal
problem-solving strategies in light of purely third-person knowledge of
the impersonal consequences of all available courses of action.
Pragmatists from Mead to Dewey offer similar criticisms (Habermas 1971,
1973; Dewey 1927b). This conception of practical knowledge would model
the role of the social scientist in politics on the engineer, who
masterfully chooses the optimal solution to a problem of design. For
the social scientist qua an ideally rational and informed
actor, “the range of permissible solutions is clearly delimited,
the relevant probabilities and utilities precisely specified, and even
the criteria of rationality to be employed (e.g., maximization of
expected utilities) is clearly stated” (Hempel 1965, 481). This
technocratic model of the social scientist as detached observer (rather
than reflective participant) always needs to be contextualized in the
social relationships it constitutes as a form of socially distributed
practical knowledge.
By contrast with the engineering model, interpretive social science
takes up the first-person perspective in making explicit the
meaningfulness of an action or expression. Interpretations as practical
knowledge are not based on some general theory (no matter how helpful
or explanatory these may be when interpretation is difficult), but
reconstruct agent’s own reasons, or at least how these reasons might
seem to be good ones from a first-person perspective. This leaves an
interpreter in a peculiar epistemic predicament: what started as the
enterprise of seeing things from others’ points of view can at best
provide the best interpretation for us of how things are
for them. As a matter of interpretive responsibility, there
is no getting around the fact that ethnography or history is our
attempt “to see another form of life in the categories of our
own” (Geertz 1971, 16–17; Bohman 1991, 132). The only way out of
this problem is to see that there is more than one form of practical
knowledge.
Naturalistic and hermeneutic approaches see the relationship of the
subject and object of inquiry as forcing the social scientist to take
either the third-person or first-person perspective. However, critical
social science necessarily requires complex perspective taking and the
coordination of various points of view, minimally that of social
scientists with the subjects under study. The “second-person
perspective” differs from both third-person observer and the
first-person participant perspectives in its specific form of practical
knowledge. It employs the know-how of a participant in dialogue or
communication (Bohman 2000). This perspective provides the alternative
to opposing perspectives especially when our first-person knowledge or
third-person theories get it wrong. When faced with interpreting
others’ behavior we quickly run into the limits of first-person
knowledge simpliciter. Third-person accounts face the same
“gerrymandering problem” as made clear in the private language
argument (Brandom 1994, 28ff). Neither the interpreter’s nor the
observer’s perspectives are sufficient to specify these opaque
intentional contexts for others. For social scientists as well as
participants in practices more generally, the adjudication of such
conflicts requires mutual perspective taking, which is its own mode of
practical reasoning.
Theories of many different sorts locate interpretation as a
practice, that is, in acts and processes of ongoing communication.
Communication is seen from this perspective as the exercise of a
distinctive form of practical rationality. A critical theory of
communicative action offers its own distinctive definition of
rationality, one that is epistemic, practical, and intersubjective. For
Habermas, for example, rationality consists not so much in the
possession of particular knowledge, but rather in “how speaking
and acting subjects acquire and use knowledge” (Habermas 1984, 11). Any
such account is “pragmatic” because it shares a number of
distinctive features with other views that see interpreters as
competent and knowledgeable agents. Most importantly, a pragmatic
approach develops an account of practical knowledge in the
“performative attitude,” that is, from the point of view of a
competent speaker. A theory of rationality can be a reconstruction of
the practical knowledge necessary for establishing social
relationships. This reconstruction is essential to understanding the
commitments of the reflective participant, including the critic.
There are two general arguments for a theory that assumes the
irreducibility of such a perspective. The first is that interpreting is
not merely describing something. Rather, it establishes commitments and
entitlements between the interpreter and the one interpreted. Second,
in doing so the interpreter takes up particular normative
attitudes. These “normative attitudes” must be those of the
interpreted. In interpreting one is not just reporting, but rather
expressing and establishing one’s attitude toward a claim, such as when
the interpreter takes the interpreted to say something to be true, or
to perform an act that is appropriate according to social norms. Some
such attitudes are essentially two-person attitudes: the interpreter
does not just express an attitude in the first-person perspective
alone, but rather incurs a commitment or obligation to others by
interpreting what others are doing (Brandom 1994, 79). To offer an
interpretation that is accepted is to make explicit the operative
social norms and thus to establish the normative terms of a social
relationship.
The critical attitude shares with the interpretive stance a
structure derived from the second-person perspective. Here an agent’s
beliefs, attitudes, and practices cannot only be interpreted as
meaningful or not, but must also be assessed as correct, incorrect, or
inconclusive. Nonetheless, the second-person perspective is not yet
sufficient for criticism. In order for an act of criticism itself to be
assessed as correct or incorrect, it must often resort to tests from
the first- and third-person perspectives as well. The reflective
participant must take up all stances; she assumes no single normative
attitude as proper for all critical inquiry. Only such an
“interperspectival” stance is fully dialogical, giving the
inquirer and agent equal standing. If indeed all cooperative social
activities “involve a moment of inquiry” (Putnam 1994, 174), then
they also need a moment of self-reflection on the assumptions of such
inquiry itself. It is this type of reflection that calls for a
distinctively practical form of critical perspective taking. If
critical social inquiry is inquiry into the basis of cooperative
practices as such, it takes practical inquiry one reflective step
further. The inquirer does not carry out this step alone, but rather
with the public whom the inquirer addresses. As in Kuhn’s distinction
between normal and revolutionary science, second-order critical
reflection considers whether or not the framework for cooperation
itself needs to be changed, thus whether new terms of cooperation are
necessary to solve problems.
Various perspectives for inquiry are appropriate in different
critical situations. If it is to identify all the problems with
cooperative practices of inquiry, it must be able to occupy and account
for a variety of perspectives. Only then will it enable public
reflection among free and equal participants. Such problems have
emerged for example in the practices of inquiry surrounding the
treatment of AIDS. The continued spread of the epidemic and lack of
effective treatments brought about a crisis in expert authority, an
“existential problematic situation” in Dewey’s sense (Dewey 1938,
492). By defining expert activity through its social consequences and
by making explicit the terms of social cooperation between researchers
and patients, lay participants reshape the practices of gaining medical
knowledge and authority (Epstein 1996, Part II). The affected public
changed the normative terms of cooperation and inquiry in this area in
order that institutions could engage in acceptable first-order problem
solving. If expertise is to be brought under democratic control,
reflective inquiry into scientific practices and their operative norms
is necessary (Bohman 1999a). This public challenge to the norms on
which expert authority is based may be generalized to all forms of
research in cooperative activity. It suggests the transformation of
some of the epistemological problems of the social sciences into the
practical question of how to make their forms of inquiry and research
open to public testing and public accountability. This demand also
means that some sort of “practical verification” of critical
social inquiry is necessary.
A practical approach to Critical Theory responds to pluralism in the
social sciences in two ways, once again embracing and reconciling both
sides of the traditional opposition between epistemic (explanatory) and
non-epistemic (interpretive) approaches to normative claims. On the one
hand, it affirms the need for general theories, while weakening the
strong epistemic claims made for them in underwriting criticism. On the
other hand, it situates the critical inquirer in the pragmatic
situation of communication, seeing the critic as making a strong claim
for the truth or rightness of his critical analysis. This is a
presupposition of the critic’s discourse, without which it would make
no sense to engage in criticism of others.
A good test case for the practical and pluralist conception of
Critical Theory based on perspective taking would be to give a more
precise account of the role of general theories and social scientific
methods in social criticism, including moral theories or theories of
norms. Rather than serving a justifying role in criticisms for their
transperspectival comprehensiveness, theories are better seen as
interpretations that are validated by the extent to which they open up
new possibilities of action that are themselves to be verified in
democratic inquiry. Not only that, but every such theory is itself
formulated from within a particular perspective. General theories are
then best seen as practical proposals whose critical purchase is not
moral and epistemic independence but practical and public testing
according to criteria of interpretive adequacy. This means that it is
not the theoretical or interpretive framework that is decisive, but the
practical ability in employing such frameworks to cross various
perspectives in acts of social criticism. In the above example, it is
accomplished in taking the patients’ perspectives seriously in altering
practices of medical inquiry into AIDS.
Why is this practical dimension decisive for democratizing
scientific authority? There seems to be an indefinite number of
perspectives from which to formulate possible general histories of the
present. Merely to identify a number of different methods and a number
of different theories connected with a variety of different purposes
and interests leaves the social scientist in a rather hopeless
epistemological dilemma. Either the choice among theories,
methods, and interests seems utterly arbitrary, or the
Critical Theorist has some special epistemic claim to survey the domain
and make the proper choice for the right reason. The skeptical horn of
the dilemma is embraced by “new pragmatists” like Richard Rorty
(Rorty 1991) and Max Weber (1949) alike, who see all such knowledge as
purpose-relative. The latter, perhaps Hegelian horn demands objectivist
claims for social science generally and for the epistemic superiority
of the Critical Theorist in particular--claims that Habermas and other
Critical Theorists have been at pains to reject (Weber 1949; Habermas
1973, 38). Is there any way out of the epistemic dilemma of pluralism
that would preserve the possibility of criticism without endorsing
epistemic superiority?
The way out of this dilemma has already been indicated by a
reflexive emphasis on the social context of critical inquiry and the
practical character of social knowledge it employs. It addresses the
subjects of inquiry as equal reflective participants, as knowledgeable
social agents. In this way, the asymmetries of the context of technical
control are suspended; this means that critical social inquiry must be
judged by a different set of practical consequences, appealing to an
increase in the “reflective knowledge” that agents already
possess to a greater or lesser degree. As agents in the social world
themselves, social scientists participate in the creation of the
contexts in which their theories are publicly verified. The goal of
critical inquiry is then not to control social processes or even to
influence the decisions that agents might make in any determinate sort
of way. Instead, its goal is to initiate public processes of
self-reflection (Habermas, 1971, 40–41). Such a process of deliberation
is not guaranteed success in virtue of some comprehensive theory.
Rather, the critic seeks to promote just those conditions of democracy
that make it the best available process upon the adequate reflection of
all those affected. This would include reflection of the democratic
process itself. When understood as solely dependent upon the
superiority of theoretical knowledge, the critic has no foothold in the
social world and no way to choose among the many competing approaches
and methods. The publicity of a process of practical verification
entails its own particular standards of critical success or failure
that are related to social criticism as an act of interpretation
addressed to those who are being criticized. An account of such
standards then has to be developed in terms of the sort of abilities
and competences that successful critics exhibit in their criticism.
Once more this reveals a dimension of pluralism in the social sciences:
the pluralism of social perspectives. As addressed to others in a
public by a speaker as a reflective participant in a practice,
criticism certainly entails the ability to take up the normative
attitudes of multiple pragmatic perspectives in the communication in
which acts of criticism are embedded.
If the argument of the last section is correct, a pragmatic account
is inevitably methodologically, theoretically, and perspectivally
pluralistic. Any kind of social scientific method or
explanation-producing theory can be potentially critical. There are no
specific or definitive social scientific methods of criticism or
theories that uniquely justify the critical perspective. One reason for
this is that there is no unique critical perspective, nor should there
be one for a reflexive theory that provides a social scientific account
of acts of social criticism and their conditions of pragmatic
success.
The standard ideas of ideology critique exhibit the problems with a
solely third-person model of criticism dependent on some idea of the
theorists being able to discern the “real interests” of
participants (Geuss 1981). Rather than claiming objectivity in a
transperspectival sense, most practically oriented Critical Theorists
have always insisted that their form of social inquiry takes a
“dual perspective” (Habermas 1996, chapter 1; Bohman 1991,
chapter 4). This dual perspective has been expressed in many different
ways. Critical Theorists have always insisted that critical approaches
have dual methods and aims: they are both explanatory and normative at
the same time, adequate both as empirical descriptions of the social
context and as practical proposals for social change. This dual
perspective has been consistently maintained by Critical Theorists in
their debates about social scientific knowledge, whether it is with
regard to the positivism dispute, universal hermeneutics, or micro- or
macro-sociological explanations.
In the dispute about positivist social science, Critical Theorists
rejected all forms of reductionism and insisted on the explanatory role
of practical reason. In disputes about interpretation, Critical
Theorists have insisted that social science not make a forced choice
between explanation and understanding. Even if social scientists can
only gain epistemic access to social reality through interpretation,
they cannot merely repeat what agents know practically in their
“explanatory understanding.” Here we might think of explanations
that create micro- and macro linkages, as between intentional actions
pursued by actors for their own purposes and their unintended effects
due to interdependencies of various sorts. Such dual perspective
explanations and criticism both allow the reflective distance of
criticism and the possibility of mediating the epistemic gap between
the participants’ more internal and the critics’ more external point of
view. Given the rich diversity of possible explanations and stances,
contemporary social science has developed a variety of possible ways to
enhance critical perspective taking.
Such a dual perspective provides a more modest conception of
objectivity: it is neither transperspectival objectivity nor a
theoretical metaperspective, but always operates across the range of
possible practical perspectives that knowledgeable and reflective
social agents are capable of taking up and employing practically in
their social activity. It is achieved in various combinations of
available explanations and interpretive stances. With respect to
diverse social phenomena at many different levels, critical social
inquiry has employed various explanations and explanatory strategies.
Marx’s historical social theory permitted him to relate functional
explanations of the instability of profit-maximizing capitalism to the
first-person experiences of workers. In detailed historical analyses,
feminist and ethnomethodological studies of the history of science have
been able to show the contingency of normative practices (Epstein 1996;
Longino 1990). They have also adopted various interpretive stances.
Feminists have shown how supposedly neutral or impartial norms have
built-in biases that limit their putatively universal character with
respect to race, gender, and disability (Mills 1997; Minnow 1990, Young
2002). In all these cases, claims to scientific objectivity or moral
neutrality are exposed by showing how they fail to pass the test of
public verification by showing how the contours of their experiences do
not fit the self-understanding of institutional standards of justice
(Mills 1997; Mansbridge 1991). Such criticism requires holding both
one’s own experience and the normative self-understanding of the
tradition or institution together at the same time, in order to expose
bias or cognitive dissonance. It uses expressions of vivid first-person
experiences to bring about cross-perspectival insights in actors who
could not otherwise see the limits of their cognitive and communicative
activities.
In these cases, why is it so important to cross perspectives? Here
the second-person perspective has a special and self-reflexive status
for criticism. Consider the act of crossing from the first-person
plural or “we perspective” to the second-person perspective in
two reflexive practices: science and democracy. In the case of science
the community of experts operates according to the norm of objectivity,
the purpose of which is to guide scientific inquiry and justify its
claims to communal epistemic authority. The biases inherent in these
operative norms have been unmasked in various critical science studies
and by many social movements. For Longino, such criticism suggests the
need for a better norm of objectivity, “measured against the
cognitive needs of a genuinely democratic community” (Longino 1990,
236). This connection can be quite direct, as when empirical studies
show that existing forms of participation are highly correlated with
high status and income, that lower income and status citizens were
often unwilling to participate in a public forum for fear of public
humiliation (Verba, et al 1995, Mansbridge 1991, Kelly 2000). Adopting
the second-person perspective of those who cannot effectively
participate does not simply unmask egalitarian or meritocratic claims
about political participation, but rather also suggests why critical
inquiry ought to seek new forums and modes of public expression (Young
2002, Bohman 1996).
The practical alternative offers a solution to this problem by
taking critical social theory in the direction of a pragmatic
reinterpretation of the verification of critical inquiry that turns
seemingly intractable epistemic problems into practical ones. The role
of critical social science is to supply methods for making explicit
just the sort of self-examination necessary for on-going normative
regulation of social life. This practical regulation includes the
governing norms of critical social science itself. Here the relation of
theory to practice is a different one than among the original
pragmatists: more than simply clarifying the relation of means and ends
for decisions on particular issues, these social sciences demand
reflection upon institutionalized practices and their norms of
cooperation. Reflective practices cannot remain so without critical
social inquiry, and critical social inquiry can only be tested in such
practices. One possible epistemic improvement is the transformation of
social relations of power and authority into contexts of democratic
accountability among political equals (Bohman 1999a; Epstein 1996).
Properly reconstructed, critical social inquiry is the basis for a
better understanding of the social sciences as the distinctive form of
practical knowledge in modern societies. Their capacity to initiate
criticism not only makes them the democratic moment in modern practices
of inquiry; that is, the social are democratic to the extent that they
are sufficiently reflexive and can initiate discussion of the social
basis of inquiry within a variety of institutional contexts. Normative
criticism is thus not only based on the moral and cognitive distance
created by relating and crossing various perspectives; it also has a
practical goal. It seeks to expand each normative perspective in
dialogical reflection and in this way make human beings more aware of
the circumstances that restrict their freedom and inhibit the full,
public use of their practical knowledge. One such salient circumstance
is the long-term historical process of globalization. What is a
distinctively critical theory of globalization that aims at such a form
of practical knowledge? How might such a theory contribute to wishes
and struggles of the age, now that such problematic situations are
transnational and even global? What normative standards can critics
appeal to, if not those immanent in liberalism? While in the next
section I will certainly talk about critical theorists, I will also
attempt to do critical social inquiry that combines normative and
empirical perspectives with the aim of realizing greater and perhaps
novel forms of democracy where none presently exist.
While the standard theories of globalization deal with large scale and
macrosociological processes, the social fact of globalization is not
uniform; differently situated actors experience it differently. This
makes it exemplary for pluralist and multiperspectival social
inquiry. It is also exemplary in another sense. As a social fact that
is not uniform in its consequences, globalization cannot be
reconstructed from the internal perspective of any single democratic
political community, it requires a certain kind of practically
oriented knowledge about the possibilities of realising norms and
ideals in praxis and is thus a theory of democratization, of
creating a political space where none now exists.  We may call this
practical theory of praxis a “praxeology” (Linklater 2001,
38).  Though the use of the term “praxeology” can be
traced back to the work of Ludwig von Mises and even earlier to Alfred
Espinas, Linklater’s use derives from the way the term is employed in
Raymond Aron’s work (Aron 2003, 577).  The purpose of praxeology, in
this sense, is inquiry into the “knowing how” of practical
normative knowledge, that is, how it is that norms are ongoingly
interpreted, realized, and enacted under particular social and
historical circumstances. A critical and praxeological theory of
globalization must therefore solve two pressing internal problems:
first, how to organize social inquiry within and among transnational
institutions more democratically; and, second, it must show the
salient differences between national and transnational institutions
and public spheres so that the democratic influence over globalization
becomes a more tractable problem with feasible solutions.
Current theories of globalization are primarily macro-sociological
and focus primarily on globalization as imposing constraints on
democratic institutions. While not denying that globalization is such a
fact, its explanations can become more critical and practical by also
showing how globalizing processes open up new institutional
possibilities and new forms of publicity (Bohman 2003). In order to
test these possibilities, this theory must make itself a more open and
multiperspectival practice; it must become a global critical theory. It
is in this context that we can press the questions of the normative
adequacy of the democratic ideal that has been inherited from modern
liberalism. Indeed, many critical theorists who defend a
“cosmopolitan” conception of democracy have a surprisingly
standard conception of how democracy is best organized discursively and
deliberatively. For this reason, they have not asked the question
whether such practices are able to sustain a sufficiently robust and
cooperative form of inquiry under the new global circumstances of
political interdependence.
In what respect can it be said that this novel sort of practical and
critical social science should be concerned with social facts? A social
scientific praxeology understands facts in relation to human agency
rather than independent of it. Pragmatic social science is concerned
not merely with elaborating an ideal in convincing normative arguments,
but also with its realizability and its feasibility. In this regard,
any political ideal must take into account general social facts if it
is to be feasible; but it must also be able to respond to a series of
social facts that ground skeptical challenges suggesting that
circumstances make such an ideal impossible. With respect to democracy,
these facts include, expertise and the division of labor, cultural
pluralism and conflict, social complexity and differentiation, and
globalization and increasing social interdependence, to name a few. In
cases where “facts” challenge the very institutional basis of
modern political integration, normative practical inquiry must seek to
extend the scope of political possibilities rather than simply accept
the facts as fixing the limits of political possibilities once and for
all. For this reason, social science is practical to the extent that it
is able to show how political ideals that have informed these
institutions in question are not only still possible, but also feasible
under current conditions or modification of those conditions. As I have
been arguing, the ideal in question for pragmatism and recent critical
social theory inspired by pragmatism is a robust and deliberative form
of self-rule—also a key aspect of Critical Theory’s wider
historical ideal of human emancipation and freedom from domination.
The issue of realizability has to do with a variety of constraints.
On the one hand, democracy requires voluntary constraints on action,
such as commitments to basic rights and to constitutional limits on
political power. Social facts, on the other hand, are non-voluntary
constraints, or within our problematic, constraints that condition the
scope of the application of democratic principles. Taken up in a
practical social theory oriented to suggesting actions that might
realize the ideal of democracy in modern society, social facts no
longer operate simply as constraints. For Rawls, “the fact of
pluralism” (or the diversity of moral doctrines in modern societies) is
just one such permanent feature of modern society that is directly
relevant to political order, because its conditions “profoundly
affect the requirements of a workable conception of justice” (Rawls
1999, 424).
This is not yet a complete story. Social facts such as pluralism
have become “permanent” only to the extent that modern
institutions and ideals developed after the Wars of Religion, including
constitutional democracy and freedom of expression, promote rather than
inhibit their development. This fact of pluralism thus alters how we
are to think of the feasibility of a political ideal, but does
not touch on its realizability or possibility. Similarly, the
“fact of coercion,” understood as the fact that any political
order created around a single doctrine would require oppressive use of
state power, concerns not the realizability or possibility of a
particular ideal, but its feasibility as “a stable and unified
order,” under the conditions of pluralism (Rawls 1999, 225). Thus, for
Rawls, regardless of whether they<unclear referent> are
considered in terms of possibility or feasibility, they are only
considered as constraints—as restricting what is
politically possible or what can be brought about by political action
and power. In keeping with the nature and scope of entrenched
pluralism, not all actors and groups experience the constraints of
pluralism in the same way: from the perspective of some groups,
pluralism enables their flourishing; for others, it may be an
obstacle.
If this were the only role of putative “facts” in Rawls’
political theory of modernity, then it would not be a full practical
theory in the sense that I am using the term here. Rawls’ contribution
is that social facts differ in kind, so that some, such as the fact of
pluralism, are “permanent” and not merely to be considered in
narrow terms of functional stability. Social facts related to stability
may indeed constrain feasibility without being limits on the
possibility or realizability of an ideal as such; in the case of
pluralism, for example, democratic political ideals other than
liberalism might be possible. Without locating a necessary connection
between its relations to feasibility and possibility, describing a
social fact as “permanent” is not entirely accurate. It is better
instead to think of such facts as “institutional facts” that are
deeply entrenched in some historically contingent, specific social
order rather than as universal normative constraints on democratic
institutions.
This approach allows us to see the “facts” of modern societies
as practical: they are precisely those determinations that are embedded
in relatively long-term social processes, whose consequences cannot be
reversed in a short period of time—such as a generation— by
political action. Practical theories thus have to consider the ways in
which such facts become part of a constructive process that might be
called “generative entrenchment” (Wimstatt 1974, 67–86). By
“entrenchment of social facts,” I mean that the relevant
democratic institutions promote the very conditions that make the
institutional social fact possible in assuming those conditions for
their own possibility. When the processes at work in the social fact
then begin to outstrip particular institutional feedback mechanisms
that maintain it within the institution, then the institution must be
transformed if it is to stand in the appropriate relation to the facts
that make it feasible and realizable. All institutions, including
democratic ones, entrench some social facts in realizing their
conditions of possibility.
Consider Habermas’ similar use of social facts with respect to
institutions. As with Rawls, for Habermas pluralism and the need for
coercive political power make the constitutional state necessary, so
that the democratic process of law making is governed by a system of
personal, social, and civil rights. However, Habermas introduces a more
fundamental social fact for the possibility and feasibility of
democracy: the structural fact of social complexity. Complex societies
are “polycentric,” with a variety of forms of order, some of
which, such as non-intentional market coordination, do not necessarily
have to answer to the ideals of democracy. This fact of complexity
limits political participation and changes the nature of our
understanding of democratic institutions. Indeed, this fact makes it
such that the principles of democratic self-rule and the criteria of
public agreement cannot be asserted simply as the proper norms for all
social and political institutions, and this seems ideally suited to
understanding how globalization limits the capacity of democracy to
entrench itself. As Habermas puts it, “unavoidable social
complexity makes it impossible to apply the criteria [of democratic
legitimacy] in an undifferentiated way” (Habermas 1996, 305). This fact
makes a certain kind of structure ineluctable; since complexity means
that democracy can “no longer control the conditions under which
it is realized.” In this case, the social fact has become
“unavoidable,” and certain institutions are necessary for the
social integration to which there is “no feasible alternative” (Habermas 2001 122).
While plausible, this claim lacks empirical evidence. Habermas here
overestimates the constraining character of this “fact,” which
does little to restrict a whole range of indirect, institutionally
mediated institutional designs. These mediated forms of democracy would
in turn affect the conditions that produce social complexity itself and
thus stand in a feedback relation to them. The consequences of the
“fact” of social complexity is thus not the same across all
feasible, self-entrenching institutional realizations of democracy, and
some ideals of democracy may rightly encourage the preservation of
aspects of complexity, such as the ways in which the epistemic division
of labour may promote wider and more collaborative problem solving and
deliberation on ends. How might this alternative conception of social
facts guide a critical and praxeological theory of globalization?
When seen in light of the requirements of practical social science and
the entrenchment of facts and conditions by institutions,
constructivists are right to emphasise how agents produce and maintain
social realities, even if not under conditions of their own making. In
this context an important contribution of pragmatism is precisely its
interpretation of the practical status of social facts. Thus, Dewey
sees social facts as always related to “problematic
situations,” even if these are more felt or suffered than fully
recognised as such.  The way to avoid turning problematic situations
into empirical-normative dilemmas is, as Dewey suggests, to see even
facts practically: “facts are such in a logical sense only as
they serve to delimit a problem in a way that affords indication and
test of proposed solutions” (Dewey 1938, 499). They may serve
this practical role only if they are seen in interaction with our
understanding of the ideals that guide the practices in which such
problems emerge, thus where neither fact nor ideal is fixed and
neither is given justificatory or theoretical priority.
The debate between Dewey and Lippmann about the public sphere and
its role in democracy is precisely praxeological in the sense that I
defined the term earlier. In response to Lippmann’s insistence on the
preeminence of expertise, Dewey criticised “existing political
practice” for the reason that it largely ignored “occupational
groups and the organized knowledge and purposes that are involved in
the existence of such groups, manifests a dependence upon a summation
of individuals quantitatively” (Dewey 1927a, 50–51). At the same time,
he recognised that existing institutions were obstacles to the
emergence of such a form of participatory democracy in an era when
“the machine age has enormously expanded, multiplied,
intensified, and complicated the scope of indirect consequences” of
collective action and where the collectives—affected by actions
of such a scope—are so large and diverse “that the
resultant public cannot identify and distinguish itself” (Dewey 1927b,
314). Dewey saw the solution in a transformation both of what it is to
be a public and of the institutions with which the public interacts.
Such interaction will provide the basis for determining how the
functions of the new form of political organization will be limited and
expanded, the scope of which is “something to be critically and
experimentally determined” in democracy as a mode of practical inquiry
(Dewey 1927b, 281). The question is not just one of current political
feasibility, but also of possibility, given that we want to remain
committed in some broad sense to democratic principles of self-rule
even if not to the set of possibilities provided by current
institutions. How do we identify such fundamentally unsettling facts? I
turn next to the discussion of a specific social fact, the “fact
of globalization” and interpret it not as a uniform and aggregative
process but as a problematic situation that is experienced in different
and even contradictory ways at different locations and from a variety
of perspectives, and is differently assessed with respect to different
normative ideals of democracy. Since this is a relatively recent and
unsettled debate, through this example we can see Critical Theory in
the making.
For some critical theorists, the relatively “new” fact of
globalization permits a direct inference to the need for new and more
cosmopolitan forms of democracy and citizenship. Whatever the specific
form these assume in future institutions, the usual arguments for
political cosmopolitanism are relatively simple despite the fact that
the social scientific analyses employed in them are highly complex and
empirically differentiated in their factual claims. In discussions of
theories of globalization, the fact of global interdependence refers to
the unprecedented extent, intensity, and speed of social interactions
across borders, encompassing diverse dimensions of human conduct from
trade and cultural exchange to migration (Held, et al 1999). The
inference from these facts of interdependence is that existing forms of
democracy within the nation-state must be transformed and that
institutions ought to be established that solve problems that transcend
national boundaries (Held 1995, 98–101). Thus, globalization is taken
to be a macro-sociological, aggregative fact that constrains the
realization of democracy so long as the proper congruence between
decision makers and decision takers is lacking. Globalization is thus
taken as a constraint on democracy as it is realized in existing
liberal representative systems. The Deweyan alternative is to see that
facts “have to be determined in their dual function as obstacles
and as resources,” as problems that also hold out the conditions that
make the transformation of the situation possible (Dewey 1938,
399–400). The “mere” fact of the wider scale of interaction is
thus inadequate on its own and does not capture what role globalization
may play as a problematic situation for the emergence of new democratic
possibilities.
A pragmatic interpretation of social facts in this way encourages us
to see globalization as Janus-faced, as an obstacle and as a resource
for the realization of democratic ideals. This sort of theory sees
globalization not as a unitary but rather as a multidimensional
process. Even the notion of “complex interdependence” can be
misleading insofar as it falsely suggests the telos of an increasingly
integrated world or an increasingly homogeneous culture or political
community (Keohane 2000, 117). A pragmatic analysis is better served by
a concept such as “interconnectedness” as opposed to
interdependence to the extent that interdependence suggests convergence
and levels the differences in the ways in which globalization is
experienced. Rather, it is important here, as in the case of the fact
of pluralism, to see that this process can be experienced in different
ways by different peoples or political communities, given that it is a
multifaceted and multidimensional process producing “differential
interconnectedness in different domains” (Held et al 1999, 27). In some
domains such as global financial markets, globalization is profoundly
uneven and deeply stratified reinforcing hierarchies and distributive
inequalities. Inequalities of access to and control over aspects of
globalizing processes may reflect older patterns of subordination and
order, even while the process produces new ones by excluding some
communities from financial markets and by making others more vulnerable
to its increased volatility (Hurrell and Woods 1999).
If these descriptions are correct, the fact of globalization is a
new sort of social fact whose structure of enablement and constraint is
not easily captured at the aggregative level. It is even experienced in
contradictory ways looking at its consequences and impacts that differ
across various domains and at various locations. Institutions can only
manage the problems of globalization in ways that consider the
interests of everyone by having mechanisms that ensure that the full
range of perspectives is available for inquiry. This requires that
international financial institutions extent their forms of inquiry to
include issues such as the social disintegration and domination
produced by their policies (Rodrik 1994, Woods 2001).
One further question about the fact of globalization must be raised
in order to understand the inherent possibilities for democracy in it.
Is globalization a “permanent” fact for democracy as Rawls
described the fact of pluralism for liberalism in that it is deeply
embedded in its possible realizations? As many social theorists have
argued, globalization is part of interlocking and long-term social
processes beginning in early modernity; as Anthony Giddens put it,
“modernity is inherently globalizing” (Giddens 1990, 63). Even if
reversing such processes were possible, it is not feasible in any short
time span and under the democratic constraints. As with Rawls’ fact of
pluralism, so long as “globalizing” societies are democratic, we
can expect such processes to continue. This is not to say that
globalization in its current form is somehow permanent or unalterable
if we want to realize democratic ideals. Indeed, just how globalization
will continue, and under what legitimate normative constraints, become
the proper questions for democratic politics, as citizens and public
vigorously interact with those institutions that make globalization a
deeply entrenched and temporally stable social fact. However
entrenched, the social fact of globalization still remains open to
democratic reconstruction, should creative reinterpretation of
democracy come about. In the next section, I examine recent debates
among Critical Theorists about the significance of the European Union
as a model for a genuine transformation of democracy.
The analysis thus far has taken a robust ideal of democracy for
granted consisting of self-rule by the public deliberation of free and
equal citizens—the ideal of deliberative democracy that informs
both pragmatism and Critical Theory (Bohman 2004). Given the uneven and
potentially contradictory consequences of globalization, it seems clear
that current democratic institutions themselves cannot be responsive to
all the dimensions of domination and subordination that are possible
considering the scale and intensity of interconnectedness. What are the
alternatives? It is not just a matter of exercising an institutional
imagination within broadly understood democratic norms and ideals.
Informed by democratic ideals of non-domination, the practical
knowledge needed to promote the democratising of uneven and
hierarchical social relations requires an empirical analysis of current
transformations and its embedded possibilities. The democratic ideal of
autonomy leads David Held and others to emphasise the emerging
structures of international law that produce a kind of binding power of
collective decisions. Others look to ways of reforming the structures
of representation of current international institutions (Pogge 1997,
Habermas 2001). Still others look to the emergence of various
institutions in the European Union (EU) to discuss the trend toward
international constitutionalism or supranational deliberation.
According to the sort of plurality of perspectives endorsed by a
pragmatist philosophy of social science, a historical account of the
emergence of single and multiple institutions would be helpful. In
Gerald Ruggie’s masterful analysis of the development of a global
order beyond the nation-state, he shows that the modern sovereign
state and the social empowerment of citizens emerged within the same
epistemic era as the single point perspective in painting,
cartography, or optics. “The concept of sovereignty then
represented merely the doctrinal counterpart of the application of
single point perspective to the organization of political space”
(Ruggie, 2000, 186). Unbundling sovereignty would lead to new
political possibilities, including the re-articulation of
international political space in a new way that cannot be anticipated
in dominant theories of international relations.  Focusing on the
shifts in the authority of states and the development of the European
Union, Ruggie sees the “EU as the first multiperspectival polity
to emerge in the modern era” and thus the emergence of a new
political form. The concept of “the multiperspectival
form” does seem to offer “a lens through which to view
other possible instances of international transformation today”
(Ruggie 2000, 196). Such an account also applies to the theory of
practical knowledge that might inform reflection on the possibilities
of democracy in an era of uneven globalization.
If the political authority that now promotes globalization is to
answer to democratic will formation, the institutions in which such
public deliberation takes place must seek to become explicitly
multiperspectival in Ruggie’s sense. The positive conditions for such
an extension of current political possibilities already exist in the
fact of interdependence—the emergence of greater social
interaction among citizens who participate in vibrant interaction
across transnational civil society and within emerging global public
spheres. In order to develop the framework for such a
normative-practical praxeology for emerging multiperspectival
institutions, pragmatism and Critical Theory once again suggest
themselves: here Dewey’s testable claim that it is the interaction of
public and institutions that promotes democracy and democratic inquiry.
However important giving greater powers to the European Parliament may
be, parliamentary politics at best serves a mediating role among
transnational and national institutions and is not the sole means to
democratisation (Habermas 2001). Given that such institutions cannot
easily be scaled up and retain their full democratic character, it is
necessary to look to a different institutional level: to the
possibility of new forms of social inquiry that may be developing in
the problem-solving mechanisms of the European Union.
How might new forms of inquiry emerge that are able to accommodate a
greater number of perspectives and also remain democratic? Here we need
again to distinguish between first- and second-order forms of
deliberation, where the latter develops in order to accommodate an
emergent public with new perspectives and interests. Dewey sees the
normal, problem-solving functioning of democratic institutions as based
on robust interaction between publics and institutions within a set of
constrained alternatives. When the institutional alternatives
implicitly address a different public than is currently constituted by
evolving institutional practice and its consequences, the public may
act indirectly and self-referentially by forming a new public with
which the institutions must interact. This interaction initiates a
process of democratic renewal in which publics organise and are
organised by new emerging institutions with a different alternative set
of political possibilities. Of course, this is a difficult process:
“to form itself the public has to break existing political forms;
this is hard to do because these forms are themselves the regular means
for instituting political change” (Dewey 1927b, 255). This sort of
innovative process describes the emergence of those transnational
publics that are indirectly affected by the new sorts of authoritative
institutions brought about by managing “deregulation” and
globalization. This account of democratic learning and innovation seems
not to be limited by the scope of the institutions, even as the
potential for domination also increases under current arrangements.
What sort of public sphere could play such a normative role? In
differentiated modern societies (that is, societies divided into
multiple economic and social spheres such as markets, a state, civil
society and so on), one role of the distinctive communication that goes
on in the public sphere is to raise topics or express concerns that cut
across social spheres: it not only circulates information about the
state and the economy, but it also establishes a forum for criticism in
which the boundaries of these spheres are crossed, primarily in
citizen’s demands for mutual accountability. But the other side of this
generalization is a requirement for communication that crosses social
domains: such a generalization is necessary precisely because the
public sphere has become less socially and culturally homogeneous and
more internally differentiated than its early modern form (Habermas
1989). Instead of appealing to an assumed common norm of
“publicity” or a set of culturally specific practices of
communication, a cosmopolitan public sphere is created when at
least two culturally rooted public spheres begin to overlap and
intersect, as when translations and conferences create a cosmopolitan
public sphere in various academic disciplines. Instead of relying on
the intrinsic features of the medium to expand communicative
interaction, networks that are global in scope become publics only with
the development and expansion of transnational civil society. The
creation of such a civil society is a slow and difficult process that
requires the highly reflexive forms of communication and boundary
crossing and accountability typical of developed public spheres. On the
basis of their common knowledge of violations of publicity, their
members will develop the capacities of public reason to cross and
negotiate boundaries and differences between persons, groups, and
cultures.
In such boundary-crossing publics, the speed, scale, and intensity
of communicative interaction facilitated by networks such as the
Internet provides a positive and enabling condition for democratic
deliberation and thus creates a potential space for cosmopolitan
democracy. Such a development hardly demands that the public sphere be
“integrated with media systems of matching scale that occupy the same
social space as that over which economic and political decision will
have an impact” (Garnham 1995, 265). But if the way to do this is
through disaggregated networks (such as the Internet) rather than mass
media, then we cannot expect that the global public sphere will no
longer exhibit features of the form of the national public sphere.
Rather, it will be a public of publics, of disaggregated networks
embedded in a variety of institutions rather than an assumed unified
national public sphere.
The emergence of transnational public spheres is informative for the
practical goals of a critical theory of globalization. Once we examine
the potential ways in which the Internet can expand the features of
communicative interaction, whether or not the Internet is a public
sphere is a practical question of possibility rather than a theoretical
question about the fact of the matter. It depends not only on which
institutions shape its framework but also on how participants contest
and change these institutions and on how they interpret the Internet as
a public space. It depends on the mediation of agency, not on
technology. With the proliferation of non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) and other forms of transnational civil society organization, it
is plausible to expect that two different and interacting levels of
multiperspectival innovation may emerge: first, new institutions such
as the European Union that are more adapted to multiple jurisdictions
and levels of governance; and, second, a vibrant transnational civil
society that produces public spheres around various institutions with
the goal of making their forms of inquiry more transparent, accessible
and open to a greater variety of actors and perspectives. This approach
does not limit the sources of the democratic impulse to transnational
civil society. Rather, the better alternative is to reject both
bottom-up and top-down approaches in favour of vigorous interaction
between publics and institutions as the ongoing source of
democratization and institutional innovation.
According to a pragmatically inspired democratic experimentalism,
attempts at democratisation and reform need not wait for publics to
emerge; they can be constructed in various practices. Consultative NGOs
may generally become too intertwined with institutions and thus do not
generatively entrench their own conditions in this way. This practical
difficulty is evident in the official civil society organizations of
the European Union that fail to promote public deliberation. Without
further conceptual and normative clarification, the appeal to various
“bottom up” strategies of democratization remains normatively
underdeveloped (Dryzek 1996, Jaggar, 2004). Even when informed by
democratic aims, this form of politics cannot capture the complex
interrelationships of civil society, the state and the market,
especially given the background of inequalities and asymmetries that
operate in processes of globalization. Apart from powerful corporate
actors in civil society, NGOs from economically advantaged regions
possess significant resources to influence and shape the formation of
civil society in other contexts. A critical theory of such activity
asks about the possibility of a strong connection between their powers
in civil society with market forces (Silliman 1998).
Besides the spontaneous emergence of publics out of transnational
associations, it is also possible to make use of self-consciously
constructed publics of relevant stakeholders to act as
“mini-publics” that are empowered to deliberate and make
decisions (Fung 2003). Here we can include a variety of experiments,
from participatory budgets to citizen boards and juries that have a
variety of decision-making powers. Properly empowered and
self-consciously constructed, mini-publics offer a strategy to get
beyond the dilemma of insider consultation and outsider contestation
that is a structural feature of civil society activity in currently
existing international institutions. Since self-consciously created
minipublics seek to include all relevant stakeholders, they do not rely
on representation as the mode of communicating interests, or even the
inclusion of well-organized actors as a way of achieving effective
implementation. Instead they open up a directly deliberative process
within the institution that includes as many perspectives as possible
and can be repeated when necessary. The minipublic is then an
institutionally constructed intermediary, although it could act in such
a way as to become an agent for the creation of a larger public with
normative powers. In this capacity, minipublics may become open and
expandable spaces for democratic experimentation. While many are issue
or domain specific, such experiments often become models for democratic
governance in dispersed and diverse polities. As Cohen and Rogers put
it, the more specific and episodic practices aim at mutual benefits
through improved coordination, experimental deliberative practices tied
to larger political projects may redistribute power and advantage and
in this way secure the conditions of democracy more generally (Cohen
and Rogers 2003, 251).
The same point could be made about taking existing democratic
institutions as the proper model for democratization. To look only at
the constraints of size in relation to a particular form of political
community begs the question of whether or not there are alternative
linkages between democracy and the public sphere that are not simply
scaled up. Such linkages might be more decentralized and polycentric
than the national community requires. The issue here is the standard
of evaluation, not whether some other public sphere or form of
community “is totally or completely democratic, but whether it
is adequately democratic given the kind of entity we take it to
be” (McCormick 1996, 345). For a nation state to be democratic
it requires a certain sort of public sphere sufficient to create a
strong public via its connections to parliamentary debate. A
transnational and thus polycentric and pluralist community, such as
the European Union, requires a different sort of public sphere in
order to promote sufficient democratic deliberation. Once a
transnational and post-territorial polity rejects the assumption that
it must be what Rawls calls “a single cooperative scheme in
perpetuity,” a more fluid and negotiable order might emerge with
plural authority structures along a number of different dimensions
rather than a single location for public authority and power. Without
a single location of public power, a unified public sphere becomes an
impediment to democracy rather than an enabling condition for mass
participation in decisions at a single location of authority. The
problem for an experimental institutional design of directly
deliberative democracy is to create precisely the appropriate feedback
relation between disaggregated publics and such a polycentric decision
making process.  The lesson for a critical theory of globalization is
to see the extension of political space and the redistribution of
political power not only as a constraint similar to complexity but
also as an open field of opportunities for innovative, distributive,
and multiperspectival forms of publicity and democracy.
A critical theory of globalization is a practical or praxeologically
oriented theory that sees the “fact of globalization” in relation
to the goal of realizing the norms of human emancipation and democracy.
The central and still open questions for such a practically oriented
social science are the following: what available forms of
praxis are able to promote the transformations that could lead
to new forms of democracy? What sort of practical knowledge is needed
to make this possible and how might this knowledge be stabilised in
institutionalised forms of democratic inquiry? What are the
possibilities and opportunities for democracy at a higher level of
aggregation that globalization makes possible? How might the public
sphere be realized at the global level? The argument here suggests that
such inquiry and institutions must go beyond single perspective
understandings of democracy that dominate national political life as
well as the various administrative techne that are common in
the international sphere. A critical praxeology of realizing norms in
multiperspectival institutions might add that it is also a reflexive
question of putting such organization in the larger context of a
project of human emancipation. Such an interactive account of publics
and institutions gives a plausible practical meaning to the extending
of the project of democracy to the global level. It also models in its
own form of social science the mode of inquiry that this and other
publics may employ in creating and assessing the possibilities for
realizing democracy. A critical theory of globalization does not only
point out the deficits of current practices, but shows the potential
for properly organized publics to create new ones. Since the new
practices need not be modeled on the old ones, it is not a theory of
democracy as such, but of democratization.
In facing the challenges of new social facts, Critical Theory
remains a vital philosophical tradition in normative disciplines of
social and political philosophy. Furthermore, this vitality is enhanced
when it considers a range of democratic claims not discussed here, all
of which equally challenge the fundamental frameworks of conceptions of
democracy, justice, and their interrelationship: these include the
struggles of aboriginal peoples, the disabled, women, and more. One
great advantage of the practical account is that it makes it easier to
see why there are many different critical theories in different
historical contexts, what Marx called the “wishes and struggles
of the age.” On a practical account, critical inquiry aims at creating
the reflective conditions necessary for the practical verification of
its inquiry, and these conditions are not confined only to democratic
institutions, but wherever publics employ critical social theories and
methods as the moment of inquiry of their democratic politics. As new
forms of critical theory emerge related to racism, sexism, and
colonialism, reflective social agents have transformed these same
democratic ideals and practices in the interest of emancipation. In
entrenching new social facts, agents transform the ideals themselves as
well as their institutional form.
This critical and practical orientation gives rise to three
different questions about critical social inquiry. First, does Critical
Theory suggest a distinctive form of social inquiry? Second, what sort
of knowledge does such inquiry provide in order to provide insight into
social circumstances and justify social criticism of current ideals and
institutions? Finally, what sort of verification does critical inquiry
require? In light of the answers to these questions on the practical,
democratic, and multiperspectival interpretation defended here, it is
likely that Critical Theory is no longer a unique approach.
Methodologically, it becomes more thoroughly pluralistic. Politically,
it loses its capital letters as the aims and struggles of the age of
globalization become more diverse and not automatically connected by
the commitment to any particular holistic social theory. Given its own
democratic aims, it would be hard to justify any other interpretation.
In a period in which philosophy cooperates with empirical sciences and
disciplines, Critical Theory offers an approach to distinctly normative
issues that cooperates with the social sciences in a nonreductive way.
Its domain is inquiry into the normative dimension of social activity,
in particular how actors employ their practical knowledge and normative
attitudes from complex perspectives in various sorts of contexts. It
also must consider social facts as problematic situations from the
point of view of variously situated agents.
This kind of normative practical knowledge is thus reflexive and
finds its foothold in those ongoing, self-transforming normative
enterprises such as democracy that are similarly reflexive in practice.
By discussing democracy in this way, I have also tried to show just how
deep the connections are between it and critical social science:
critical theories are not democratic theories, but their practical
consequences are assessed and verified in democratic practice and
solved by inquiry into better democratic practice. Perhaps one of the
more pernicious forms of ideology now is embodied in the appeal of the
claim that there are no alternatives to present institutions. In this
age of diminishing expectations, one important role that remains for
the social scientifically informed, and normatively oriented democratic
critic is to offer novel alternatives and creative possibilities in
place of the defeatist claim that we are at the end of history. That
would not only mean the end of inquiry, but also the end of
democracy.