Theories of cultural evolution need to be distinguished from theories
within evolutionary psychology, even though both may involve an
application of evolutionary ideas to the explanation of cultural
phenomena. The evolutionary psychologist (e.g. Tooby and Cosmides
1992) tends to assume that the most important inheritance mechanism in
all species—our own included—is genetic inheritance.
Evolutionary psychology regards the human mind as evolving through a
conventional process of natural selection acting on genetically
inherited variation. For example, an evolutionary psychologist might
explain the widespread taste among humans for fatty foods in terms of
the importance in our species’ distant past of consuming as much
fat as possible on those rare occasions when the circumstances
presented themselves. Such a hypothesis can also help to explain novel
cultural trends: the recent increase in obesity is explained as the
result of a novel environmental change—the increased
availability of cheap, high-fat foods—acting in concert with a
once-adaptive, now dangerous, gustatory preference. So evolutionary
psychology is hardly silent about culture and cultural change. Even
so, cultural evolutionary theorists tend to place far more stress on
the role of non-genetic inheritance, and specifically of cultural
inheritance mediated via learning, as a factor playing a positive,
creative role in adapting species to their social and biological
environments.
Darwin believed, as do biologists today, that natural selection can
explain the origin of many complex adaptive traits. In Darwin’s
original presentation of natural selection, he requires that parent
organisms differ in their abilities to survive and reproduce, and that
offspring resemble their parents in terms of the traits that promote
or inhibit these abilities (Darwin 1859). This explanatory schema is
largely neutral regarding what mechanism accounts for parent-offspring
resemblance. For example, offspring might learn skills from their
parents, and thereby come to resemble them behaviourally. From the
perspective of natural selection explanations, it does not matter why
offspring resemble parents, only that they do resemble them.
Darwin’s theory of natural selection explains adaptation by
appealing to what we now call vertical transmission—the
inheritance of parental traits by offspring. As we have seen, cultural
processes such as learning might, in principle, underpin this form of
inheritance. But we do not learn only from our parents—we also
learn from peers, authority-figures and so forth. This is known as
oblique transmission. Once we acknowledge the possibility
that learning can underpin natural selection, we also acknowledge that
a theory of evolution—a theory which seeks to explain change,
including adaptive change in a population—may also need to be
further expanded to encompass oblique transmission. The admittance of
oblique transmission into evolutionary theory necessitates far more
radical revisions to traditional Darwinian models of evolution. This
is because oblique transmission opens up the possibility that some
traits may spread through a population in spite of the fact that they
reduce the fitness of the individuals who bear them.
While large amounts of work in cultural evolution have focused on the
human species, there is also a growing body of work assessing the
implications of learning for adaptation and speciation in many other
species including chimpanzees (Whiten et al. 1999), whales (Rendell and
Whitehead 2001), fish and birds among many others (Laland and Hoppitt
2003). Moreover, this work on non-human species also helps to refine
and to answer a series of questions about why humans, compared with
other species, seem so conspicuously good at building, maintaining and
refining collective storehouses of adaptive cultural capital (Henrich
2015, Laland 2016).
In a classic early work of cultural evolution, Cavalli-Sforza and
Feldman (1981) ask (among other things) how we can explain declining
birth rates among Italian women in the nineteenth century. These women
went from having around five children on average to having only two.
It would be extremely implausible to argue that this occurred as
result of natural selection (Sober 1991, 482). It would be
implausible, for example, to argue that the fitness of women with
smaller families was greater than the fitness of women with larger
families. True enough, an individual’s long-term fitness
(measured in terms of numbers of grandchildren, or
great-grandchildren) may sometimes be augmented by having a few strong
offspring rather than lots of weak ones (Lack 1954). But surely
Italian women could have raised more than two children to be healthy
adults. Cavalli-Sforza and Feldman instead argue that the practice of
having fewer children spread through Italy because women acquired the
trait both from peers and from individuals from their mother’s
generation, through modes of cultural transmission. Forms of oblique
transmission are required to explain this transition, because if
cultural transmission were always vertical, then the trait of having
greater numbers of offspring would be maintained in the population by
natural selection, albeit selection acting via cultural
inheritance.
One might react to this with confusion: why is a body of theory needed
to make these claims? Of course we acquire traits from others by
learning. And of course those others from whom we learn can include
peers as well as parents. In part, we can respond to this bewilderment
by pointing to the virtues of clarifying the conditions required for
cultural inheritance to overcome natural selection. Cavalli-Sforza and
Feldman argue that if women simply acquired whichever preference for
family size was the most widely adopted in their local cultural
environment, then cultural inheritance would not have enough of an
effect to overcome natural selection. Women must be disposed to
acquire the preference for small family size even when it is present
in only a small proportion of their cultural circle, if small family
size is to replace large family size in the population as a whole.
This is an illuminating claim, and it takes a quantitative model to
show it.
This question of what benefit is to be had from setting these sorts of
claims in a quantitative theory will be raised in more detail later in
this article. For the moment, note that one may also ask why it should
be the case that we are able to learn from non-parents at all, given
the adaptive costs of such a disposition. If the tendency of Italian
women to learn from their peers has led them to reduce their fitness
by reducing their family size, why did natural selection allow such
learning dispositions to become established in the first place? Boyd
and Richerson, two other pioneers in cultural evolutionary theory,
claim that the overall adaptive benefits of learning from non-parents
in fact outweigh the overall adaptive costs (Richerson and Boyd 2005,
Ch. 4). They give several reasons for this view. Suppose an inventive
(or lucky) individual is able to discover some behaviour, or
technique, which augments fitness. If other individuals in the
population can copy that behaviour, then their fitness will probably
be augmented, too. It will often be difficult for individuals to
ascertain which behaviours in fact augment fitness, hence which
behaviours should be copied. The problem, then, is how to tune a
learning mechanism so that beneficial behaviours are copied, while
non-beneficial behaviours are not.
Boyd and Richerson suggest that prestige bias can overcome
this problem: if individuals copy techniques from those who are in
prestigious positions, then this increases the chances that they will
copy techniques that are, in fact, beneficial. As they put it,
“Determining who is a success is much easier than
determining how to be a success” (Richerson and Boyd,
2005, 124). Moreover, evidence has been accumulating for the reality
of prestige bias. Henrich and Broesch (2011) have argued, based on
fieldwork in Fiji, that an individual’s perceived success in a
single domain of activity (for example, yam cultivation) predicts
whether that individual will be asked for advice in other domains (for
example, fishing). In other words, they claim that individuals are
accorded a broad form of prestige, which affects their likelihood of
serving as a cultural model. The value of prestige bias relies on the
supposition that those individuals who are able to get themselves into
prestigious positions have a better than average tendency to make use
of fitness-enhancing techniques. This heuristic will not be failsafe:
after all, not every technique a prestigious individual uses will also
augment fitness, and some individuals may be accorded prestige without
good cause. But the question which settles the plausibility of natural
selection explaining prestige bias is not whether prestige bias will
sometimes lead to the copying of maladaptive techniques; the question,
rather, is whether individuals who learn from the prestigious will
tend to be fitter on average than individuals who either do not learn
at all, or who are equally likely to learn from any member of the
population, regardless of their social status.
Richerson and Boyd (2005, 120–22) suggest that other learning
heuristics may be adaptive. One of these is standardly referred to by cultural evolutionists as conformist
bias. To say that someone has conformist bias is to say that the person in question has a tendency to imitate those behaviours, beliefs or other dispositions that are present among a high frequency of individuals in the population. More precisely, this bias is usually defined as a heightened, or exaggerated, tendency to imitate the most common behaviour. That is because if (for example) the great majority of people eat with chopsticks, and just a few eat with a knife and fork, then choosing whom to imitate at random will also be likely to lead to imitation of the majority chopstick behaviour. Under these circumstances purely random choice of whom to imitate is likely to lead one to choose a chopstick user as a model. So if 70 percent of individuals in some population use chopsticks, then an imitator only has conformist bias in the strict sense favoured by cultural evolutionists if the imitator has a chance greater than 70 percent of acquiring the behaviour of chopstick use.
Richerson and Boyd argue (along with many others in the field) that conformist learning is adaptive, in the sense that it provides an individual learner with behaviours that
are appropriate to novel situations. More specifically, they argue that it is more adaptive in this regard than not
imitating others at all, and more adaptive than imitating randomly-chosen
members of a population. Conformist learning, they say, can help with the acquisition of
behaviours appropriate to a new biological environment: when moving
into a new habitat, with unknown plants and animals, it is best to eat
the foods the locals eat, for one thereby avoids poisoning. But it can
also lead to the generation of socially appropriate behaviours, which
will obviate ostracism or attack. Harris and Corriveau’s (2011)
empirical work concludes that while young children are unselective
with regard to what they learn, they are far more selective regarding
whom they learn from. Moreover, they argue that children tend to seek
out cultural conformists as individuals whom they should trust. These
findings offer some support for the existence of a form of conformist
bias, although Lewens (2015) has suggested that both the theoretical
and empirical cases for conformist bias may not be as strong as first
meets the eye.
These examples show the nature of the interaction between cultural
evolutionary thinking and more traditional natural selection thinking.
Natural selection acting on genetic variation can establish
dispositions to learn from non-kin in spite of the fact that under
some circumstances these dispositions lead to the proliferation of
maladaptive traits. It is worth noting that this aspect of much
cultural evolutionary thinking retains a strong methodological
affinity with the evolutionary psychological approach it is sometimes
contrasted with (Lewens 2015). Learning dispositions themselves are
often understood by cultural evolutionists as genetically inherited
adaptations, produced in response to adaptive problems faced by our
earlier ancestors. Some recent critics of cultural evolutionary
thinking (e.g. Heyes 2012, and especially Heyes 2018) consequently
argue that it is not cultural enough, for it tends to downplay the
possibility that learning dispositions themselves might be inherited
through forms of learning. All agree, though, that once these learning
dispositions are in place, we should not assume that every trait in a
population must be explained by reference to the biological fitness
benefit it has conferred in the past. Evolutionary adaptationists tend
to ask, of any given trait, what effect might have led natural
selection to favour that trait. Even if an adaptationist stance of
this sort is justifiable for learning mechanisms (and cultural
evolutionists typically are adaptationists in this respect) this does
not mean that an adaptationist stance is justifiable for learned
traits.
The notion that culture itself evolves, and that Darwinian insights
can be applied to understanding cultural change, is by no means new. A
very early example of cultural evolutionary thinking comes from
William James:
James’s paper is primarily concerned with using what he regards
as a proper understanding of Darwinism to undermine the
“so-called evolutionary philosophy of Mr Herbert Spencer”
(ibid., 422). Spencer had argued that ‘great men’ were of
secondary importance in determining the course of history, on the
grounds that ‘Before he can remake his society, his society must
make him’ (from Spencer’s Study of Sociology,
quoted in ibid., 449). The great man needs to be made, and society
does this. Hence ultimately it is society itself that explains social
change.
James argues that the central key to Darwin’s natural selection
mechanism is to decouple the causes of variation from the causes of
selection (see Lewens, 2007, Ch. 2). Variations are produced by
unknown causes, and the environment selects among them. Variations
themselves (for James’s Darwin) are inexplicable. The same is
true of great men: ‘The causes of production of great men lie in
a sphere wholly inaccessible to the social philosopher. He must simply
accept geniuses as data, just as Darwin accepts his spontaneous
variations’ (James, 1880, 445). Great men, like spontaneous
variations, are essential and inexplicable elements of the
evolutionary process. Just as Darwin’s theory credits
environment and variation with distinctive, yet vital, roles, so both
great men and the social environment are important for the explanation
of social change:
There are problems associated with any effort to trace the pedigree of
cultural evolutionary theories back to Darwin himself. One of the
reasons for this is that cultural evolutionary theories often define
themselves in opposition to those which claim that genetic inheritance
is the only significant inheritance mechanism. Clearly one cannot cast
Darwin as a cultural evolutionist in this manner, for he had no notion
of genetic inheritance to oppose. Having said this, Darwin did believe
that what was learned in one generation could be inherited in later
generations. But far from distinguishing cultural inheritance from
organic inheritance, Darwin thought that all inheritance should be
explained by the transmission of ‘gemmules’. These were
understood to be particles produced throughout the body, of a
character specific to the body part that produces them. Darwin
believed that gemmules then travelled to the gonads, where they were
transmitted to offspring in the sex cells. Darwin claimed that
gemmules were produced throughout the body in order to explain the
inheritance of acquired characteristics. So in one sense Darwin is in
alignment with modern cultural evolutionists—he believed that
characteristics learned during the life of a parent could be
transmitted to offspring. But in another sense Darwin is opposed to
modern cultural evolutionists, for rather than distinguishing between
different interacting inheritance systems (e.g. cultural and genetic
inheritance), Darwin tends to use the transmission of gemmules to
explain the inheritance of all types of trait.
There are other respects in which one might choose to regard Darwin as
a proto-cultural evolutionist. Darwin sometimes integrates discussion
of technological evolution into his broader discussions of natural
selection. In the Descent of Man, Darwin pauses to discuss
technical innovation, arguing that successful innovations will usually
be imitated, thereby increasing the success of a group as a whole,
increasing the size of that group, and consequently increasing the
chances of inventive members being born into it (Darwin 1877, 154). This
explanation combines natural selection’s central concern with
reproductive output, and cultural evolution’s central concern
with imitation. Darwin writes:
Finally, Darwin endorses the view, widely favoured these days, that
natural selection need not act on organisms. Rather, natural selection
is substrate-neutral. A natural selection process can occur
whenever certain abstract conditions—these days often expressed
as differential reproduction with inheritance—are met. Darwin
explicitly endorses the view that natural selection can act on
entities other than organisms in the context of language change, a
cultural phenomenon. This position is briefly explored in the
Origin of Species, and further expanded in the Descent of
Man. In this work, he endorses the opinion of Max
Müller:
Darwin asserts that this is no mere analogy: “The survival or
preservation of certain favoured words in the struggle for existence
is natural selection” (1877, 113). This
claim—that cultural entities of various sorts can undergo
natural selection processes in their own right—is not a
necessary feature of a theory of cultural evolution. Cultural
evolutionary theory in general requires only a systematic effort to
model the effects of cultural inheritance, and one might decide that
thinking in terms of natural selection acting on units of culture is
not the best way of doing this. We will investigate these issues in
more detail later in this article.
We have already mentioned Herbert Spencer, and Spencer is sometimes
regarded as a key early advocate of efforts to apply evolutionary
thinking to human culture (e.g. Jablonka and Lamb 2005, 21–22).
As early as 1855, in his Principles of Psychology, Spencer
proposed a form of evolutionary epistemology, arguing for a third way
between empiricism’s emphasis on the necessity of experience for
knowledge, and rationalism’s insistence on the importance of
a priori knowledge. Spencer reasoned that if the experiences
of past generations were imprinted on human minds, then it would be
true both that some forms of knowledge in current generations were
a priori, and also that this knowledge had its origins in
experience, albeit the experience of our ancestors. Darwin himself had
made a brief note along similar lines in his M notebook:
‘Plato…says in Phaedo that our
‘necessary ideas’ arise from the preexistence of
the soul, are not derivable from experience.—read monkeys for
preexistence.’ (Barrett et al. 1987, 551) Much later in the
twentieth century, Konrad Lorenz would argue for a similar set of
views in his efforts to see the Kantian a priori through the
lens of evolutionary biology, and natural selection more specifically
(Lorenz 1941). There is an important difference between Darwin and
Lorenz, which these superficial similarities might hide.
Darwin’s comments do not presuppose the action of natural
selection as the mechanism by which these adaptive ideas become common
in the species; rather, the mechanism of use-inheritance is what
explains the preservation of concepts and techniques that are seen to
work well.
Although Spencer is sometimes credited with initiating the application
of evolutionary thinking to culture, Spencer’s contributions in
this domain and others are often regarded as scientifically worthless
(although see Jablonka and Lamb 2005, 372–3 for an exception). Ernst
Mayr, for example, claimed that ‘It would be quite justifiable
to ignore Spencer totally in a history of biological ideas because his
positive contributions were nil’ (Mayr 1982, 386). Spencer is
usually treated harshly for his adherence to the importance of
‘use-inheritance’, according to which habits initially
learned are eventually inherited automatically in offspring. This form
of inheritance would be classed by many as ‘Lamarckian’,
in contrast to the ‘Darwinian’ forms of inheritance that
are typically placed in the foreground in presentations of modern
evolutionary theory.
Some recent modern theorists have argued that Lamarckian inheritance
should not be dismissed out of hand (e.g. Jablonka and Lamb 1995).
Whatever we think of this move, the tendency to praise Darwin while
damning Spencer often overlooks the fact that Darwin, too, believed in
the biological significance of use-inheritance, and it figured
strongly in his own views of cultural evolution. Spencer is also
criticised for his ‘social Darwinist’ beliefs, but Darwin,
too, was a social Darwinist of sorts, and held evolutionary views
regarding race, social degeneration and other such topics that most
would dismiss today (see Lewens 2007, chapter eight). As we have seen,
Darwin’s theory of pangenesis was developed partly in order to
explain what he took to be the phenomena of use-inheritance, and a
general account of use-inheritance played an important role in
Darwin’s cultural evolutionary account of human moral progress.
Indeed, at one point in the Descent of Man, Darwin quotes
Spencer at length and with approval:
Serious efforts to construct cultural evolutionary theories can be
traced to the work of Lumsden and Wilson (1981), Cavalli-Sforza and
Feldman (1981), and Boyd and Richerson (1985). All of these authors
have attempted, in one way or another, to produce formal models that
can integrate the effects of cultural inheritance into more standard
biological models of evolution. We have already looked at some of the
claims of these theorists, but before looking at their work in more
detail, let us look at the theory of memetics. This theory, originally
put forward by Richard Dawkins (1976), is perhaps the best known
attempt to apply evolutionary thinking to culture; that said, while
it has enjoyed considerable popular attention, it has not become well
established in scientific circles. Instead, the school of Boyd and
Richerson has been far more successful, for reasons that are explained
below.
The meme theory seeks to draw a very strong analogy between evolution
at the cultural level, and biological evolution. It begins with an
abstract characterisation of selection as a process requiring entities
that reproduce, such that parents resemble offspring. Memetics takes
the view, popularised by Dawkins, that entities which have the ability
to make faithful copies of themselves—so-called
‘replicators’—are required to explain this
trans-generational resemblance. In standard biological models of
evolution it is assumed that genes are the relevant replicators. Genes
make copies of themselves, and this ability explains why offspring
organisms resemble their parents. If culture is to evolve, it
therefore becomes necessary to find some form of cultural replicator
that explains cultural inheritance. Memes play this role. Dawkins
gives a list of some exemplary memes: ‘tunes, ideas,
catch-phrases, clothes fashions, ways of making pots or of building
arches.’ Note that while it is sometimes assumed that all memes
are ideas (and vice versa) Dawkins’s list includes other types
of thing, such as ways of making pots, which are techniques.
Dawkins’s claim is that ideas, for example, can be
conceptualised as entities that hop from mind to mind, making copies
of themselves as they go. On the face of things, this seems an
attractive proposition. Just as genes make copies of themselves at
different rates according to their effects on the organisms that bear
them and on their local environments, so ideas make copies of
themselves at different rates according to their effects on the
organisms that bear them and on their local environments. In a
community of scientists, for example, different hypotheses are
entertained, and some come to be believed more widely than others. A
hypothesis that begins in the mind of one or two scientists thereby
spreads, until it is widely held in the research community. Another
hypothesis quickly dies. We can perhaps characterise the features that
make some hypotheses likely to spread, and others likely to perish.
‘Fit’ hypotheses may have predictive power, or simplicity,
or they may integrate well with existing bodies of theory. Note that
what this example shows is that taking the meme’s-eye
perspective does not literally show that we are being manipulated by
selfish cultural replicators. One can describe scientific change as a
struggle between selfish memes, but one can also describe just the
same process in terms of scientists choosing to accept, or to reject,
theories by reference to familiar criteria of explanatory power,
theoretical elegance and so forth. It is only an incidental feature of
the metaphor of memetic selfishness that appears to deprive humans of
control over which ideas they do, and do not, accept.
There are various problems associated with memetic views, most of
which focus on limitations of the gene/meme analogy. These worries are
sometimes raised by theorists from the social sciences who are hostile
to evolutionary theories of culture. But they are also raised quite
frequently by cultural evolutionists who argue that the meme concept
is not the right way to ground a theory of cultural evolution: it is
essential to bear in mind, then, that cultural evolutionary theories
in general do not require the meme theory to be true (see Henrich et
al. 2008). Here are some of the most frequently encountered arguments
against the meme concept (the remainder of this section draws on
Lewens, 2007, Ch. 7):
Cultural units are not replicators: Replicators, remember,
are supposed to be units that make copies of themselves. Some critics
of the meme concept argue that there is no known mechanism that could
explain how memes are copied. But this is a mistake. An idea can be
copied simply through observation and inference: agent B can
observe the behaviour of agent A, infer that A holds
some belief X, and thereby come to hold the same belief as
A. Ideas can also be copied using linguistic communication.
Agent A might be convinced of belief X, she tells
B about it, and B comes to believe X too.
In both cases one can say that belief X makes a copy of
itself, albeit via language, inference, and so forth. A more pressing
worry for memetics is that imitation is usually too error-prone to
underpin replication. If I make a cake on the basis of a secret family
recipe, you eat the cake, and you then attempt to make another one,
then the chances are that the recipe you hit upon will not, in fact,
be exactly the same as the one I used, even if you are able to make a
similar-tasting cake. Another significant worry for memetics is that
when the same ideas do spread through a population, it is rarely
because they are literally copied from each other. Sperber argues that
cultural reproduction is rarely meme-like, but instead makes use of
what he calls ‘attractors’—culturally shared
patterns of thought, which enable representations to spread through a
population without literal copying. Sticking with the cake example,
perhaps you eat a slice of my Victoria sponge, you like it, and you
decide to make one for yourself. Perhaps the recipe you use is very
similar to mine. But you have not figured out by tasting my cake which
ingredients needed to go in and in what order. Rather, you already
knew how to make a Victoria sponge. Eating my cake simply triggered
the use of a recipe that was already in your repertoire. In this case,
the recipe has appeared in my head, and because of this it has
appeared in yours, but not because your recipe is a copy of mine.
Sperber argues that memetics is mistaken because most cases of the
spread of ideas are like this:
Both of these concerns raise serious problems for the generality of
memetics: not all ideas are replicators, hence not all ideas are
memes. Whether this shows the meme concept to be useless depends on
whether there are insights to be had by distinguishing cultural
inheritance that is meme-like from cultural inheritance that is not
(Sterelny 2006a).
Cultural units do not form lineages: A closely-related
criticism of memetics draws on the fact that while in genetic
replication we can trace a new copy of a gene back to a single parent,
ideas are rarely copied from a single source in a way that allows us
to trace clear lineages (Boyd and Richerson 2000). Memeticists are
fond of analysing religious belief in terms of the spread of memes.
But while religious beliefs may well spread through populations of
humans, it seems unlikely that we will always be able to trace token
instances of faith back to one source. Instead, individuals often
acquire belief in God through exposure to several believers in their
local community. In these circumstances, belief in God is not caused
by one identifiable earlier token of the same type. Within the realm
of biological evolution, an understanding of Mendel’s laws has
been important in explaining some aspects of evolutionary dynamics.
Mendel’s laws rely on an understanding of genes as discrete,
transmitted units. But if token ideas can appear in an individual in
virtue of that individual’s exposure to several sources, then
this makes it unlikely that anything close to Mendel’s laws will
be discovered within cultural evolution. This suggests a practical
limitation on enquiry that may result from this difference between
ideas and genes. Criticisms of this form have been put especially
forcefully by William Wimsatt (1999), who argues that the creative and
inferential abilities of human users make it the case that any given
idea, or item of technology, can have fluctuating numbers of cultural
parents over time. This is because the causal sources of its
reproduction may vary. Belief in God may sometimes be caused by
exposure to a single charismatic evangelist, it may sometimes be
caused by the joint inculcation of two biological parents, and it may
sometimes be caused by immersion in a diffuse community of theists.
Ideas and items of technology also have no stable analogue to the
genome, or germline, because different elements within cycles of
technological reproduction, including ideas, behaviours of artisans,
and material elements of technologies themselves, can all temporarily
acquire the status of replicators depending on the attention that
human agents happen to be paying to them. Accidental variations in
one’s mental plan for constructing a pot, or in one’s
actions in producing the pot, or in the made pot itself, can all
conceivably be reproduced when another artisan comes to make a
resembling item. Wimsatt uses these disanalogies to highlight the
formidable problems facing any effort to use population genetic models
in the explanation of cultural change.
Culture cannot be atomised into discrete units: Ideas stand
in logical relations to each other. Whether an individual is able to
acquire some belief, for example, depends on their related conceptual
competencies. It is impossible to believe in the theory of relativity
without understanding it, and one cannot understand it without holding
many additional beliefs relating to physics. The same is true for
non-technical beliefs. Depending on which religion one is talking
about, belief in God is likely to be related to various other beliefs
concerning forgiveness, retribution, love and so forth. This has led
some critics to argue that it is a mistake to take a view of culture
which atomises it into discrete units, assigning replicative power to
them individually. The anthropologist Adam Kuper complains that
‘Unlike genes, cultural traits are not particulate. An idea
about God cannot be separated from other ideas with which it is
indissolubly linked in a particular religion’ (Kuper 2000, 180).
Memeticists are likely to respond by saying that although ideas are
inter-linked, this does not undermine the meme-gene analogy:
O’Brien et al. (2010) have argued that a more mature view of the
role of genes in evolution and development re-instates the meme-gene
parallel. For there is a sense in which genes, too, need to be studied
in a context that takes other genes, and their broader developmental
and environmental settings, into account. A DNA sequence can have
different effects in different organisms, depending on the network of
relations it enters into with other genetic and developmental
resources. Just as the significance of belief in God can vary with
social context, with the result that it can make little sense to think
of ‘belief in God’ as a meme, so the function of some DNA
sequence can vary with organic context, with the result that it makes
little sense to identify some sequence type as a gene for the purposes
of evolutionary analysis.
These criticisms focus on whether there truly are memes. But there are
also criticisms of the usefulness of the meme concept, regardless of
whether memes exist. As was already indicated above, one might worry
that memetics merely offers a cosmetic re-packaging of a familiar set
of stories about cultural change. Perhaps science is composed of
replicating entities struggling against various selection pressures,
but what insight does this offer us, if in the end it presents us with
nothing more than an alternative idiom in which to describe the
various factors that affect the evaluation of scientific hypotheses?
Perhaps clothes fashions are memes, but even if that is the case, one
still needs to explain what makes one clothing meme fitter than
another, and the fear is that once spelled out this will quickly boil
down to a well-known appeal to consumer psychology.
The most serious and most respected efforts to apply evolutionary
thinking to culture begin from a different starting point to memetics
(although see Shennan 2008, 2011 for significant work that takes the
meme’s-eye view). Meme theorists tend to begin with a general
characterisation of evolution by natural selection, namely as a
process that requires differential competition between replicators.
Hence the meme theorist looks for some strict analogue to the gene in
the cultural realm, which can play the replicator role. Dawkins
implies that it is only because humans are subject to colonisation by
replicators other than genes that human evolution escapes the tyranny
of the gene. On this view, memes are required in order to free our
species from a form of biological determinism.
The alternative to this view begins with the observation that cultural
inheritance is important, and it seeks to integrate cultural
inheritance into traditional evolutionary models. But this general
motivation leaves open the issue of whether cultural evolution
requires the existence of cultural replicators. Clearly one can accept
many of the criticisms of the meme concept, and still attempt to model
the effects of cultural inheritance. Rather than seeking to show that
there are cultural replicators, one can instead seek to build models
that allow for error-prone learning, and that acknowledge that an
individual’s beliefs are often the result of exposure to many
sources, rather than copying from just one source. The interest of
cultural evolutionary models in this tradition is sometimes simply to
show how cultural change of various sorts—not necessarily
adaptive cultural change—can subsequently affect genetic
evolution, and vice versa. This is the general goal of models of
gene-culture co-evolution. But cultural evolutionary models also aim
to assess the role of cultural inheritance in the construction of
adaptation: here, cultural evolutionary theorists are not merely
seeking to explain distributions of traits in populations, they are
seeking to explain the appearance of valuable cultural novelties
(Godfrey-Smith 2012).
One might think that even if cultural change does not require cultural
replicators, at least adaptive cultural change does. The
general Darwinian scheme for explaining adaptation demands reliable
inheritance—it demands that once a fitness-augmenting mutation
arises, it can be retained in future generations. If cultural learning
is error-prone, or if individuals acquire cultural traits by taking an
average of many different models, then one might think that if some
individual is able to discover a fitness-enhancing behaviour, that
trait will be lost to future generations either because it is
mis-copied, or because it is combined with other less adaptive traits
to produce an averaged mish-mash of a behaviour.
All of these inferences have been challenged by recent cultural
evolutionary theory. Cultural evolutionists agree that at the level of
the population, cumulative evolution requires that fitness-enhancing
cultural traits are preserved in the offspring generation. However,
they deny that this requires faithful transmission between
individuals. A formal model from Henrich and Boyd (2002) suggests that
conformist bias can overcome the effects of
error-prone learning to produce reliable inheritance at the population
level. Conformist bias was defined, in section 2 above, as the tendency of individuals to
adopt the most common representation in a
population. Henrich and Boyd cite evidence that conformist bias is a
real phenomenon (although again see Lewens 2015 for scepticism about
the case for conformism). Henrich and Boyd’s theoretical model
assumes that individuals are poor at inferring the representations of
others. Even so, they argue that when we look to the population level,
conformist bias helps to correct the effects of such errors, producing
a population-wide distribution of representations in the offspring
generation that is close to the population-wide distribution of
representations in the parent generation. Henrich and Boyd explain the
reason for this. In general, error-prone transmission has a tendency
to produce a mixture of different representations. In a population
that already contains several different representations at significant
frequencies, the effect of error on a population-wide distribution of
representations is therefore low. In a population in which one
representation is common, the effects of error are much more
significant. But if we add conformist bias, we increase the chances of
a commonly held representation remaining commonly held in future
generations, even with error-prone imitation.
Boyd and Henrich acknowledge that this does not make population-level
distributions perfectly reliably inherited. But this does not show
that cumulative evolution acting on cultural inheritance is
impossible. At the genetic level, highly faithful copying processes
allow even very small selective forces to preserve adaptive variation.
Less faithful copying demands stronger selective forces if adaptive
variation is not to be lost. Boyd and Henrich are confident that
selective forces in the cultural realm are stronger than selective
forces in the genetic realm. The moral, once again, is that it is
important not to focus too closely on genetic evolution as a model for
cultural evolution.
Memetics tends to be driven by a desire to see cultural analogies to
genetic evolution. Cultural evolutionary models in the manner of Boyd
and Henrich are driven instead by a desire to find ways of
understanding how cultural inheritance affects evolutionary processes.
These sorts of cultural evolutionary models do not assume that
cultural inheritance works in the same way as genetic inheritance.
Indeed, they are free to model cultural inheritance in ways that
depart quite markedly from genetic inheritance. Yet they remain
recognisably evolutionary in style, primarily because they seek to
explain the changes in trait frequencies in a population over time.
They do this by making broad assumptions about how individuals acquire
cultural traits—for example, they may assume that an
individual’s representations are the product of learning from a
variety of peers, or that they arise from attending particularly to
authority figures—and by assessing how such rules will play out
at the population level. Moreover, these rules for cultural
acquisition are not merely conjectured, they are given experimental
backing. Cultural evolutionary theorists seek to document the effects
of various empirically supported forms of bias, such as prestige bias.
Just as Darwin’s own theory of evolution by natural selection
remained largely conjectural until supplemented by empirical work
showing how inheritance worked, and by statistical work focusing on
the population-level consequences of inheritance, selection, mutation
and other forces, so cultural evolutionary theory has gained its
insights from a similar combination of empirical and mathematical
approaches.
At the beginning of this entry it was claimed that the case for
cultural evolution was irresistible. No one can deny that cultural
inheritance is an important factor in explaining how our species has
changed over time. Cultural inheritance is not merely a process that
acts in parallel to genetic evolution, it is intertwined with genetic
evolution. Cultural changes bring about alterations to the
environment, which in turn affect both how genes act in development,
and what selection pressures act on genes. In spite of all this, one
might still worry that it is a mistake to understand the importance of
culture using the tools of evolutionary theory. This is because one
may be sceptical of the existence of a theory that is both general
enough to cover all forms of cultural change, and informative enough
to be enlightening.
There is no doubt that it is often important to remind
overly-enthusiastic orthodox Darwinians of the importance of culture.
For example, it seems that the increased incidence of
lactose-tolerance among human populations has arisen as a consequence
of a cultural innovation—namely dairy farming. The relatively
recent appearance of this genetically-controlled adaptation
demonstrates that human physiological nature is something that
continues to change, and it also demonstrates the causal impact of
culture on genes (Richerson and Boyd 2005, 191–92). Such
examples by themselves show the rashness of any view that claims
either that human nature has remained fixed since the Stone Age, or
that genes are somehow in the evolutionary driving seat. Yet none of
this shows that we can develop a general, informative theory of
cultural evolution. One might fear that in the end cultural change,
and the influence of cultural change on other aspects of the human
species, are best understood through a series of individual
narratives. Our brief examination of memetics illustrated this
concern. We gain no real explanatory insight if we are told that ideas
spread through populations, some more successfully than others. We
want to know what makes some ideas fitter than others. And it is not
clear that there will be any general rules that can help us to answer
this question. In the biological realm we need detailed accounts of
local environmental circumstances, species-specific physiology and
anatomy, and so forth, to tell us what makes one organic variant
fitter than another. Similarly, in the cultural realm we will need to
look at local psychological dispositions to explain why some ideas are
more likely to spread than others. So any explanatory value to be had
from memetics is parasitic on conventional work done in psychology.
And if individual preferences are subject to change over time, then
there may be no general and informative theory of cultural evolution
to be had; rather, we will have to settle for local explanations that
look to shifting preferences. Rather than provide a new scientific
framework for an understanding of culture, memetics will tend to
degenerate into conventional narrative cultural history.
In the remaining sections I distinguish five broad sets of responses
to this line of argument, each of which picks up on a different
explanatory element of mainstream evolutionary theory (Lewens 2012).
They can be yoked together to provide a broad justification for the
payoffs of a cultural evolutionary perspective (Lewens 2015). First,
Boyd and Richerson argue that informative insights arise out of
cultural evolution’s ‘population thinking’
(Richerson and Boyd 2005). Second, Sperber and collaborators have
endorsed this populational approach, while further insisting on the
explanatory value of the notion of cultural ‘attractors’
in pinpointing why traditions are sustained over time (Sperber 1996,
Morin 2016). Third, Richerson, Boyd, Henrich and others have stressed
the importance of cumulative cultural adaptation, alongside a specific
set of explanatory puzzles that these phenomena present (Richerson and
Boyd 2005, Henrich 2015). Fourth, Sterelny (2001, 2003, 2006a, 2006b,
2007, 2012) and Wimsatt (1999) argue that illuminating insights
regarding the general conditions required for evolvability also apply
in the cultural realm. Fifth, many have argued that cultural
evolutionary theories can provide insights into the historical
patterns of cultural change, in much the same way that evolutionary
biological tools have enabled us to reconstruct the branching (or
perhaps reticulated) history of life. We will look at each line of
defence in turn. For a much fuller account of the value of cultural
evolutionary thinking, and indeed for a thorough and accessible
introduction to the theory as a whole, Alex Mesoudi’s (2011)
book is an excellent place to look. Meanwhile, Sterelny (2017) and
Lewens (2015) offer overviews of some of the main conceptual divisions
within the field.
‘Population thinking’ means many things to many people.
For Boyd and Richerson it denotes any effort to abstract from a
characterisation of individual psychological profiles, in a way that
allows an exploration of the consequences of these individual-level
dispositions for population-level properties. We have already seen an
example of this sort of population thinking in action. It is far from
obvious that conformist bias among individuals can enable
population-level inheritance in spite of individual-level errors in
copying. To show that these properties of individual psychology
(conformist bias and error-prone learning) combine to yield
population-level inheritance requires some abstract mathematical
modelling. And the establishment of this population-level consequence
is important, for it enables the investigator to revise the
constraints one might naively think must bear on cultural inheritance
if cumulative cultural evolution is to occur.
In a useful article, Elliott Sober (1991) suggests that theories of
cultural evolution may have limited value for the work of social
scientists, on the grounds that social scientists are primarily
interested in explaining what makes individuals likely to adopt one
idea, rather than another. They want to know, for example, why
nineteenth-century Italian women decided that they would rather have
two children than five, not what the population-level consequences of
their decisions might be. Richerson and Boyd respond by saying that
Sober’s argument assumes, erroneously, that ‘we are all
good intuitive population thinkers’ (Richerson and Boyd 2005,
97). In Sober’s original article he points out that population
thinking might save cultural evolutionary models from vacuity in just
this way:
Many of Richerson and Boyd’s models are enlightening. As we have
seen, it takes work to show that cumulative cultural adaptation does
not require replication. Note, however, in favour of Sober’s
scepticism, that the most interesting cultural evolutionary models are
often those which show the general circumstances under which it is
possible for cultural inheritance to be effective in producing
adaptation. Boyd and Richerson’s claim in favour of the
importance of prestige bias is primarily an effort to show how natural
selection might have favoured cultural learning. Sober’s concern
is with whether models such as these will also affect ‘the
day-to-day research of social scientists’, who are not so
interested in establishing such general conditions for cumulative
cultural evolution, but who are instead interested in understanding
particular episodes of social and cultural change. Even here,
Richerson and Boyd’s population thinking may have some bite.
They seek, for example, to explain the disappearance of important
technologies on Tasmania. Drawing on the work of Joseph Henrich, they
suggest (Richerson and Boyd 2005, 138) that the maintenance of
technologies and the associated behaviours required to produce and
operate them may require a population that is large enough for the
rate of innovation to offset the degradation that results from
error-prone imitation. If Boyd and Richerson are right about this
episode in the history of Tasmania, then we may be able to explain the
differences in the abilities of the Tasmanians, compared with other
peoples, to maintain a set of technologies, merely by citing
population size, rather than other forms of social or cultural
difference. Note, finally, that Henrich’s model, like any
populational model, must proceed by making highly simplified
assumptions about the properties of the individual entities that make
up the larger population. This invites a generic series of criticisms
aimed at any effort at abstract modelling: Henrich’s model has
been criticized by those who doubt the robustness of its assumptions
and its match with empirical data (see Read 2006 for such criticism,
Kline and Boyd 2010 for a response, and Houkes 2012 for a useful
philosophical overview). At the same time, this abstraction
constitutes a potential strength of the populational approach, for it
offers us the possibility of understanding a complex system without
needing comprehensive information about all of its parts.
Sperber and other advocates of the approach to cultural evolution
known as ‘cultural epidemiology’ share Richerson and
Boyd’s focus on a populational approach to understanding culture
(Sperber 1996). As they put it, “the overall general framework
for the study and modelling of cultural evolution should be that of
‘population thinking’ … ” (Claidiere et al
2014). They argue that any successful execution of this populational
approach requires that we explain the distributions of cultural items
by paying close attention to what they call cultural
‘attractors’. Moreover, they argue that this approach
frequently (although not always) gives rise to explanations that elude
approaches grounded in forms of cultural selection.
As indicated earlier, Sperber argues that the simple notion of copying
is only rarely appropriate to explain why broadly similar cultural
items propagate in a stable manner through a population. For example,
when emotional states spread through communities—perhaps at
times of national mourning—it is often the case that one
individual’s grief is causally initiated by that of another. But
the second individual does not closely imitate, or copy, the emotional
state of the first, even if the second emotional state
resembles—and hence is a ‘reproduction’ of—the
first. Instead, a shared set of background emotional dispositions,
perhaps coupled to shared norms for public behaviour, conspire to
reconstruct a second emotional state that is similar to the first.
Such states, which are the broadly stable outcomes of these
reconstructive processes, are examples of cultural
‘attractors’.
An attractor should not simply be equated with an idea that is
psychologically attractive to individuals (Sperber 1996, Buskell
2017). Instead, it is a more abstract notion corresponding to any
more-or-less stable outcome of processes of cultural reproduction.
Very many different ‘factors of attraction’ can
potentially underpin such stable reproduction. For example, if a
widely-encountered engineering problem has only a few effective
solutions, which are also easy to figure out, then we should expect
those solutions to appear again and again, even if individuals are not
attempting to copy the innovations of others in detail. In other
words, factors of attraction need not be psychological at all, and can
instead correspond to physical or ecological constraints. Shared
bodies of information, shared preferences and shared emotional or
inferential biases might also explain why some cultural variants
re-appear with regularity. Some such attractors may be grounded in
evolved cognitive dispositions shared by almost everyone. When drawing
on these factors of attraction, Sperber and like-minded colleagues
have often declared explicit debts to evolutionary psychology (Sperber
1996). Yet attractors can also be more local, corresponding to more
narrowly shared cognitive dispositions or biases, common only to small
communities. Such dispositions can explain reproduction that is only
reliable across narrowly specified cultural contexts. Work in this
tradition (e.g. Morin 2016) aims to answer the charge that the
cultural evolutionary approach is vacuous via the detailed delineation
of such factors of attraction, and their populational consequences, at
various spatial and temporal scales.
Some theorists begin their presentations of cultural evolutionary
theory by arguing that cultural change meets the conditions for
evolution by natural selection stressed by Darwin. They argue, for
example, that in the realm of culture we find ample
variation—there are alternative ways of making pots, alternative
designs for kayaks, and so forth—that there are differences in
the likelihood of these variants being preserved or multiplied in
future generations—dependent on whether the pots in question
look attractive, whether the different forms of kayak are easy to
handle—and that there is adequately faithful reproduction as
these techniques or designs travel from one individual to another. In
other words, we find some version of variation, differential fitness
and inheritance instantiated in the cultural context, as well as in
the organic realm that Darwin primarily focused on. One of the risks
of approaching the cultural evolution project in this abstract manner,
which begins with the hunt for general similarities between the
cultural and organic domains, has already been touched on. While we
secure the general claim that a form of natural selection applies in
the cultural domain, we can lose sight of what specific explanatory
problems a theory of cultural evolution is supposed to address.
As we have seen, other presentations of cultural evolution begin in a
more pragmatic, problem-driven fashion. In some cases they begin with
explanatory puzzles similar to those that led Darwin to formulate his
principle of natural selection in the first place. Darwin was
concerned to explain how structures could arise which fit organisms so
remarkably well to their conditions of existence. Cultural
evolutionists frequently draw attention to a variety of adaptive
cultural traits, whose origination seems inexplicable in terms of
individual innovation alone. Henrich (2015, 97–100), for example,
makes good use of the example of manioc processing. Manioc (also
called cassava) is a good source of starch, but it needs to be
processed to make it safe to eat. Without this processing it can
release poisonous hydrogen cyanide. According to Henrich, while unprocessed
manioc tastes bitter, the bitter taste is not a good indicator of its
safety: bitterness disappears in the preparation process before it
becomes safe to eat. Worse, while unprocessed manioc is poisonous, it
is hard to discover that this is the case, because the symptoms of
poisoning only appear well after eating unsafe manioc. Henrich argues
that it is hard to see how any single insightful individual could have
invented this processing technology. Instead, a more gradual process
of cumulative cultural adaptation, spread across the population, must
be invoked. In this kind of work, cultural analogues of organic
selection processes are invoked because they promise a ‘hidden
hand’ explanation for the appearance of adaptation, in contexts
where explanations that rely on foresight seem unavailable. In other
words, the rationale for turning to selection is the same in both the
cultural and organic domains.
A second example of a more pragmatic, problem-driven invocation of
cultural selection can be found in the ‘Tribal Social
Instincts’ hypothesis. As Darwin (1877, 134) noted, humans are
regularly moved to act in ways that benefit others, even when those
others are not members of extended families. He suggested that we are
moved by sympathy for others, and that the ultimate explanation for
why we have such fellow-feeling can be explained as a result of a
process of selection, albeit one that acts at the level of what he
calls ‘tribes’. This explanation has been updated across a
long series of publications by Richerson, Boyd and others, who also
aim to explain the very widespread tendencies of modern humans to
share valuable resources across broad social networks (e.g. Richerson
and Boyd 2005, Richerson et al. 2016). Their view is that the resources
of more mainstream evolutionary theory are not up to this explanatory
task. Kin selection is insufficient, they say, because humans
regularly share with people outside their immediate family groups.
Moreover, they take the view that the Pleistocene social groups in
which (they believe) these sharing behaviours evolved were probably
too large for reciprocal altruism to explain their emergence. Their
favoured explanatory hypothesis is a complex one, involving
interaction between what they call ‘cultural group
selection’ and natural selection acting on genetic variation:
“Selection on tribes can account for the innate foundation of
our social psychology via the process of gene-culture
coevolution” (Richerson and Boyd 2005).
They argue, based on a mixture of historical, ethnographic and
theoretical work, for a scenario that begins with what they also call
‘tribes’—they consider these to be ethnolinguistic
units of around 500 to 1500 people—competing against each other
in ways that are aided by culturally transmissible differences in
group properties. This competitive process eventually produces
“culturally transmitted cooperative, group-oriented norms, and
systems of rewards and punishments to ensure that such norms are
obeyed” (Richerson and Boyd 2005). Once cultural transmission
has established this social environment, natural selection acting on
genetic variation then favours an innate psychology that is suited to
this new, socially-inherited set of environmental problems.
The very idea of group selection is a controversial one. Many
commentators have taken a sceptical view of group selection when
underpinned by genetic inheritance, because of worries that
competition based on genetic variation within groups will tend to
undermine the effects of competition between groups. Several cultural
evolutionists (e.g. Boyd and Richerson 2009, Henrich 2015) have argued
that cultural inheritance processes are better able than processes of
genetic inheritance to sustain between-group differences, for they
believe there is good empirical and theoretical evidence that cultural
processes can maintain within-group homogeneity in the face of various
countervailing factors (immigration, unreliable imitation and so
forth).
Needless to say, this work is contentious. It is possible to challenge
the claims made about the innateness of the social psychological
dispositions in question, the characterisation of likely Pleistocene
social groups, the inability of more traditional evolutionary
resources to explain our altruistic tendencies, and so forth (see
Birch 2018). Such challenges are inevitable when a hypothesis is as
ambitious as this one, and when it draws on such a variety of
supporting sources of data. There are also conceptual concerns. A
recent paper lists three different forms of cultural group selection,
of which straightforward competition between groups is just one
variant (Richerson et al. 2016). The authors also offer selective
imitation (by individuals) of individuals in successful groups, and
selective migration (by individuals) into successful groups, as two
further types of cultural group selection. These are indeed additional
ways by which behavioural traits that are of benefit to a group can
increase in frequency in a larger population of groups. However, in
the second two cases, trait frequencies are increased simply by
individuals’ attraction to traits that they regard as bestowing
collective benefits. Because of this, thinking of them as forms of
group selection may introduce confusion (see also Morin 2016).
Regardless of these worries, it is clear that the cultural group
selection explanation for forms of altruistic behaviour marks a
significant effort to synthesise theory and evidence across a wide set
of domains.
A closely related way to vindicate models of cultural evolution looks
to the question of the general features of inheritance systems that
make for evolvability in a lineage. This project has been pioneered in
recent years by Kim Sterelny (e.g., 2001, 2003, 2006a, 2006b, 2007,
2012). Once again, let us illustrate the general nature of these
issues by beginning in the organic realm. Darwin’s theory is
intended to explain adaptation. The basic conditions for natural
selection do not, in spite of appearances, suffice for the appearance
of functional traits. A system in which offspring resemble parents
with respect to fitness-enhancing traits may not develop complex
adaptations. The environment needs to cooperate: if selective
pressures change very quickly then there will be no sustained
environmental demands of the sort that might build complex adaptations
over time. Development also matters. If ontogeny is set up in such a
way that changes to any one trait tend to be accompanied by changes to
all other traits, then the chances are that cumulative adaptation will
be particularly hard to come by. For even in those cases where a
mutation contributes positively to the function of one trait, the
chances are that it will contribute negatively to overall fitness in
virtue of its disruption of the functioning of other traits.
Development also needs to make a wide range of variation available. If
it is highly constrained, so that only a small number of forms are
possible, then selection is not presented with a broad enough range of
raw materials from which to fashion complex traits. It also seems that
cumulative adaptation relies on the suppression of
‘outlaws’ (Sterelny 2001, 2006b). We saw in the previous
section that group selection is often held to be an ineffective agent
of group-level adaptation, on the grounds that it is vulnerable to
‘subversion from within’. This occurs when individual
organisms go it alone, sabotaging complex features of group
organisation in favour of their own fitness. Individual-level
selection, in contrast, can build individual-level adaptations. This
is because, by and large, genes in a given human organism share a
‘common fate’—they do not behave as though they were
in direct competition, struggling for representation in future
generations. When genes genuinely ‘go it alone’, for
example by sabotaging meiosis so that some have greater chances of
appearing in future generations than others, then the overall
integrity of the organism can be compromised, and individual-level
adaptation is undermined.
By applying these sorts of considerations to the cultural realm we can
attempt to understand the likely costs and benefits associated with
various different forms of cultural inheritance (vertical, oblique,
meme-like and so forth). We can also perhaps come to an understanding
of the different evolutionary forces that might bring these different
forms of cultural inheritance into existence. And, in turn, these
insights may facilitate comparative work that seeks to document the
general conditions that are required for a species to make use of
cultural inheritance in order to build complex adaptations such as
tools. This way of thinking offers the promise, for example, of
explaining why few, if any, non-human species are able to build
progressively more and more complex cultural features in a cumulative
manner (Richerson and Boyd 2005, 107; see also Laland 2017). The
exploration of the significance of these conditions in the cultural
realm is contentious, partly because the conditions for evolvability
themselves are disputed (see Godfrey-Smith 2009). Boyd and
Henrich’s work brings out the fact that although
population-level inheritance is important for adaptation,
parent-offspring resemblance is not, in fact, necessary. Questions
relating to evolvability are also tied up with difficult issues
relating to the units-of-selection debate (Okasha 2006). As we have
seen, natural selection at a higher level of organisation may be
required to generate mechanisms that suppress the ability of
disruptive ‘outlaws’ to go it alone at lower levels of
organisation. Does something like this occur in the cultural realm?
Does selection on human groups act so as to limit the ability of
individual humans to go it alone? In what ways might cultural
inheritance be involved in these processes? These questions are
complex, both in terms of how they should be posed and how they should
be answered. But some of the most interesting work in cultural
evolutionary theory may come from efforts to answer them.
Issues relating to evolvability are sometimes framed in terms of
systems of information transfer. On this view, if offspring are to
resemble parents, developmental information must be transmitted from
one generation to the next. The question is what forms of information
transmission system do this job. This mode of framing the issue is
contentious, for it is not always clear how we are to understand the
concept of information, and what it means for some causal contributor
to development to count as an information-bearer, rather than some
other kind of developmental participant, such as an
information-reader, say, or a background condition for information
transfer (see Oyama 2000 and Griffiths 2001 for discussion of these
issues). This general way of thinking about inheritance has, however,
been influential in characterising so-called ‘major evolutionary
transitions’ (Maynard Smith and Szathmary 1995). Key transitions
in the history of life are said to include the development of
DNA-based inheritance, the emergence of chromosomes, the advent of the
‘genetic code’, and events such as the arrival of
sociality and language. Maynard Smith and Szathmary propose that we
can think of these events as modifications to the mechanisms of
inter-generational information transmission.
Jablonka and Lamb (2005) argue that thinking in terms of information
transmission systems also allows us to point out salient differences
in the forms of social transmission underlying cultural evolution.
They claim that only some forms of social transmission make use of a
system of symbols. Consider, for example, that to say that
some birds inherit their song by social transmission is not to say
that birdsong is a symbolic system. Humans, on the other hand, trade
in publicly-accessible symbols. Moreover, repositories of symbols,
most obviously in the form of libraries and computer databases, are
vital inheritance systems for humans, allowing the preservation and
accumulation of knowledge across generations. Note, also, that there
are different types of symbol system. In some cases the relationship
between a symbol and what is represented is arbitrary. The is the case
for a word like ‘man’, which does not look or sound like a
human male. In other cases of iconic symbolism, the
relationship is one of resemblance: a sign for the gents’ toilet
looks like a man.
Jablonka and Lamb use the characteristic differences between typical
modes of social inheritance in animals and humans to illuminate the
impact our own symbolic transmission systems have on human cultural
evolution (see also Deacon 1997). Although they argue that there can
be non-linguistic symbolic systems (2005, 224), language exemplifies
nicely the way in which systems of symbols contain elements that can
be recombined in countless ways to yield a vast array of different
meaningful messages. Repositories of symbolically stored information,
such as books, can also be searched, annotated, edited and so forth,
in ways that add to their power and versatility. This manner of
thinking opens up a number of challenging issues. The question of the
degree to which symbolic systems resemble other inheritance systems is
an illuminating one. Consider, by way of example, Stegmann’s
(2004) discussion of the sense in which the genetic code is
‘arbitrary’. One quickly realises that any attempt to say
precisely what makes some inheritance system a symbolic system, and
any attempt to differentiate between types of symbolic systems
(linguistic, non-linguistic and so forth), will be exceptionally
philosophically demanding.
Many evolutionists have argued that biological tools can have great
value when we wish to develop a historical view of the pattern of
cultural change (see, for example, Gray at al 2007, Mace and Holden
2005: this section itself draws on Lewens 2012). A variety of
biological methods have been developed that help us to uncover the
structure of evolutionary trees: they help us to understand which taxa
split from which others and when. It seems clear that cultural items
of many kinds (most obviously languages, but also tools and
techniques) also stand in recognizable genealogical relationships, and
this has led many biological anthropologists to use phylogenetic
methods borrowed or adapted from the biological sciences in order to
reconstruct the history of borrowings in the cultural realm. Critics
have sometimes followed Gould (1988) in arguing that these biological
methods cannot be properly applied to the cultural realm, because
cultural genealogies take the form of reticulated networks, rather
than branching trees. Cultural change is indeed often highly
reticulated: it is obvious that a complex object like a car is a
confluence of numerous technical lineages, which come together to form
the hi-fi system, the engine, the safety devices, and so forth.
Moreover, as improvements are made to cars these new developments may
be borrowed by innovators of bicycles, furniture, toys and other
shifting constellations of artifacts. 
These important observations need not undermine the project of
cultural phylogeny. Much of biological evolution is also reticulated.
Bacteria, for example, do not form genealogically isolated lineages,
hybridization is rife among plants, and there is also considerable
borrowing of elements of the genome between apparently isolated
mammalian species. Of course this might show simply that phylogenetic
modes of inference are doubly imperilled: they don’t work for
much of the biological world either. But cultural evolutionists (e.g.
Gray et al. 2007) are encouraged by inferential developments within
biology itself, which aim to reconstruct partially reticulated trees
by proposing so-called reconciliations of the conflicting trees that
traditional methods often propose for species and genes. 
This kind of work is important, in part because of the uses to which
well-confirmed cultural phylogenies can be put. It may be easiest to
illustrate their value via a simple example. On the face of things,
looking for correlations is a reasonable (albeit fallible) way to
discover causal relationships. If, for example, people who smoke often
get lung cancer, and people with lung cancer are often smokers, then
we have good evidence that smoking causes lung cancer (or perhaps that
lung cancer causes smoking). But there can be strong correlations that
do not indicate causation. If, for example, we find that there is a
strong correlation in animals between making a moo sound and producing
large quantities of milk, we should not conclude that one causes the
other. Mooing and milk production go together because the creatures in
question share ancestors in common, who both mooed and gave lots of
milk. Of course, in the case of cows this fact of common ancestry is
so obvious that we hardly notice how it informs our causal inference.
But cultural phylogenies are unobvious. Russell Gray, among others,
has long argued that when we understand them better, our knowledge of
phylogenies can then confirm, or undermine, causal hypotheses that are
claimed on the basis of correlation. 
Gray and Watts (2017), for example, have scrutinised what is sometimes
called the Supernatural Punishment Hypothesis. This is the hypothesis
that belief in powerful gods, who inflict punishment on wrongdoers,
tends to result in societies that are better able to harness the
fruits of cooperation (see Norenzayan et al. 2016). Gray and Watts
again caution that mere correlation between societies that believe in
‘moralising high gods’ and various measures of social
complexity does not count strongly in favour of the Supernatural
Punishment Hypothesis. We must also take into account the potentially
confounding consequences of shared ancestry among the societies
surveyed. Gray and Watts draw on Austronesian data to argue that
belief in moralising high gods tends to be gained after, not before,
the emergence of political complexity; so these data, they suggest,
undermine the thought that moralising high gods drive this form of
complexity. That said, they do find some support for a weaker
supernatural punishment hypothesis based on belief in punishment
interventions from natural spirits, ancestral spirits and mythical
heroes, as well as from moralising high gods. In their view this type
of belief facilitated, ‘the rise of political complexity’
without ‘helping sustain it’ (2017: 7848). Work such as
this indicates the potential for cultural phylogenetics to inform
broad-sweep hypotheses about not just the patterns, but also the
causal processes, that have marked the cultural history of our
species.
How do theorists within the field of cultural evolution understand
what ‘culture’ is (see Driscoll 2017 for general
discussion)? Richerson and Boyd’s (2005) definition is fairly
typical of the field as a whole, and is mirrored in definitions given
by Mesoudi (2011) and Henrich (2015). Culture, they say, is
‘information capable of affecting individuals’ behavior
that they acquire from other members of their species through
teaching, imitation, and other forms of social learning’
(Richerson and Boyd 2005, 5). This raises the further question of what
is meant by ‘social learning’. In an important overview of
work on cultural evolution, Henrich gives a definition of this key
notion for cultural evolutionary theory, and of the notion of
‘individual learning’ that it is regularly contrasted
with:
One consequence of this way of defining things (a consequence which
Henrich explicitly recognises) is that the two terms, ‘social
learning’ and ‘individual learning’, are not
exclusive. In a species like ours it is hardly ever the case that what
an individual learns is free from influence by others. Even in extreme
cases where we learn by probing our surroundings well away from social
company, almost every aspect of the environments we interact
with—and hence what we end up learning from those
environments—has been affected by other people’s past
actions. The structures and contents of our dwellings and workplaces,
the constitutions of the domesticated plants and animals we interact
with, the cultivated and engineered environments we live in, all have
been affected by the activities of our predecessors.
The overlap between individual and social forms of learning has
significance for research on non-human, as well as the human, species.
The group of wild chimpanzees studied by Hobaiter et al. (2014) began
to develop a new behaviour: previously they had used
‘sponges’, made from chewed-up leaves, to soak up drinking
water. Some then began to make these sponges from moss instead. The
researchers saw one individual develop this behaviour because she
re-used an old moss sponge, which had previously been discarded by
another chimp. But she did not do this because she had seen the sponge
in use. One the one hand, this is a clear case of individual learning:
from the chimp’s-eye view the discarded sponge was simply
something she happened to have found lying around. On the other hand,
this is manifestly a piece of social learning according to
Henrich’s definition, for the past action of another chimp
greatly eased the inventive burden in discovering that moss could be
used as a sponge. Little wonder, then, that the study authors mention
this example as part of ‘a growing literature that refutes a
strong distinction between individual and social learning’
(2014). As that distinction blurs, so the further question of what
culture consists in becomes less clear (Lewens 2017). For there are
numerous ways in which activities of one generation can, by altering
or maintaining stable features of biotic, social and technical
environments, have an influence over what individuals in the following
generations end up learning.
These phenomena are recognised by many prominent theorists of cultural
evolution. Laland et al. stress this theme in their work on
niche-construction—i.e. the role of organisms in fashioning
their environments—when they remark that, ‘We inherit a
world of our making...This is both our ecological and our cultural
inheritance’ (2001). Sterelny’s work on the evolution of
cognition (e.g. Sterelny 2012) also places stress on what he sometimes
calls ‘scaffolded learning’. Like Hobaiter et al’s
chimps, unskilled, ignorant or uninitiated human novices can find
their epistemic burdens greatly eased by the ways in which the
environments in which they learn are littered with the fruits of past
activities of adepts.
Henrich, also, remarks that ‘...the least sophisticated forms of
social learning occur simply as a by-product of being around others,
and engaging in individual learning’. He reserves the term
‘cultural learning’ for the ‘more sophisticated
subclass of social learning abilities in which individuals seek to
acquire information from others...’ (2015, 12–13). Critics of
these final comments (e.g. Clarke and Heyes 2017) have urged that we
seek more detailed information concerning whether individual
learning—which, as we have seen, can take place in felicitously
structured environments—truly is less sophisticated than forms
of learning that attend directly to the behaviours of others. We need
to ask both whether there is an additional form of sophistication in
the cognitive mechanisms that underpin social (compared with
individual) learning, and also whether social learning has greater
functionality, specifically with respect to the generation of
increasingly refined behaviours, technologies, norms and institutions
across populations. These are just the types of questions to which the
methods of cultural evolutionary work—which combine populational
modelling with work in cognitive science—are well placed to give
answers.