Ordinarily, when philosophers talk about descriptions, they have two
kinds of expressions in mind: definite descriptions—understood
to be phrases of the form ‘the F’ (and their
equivalents in other languages), and indefinite
descriptions—understood to be phrases of the form ‘an
F’ (and their equivalents in other languages). As we will
see, this way of carving up the kinds of descriptions is far too
blunt. First, there are many kinds of expressions that appear to have
this form but that are often argued not to be descriptions. For
example, in the expression ‘John is a lawyer’ it is often
claimed that ‘a lawyer’ is not a genuine description, but
is rather something different—a predicate for example.
Second, it is arguable that there are many expressions having surface
forms quite different from ‘the F’ or ‘an
F’ that could count as being descriptions. For example, it seems
quite plausible that possessives like ‘my father’ are
descriptions (as in ‘the father of me’). Russell also
proposed that ordinary proper names could be construed as definite
descriptions in disguise. Thus a name like ‘Aristotle’
might be taken as shorthand for ‘the student of Plato who taught
Alexander, wrote The Nichomachean Ethics etc.’. Furthermore, as
we will see, it has been argued that pronouns like ‘it’
might “stand proxy” for descriptions. So, for example, the
pronoun in (1) might be taken to stand proxy for the corresponding
definite description (indicated by square brackets) in (1′).
 

Correlatively, it has been suggested that temporal anaphors like
‘then’ and modal anaphors like ‘that’ (in
‘that would have been unfortunate’) are kinds of
descriptions.
Finally, as noted above, some recent analyses of descriptions have
converged on the view that the contributions the determiners
‘the’ and ‘a’ make are not semantical, but
rather pragmatic or even syntactic in nature. All of these
possibilities will be discussed in due course, but for now we will
begin with the analysis of ‘the F’ and ‘an
F’ first taken up in Russell (1905, 1919).
 The key idea of Russell’s proposal is that a sentence like (2)
containing an indefinite description, is understood to have the
logical form in (2′),
 and a sentence like (3) containing a definite description is
understood to have the logical form in (3′).
Boiled down to its simplest non-technical form, the idea is that an
expression of the form in (3) is shorthand for the conjunction of three claims:
(Following Neale (1990) we will find it useful to substitute
(3c′) for (3c), which retains Russell’s truth conditions and (as we will see)
allows us to extend the theory to plural descriptions in a natural
way.)
Thus tweaked, Russell’s analysis is that the semantics of a definite
description in a sentence involves an existence claim, a
uniqueness claim, and a maximality claim.
There are three main motivations for the theory of descriptions;
the first is metaphysical, the second involves semantical concerns in
the philosophy of language, and the third is epistemological.
Consider a negative existential sentence like (4).
Because definite descriptions are devices of quantification on
Russell’s view, they can enter into scope relations with other
operators—in this case, for example, negation. Accordingly,
there is a kind of ambiguity in (4), between the following two logical
forms.
Here we are using the restricted quantifier notation
adopted in Neale (1990). So for example, we read:
as saying “the x such that x is F, is such
that x is G”. The material in the square brackets
gives the
restriction on the quantifier, and the formula in parentheses
after the bracket constitutes the scope of the restricted quantifier.
(We sometimes drop the outer parentheses when it is clear what the
scope of the restricted quantifier is, and we sometimes add
parentheses around the entire formula for disambiguation.)  Thus, (4a)
captures the fact that the negation has wide scope in a manner that
can be glossed thus: it is not the case that the x such
that x is the present king of France exists. Whereas (4b) gives
the restricted quantifier wide scope, in a manner that can be glossed
this way: the
x such that x is the present king of France does not
exist.
If one wants to avoid the ontological entanglements of nonexistent
objects, then one is free to say that (4b) is false (since it involves
quantifying over things that don’t exist) but that (4a) is true (since
it is not the case that there is a present king of France). What is
negated in (4a) is not a claim about some particular individual, but
rather a general claim about the world—in effect a claim that
the world contains exactly one individual that is presently the king
of France and that whoever is presently the king of France exists.
Russell also had a number of concerns that today we might call
“semantical”. Consider the expressions ‘the Morning
Star’ and ‘the Evening Star’. Both refer to (or at
least denote) the planet Venus, but there are contexts in which it
seems incorrect to say that they have the same meaning. For example,
it was an astronomical discovery that the Morning Star was identical
to the Evening Star, so it would be odd to treat an expression like
‘The Morning Star is the Evening Star’ as merely asserting
some object to be self-identical. In a similar vein, if we utter
(6),
we are most likely not saying that George was curious about whether
Venus was identical to itself.
Frege proposed that that the solution to this puzzle involved the
introduction of senses—abstract objects that fix the referents
of these expressions, each having a different cognitive significance.
In the case of (6), the Fregean solution would be to say that there
are different senses attached to ‘the Morning Star’ and
‘the Evening Star’. If we take these expressions to be
standing proxy for definite descriptions, then (6) can be unpacked as
in (6′).
Russell saw that scope relations are relevant here. So, for example,
sentences like (6) evince what are sometimes called de
dicto/de re ambiguities. There are circumstances under
which George has some object in particular in mind and is wondering,
of that object, whether it is the star that appears in the evening. We
can use (6) to report this fact as well; In this case we may think of
the description as taking wide scope relative to the propositional
attitude verb ‘wondered’ yielding a logical form like
(7).
Alternatively, if George has gone mad and is in fact wondering about
the law of identity, this may be represented as in (8), where both
descriptions have wide scope.
Metaphysical and semantical concerns were important to Russell in
his 1905 paper, but epistemological concerns were no less
significant. This became particularly clear when he authored his
(1910–11) paper “Knowledge by Acquaintance and Knowledge
by Description.” In that paper, Russell distinguished between
objects that we are directly acquainted with and objects that we only
know under a description. So, for example, I might know myself by
acquaintance, but I know the tallest man in Iowa only under a
description.
Ludlow (2002) argued that the Cartesianism in Russell’s psychology and
epistemology led him into difficulties here. The problem is that we
can be in error as to whether we are directly acquainted with someone
(did I really have lunch with a colleague or was that a clever
hologram?) and this concern (coupled with the Cartesianism that
Russell held at that point in his career) propelled Russell to
radically minimize the class of cases where we have
acquaintance—down to what he called “egocentric particulars,”
which is basically to say I’m only acquainted with myself and sense
data.  This in turn led Russell to extend the theory of descriptions
to almost all uses of names—treating them as definite
descriptions in disguise.
Russell could have saved himself from some of the more troubling
consequences of his view if he had jettisoned the Cartesianism and
opted for a more liberal notion of acquaintance. Alternatively, if
Hawthorne and Manley (2012) are correct, the true mistake would have
come in at the beginning—with the linking of acquaintance and
reference. In their view a case can be made that reference comes much
cheaper than Russell imagined.  It would follow that descriptions need
not be relied upon as heavily as he imagined
The analysis of descriptions has been extended from canonical examples
of descriptions (expressions of the form ‘the F’
and ‘an F’) to expressions that don’t have this
surface form. As we noted in section 3, one of the key motivations for
Russell’s theory of descriptions was the idea that it could ameliorate
the problem of non-denoting expressions—expressions like
‘the golden mountain’, and ‘the present king of
France’. But the account has been extended to other
constructions as well, including proper names, pronouns, and temporal
anaphors, all with mixed results.
If the theory of descriptions can unburden us metaphysically in the
case of nondenoting expressions like ‘the present king of
France’ can it do the same for us with nondenoting names like
‘Pegasus’?  Perhaps, but there is no shortage of difficulties.
One problem has to do with the fact that there is often no single
shared description for certain fictions. Even a simple case like
‘Santa Claus’ presents difficulties here. Many people will
associate many different descriptions with the name ‘Santa
Claus’. Which, if any of those descriptions is the correct one,
and in what sense can we say that all the people deploying the name
‘Santa Claus’ and associating different descriptions with
the term are talking about the same thing? Complicating the matter
further, others might not use the term ‘Santa Claus’ but a
name like ‘Saint Nick’ or ‘Babbo Natale’, and
associate those terms with descriptions that converge to some degree
with typical Santa descriptions.
At best the Russellian can argue that others are in the same
boat here. Consider the option of non-existent objects. If such objects
are individuated by their properties then we can again ask which
properties the non-existent object Santa Claus is supposed to have. And
is the Italian who deploys the term ‘Babbo Natale’
talking about the same nonexistent object as an American that deploys the
name ‘Santa Claus’? (See Everett
and Hofweber (2000) and French and Wettstein (2001)
for papers on these general issues, and see Zalta (1983, 1988) for a
robust defense of the nonexistent object strategy).
On the face of it then, a naïve application of the descriptive
theory of names faces some serious difficulties. 
Devitt and Sterelney (1998, 48 ff.) catalogue them as follows:
The principled basis objection. There are a number of
different descriptions that people might associate with a name like
‘Aristotle’.  An historian might favor the description of
‘the teacher of Alexander the Great’, a Catholic Church
historian might know him under the description of ‘the leading
influence on Saint Aquinas’, some philosophers might know him
under the description of ‘the pupil of Plato and author
of The Metaphysics and
The Nichomachean Ethics’, Plato himself might
have known him under the description ‘the obnoxious student of
mine.’ Which of these descriptions is the correct one, what is
the principled basis that determines which description is correct?
The unwanted ambiguity objection. Suppose that we
respond to the principled basis objection by letting many flowers
bloom. That is, suppose we argue that there is no single correct
description associated with the name but there are many. We now run
into the teeth of the problem of unwanted ambiguity. Are there really
that many different names, each corresponding to an different
description? If so, why does ‘Aristotle was Aristotle’
seem so much less informative than ‘the teacher of Alexander the
Great was the leading influence on Saint Aquinas’?
The unwanted necessity objection. Consider a sentence
like ‘Aristotle taught Alexander the Great’. This seems to
be a contingent claim—one that is true but matters could have
gone otherwise.  Aristotle could have decided it was immoral to take
the position, or Phillip of Macedonia could have decided that
Aristotle was not the best tutor for his young Alexander. We can
imagine numerous possible worlds in which the sentence turns out to be
false (unlike necessary claims like ‘5+7=12’ which appear
to be true in every possible world). But now consider this sentence
with the description unpacked.  We get something like ‘The pupil
of Plato and teacher of Alexander the Great taught Alexander the
Great’, and it seems that this would have to be true in every
world in which someone satisfies the relevant description. The problem
is that the Russellian analysis seems to turn a contingent proposition
into a necessary proposition.
Searle (1958, 1969; 162 ff.) offers some modifications designed to
overcome these difficulties with the descriptive theory of names.
Consider a name like ‘Socrates’. Is it really part of the
meaning of that name that its bearer drank hemlock, taught Plato and
did all of the other things that we are told that he did when we study
the history of philosophy? Searle suggests that we needn’t associate
the meaning of a name with a description that contains all of these
elements—it might be enough that most of them hold, or that a
suitably weighted bundle of them hold. (Other versions of this idea
were proposed in Strawson (1959; 180 ff.) and Wilson
(1959).)
How does Searle’s proposal help with the objections just listed? The
unwanted necessity objection collapses immediately because the use of a
name does not commit the speaker to the object in question having all
the properties in the bundle. When I say Aristotle authored
the Nichomachean Ethics it is as though I uttered
the following:
Someone might be associated with this bundle of properties and not have
written the Nichomachean Ethics (so long as they had
enough of the other properties).
The principled basis objection is supposed to collapse because
there is now no issue of choosing which description is the correct
one—if the theologian, the historian, and the philosopher all
associate different descriptions and hence different properties with
Aristotle, all of those properties will make it into the bundle of
properties for the name ‘Aristotle’. We don’t need to
worry about the principled basis for choosing the relevant properties
because we don’t have to choose period. We take them all.
The unwanted ambiguity objection is supposed to collapse because
every use of the name ‘Aristotle’ is now associated with
the same bundle of properties. ‘Aristotle is Aristotle’ is
uninformative because it is shorthand for (10).
As compelling as Searle’s proposal may seem at first blush, it soon
runs into problems of its own.
As Devitt and Sterelny observe, the three
objections to the traditional descriptive theory of names come creeping
back. For starters, one presumably doesn’t want every single fact about
Aristotle to make it into the bundle of properties that we associate
with his name (that would lead us down the path to an extreme holism in
which every fact that we acquire changes the meaning of the name), so
what is the principled basis for deciding what goes into the bundle?
Worse, what is the principled basis by which we weight the importance
of the properties in the bundle?
The unwanted ambiguity objection returns as well if we allow that
different people will associate different bundles of properties with a
name or at least weight those properties differently. One might be
tempted to dodge this problem by arguing that the relevant bundle of
properties for a name is socially fixed and does not vary between
individuals, but then it is hard to see how names like
‘Scott’ and ‘Sir Walter’ could be associated
with different bundles of properties since the community as a whole is
likely to attribute the same bundle of properties (with the same
weights) to these names. This is a problem, because different bundles
of properties are needed to distinguish the differences in cognitive
significance between ‘Scott’ and ‘Sir Walter’.
There is a dilemma then: one can avoid the problem of unwanted
ambiguity only at the expense of the problem of accounting for the
cognitive significance of names.
 

Finally, as Kripke (1980) argued, Searle’s solution really doesn’t
help with the problem of unwanted necessity. Aristotle might have had
none of the properties that we ordinarily associate with his
name. Searle certainly didn’t think this was possible—for him,
if nothing had the properties in question (or enough of them) then
Aristotle did not exist. But Kripke (ch. 2) enlisted a number of
arguments to show that the behavior of names in modal environments
suggests otherwise. For example even if we concede that Aristotle did
all the things he was supposed to have done, it is still the case that
Aristotle could have refrained from doing any of the things he did. He
could have forsaken philosophy for other pursuits. He could have been
run over by a chariot at age two. But then how do we make sense of a
descriptive name in a sentence like (11)?
If the description is unpacked, we get something like (11′).
But (11′) is false. There is no nearby possible
world where Aristotle did all those things by age two.
 

Kripke held that the behavior of names in these environments could
only be explained if we think of the names as being rigid
designators—i.e., as devices that rigidly pick out an individual
across possible worlds. Kripke also stressed that this is not really a
point about conditional or modal sentences—the same point can be
made for simple declarative sentences evaluated in a counterfactual
situation. So, for example, take a simple sentence like (12).
We can evaluate this sentence in other possible worlds. We can say
that it might have been true under certain circumstances. But it does
not seem plausible that there is a nearby possible world where the
following is true.
Finally, Donnellan (1972) and Kripke (1980) both
argued that the Descriptive Theory of Names suffers from an important
epistemological defect. The descriptions that we associate with names
routinely do not describe the individuals that we intend to refer to.
Asked to come up with a description to substitute for the name
‘Einstein’, many people would write ‘The inventor of
the atom bomb’ (which of course he was not). Others might write
‘the inventor of the theory of relativity’, but then asked
what the theory of relativity was would respond ‘the theory that
Einstein invented’. The descriptive information that we associate
with names just is not sufficient to pick out the intended
referent.
 

Kripke’s positive proposal—suggestion really—was that
names are associated with a causal chain; there is an initial baptism
of an individual (e.g., Albert Einstein as ‘Albert
Einstein’) and that referent is passed along to other users of
the name. Likewise the referent of ‘Aristotle’ is not
fixed by some description, but by a causal chain linking our use of
‘Aristotle’ with some historical individual. (This is not
the place for an extended discussion of this proposal, but see Devitt
1981 and Salmon 1991 for development of this idea and Evans (1973,
1980) for criticism.)
In spite of the great force of Kripke’s criticism of the
descriptive theory of names, there have been some significant attempts
to answer them. One idea (explored by Loar (1976), McDowell (1977),
and Schiffer (1978)) would have the description be something like
‘the individual designated by the name
‘Aristotle’. For Kripke (1980), and Devitt (1981) this
sort of approach was hopelessly circular. Indeed, Devitt and Sterelny
disparagingly referred to the position as “circular
descriptivism” (but see Kroon (1989) for an attempt to disarm
the circularity charge). Another idea (taken up in Kroon (1987) and
Jackson (1998)) was to build reference to the causal chain into the
description itself. Thus, ‘Aristotle’ might stand proxy
for ‘the individual linked by a causal chain to
‘Aristotle’’ (this view was dubbed “causal
descriptivism” by Lewis (1984)). Whatever the merits of these
views, they clearly abandon some of the key motivations for the
descriptive theories of names—in particular the idea that the
description could do the work of providing the sense of the name.
Still, from a linguistic point of view, we should note that there are
features of names in natural language that make them appear to be
similar to descriptions. Names can take determiners like
‘a’ and ‘the’ (indeed in some languages they
routinely do so), which suggests that they are behaving more like
nouns than like saturated referring expression. Indeed it is a
widespread linguistic analysis of names that they have possibly empty
determiner positions, so that a name like Aristotle has at a minimum
the following structure, which represents a syntactic structure for a
determiner phrase having an empty determiner and the noun
‘Aristotle’ as constituents:
In addition, Burge (1973) offered a number of arguments in support of
the idea that names really are predicates, and further support has
come from Hornsby (1976), Larson and Segal (1995) and Eluguardo
(2002). (But see Boer (1975), Bach (1987), and Higginbotham (1988) for
criticism.)
 

The Burge story had the determiner as something like a bare
demonstrative. It is not a long step to the supposition that the
default interpretation of the null element is to treat it as the
definite determiner ‘the’. This is in effect the proposal
offered in Larson and Segal (1995); ‘Aristotle’ stands in
for an incomplete definite description of the form ‘the
Aristotle’. In both cases, the predicate in question would be
something like being named ‘Aristotle’, so again it is
difficult to see how this general approach (without emendation) can
satisfy Russell’s desiderata that the description play the role of
senses.
 

An alternative riff on these ideas which has been widely
discussed, but not, so far as I know, published, would be to suppose
that there is a rigid property of being Aristotle—one that only
Aristotle could have in any possible world (this property would be
completely independent of being named ‘Aristotle’). The
idea is that the content of the description could consist solely of
that property. For example, when we say that ‘Aristotle might
have been run over by a chariot’ we would in effect be saying
there is a possible world in which the unique individual who has the
property of being Aristotle was run over by a chariot. It seems that
charges of circularity are not so easily advanced here, although the
view does raise questions about the nature of these rigid properties
and our epistemic access to them. (See Parsons (1982) for an account
of the logic of rigid properties.)
Another class of responses has attempted to retain the standard
descriptive content of names but moved to
circumvent Kripke’s modal worries. Dummett (1973;
111–135, 1981) and Sosa (1996; ch. 3, 2001) proposed that the
behavior of names in modal contexts can be accounted for if
we take names to be descriptions with mandatory wide scope. So, for
example, (11) could be taken to have the following logical form.
 

Kripke discussed this possibility briefly in the Preface to
(1980), holding that the move overlooks the fact that we can simply
evaluate (12) in other possible worlds, hence no embedding within
modal operators is really necessary. For that matter, consider a
sentence like ‘(12) might have been true’. How does a wide
scope story help us in this case? More recently, Soames (2002; ch. 2)
has expanded on Kripke’s points and marshaled a number of additional
arguments against the wide scope thesis, including the observation
that if one embeds a name within a propositional attitude environment
and in turn embeds the propositional attitude in a modal environment
then one is in the peculiar position of needing the description to
escape the modal environment (to honor the rigidity facts) but not
escape the propositional attitude environment (to honor the
‘Scott’/‘Sir Walter’ cases that Russell (1905)
employed to motivate the descriptive theory of names). In other words,
the description theorists need to have their cake and eat it too.
Another possibility (considered in Nelson (2002)) would be to argue
that names are “rigidified descriptions” (i.e.,
descriptions like ‘The individual who actually was a student of
Plato, taught Alexander, etc.’ or perhaps rigidified causal
descriptions. This general strategy is criticized by Soames (2002;
ch. 2), who argues that ‘the actual F is G’
and ‘n is G’, where n is a name, do not
express the same proposition. The argument for this turns on cases
where these expressions are embedded in propositional attitude
environments, as in (14a) and (14b).
According to Soames, there are contexts of utterance and worlds of
evaluation where (14a) is true but (14b) is false. Accordingly,
‘the actual F is G’ and ‘n is
G’ cannot express the same proposition. Hence names
cannot be rigidified descriptions. (But see Nelson (2002) for a
response to this argument.)
 

Yet another approach to defending descriptions would be to employ a
“2-dimensionalist” semantics (in the sense of Stalnaker
(1978, 1990), Davies and Humberstone (1980)) to account for the
behavior of descriptive names in modal environments. Some form of this
idea has been offered by Evans (1982), Stanley (1997a, 1997b),
Chalmers (2000, 2002), and Jackson (1998). Here the basic idea is that
the content of a description picks out different contents in different
possible worlds. Accordingly, if we want to evaluate the descriptive
content of ‘Aristotle’ in another possible world, we do
not use the descriptive content ‘student of Plato…’
in every world, since that is only an appropriate descriptive content
for some worlds. In other worlds we will draw on other descriptive
contents. As Jackson (1998, 112) puts the idea:
Soames (2009) has responded that this particular 2-dimensionalist
approach is tantamount to the claim that descriptive theories of
reference determination are priori irrefutable, since any evidence
that a term refers to an object is automatically taken to demonstrate
the existence of an implicit description in our minds that
successfully determines reference, whether or not we can successfully
state it. Additional criticism of 2-dimensionalism criticism can be
found in Block and Stalnaker (1998) and Byrne and Pryor (2006).
Consider sentence (1) again.
One of the arguments that Strawson (1952) enlisted on behalf of the
referential theory of descriptions was the following.  Since the
pronoun in (1) gets its content from the description that it is
anaphoric on, and because the pronoun refers, it must be the case that
the description also refers. Strawson’s idea was that descriptions
refer because their anaphoric pronouns do.
 

There are obviously two responses to Strawson here. One may either
reject the idea that the content of the pronoun is in some sense
dependent upon the description (for example, one might claim it
independently picks out some object raised to salience (Lewis 1979),
one might claim that it is a bound variable (Geach 1962)), or one can
argue that the pronoun is a kind of definite description in
disguise. This third idea has been explored by Parsons (1978, Other
Internet Resources), Cooper (1979), Davies (1981), Neale (1990,
ch. 6), Heim (1990), Ludlow (1994), van Rooy (2001), and Elbourne
(2005) (the view is sometimes attributed to Evans (1977), but it is
more accurate to say that he thought the pronouns had their references
fixed rigidly by descriptive content). As noted above, the basic idea
is that the pronoun in (1) may stand proxy for the square-bracketed
definite description in (1′).
The philosophical attraction of this view should be obvious. What it
allows us to do is to make sense of cases where we employ nondenoting
pronouns in negative existentials, belief reports, and fictional
contexts. Examples would be the following:
    (15) The present king of France doesn’t clean my pool. He doesn’t
    exist, either.
    (16) Mary believes that the present king of France exists and that
    he cleans my pool.
Clearly if these pronouns are referring expressions then any victories
won through the theory of descriptions are going to be fleeting. In
effect, all the unwelcome metaphysical commitments that we banished by
using descriptions would re-enter via the back door as soon as we
employ anaphoric pronouns in our discourse. But if we treat anaphors
as standing proxy for descriptions, the back door is blocked as
well.
Consider an example like (16), with the descriptive material spelled
out.
Mary’s belief is strange, but general for all that, so we can report
it without being committed to the existence of a present king of
France.
 

Nor is this strategy necessarily limited to pronominal
anaphora. Ludlow (1999, 2000) has argued that temporal and modal
anaphora can be handled in a similar manner. In effect, one can take a
temporal anaphor as standing proxy for a when-clause and a modal
anaphor like ‘that’ in ‘that would have hurt’
as standing proxy for the antecedent of a conditional.
To illustrate, consider an example like (17), due to Partee (1972).
 

Now clearly this does not mean that I turned the stove off once in my
life, but rather there is intuitively some relevant time when I turned
it off—for example, when I left the house this morning.  The
standard analysis would have it that I refer to a past time or past
time interval here, but such an analysis does not go down well with
presentists, who do not believe that there are such intervals, and at
a minimum we might think there is something epistemologically
troubling about referring to past and future times (to see this,
consider what a Russellian might say, given that some notion of direct
acquaintance is required on the Russellian view). An alternative would
be to suppose that the implicit temporal anaphora here can be
accounted for by the introduction of descriptive material—an
explicit temporal when-clause—as in (18), for example.
 

The presentist can then treat ‘when’ as a primitive tense
that holds between propositions. (See Ludlow (1999) for discussion of
difficulties with this strategy.) As in the pronominal anaphora case,
descriptive material does the work that reference does in most other
accounts of the semantics of temporal and modal discourse. Again, the
goal is metaphysical austerity and faithfulness to our epistemic
position.
Clearly descriptive anaphora represents a powerful extension of
Russell’s theory of descriptions and a useful tool
for presentists and modal antirealists. For all of that, the
theory has encountered a number of objections.

Consider (19), for example, and a paraphrase (20) in which the pronoun
is rendered as a description.
    (19) If a man enters the room, he will turn
the switch.
    (20) If a man enters the room, the man who
enters will turn the switch.
 Heim (1982) observed that (20) (unlike (19)) implies that a unique man
entered the room and that (20) will therefore be false if two men
enter the room. The question is, is there some way to answer this
objection and retain the descriptive analysis of anaphora? Davies
(1981), Lappin (1989), Neale (1990, chapter 6), Krifka (1996), and
Yoon (1996) explored the possibility that the descriptive pronouns are
in fact numberless—that is, the pronoun in (20) might in fact be
proxy for something like ‘the man or men who enter’. (See
Kanazawa (2001) for a literature review and criticism of this
idea.)
Another idea, considered in Heim (1990), Ludlow (1994), and Elbourne
(2005) is to see how descriptive theories of pronouns fare when
embedded within an event-based (or situation based) theories of
conditionals like those articulated by Berman (1987), Kratzer (1989),
and Lycan (1984). On an event-based analysis of conditionals, we would
expect a treatment of (19) along the lines of (21).
 Sentence (21) seems to accurately reflect the truth conditions of
‘He will turn the switch’, even in the case where two men
turn the switch simultaneously. To see this we need merely recognize
that even though two men (say Ralph and Norton) may turn the switch
simultaneously, it is still the case that we can recognize two
independent minimal events; one where Ralph turns the switch and one
where Norton turns the switch. The strategy is to show that the
supposed loss of uniqueness is an epiphenomenon, and is due to the
fact that the descriptive pronoun’s denotation is relativized to
events.
Unfortunately, there are more sophisticated versions of these cases
where simple relativization to events will not do.  These include the
sage plant examples discussed in Heim (1982, 1990) and Kadmon
(1990).
Here the problem is that the minimal event appears to contain ten sage
plants, so we are left to ask how the pronoun, rendered as a definite
description complete with a uniqueness claim, is supposed to work.
There is no unique sage plant in the minimal events.  Or at least a
more detailed story needs to be told.
Finally, there is (23). (Heim (1990) attributes the example to Hans
Kamp and Jan van Eijk).
The interesting feature of this example is that the uniqueness
implications of the definite descriptions remain problematic, for they
imply that there is a unique satisfier of the description in each
event. But notice that because the bishops bless each other, it
appears there is no unique individual that satisfies either
description in the consequent of (23 ).  This class of problems,
sometimes called bishop sentences, has yielded a number of
proposed solutions.  For example, Elbourne (2005) has argued that the
minimal situation story can suffice if there are subsituations
containing only one bishop.  Here is a crude version of the idea: If
there is a subsituation s1 with only one bishop and a subsituation s2
with one different bishop, there could be a containing situation s0 in
which the bishops from those subsituations bless each other (see Kroll
(2008) and Elbourne (2009, 2010) for further discussion).
An alternative idea is to treat the pronoun in these cases as semantically
akin to an indefinite description rather than a definite description.
(See Groendijk and Stokhof (1991), Chierchia (1996),
van der Does (1994), and also see van Rooy (2001)
for criticism. The proposal in King (1978) has a similar effect.) If we
make this move, then (24) might be glossed as in (24′).
Similarly, the sage plant example in (23) would receive the gloss in
(23′).
Such solutions thus surrender the uniqueness entailment in Russell’s
proposal (we will return to this idea in section 6.1).  Of course, as
Kadmon (1990) stressed, pronouns typically do appear to introduce
uniqueness, as an example like (25) shows.
 

Notice that the first sentence doesn’t introduce uniqueness, so
the pronoun introduces something that indefinites do not. What
this means is that whatever account we give of pronouns—through
dynamic semantics or whatever—we will want to account for this
variation in interpretation in a principled way. We want to know
precisely why a pronoun looks like a definite description here, but an
indefinite description there. Whether extant accounts are satisfactory
in this respect is subject to debate.
Of course, none of this is to say that solving this problem will close
the book on the analysis of descriptive pronouns. A number of other
puzzles remain, including the problem of pronominal contradiction,
which has been discussed by Strawson (1952), Davies (1981), Ludlow and
Neale (1991), and van Rooy (2001) among many others. Consider the
following brief dialogue.
 

The problem is that if the pronoun is to have its descriptive
content recovered from previous discourse, the pronoun
‘He’ is going to stand proxy for a description like
‘the man who fell in front of the train’ or ‘a man
who fell in front of the train’. Here, considerations about
uniqueness implications are of little help. One possibility, advocated
by Davies (1981) and Ludlow and Neale (1991) is to say that speaker B
is engaged in a kind of pretense—playing along with speaker A,
as if saying with scare quotes something like B′.
 

Other strategies are also in play, for example one might ignore
the descriptive content of the antecedent and build the content out of
thematic roles like agent and theme (Ludlow 1994), or perhaps
metalinguistic material (“the person you spoke
of”). Whatever the ultimate disposition of these cases, it is
fair to say that there are more issues here than whether pronouns are
to be treated as standing proxy for definite descriptions or
indefinite descriptions.
Most of the action in the philosophy of language has been with
definite descriptions, but indefinite descriptions have also generated
a fair bit of attention—some of it mirroring the debates about
definite descriptions. For example Chastain (1975), Donnellan (1978),
Wilson (1978), and Fodor and Sag (1982), held that indefinite
descriptions are ambiguous between referential and quantificational
interpretations. That is to say, there are referential and
quantificational uses of indefinite descriptions and these are a
reflex of a genuine semantical ambiguity. The basic structure of their
argument was the following. Referential uses of indefinites must be
either a function of quantifier scope or a semantically referential
indefinite determiner. Since indefinites with the relevant scopal
properties would violate standard syntactic constraints, indefinites
must in some cases be semantically referential.
 Examples of the kinds of syntactic considerations they had in mind
include island constraints like the following. Quantified expressions
are ordinarily considered to be clause bound. So, for example, a
sentence like (26) is not supposed to have the interpretation in
(26′), where the quantified expression takes wide scope.
(26) Someone believes that every man I know
is angry.
(26′) *[every y: man(y) and
 know(I,y)]([Some x: person(x)](x believes
 that y is angry))
On the other hand, it seems more natural to say that (27) can have
the interpretation corresponding to the structure in (27′).
(27) Everyone believes that a man I know is
angry.
(27′) [An x: man(x) and 
 know(I,x)]([every y: person(y)](y believes
that x is angry))
A more compelling example of an island constraint would be the
antecedent of a conditional, as in (28), which is not supposed to have
the interpretation in (28′).
(28) If every person I know is happy then I
will be happy.
(28′) *[every x: person(x) and
know(I,x)](if x is happy then I will be happy)
But a “wide understanding” of (29) does seem to be
possible.
(29) If a person I know is happy then I will be
happy.
(29′) [An x: person(x) and
    know(I,x)](if x is happy then I will be happy)
The moral was supposed to be that these “wide” readings
are not the reflex of wide scope quantification (that would be to make
indefinite descriptions syntactically special), but rather due to the
fact that the indefinites in these examples are referring
expressions.
The Fodor and Sag argumentation was taken up in the philosophical
literature by King (1988) and Ludlow and Neale (1991), who argued that
there is a confusion in the Fodor and Sag
discussion. Kripke’s claim, of course, was that referential
uses of a description are a function of pragmatics, not quantifier
scope. Nor, of course, could a referential use be associated with wide
scope, as Kripke (1977) argued forcefully—they simply
are not the same phenomenon. The problem is that the Fodor and Sag
arguments do not address the pragmatic account of referential
uses, which of course was the alternative advanced by Kripke.
In addition, there do appear to be more quantifier scope
possibilities than the Fodor and Sag proposal seems to allow. Consider
(30), from Ludlow and Neale and (31) from Kripke.
(30) Each teacher overheard many
exclamations that a student of mine cheated.
(31) Hoover charged that the Berrigans plotted to kidnap a high
    American official.
In the case of (30) ‘a student of mine’ can have narrow
scope with respect to ‘every teacher’ but wide scope with
respect to ‘many exclamations’. Similarly, as Kripke
(1977) observed, intermediate scope is possible in (24) (as when the
Berrigans have someone in mind, but Hoover does not know who). Similar
observations about the possibility of intermediate scope have been
made by Farkas (1981), Rooth and Partee (1982), King (1988), Ruys
(1992) and Abusch (1994). How are Fodor and Sag supposed to generate
readings like that, given only a referential/quantificational
ambiguity and no relative scope relations? As Kripke put the point,
“no two-fold distinction can replace Russell’s notion of
scope.” While this tells against referential analysis of
indefinites, it opens a can of worms for the other approaches as well;
for example, if indefinite descriptions are ordinary quantified
expressions, then why do they have such extraordinary island-escaping
properties (or at least appear to)?
One attractive possibility that has emerged from the literature in
Discourse Representation Theory—in particular in work by Heim
(1982), Kamp (1984), Deising (1992), Kamp and Reyle (1993)—has
been that the appearance of a determiner in an indefinite description
is chimeral—‘a man’ in fact comes to an expression
containing a predicate and a free variable, as in
‘man x’. This free variable might then be picked up by
some sort of discourse operator as discussed in the previous
section.
Accordingly, a sentence like (1) might have a logical form, or
better, a discourse representation structure akin to (1*) (abstracting
from details).
This general strategy gives us some explanation for why indefinites
sometimes appear to have island escaping properties as in cases like
conditionals. The answer is that they don’t escape at all, but are
free variables that are bound by (or existentially closed by)
operators outside of the island. This describes the DRT strategy only
in the most general of terms, but we can already see that the
questions that plague the Russellian story have their reflex here as
well. Everyone now recognizes that intermediate scope is a possibility
in cases like (30) and (31), but the question is just what mechanisms
make it possible?  The Russellian has to opt for operators with
unusual island escaping properties. What is the DRT theorist to
do?
One option, explored by Reinhart (1996), Kratzer (1995),
and Winter (1997), employs the device of choice functions.
As Winter informally characterizes the doctrine, the idea is
as follows.
(A1) Indefinites lack quantificational force
of their own
(A2) An indefinite NP in an argument
position, however, ends up denoting an individual, because the
semantics involves a free function variable that assigns an individual
to the restriction predicate.
(A3) This function variable is existentially
closed, together with the restriction that it is a choice function: a
function that chooses a member from any non-empty predicate it
gets.
How does this help in the case of intermediate scope? For Reinhart
(1996), choice functions by themselves cannot account for
the extant phenomena (in particular cases of intermediate
scope), so the theory must be supplemented with standard quantifier
raising accounts as well. Winter (1997) has offered a more general
account employing choice functions (also extending the account to
plural indefinites) that purport to make do without the additional
resource of quantifier raising.
The interesting conceptual issue that arises, whether we opt for
standard DRT accounts or such accounts supplemented with choice
functions, is whether this departs from the Russellian analysis of
indefinite descriptions in important ways. In one respect, of course,
the accounts are very different—Russell takes indefinite
descriptions to be existential quantifiers, while the DRT accounts take
them to be akin to free variables. On the other hand, once the free
variables are interpreted the effect comes to very much the same thing:
in both cases the accounts are fundamentally quantificational.
Not everyone has seen DRT theory and choice functions in this
light. Kratzer (1995) maintained that the choice function
provided something like a referential interpretation of an indefinite,
here understood as a “pointing gesture within the mind of the
speaker,” but as Winter points out this raises some difficult
methodological issues, and in the view of Ludlow and Neale (1991) this
amounts to a conflation of the notions of referentiality and
specificity, and a further confusion about the nature of specificity.
On their view, using an expression with a particular individual in mind
is not the same thing as referring to that individual. For example,
according to Ludlow and Neale, there are a number of possible uses to
which we can put indefinite descriptions, including referential uses,
specific uses, definite uses, and purely existential uses. To
understand this distinction, consider the following cases.
Referential use. A teacher announces the following to the
class, with a single red haired student in the front row. “I’m
not going to name names, but I have good reason to believe that red
haired student in the front row cheated on yesterday’s exam.” In
this case the teacher has singular grounds for the utterance, and is
communicating directly to the audience the identity of the individual
that serves as the grounds for the utterance.
Specific use. In this case the teacher has singular
grounds, and wishes to communicate that fact to the audience, but does
not wish to communicate the identity of the cheater to the class.
“I’m sorry to announce that yesterday I witnessed a student
cheating on the exam.”
Definite use: In this case the teacher knows that there
must have been a unique cheater, but does not know the identity of the
cheater and hence does not have singular grounds for the utterance and
accordingly is not in a position to communicate the identity of the
cheater except under extraordinary circumstances. “I have
statistical evidence that a student cheated on the exam. Fortunately
there only appears to be one cheater.”
Purely quantificational use: In this instance not only does
the teacher fail to know the identity of the cheater, but also fails to
know whether or not there was a unique cheater (perhaps there were
several). “I have evidence that a student cheated on the exam.
The answer sheet was stolen from my office. Hopefully, there was only
one student involved. We will know more pending an
investigation.”
According to Ludlow and Neale, it is implausible to think that all
of these uses can be chalked up to semantic facts. In each case, the
proposition expressed is argued to be that which would be expressed if
the indefinite determiner were replaced by the existential
quantifier. The different uses of descriptions then stem from the
application of Gricean principles of conversational implicature to
what was literally said.
So far we have discussed singular definite and indefinite
descriptions (and the possibility that names are descriptions) but as
it turns out these types of descriptions are probably not the most
commonly occurring descriptions in English. Ultimately we also want to
take into account plural descriptions (as in ‘the dogs are
barking’), mass noun descriptions (as in ‘the water is
cold’), and generics (as in ‘the dog is a loyal
friend’). The question is whether each of these constructions
must be treated in a different way, or whether it is possible to unify
their treatment with the analysis of definite descriptions discussed
above. Sharvy (1980) suggested that a unified treatment is indeed
possible (this is also a possibility that Chomsky (1975) saw).
Sharvy’s idea was that we could generalize Russell’s theory of
descriptions by ‘the F (or Fs) is
(are) G’ to be equivalent to the following,
where F can be either a singular count noun (like
‘dog’), a plural count noun (like ‘dogs’) or a
mass noun (like ‘water’), and the symbol ‘≤’
indicates a parthood relation. Following Brogaard (2007) we can take
this as saying ‘an F that every F is part of satisfies
“G”’. It follows then, that a definite
description ‘the F’ (‘the Fs’) denotes the
maximal sum or mass in the extension of F. So, for example, when we
utter ‘The dogs’ we are denoting the maximal set of dogs in
the domain of discourse. When we utter ‘the water’, we are
denoting the maximal mass of water in the discourse. In the case of
singular definite descriptions (like ‘the dog’) we are
still denoting the maximal set of dogs in the domain of discourse
(since in this case there is only one dog). In effect, singular
definite descriptions are just special cases
of Sharvy’s generalized theory of descriptions.
Fara (2001) argued that the same strategy can be extended to
generics as well.
If natural kinds like species and sub-species can bear the parthood
relation to one another, then one can extend the Sharvy parthood
operator to these cases as well. I don’t mean to suggest that Sharvy’s
analysis of these constructions has no competitors, but the fact that
he was able to give a unified treatment of these constructions
suggests that competitors will have to do the same. It really does
seem as though singular, plural, mass, and generic descriptions are
not so different in kind. A unified Russellian treatment of the
constructions seems possible. In section 7 we will return to the
question of whether the maximality claim should be part of the
analysis or whether it represents a weakness in the analysis.
 The theory of descriptions has encountered its fair share of
criticism. This criticism has ranged from contentions that Russell
simply got the truth conditions wrong in important cases to nagging
worries about the details of the proposal—in particular worries
relating to the nature of the descriptive content. As we will see,
none of these concerns have been completely ameliorated.
Strawson (1950) objected that Russell’s theory is simply incorrect
about the truth conditions of sentences like ‘The present king
of France is bald’. According to Russell’s analysis, this
sentence is false (since it contains an existence claim to the effect
that there is a present king of France), but according to Strawson,
this does not conform to our intuitions about the truth of an
utterance of that sentence. In Strawson’s view, an utterance of the
sentence in a world where there is no present king of France is
neither true nor false; perhaps the sentence has a truth value gap, or
perhaps it fails to express a determinate proposition (Strawson
vacillated on this), but either way it does not appear to be
false. Strawson held that this fact supported a referential
interpretation of expressions like ‘The present king of
France’.
If there is no present king of France, then an utterance containing
such an expression is somehow defective. It is as if I looked into my
desk drawer, not allowing you to see what I was looking at, and said
‘that is a fine green one.’ Strawson held that utterances
like these do not entail the existence of a fine green one or the
present King of France, but rather presuppose their
existence. If the expressions fail to refer, then there is a
presupposition failure and the utterance fails to have a determinate
truth value. (Notice that this sort of failure is not supposed to
undermine the meaningfulness of the sentences that we utter; for
Strawson, sentences are meaningful in and of themselves, independently
of the utterance situation. Utterances of meaningful sentences may be
true or false or, if here is a presupposition failure, they may be
neither.)
For his part, Russell (1957) argued that, despite Strawson’s
protestations, the sentence was in fact false:
Does this whole debate come down to a case of intuition swapping?
Thomason (1990; 327) and Soames (1976; 169) seemed to think so, and
Strawson himself (1964) also came to doubt whether the entailment
vs. presupposition debate could be settled by “brisk little
formal argument[s]”. However, Neale (1990) maintained that the
matter could be settled in Russell’s favor, and supported the claim by
collecting a number of previously observed cases in which intuitions
about truth conditions clearly do not support Strawson’s view. For
example, ‘My mother is dating the present king of France’
seems clearly false, as does ‘The present king of France cleans
my swimming pool’, and he concluded that these are clearly cases
where the Strawsonian truth conditions have gone awry.
But truth value judgments for cases like this are extremely
sensitive. Lasersohn (1993), von Fintel (2004), Yablo (2006, 2009) and
Schoubye (2009, 2011) have collected a number of examples where subtle
changes to the example give rise to different judgments of truth
value. Consider the following minimal pairs, where the examples marked
with ‘#’ indicate ambivalence about assigning a truth
value, and ‘F’ indicates it is more plausible to assign a
value of falsehood.
Von Fintel and Yablo offer an explanation for these minimal pairs
that draws upon the nature of belief revision. Their idea is that
the false presupposition is added to the evaluator’s set of
beliefs and is tested against that set of beliefs. So, if we test
‘The king of France read Anna Karenina’ against a typical
set of beliefs, there is no clash with existing beliefs. But if
we test ‘The king of France wrote Anna Karenina’
against this set of beliefs, we get a clash. These are the cases
where we judge the sentence false.
Schoubye (2009, 2011) has argued that the von Fintel/Yablo story
fails in key places, in particular with cases where there is no
previously existing conflicting belief. We typically believe that
Anna Karenina was written by Tolstoy, who was not and is not
the king of France, but do we really have a belief in which the king of
France was not a bald Nazi? Where would that belief come
from? A general belief that royals can’t be Nazis? 
That seems implausible.
More significantly, Schoubye observes that with some modest
contextual framing the truth value judgments on these examples can
flip. In other words, we don’t even need to change the
example sentences. Suppose, for example, that someone says that
all the royalty at a party are standing and someone utters ‘The present
king of France is sitting in a chair’. Here Schoubye
suggests that our truth value judgments firm up and flip from being
indeterminate to being clear judgments of falsity.
Schoubye’s positive proposal is that the divergent judgments about
truth conditions key off of whether a speaker’s utterance can be
interpreted as being cooperative. Here Schoubye draws on Robert’s
(1998, 2004) idea of the “topic under discussion.” In the
example just given, where we are talking about who is sitting at a
particular party, someone who utters (35a) is being an uncooperative
discourse partner, in that they are not addressing the topic under
discussion.
The literature on presuppositional accounts of definite
descriptions has become vast, although not entirely uniform in its
criticism of Russellian doctrine.  Earlier, we noted that on Russell’s
view definite descriptions pack within them an existence claim, a
uniqueness claim, and a maximality claim.  Different presuppositional
accounts have targeted different parts of this package, arguing that
the relevant component is not entailed but is presupposed.
For example, begining with Strawson and the work cited above, we
have numerous writers arguing that the existence claim is
presupposed. The idea that uniqueness is presupposed is suggested in
work by Heim (1991), von Fintel (2004), Elbourne (2005, 2013),
Rothschild (2007), and Schoubye (2013).  It is possible to understand
Cooper (1983), Heim (1983), Chemla (2009), Schlenker (2008, 2009) and
Romoli (2015) as holding that the maximality component is presupposed.
Combinations are possible. The idea that both the existence claim and
the uniqueness claim is presupposed can be attributed to Abbott
(2008), Hawthorne and Manley (2012) and Schoubye (2013), among
others.
Donnellan (1966) observed that there is a sense in which Strawson and
Russell are both right (and both wrong) about the proper analysis of
descriptions. He argued that definite descriptions can be used in (at
least) two different ways. On a so-called attributive use, a sentence
of the form ‘The F is G’ is used to express
a proposition equivalent to ‘Whatever is uniquely F is
G’. For example, on seeing murder victim Smith’s badly
mutilated corpse, Detective Brown might say “The murderer of
Smith is insane” thereby communicating the thought that some
unique individual murdered Smith and that whoever that individual is,
he/she is insane. Alternatively, on a referential use, a sentence of
the form ‘The F is G’ is used to pick out a
specific individual, x, and say of x that x is
G. For example, suppose Jones is on trial for Smith’s murder
and is behaving quite strangely at the defense table. I point at Jones
and say, “The murderer of Smith is insane”, thereby
communicating the thought that Jones is insane (whether or not Jones
is the actual murderer).
 Donnellan suggested that Russell’s quantificational account of
definite descriptions might capture attributive uses, but that it does
not work for referential uses. In effect, we might take Donnellan as
saying that in some cases descriptions are Russellian and in some
cases they are Strawsonian. Perhaps we could even say that the
definite determiner ‘the’ is ambiguous between these two
cases (it is not clear whether Donnellan himself intended to endorse a
lexical ambiguity of this sort).
Kripke (1977) responded to Donnellan by arguing that the Russellian
account of definite descriptions could, by itself, account for both
referential and attributive uses; the difference between the two cases
could be entirely a matter of pragmatics. Here is the idea: Grice
showed us that there is an important distinction to be made between
what one literally says by an utterance and what one intends to
communicate (what one means) by that utterance. To take a famous
example of Grice’s, I might write a letter of recommendation for a
student saying that he is very punctual and has excellent
handwriting. Now what I have said is something about the student’s
punctuality and handwriting, but what I meant was that this is a very
weak student.
In a similar vein, we could say that when I use a description
referentially—say in Donnellan’s courtroom case—I am
literally making a general claim to the effect that there is a
murderer of Smith and that he is insane, but what I mean by that
utterance is that Jones is insane. That is, when I say ‘The
murderer of Smith insane’ what I literally say is that exactly
one person, x, is such that x murdered Smith and
x is insane, but in that context I would succeed in
communicating the singular proposition (about Jones) that Jones is
insane. Kripke gave several reasons for thinking that this Gricean
solution was preferable to an ambiguity thesis. One reason was a
general methodological point that one should not introduce ambiguities
blithely—doing so is a kind of philosophical cheat.
 Also, Kripke observed that these two uses of definite descriptions
are really just subspecies of the general distinction between what is
meant (speaker’s reference in Kripke’s terminology) and what is
literally said (semantic reference) and not at all unique to
descriptions. Kripke noted that the distinction even applies to uses
of proper names. So, for example, consider the case where I see a man
in the distance raking leaves. I take the man to be Jones but it is
actually Johnson. I say ‘Jones is really working up a sweat
today’. Now what I have literally said is that Jones is working
up a sweat, but what I have communicated (what I meant) is something
about Johnson. Clearly no one would argue that the name
‘Jones’ is ambiguous between referring to Jones and
referring to Johnson, so why opt for an ambiguity thesis when
descriptions are involved? It appears to be exactly the same
phenomenon.
 One of the advantages of employing the Gricean distinction between
the proposition literally communicated and the proposition meant is
that it offers an account for our being ambivalent about Donnellan’s
(1966) misdescription cases. In the courtroom case discussed above, I
might say “Smith’s murderer is insane,” and still say
something true even if the crazy man at the defense table is entirely
innocent of the charges and the actual murderer, who is miles from the
courtroom, is quite sane. At the same time there is some pull to say
that in such a case one is saying something false too. We can say that
this is a case where what we literally said was false, but that what
we intended to communicate—the proposition meant—was
true. The two-level theory thus accounts for our conflicting
intuitions.
 Similarly, Hornsby (1977) gave the case of my observing the man
ranting at the defense table and (me) saying, “The murderer of
Smith is insane” not realizing that the man at the table is both
innocent and quite sane, while the actual murderer is at large and
quite insane. Again we are ambivalent about the truth of what I say,
and as Neale (1990; 91–93) observed, the distinction between the
proposition literally expressed and the proposition meant allows us to
understand why. In this case, the proposition literally expressed is
true, but what I intend to communicate is mistaken.
Unfortunately, there are cases where the two-stage theory doesn’t
appear to be sufficient. For example, there remains a difficulty that
Ludlow and Segal (2004) have called the residue of the problem of
misdescription. Consider a case where we are at the crime scene,
and unbeknownst to Detective Brown there is not one murderer but
several—suppose there were several perpetrators and they were
all mad members of an evil cult. When Brown utters the sentence
‘The murderer of Smith is insane’ has he said something
true or false? Again we are in two minds about the matter but this
time the distinction between what is literally said and what is meant
is no help.
 Another persistent problem for the classical Russellian theory of
descriptions has been the charge that it fails to account for the
problem of “incomplete descriptions” (for discussion see
Donnellan (1968), Hornsby (1977), Devitt (1981, chapter 2; 2004),
Wettstein (1981), Recanati (1986), Salmon (1982), Soames (1986), Neale
(1990; chapter 2), and Reimer (1992)). In addition, Kripke (1977),
while defending Russell’s theory of description against the problem of
misdescription, allows that the argument from incomplete descriptions
might be enough of a problem to force us to accept referential
interpretations of descriptions. The worry, initially raised in
Strawson (1950), is that if I say ‘the table is covered with
books’, I do not mean to be suggesting that there is only one
table in the world. Unfortunately, that seems to be precisely what the
Russellian theory of descriptions is committed to. (Recall that on the
Russellian analysis my utterance is shorthand for ‘there is a
table and only one table and every table is covered with
books’.)
 One strategy for dealing with this problem is that the context may
provide us the means to flesh out the description. For example,
perhaps descriptions can be fleshed out appropriately if we allow
implicit spatiotemporal locating expressions to be inserted into the
description. The suggestion is that when we speak of the table we are
implicitly specifying a spatial coordinate—in effect, we are
saying ‘the table over there’. One problem with strategies
of this nature is that there fails to be a principled basis (in the
terminology of Devitt and Sterelny (1999)) for determining what the
content of these descriptions is to be. Is it to be a description that
the speaker has in mind? Is this description really sufficient to
uniquely identify the object in question? Is it always clear that the
speaker has a description in mind?
 Neale (1990) has argued that whatever we may want to say about the
problem of incompleteness, it is not very effective as an argument for
the referential analysis of descriptions. For example, at the crime
scene Detective Brown may simply utter ‘The murderer is
insane’ failing to specify exactly which murderer he is talking
about (is it the murderer of Smith or Jones or …?). But by
hypothesis this case is a canonical example of an attributive use of a
definite description. No reference is possible, so how can appeal to
reference bail us out? How can any of this be an argument for definite
descriptions being semantically referential?
 

Even stronger, it appears that there are numerous examples
involving quantified expressions that suffer the same fate as
incomplete descriptions. I can say ‘Everyone came to the
party’, not intending to mean everyone in the world. Or I might
say, as Yogi Berra once did, ‘Nobody goes there anymore, it’s
too crowded’. It certainly appears that what is going on in
these cases is similar to the cases of incomplete definite
descriptions and that there should be a single strategy for accounting
for these different cases of “incompleteness.”
Devitt (2004, 2007) and Reimer (1998) have argued that these cases are
genuinely different in kind. Their idea is that since definite
descriptions are regularly used to express singular thoughts, it
stands to reason that the standard meaning of the definite description
must be referential. Schoubye (2011, ch. 3) has responded to this claim arguing that it
rests on mistaken assumptions about semantic processing and that in
any case the line of reasoning would generalize so as to force a
referential interpretation of most (possibly all) the other
determiners (e.g. ‘every’ and ‘no’).
 Alternatively, some writers have argued that that the problem of
incomplete definite descriptions can be accounted for if we pursue an
appropriate theory of quantifier domain restriction. Stanley and
Szabó (2000), for example, take this approach, suggesting that
context can restrict the domain of quantification. On their proposal,
context can even shift within a sentence, allowing us to make sense of
an utterance like ‘The dogs barked at the dogs’, where I
mean to say that one group of dogs barked while the other group
perhaps suffered in silence. (Their proposal is applicable to all
quantified expressions; not just the theory of descriptions.  See Bach
(2000), Neale (2000b), and Lepore (2004) for a more general dicussion
of the proposal.)
It is important to note (following Szabó (2000) and Ludlow and Segal
(2004) that even with a fully functional account of quantifier domain
restriction there is a lingering problem here too. Let’s call it the
residue of the incompleteness problem. Consider cases like (38)
On the domain restriction proposal, the first use of ‘the book’ cannot have the
same domain of quantification as the second use, since that would put
two books in the domain of quantification and it would mean that both
descriptions in the sentence are incomplete. But one wonders how legitimate
a domain-shift analysis is here. Is there really a shift in the domain
of quantification between the first utterance of ‘the book’
and the second utterance of that noun phrase? What would count as
independent evidence either for, or against, a domain-shift taking
place?
As noted in the beginning of this article, the Russellian account of
descriptions not only offers a quantificational as opposed to a
referential account of descriptions, but it packs three different
claims into the analysis of descriptions: an existence claim,
a uniqueness claim, and a maximality claim. As we
will see, all of these claims can be put under pressure, and all three
arguably collapse under that pressure. Let’s begin by examining the
uniqueness claim.
 Given the Gricean resources discussed above, one might speculate
that the distinction between definite and indefinite descriptions can
be collapsed—that is, perhaps ‘the’ and
‘a’ have the same literal meaning and the only relevant
distinction between them is pragmatic.
The motivation for this idea would be as follows. Very few natural
languages have what we would recognize as definite and indefinite
descriptions. In most Asian and Slavic languages, for example,
‘the man’ and ‘a man’ would both be expressed
in the same way—in the determiner-free equivalent of
‘man’. Perhaps it is just our infatuation with surface
grammatical form that leads us to think that English or Italian really
has two different logical elements corresponding to surface forms
‘the’ and ‘a’. Perhaps there is a single
logical element (or perhaps just a free variable) with different
pragmatic application conditions. That is, perhaps ‘the’
and ‘a’ have the same literal meaning—i.e., for both
‘An F is G’ and ‘The F is
G’ the literal semantics is exhausted by the
interpretation that [∃x: Fx](Gx) receives
in a standard truth-conditional semantics. A number of linguists and
philosophers have entertained this idea in recent years, including
Kempson (1975), Breheney (1999), Szabó (2000), Zvolensky (1997),
Ludlow and Segal (2003) and a version of the idea is at least
considered in Heim (1982) and Kamp and Reyle (1993).
 Obviously there are important differences between our application
of the terms ‘the’ and ‘a’, but it does not
follow that these differences in application are part of their
semantical content. Indeed, many synonyms customarily are put to
different uses. Take, for example, Grice (1961, 1975) on the
distinction between ‘but’ and ‘and’. On
Grice’s story ‘but’ and ‘and’ literally mean
the same thing, but different “conventional implicatures”
are associated with them; ‘but’ implicates a sense of
contrast between the conjuncts.
Ludlow and Segal (2004) offer a similar story about ‘a’
and ‘the’. Following a standard assumption in traditional
grammar (see Christophersen 1929), they argue that
‘the’ signals that the object under discussion is given in
the conversational context. Noun phrases fronted by the determiner
‘a’ signal that they involve new information. The idea
advanced by Ludlow and Segal, however, is that this slender bit of
information, combined with Gricean principles, is sufficient to
generate the uniqueness implication that is carried by a definite
description. That is, an existential claim that there is an F
that is G, plus a signal that this is given information, is often
enough to allow us to implicate that there is unique F that is
G.
 Armed with this idea, let’s return to the some of the loose
threads that we left hanging in section 4 above—the residue of
the misdescription problem and the residue of the incompleteness
problem. As we will see, the unified treatment of definite and
indefinite descriptions may provide us an entering wedge for cracking
open these puzzles. Let’s look at the misdescription case first.
Recall the case in which Detective Brown says ‘the murderer of
Smith is insane’, incorrectly believing that there was one
murderer when in fact the crime was committed by a ghoulish cult of
insane individuals. There is a sense in which Brown spoke falsely, but
there is also clearly some pull for us to say that what he said was
true. As we saw in section 4, the distinction between the proposition
literally expressed and the proposition meant was not sufficient to
account for this ambivalence on our part. But according to Ludlow and
Segal (2004), if we combine this pragmatic distinction with the unified
analysis of definite and indefinite descriptions there is something we
can say about this last bit of residue.
According to the unified analysis of descriptions, what Detective
Brown literally expresses is not the idea that there was a unique
murderer of Smith who is insane. To the contrary, he literally
expresses the proposition that there is at least one murderer of Smith
who is insane. By applying Gricean principles in this context
we have made out that Brown intends to say that there is a unique
murderer of Smith and that he is insane. We are
pulled in two directions by this case because what Brown has said
is literally true but what he intended to communicate was, strictly
speaking, false.
In section 5.3 we considered cases like (38), repeated here, which did not seem to
yield in a natural way to the device of quantifier domain
restriction.
 

But as Szabó (2000) and Ludlow and Segal (2003) have
argued, if we combine quantifier domain restriction with the unified
analysis of descriptions, the problem seems more amenable to solution.
The idea is the following: What one literally expresses in (38) is
that the hearer should put a book on a book. Pragmatics helps us to
make out that one book in particular is being spoken of, which book
that is, and where it is to be moved.
Although a unified approach is attractive, it has come under
criticism from Abbott (2003, 2008), Horn (2006) and Abbott and Horn (2011). 
For example, Abbott (2008) argues that the 
pragmatic story (in which the uniqueness of some descriptions is
conversationally implicated) fails because it predicts that the
uniqueness implication should be cancellable, but according to Abbott,
it is not. (Here we use the hash symbol to indicate a failed implicature cancellation.)
One response to this line of argument is that it frontloads our
assumptions about written works having single authors.  Is (40) any
better?
This suggests that the uniqueness is not implicated by
‘the’, but is rather built into the meaning of
‘authored’. Strictly speaking, Russell isn’t an author,
but a co-author.  Contrast both with the following, which seems
entirely natural.
This also raises the question of how far one can press the case
based on examples like (39). Should we also reject
Kripke’s pragmatic analysis of referential descriptions because
of the infelicity of examples like (42)?
Abbott and Horn have suggested that the use of stress in descriptions
highlights the uniqueness implications of the utterance. In
particular, they claim that in the case of focal stress on the
definite, “only uniqueness is at issue with
focused the, never familiarity.”
Consider the following examples from Horn (2006).
(43) Graham claims that cancer selection is not
a but the driving
force in the emergence of complex animal life.
(44)  an idea that the EU is not
A but THE form of
regional integration.
(45) Yet time and again, North Korea is cited as not only
“a” but “the” major threat to US
security.
(46) So Lufthansa is a—or even the—German
airline.
Setting aside the question of whether these examples offer a case
against familiarity, they are not, by themselves, evidence for
uniqueness. For example, if (46) is asserting that there is a single
unique German airline, it is clearly false, as there are many other
German airlines, including Germanwings, Air Berlin, Germania, Hahn
Air, and Air Hamburg.  Abbot (1999, 2008) recognizes that cases like
this are false, but argues that what is going on is that the speakers
are engaged in hyperbole.  That is, in (46) the speaker is literally
saying there is only one German airline and we recognize this as an
intentional falsehood, and then infer that the speaker means to
communicate the airline is special in some way.  The alternative, of
course, is to hold that the stressed definite determiner is indicating
familiarity or salience.
Uniqueness accounts also must account for cases in which uniqueness
appears to vanish altogether. Consider (47).
 In a similar vein it is hard to overlook the fact that possessives
in languages like Italian typically deploy definite determiners
(‘la mia machina’) without forcing the reading that I own
only one car.
Cases of this nature have of course been familiar for some time, but
perhaps it has been less on the radar that the uniqueness proposal
creates foundational problems for language acquisition theory. It is
something of a basic working hypothesis of acquisition theory that
semantical components of language are acquired very early and that
pragmatic components are acquired much later (see Chien and Wexler
(1990), Thornton and Wexler (2000)). This is not surprising, given
that pragmatics can involve sophisticated real world
reasoning. However, children’s grasp of definite and indefinite
descriptions come late in the acquisition process (around age 9; see
Karmiloff-Smith 1979 and Warden 1976)), prompting Wexler (2011),
working on hypothesis that descriptions are Russellian, to question
the working hypothesis that semantics is fixed early. But an
alternative explanation is that uniqueness is a pragmatic phenomenon,
thus saving the working hypothesis. In other words, a basic working
hypothesis of acquisition theory is preserved if we reject the
Russellian story about the distinction between definite and indefinite
determiners.
So far we have been talking about the unified theory in the context
of rejecting the uniqueness component of Russell’s analysis. But there
are also the existence component and the maximality component to
consider. Can these also be rejected?
A number of authors have observed that the traditional Russellian
analysis of definite descriptions gets us into trouble when we embed
descriptions into certain environments like propositional attitudes,
conditionals, and questions (see Heim (1991) Elbourne (2005, 2010,
2013, forthcoming), Neale (2005), Rothschild (2007), Hawthorne and
Manley (2012) and Schoubye (2011, 2013)). To illustrate the problem,
consider the following:
(48)  John wants the ghost in the attic to stop making so much
noise.
(49) John wants that there be exactly one ghost in the attic and
that it stop making so much noise.
On the standard Russellian analysis, we get something like a claim
that John wants that there be a unique ghost in his attic and that it
stop making so much noise. Let’s set aside the uniqueness
claim for the moment and just focus on the existence claim; is it
really the case that John wants there to be a ghost in the attic at
all? Notice that it won’t do to try and extract the
existence claim from the propositional attitude environment, for then
we get an actual existence claim, which is definitely not what we
want.
As Rothchild (2007) observes, a similar argument can be made for
descriptions embedded in questions (here assuming, as did Russell,
that possessives are to be analyzed as definite descriptions):
(50)  Is my child making too much noise?
(51) Is it the case that I have exactly one child and that it is making too much noise?
Clearly, the question being put forth in (50) is not concerned with
finding out whether or not the questioner has a child.  Responding by
saying ‘yes you have a child’ would not be a partial
answer to the question. 
The phenomenon also seems to apply to modal adverbs.  Consider the
case where I do not know if my upstairs neighbors have a child, but I
speculate that they do and that it is making noise.  It would be odd
for me to offer up an utterance of (52), even though (53) would be
fine.
(52) It is possible that the child of my upstairs neighbors is
making noise.
(53) It is possible that there is exactly one child of my upstairs
neighbors and it is making noise.
(54) It is necessary that my identical twin has my DNA.
(55) It is necessary that there is exactly one identical twin of me
and that it have my DNA.
Elbourne (forthcoming) believes that the problem can even be
constructed in cases that are extensional if we quantify into the
description.  Consider the following.
(56) No boy sold the dog he bought.
(57) No boy bought exactly one dog and sold it.
There are circumstances in which the Russellian gloss in (57) is true,
but (56) is not true.  For example, the case in which no boys bought
any dogs.
Schoubye’s (2011) solution to all these cases bears notice.  He argues
that the problem can be avoided if we distinguish between the sentence
itself, the presupposition, and what is asserted. So, for example, for
a sentence like ‘The F is
G’ we have the following:
So, as in the Ludlow and Segal analysis, the uniqueness claim is not
part of what is asserted. On Schoubye’s proposal, uniqueness is not
implicated, but is presupposed. But notice also that in this case the
existence claim is also not part of what is asserted. What is asserted
is simply an open sentence! In some cases, the open sentence will be
existentially closed, but in cases like ‘John wants the ghost in
the attic to be quiet’ there is no existential closure. Of
course it is possible to ask what it means to assert an open sentence,
but notice that again we are converging on a view in which the
determiners fall out, leaving behind a free variable.
 We’ve already put the uniqueness and existence claims of
descriptions under pressure. Can we do the same with the maximality
claim? Here it is difficult to find evidence one way or the other for
the case of singular definite descriptions, but earlier we saw that
the theory could be generalized à la Sharvy,
to plural descriptions, and in the plural case we could actually probe
the question of whether maximality holds.
Recall from section 4.4 that on the Sharvy (1980) analysis of
descriptions we could generalize Russell’s theory of descriptions to
plurals by arguing that ‘the F (or Fs) is (are)
G’ is equivalent to the following,
(again, where F can be either a singular count noun (like
‘dog’), a plural count noun (like ‘dogs’) or a
mass noun (like ‘water’), and the symbol ‘≤’
indicates a parthood relation.)
Of interest to us at the moment is the fact that this analysis encodes
the maximality claim—it says that all the Fs are Gs. But
is this analysis right? Arguably not. If one says the American people
are disappointed in Trump, it doesn’t mean that all of them are. If my
neighbor has 101 Dalmatians, I might complain ‘the dogs are
barking again’, even if only some of them are barking (and it
doesn’t seem plausible to say that I am restricting the domain of
discourse to just the 20 or so dogs that are barking). Likewise for
definite mass terms; if I say that the bread in the breadbox is moldy
I am not saying that the bread is moldy through and through—I’m
saying that some of it is. And if I say that ‘the dog is a loyal
animal’ I am not saying that all subspecies of dogs are
loyal. Arguably the maximality condition in Sharvy’s generalized
theory of descriptions should be dropped altogether. (But see Brogaard
(2007) and Bach (2004) for defenses of maximality.)
It seems that all three components of Russell’s analysis face serious
challenges. At this point, is there anything left to salvage? 
At the beginning of this article I noted that some uses of the
expressions ‘an F’ and ‘the F’
are argued to be predicational, rather than quantificational. So, for
example, consider the following cases.
(60) John is a lawyer.
(61) John is the mayor of Pittsburgh.
It is not unusual to think of ‘is a lawyer’ and
‘is the mayor of Pittsburgh’ as predicates. In the case of
(60), we intuitively are not saying that there is a lawyer such that
John is identical to that lawyer. Indeed, as Williams (1983) observed,
this appearance is even more pronounced if we consider cases like
(62).
(62) does not seem to have the meaning that there is a
lawyer such that John is not identical to that lawyer. It is more
natural to take an utterance of (62) as denying that John has a certain
property.
If this is right, then the copula ‘is’ is really just
the ‘is’ of predication and semantically dispensable
(significantly, it routinely does not appear in many other languages
unless it is needed to carry tense or other inflectional information).
Likewise, we might say that the indefinite article ‘a’ is
semantically inert as well—a mere “grace note” in
Higginbotham’s (1987) terminology. In this vein, one widely held view,
due to Kamp (1981) and Heim (1982), is that we could regard indefinite
descriptions as expressions containing free variables which are bound
by adverbs of quantification (in the sense of Lewis (1975)) interpreted
as existentially quantified by the model theory, or perhaps bound by
implicit existential closure operators (Diesing 1992).
For linguists it is now standard to think of indefinite descriptions
following the copula as always being predicational, and it is a
widespread belief that definite descriptions following the copula are
often predicational. Philosophers have also been attracted to this
view. See, for example, Geach (1962; section 39), Wiggins
(1965, 42 ff.), Kim (1970; 211 ff.), Wilson (1978), Smiley (1981) and
Higginbotham (1987) among others). Does it follow that we must admit
two different kinds of descriptions (quantificational and
predicational)? We saw that singular, plural, mass, and generic
descriptions can be unified; can we perform the same unification trick
here?
Fara (2001) pursued the possibility that all uses of definite
descriptions are predicational—even descriptions in subject
position. The idea is that if I say ‘The present King of France
is bald’, I am saying something like the following:
some x is such that x is the unique present king of
France and x is bald. The interesting riff here is the notion
that the uniqueness condition is built into the predicate. Extending
the Sharvy (1980) analysis of plural descriptions, we get the
following, where F is the set of all Fs, or the mass of
all substance that is F (the vertical strokes before ad after
and after the expression indicate that we are talking about the
semantic value, or meaning, of the bordered expression):
 But again we might consider collapsing the distinction between
definite and indefinite descriptions here, and say that there is a
single rule that interprets all descriptions—definite,
indefinite, singular, plural, mass, or generic—as
predicates. When we supplement this with the rejection of the
uniqueness/maximality clause we get this result:
If this is right then the determiners ‘a’ and
‘the’ are both “grace notes” not just in
special positions, but across the board.
What then are we to say about the determiners ‘the’ and
‘a’? Determiners are rare in the world’s languages and are
not universally employed in many Indo-European languages (for example
they are not found in Slavic languages, with the exception of southern
Slavic languages like Bulgarian). And (as we saw above) even in
languages that deploy determiners, it is not clear that the
determiners are behaving as quantificational operators. 
One interesting fact to observe here, is that as noted by Hewson
(1972; 66–67) languages with articles and languages with robust
case morphology are typically in complementary distribution.  Indeed,
as languages evolve, their robust inflectional system gives way to
structure dependent language (Leiss (2000)).  It is when the case
system weakens that determiners begin to appear––an idea
that is offered in Abraham (1997:29), Philippi (1997:63–64),
Selig (1992), Ivančev 1988:105, and (Mayer 1988: 112).  As Mladenova
(2007) puts it, “the morphology of the definite article makes it
possible to perpetuate case distinctions long after they have been
obliterated elsewhere.” (But see also Mladenova for subtleties
in applying this idea to Bulgarian.)  Could it be then that
determiners serve the purpose of case marking?  
This question calls for an ambitious empirical research program,
but we can already see hints of an analysis. For example, it is
plausible to think that one central function of the definite
determiner is to provide genitive case when needed.  In some cases
this would yield a possessive meaning. Consider the following
examples.
(64)  The car went in the ditch.
(65)  I was such a terrible bowler that the ball went in the
gutter.
(66)  The car needs gas.
(67)  The doctor told me to stop eating red meat.
It is easy to hear all of these examples as involving an implicit
possessive operator.
(64′)  The car went in the road’s
ditch.
(65′)  I was such a terrible bowler that my ball
went in my lane’s gutter.
(66′)  Our car needs gas.
(67′)  My doctor told me to stop eating red
meat.
Example (65) is particularly instructive in this regard. If I am an
exceptionally terrible bowler I might toss the ball into the gutter of
someone else’s lane. In this case I might be more apt to say
“The ball went in a gutter”; saying that it went
in the gutter doesn’t quite seem to do justice to my failure as a
bowler. That is because when I say the ball went in the
gutter it suggests that it at least ended up in my
gutter.
The claim, however, is not that the definite determiner is
functioning as a possessive. The hypothesis is that it is functioning
as a multi-purpose case marker, and when it is marking for genitive
case, possessive meaning is one possible outcome.  But genitive case
can be put to other uses. For example, species names are routinely
given in the genitive case in Latin, and indeed it is a prescriptive
rule about the coining of a new species name that it be placed in
genitive case.  The underlying deep motivation is presumably that
species are part of a genus, so that when one expresses a species name
it is shorthand for a more complete description.  So, for example,
when we say ‘The tiger’, we are offering up an abbreviation of
something like ‘tiger, species of genus panthera’ (or more accurately,
‘panthera tigris, of genus panther’).  One might here argue that this
is a partitive construction, but more explicit possessive
constructions are possible: ‘species panthera tigris, belonging to the
genus panthera’.
This genitive case analysis perhaps sheds light on what is going on in
the array of facts offered by Abbott and Horn.  Consider (46) again.


(46) So Lufthansa is a—or even the—German
airline.


As observed earlier, (46) can be asserted even if there is more than
one German airline.  One intriguing possibility here is that the
stress is creating what is known as a superlative genitive,
an example from Latin being sanctum sanctorum (holy of
holies).  In the case of (46), for example, we are saying Lufthansa is
the most German airline of German airlines.  This story would require
a story involving some movement and copying of the noun within the
determiner phrase, but such a story would not be unheard of in
contemporary work on the structure of determiner phrases (see Larson
(2014)).

What is also intriguing about this line of inquiry is that it suggests
a new strategy for accounting for definiteness.  It is not
pragmatically extruded from givenness (as suggested by Ludlow and
Segal) but rather from whatever meaning the genetive case brings with
it – often some notion of possession.  For example, an appearance of
a description of the form ‘the dog’ in a sentence might
indicate something like ‘dog of the event’ or ‘dog
bearing some thematic role to the event’.  From this bit of
information, the pragmatics might allow us infer that there is a
unique dog.
It would not be fruitful to suggest that definite determiners
always play the role of case assignment, and they most
certainly cannot be cashed out as exclusively assigning genitive
case. The prospects for a unified explanation for determiner behavior
seems remote. The evidence does suggest however, that definite
determiners can often play the role of supplying case, and this may go
a long way towards explaining some of the most recalcitrant facts
involving descriptions.
8. Conclusion


A close study of the syntax and semantics of natural language suggests
that constructions of the form ‘the F’ and
‘an F’ are not only rare in natural languages, but
potentially misleading in languages like English. These expressions
really don’t carry out the logical roles that Russell and subsequent
authors have thought. However, Russell’s core insight remains intact:
The critical question is whether the sentences in which they appear
are quantificational or referential, and Russell may well be right
about the critical cases here.  That is, many apparently referential
constructions may in fact be quantificational. What Russell didn’t see
was that surface grammar is more deceptive than even he
realized. Elements like ‘the’ and ‘a’ do not
directly encode quantifiers or uniqueness clauses. The task for
philosophers of language now is the thorny task of figuring
out what information they do encode. 
(46) So Lufthansa is a—or even the—German
airline.
As observed earlier, (46) can be asserted even if there is more than
one German airline.  One intriguing possibility here is that the
stress is creating what is known as a superlative genitive,
an example from Latin being sanctum sanctorum (holy of
holies).  In the case of (46), for example, we are saying Lufthansa is
the most German airline of German airlines.  This story would require
a story involving some movement and copying of the noun within the
determiner phrase, but such a story would not be unheard of in
contemporary work on the structure of determiner phrases (see Larson
(2014)).
What is also intriguing about this line of inquiry is that it suggests
a new strategy for accounting for definiteness.  It is not
pragmatically extruded from givenness (as suggested by Ludlow and
Segal) but rather from whatever meaning the genetive case brings with
it – often some notion of possession.  For example, an appearance of
a description of the form ‘the dog’ in a sentence might
indicate something like ‘dog of the event’ or ‘dog
bearing some thematic role to the event’.  From this bit of
information, the pragmatics might allow us infer that there is a
unique dog.
It would not be fruitful to suggest that definite determiners
always play the role of case assignment, and they most
certainly cannot be cashed out as exclusively assigning genitive
case. The prospects for a unified explanation for determiner behavior
seems remote. The evidence does suggest however, that definite
determiners can often play the role of supplying case, and this may go
a long way towards explaining some of the most recalcitrant facts
involving descriptions.
A close study of the syntax and semantics of natural language suggests
that constructions of the form ‘the F’ and
‘an F’ are not only rare in natural languages, but
potentially misleading in languages like English. These expressions
really don’t carry out the logical roles that Russell and subsequent
authors have thought. However, Russell’s core insight remains intact:
The critical question is whether the sentences in which they appear
are quantificational or referential, and Russell may well be right
about the critical cases here.  That is, many apparently referential
constructions may in fact be quantificational. What Russell didn’t see
was that surface grammar is more deceptive than even he
realized. Elements like ‘the’ and ‘a’ do not
directly encode quantifiers or uniqueness clauses. The task for
philosophers of language now is the thorny task of figuring
out what information they do encode. 