I shall refer to the brand of knowledge Descartes seeks in the
Meditations, as ‘perfect knowledge’. Famously, he
defines perfect knowledge in terms of doubt. While distinguishing
lesser grades of conviction, and perfect knowledge,he writes:
In the Second Replies, he adds:
These passages (and others) suggest an account wherein doubt is the
contrast of certainty. As my certainty increases, my doubt decreases;
conversely, as my doubt increases, my certainty decreases. The
requirement that knowledge is to be based in complete, or perfect
certainty, thus amounts to requiring a complete inability to doubt
one’s convictions – an utter indubitability. This
conception of the relationship between certainty and doubt helps
underwrite Descartes’ methodical emphasis on doubt, the
so-called ‘method of doubt’ (discussed in
 Section 2).
That perfect knowledge requires that it be “impossible for us
ever to have any reason for doubting what we are convinced of”
marks an extraordinarily high standard of justification. Is this the
only standard deserving of knowledge-talk? This is a
difficult question to answer, because Descartes didn’t write in
English. But arguably he’s an epistemic contextualist,
at least in the sense of invoking the notion of knowledge in
divergent contexts that presuppose different epistemic standards.
We’ll see, for example, that he holds that even the deductive
demonstrations of expert geometers fall short of the standards needed
for perfect knowledge; yet, the kind of terminology he uses to
characterize their epistemic achievements is routinely rendered in
terms of knowledge-talk, in standard English translations of his
work.
The certainty/indubitability of interest to Descartes is psychological
in character, though not merely psychological – not
simply an inexplicable feeling. It has also a distinctively epistemic
character, involving a kind of rational insight. During moments of
certainty, it is as if my perception is guided by “a great light
in the intellect” (Med. 4, AT 7:59, CSM 2:41). This rational
illumination empowers me to “see utterly clearly with my
mind’s eye”; my feelings of certainty are
grounded – indeed, “I see a manifest
contradiction” in denying the proposition of which I’m
convinced. (Med. 3, AT 7:36, CSM 2:25)
Descartes characterizes these epistemically impressive cognitions in
terms of their being perceived clearly and
distinctly. The Meditations never defines these
terms; indeed, it sometimes uses them in confusing ways (e.g.,
sometimes using clarity-talk as a shorthand for the
conjunction of clarity and distinctness). The Principles
offers the following definitions:
Other texts indicate that clarity contrasts with obscurity,
and distinctness with confusedness. Though having clear and
distinct apprehension is epistemically impressive, we’ll see
that it is merely a necessary condition of perfect knowledge, not a
sufficient condition.
Should we regard Descartes’ account of perfect knowledge as a
version of the justified true belief analysis of knowledge
tracing back to Plato? The above texts are among Descartes’
clearest statements concerning perfect knowledge. Yet they raise
questions about the extent to which his account is continuous with
other analyses of knowledge. Prima facie, his characterizations imply
a justified belief analysis – or using language closer
to his own (and where justification is construed in terms of
unshakability), an unshakable conviction analysis.
There’s no stated requirement that the would-be knower’s
conviction is to be true, as opposed to being unshakably
certain. Is truth, therefore, not a requirement of perfect
knowledge? We’ll return to the issue in
 Section 6.4.
One way to divide up theories of justification is in terms of the
internalism-externalism distinction. Very roughly: a theory of
epistemic justification is internalist insofar as it requires
that the justifying factors are accessible to the knower’s
conscious awareness; it is externalist insofar as it does not
impose this requirement.
Descartes holds an internalist account requiring that all justifying
factors take the form of ideas. Various texts imply that
ideas are, strictly speaking, the only objects of immediate perception
or awareness. (More on the directness or immediacy of sense perception
in
 Section 9.1.)
 Independent of assumptions about the directness of perception,
Descartes’ method of doubt underwrites an assumption with
similar force: for almost the entirety of the Meditations,
his meditator-spokesperson – hereafter, the
‘meditator’ – adopts the methodological assumption
that all his thoughts and experiences are occurring in a dream. This
assumption is tantamount to requiring that justification comes in the
form of ideas, rather than via direct perception of an extramental
world.
An important consequence of this kind of interpretation –
namely, a traditional representationalist understanding of ideas
– is that rigorous philosophical inquiry must proceed via an
inside-to-out strategy. This strategy is assiduously followed in the
Meditations, and it endures as a hallmark of many early
modern epistemologies. Ultimately, all judgments are grounded in an
inspection of the mind’s ideas. Philosophical inquiry
is, properly understood, an investigation of ideas. The
methodical strategy of the Meditations has the effect of
forcing readers to adopt this mode of inquiry.
In recent years, some commentators have questioned this traditional
way of understanding the mediating role of ideas. Noteworthy is John
Carriero’s outstanding commentary on the Meditations
(2009), an account providing a serious challenge to traditional
representationalist interpretations (including interpretations
typically assumed in the present treatment).
How are would-be knowers to proceed in identifying candidates for
perfect knowledge? Distinguish particularist and methodist answers to
the question. The particularist is apt to trust our prima
facie intuitions regarding particular knowledge claims. These
intuitions may then be used to help identify more general epistemic
principles. The methodist, in contrast, is apt to distrust
our prima facie intuitions. The preference is instead to begin with
general principles about proper method. The methodical principles may
then be used to arrive at settled, reflective judgments concerning
particular knowledge claims.
Famously, Descartes is in the methodist camp. Those who haphazardly
“direct their minds down untrodden paths” are sometimes
“lucky enough in their wanderings to hit upon some truth,”
but “it is far better,” writes Descartes, “never to
contemplate investigating the truth about any matter than to do so
without a method” (Rules 4, AT 10:371, CSM 1:15f). Were
we to rely on our prima facie intuitions, we might accept that the
earth is unmoved, or that ordinary objects (as tables and chairs)
are just as they appear. Yet, newly emerging
mechanist doctrines of the 17th century imply otherwise. Descartes
thinks such cases underscore the unreliability of our prima facie
intuitions and the need for a method by which to distinguish truth and
falsity.
Descartes’ view is not that all our pre-reflective
intuitions are mistaken. He concedes that “no sane person has
ever seriously doubted” such particular claims as “that
there really is a world, and that human beings have bodies”
(Synopsis, AT 7:16, CSM 2:11). But such pre-reflective judgments may
be ill-grounded, even when true.
The dialectic of the First Meditation features a confrontation between
particularism and methodism, with methodism emerging the victor. For
example, the meditator (while voicing empiricist sensibilities) puts
forward, as candidates for the foundations of knowledge, such prima
facie obvious claims as “that I am here, sitting by the fire,
wearing a winter dressing-gown, holding this piece of paper in my
hands, and so on” – particular matters “about which
doubt is quite impossible,” or so it would seem (AT 7:18, CSM
2:12f). In response (and at each level of the dialectic), Descartes
invokes his own methodical principles to show that the prima facie
obviousness of such particular claims is insufficient to meet the
burden of proof.
Another methodological feature of the Meditations is its
first-person, meditative character. Gary Hatfield explains.
Descartes’ commitment to innate ideas places him in a
rationalist tradition tracing back to Plato. Knowledge of the nature
of reality derives from ideas of the intellect, not the external
senses. An important part of metaphysical inquiry therefore involves
learning to think with the intellect. Plato’s allegory of the
cave portrays this rationalist theme in terms of epistemically
distinct worlds: what the senses reveal is likened to shadowy imagery
on the wall of a poorly lit cave; what the intellect reveals is
likened to a world of fully real beings illuminated by bright
sunshine. The metaphor aptly depicts our epistemic predicament given
Descartes’ own doctrines. An important function of his methods
is to help would-be perfect knowers redirect their attention from the
confused imagery of the senses to the luminous world of clear and
distinct ideas of the intellect.
Further comparisons arise with Plato’s doctrine of recollection.
In the Fifth Meditation, in connection with the discovery of innate
truths within, the meditator remarks: “on first discovering them
it seems that I am not so much learning something new as remembering
what I knew before” (Med. 5, AT 7:64, CSM 2:44). Elsewhere
Descartes adds, of innate truths: 
The famous “wax” thought experiment of the Second
Meditation is supposed to illustrate (among other things) a procedure
to “dig out” what is innate. The thought experiment
purports to help the meditator achieve a “purely mental
scrutiny,” thereby apprehending more easily the innate idea of
body. (Med. 2, AT 7:30f, CSM 2:20f) According to Descartes, our minds
come stocked with a variety of intellectual concepts – ideas
whose content is independent of experience. This storehouse includes
ideas in mathematics, logic, and metaphysics. Interestingly, Descartes
holds that even our sensory ideas involve innate content. On his
understanding of the new mechanical physics, bodies have no real
properties resembling our sensory ideas of colors, sounds, tastes, and
the like, thus implying that the content of such ideas draws from the
mind itself. But if even these sensory ideas count as innate, how then
are we to characterize the doctrine of innateness? Importantly, the
formation of these sensory ideas – unlike purely intellectual
concepts – depends on sensory stimulation. On one plausible
understanding, Descartes’ official doctrine has it that ideas
are innate insofar as their content derives from the nature
of the mind alone, as opposed to deriving from sense experience (cf.
Newman 2006). This characterization allows that both intellectual and
sensory concepts draw on native resources, though not to the same
extent.
Though the subject of rationalism in Descartes’ epistemology
deserves careful attention, the present article generally focuses on
Descartes’ efforts to achieve perfect knowledge. Relatively
little attention is given to his doctrine of innateness, or, more
generally, his ontology of thought.
Further reading: For a contrary understanding of
Descartes’ conception of scientia, see Jolley (2013).
On the internalism-externalism distinction, see Alston (1989) and
Plantinga (1993). For a partly externalist interpretation of
Descartes, see Della Rocca (2005). For coherentist interpretations of
Descartes’ project, see Frankfurt (1970), Sosa (1997a), and
Della Rocca (2011); for a reply to such interpretations, see Frankfurt
(1978) and Newman (2012). For a stability interpretation of Descartes,
see Bennett(1990). On the full indubitability of knowledge, see Newman
and Nelson (1999). On the methodism-particularism distinction, see
Chisholm (1982) and Sosa (1980). On analysis and synthesis, see Smith
(2010). On Descartes’ rationalism, see Adams (1975), Jolley
(1990), Newman (2006), and Nelson (2007).
Of his own methodology, Descartes writes:
The theory whereby items of knowledge are best organized on an analogy
to architecture traces back to ancient Greek thought – to
Aristotle, and to work in geometry. That Descartes’ method
effectively pays homage to Aristotle is, of course, welcome by his
Aristotelian audience. But Descartes views Aristotle’s
foundationalist principles as incomplete, at least when applied to
metaphysical inquiry. His method of doubt is intended to complement
foundationalism. The two methods are supposed to work in cooperation,
as conveyed in the above quotation. Let’s consider each
method.
The central insight of foundationalism is to organize knowledge in the
manner of a well-structured, architectural edifice. Such an edifice
owes its structural integrity to two kinds of features: a firm
foundation and a superstructure of support beams
firmly anchored to the foundation. A system of justified beliefs might
be organized by two analogous features: a foundation of unshakable
first principles, and a superstructure of further propositions
anchored to the foundation via unshakable inference.
Exemplary of a foundationalist system is Euclid’s geometry.
Euclid begins with a foundation of first principles –
definitions, postulates, and axioms or common notions – on which
he then bases a superstructure of further propositions.
Descartes’ own designs for metaphysical knowledge are inspired
by Euclid’s system:
It would be misleading to characterize the arguments of the
Meditations as unfolding straightforwardly according to
geometric method (cf. Curley 2006, 31). But Descartes maintains that
they can be reconstructed as such, and he expressly does so
at the end of the Second Replies – providing a
“geometrical” exposition of some of his central lines of
argument, organized as definitions, postulates,
axioms or common notions, and propositions (AT
7:160–70, CSM 2:113–120).
As noted above, the Meditations contains a destructive
component that Descartes likens to the architect’s preparations
for laying a foundation. Though the component finds no analogue in the
methods of geometers, Descartes appears to hold that it is needed in
metaphysical inquiry. The discovery of Euclid’s first principles
(some of them, at any rate) is comparatively unproblematic: such
principles as that things which are equal to the same thing are
also equal to one another accord not only with reason, but with
the senses. In contrast, metaphysical inquiry might have first
principles that conflict with the senses:
Among Descartes’ persistent themes is that such preconceived
opinions can obscure our mental vision of innate principles: that
where there are disputes about first principles, it is not
“because one man’s faculty of knowledge extends more
widely than another’s, but because the common notions are in
conflict with the preconceived opinions of some people who, as a
result, cannot easily grasp them”; whereas, “we cannot
fail to know them [innate common notions] when the occasion for
thinking about them arises, provided that we are not blinded by
preconceived opinions” (Prin. 1:49f, AT 8a:24, CSM
1:209). These “preconceived opinions” must be “set
aside,” says Descartes, “in order to lay the first
foundations of philosophy” (May 1643 letter to Voetius, AT
8b:37, CSMK 221). Otherwise, we’re apt to regard, as
first principles, the mistaken (though prima facie obvious) sensory
claims that particularists find attractive. Such mistakes in the
laying of the foundations weaken the entire edifice. Descartes
adds:
Though foundationalism brilliantly allows for the expansion of
knowledge from first principles, Descartes thinks that a complementary
method is needed to help us discover genuine first principles. As
Hatfield writes, “the problem is not to carry out proofs (which
might well be assented to, given the definitions and axioms), but to
discover the axioms themselves (which are hopelessly obscured by the
prejudices of the senses)” (1986, 71). Descartes therefore
devises the method of doubt for this purpose – a method to help
“set aside” preconceived opinions.
Descartes opens the First Meditation asserting the need “to
demolish everything completely and start again right from the
foundations” (AT 7:17, CSM 2:12). The passage adds:
In the architectural analogy, we can think of bulldozers as the ground
clearing tools of demolition. For knowledge building, Descartes
construes sceptical doubts as the ground clearing tools of
epistemic demolition. Bulldozers undermine literal ground;
doubt undermines epistemic ground. Using sceptical doubts, the
meditator shows how to find “some reason for doubt” in all
his preexisting claims to knowledge.
The ultimate aim of the method is constructive. Unlike “the
sceptics, who doubt only for the sake of doubting,” Descartes
aims “to reach certainty – to cast aside the loose earth
and sand so as to come upon rock or clay” (Discourse 3,
AT 6:29, CSM 1:125). Bulldozers are typically used for destructive
ends, as are sceptical doubts. Descartes’ methodical innovation
is to employ demolition for constructive ends. Where a
bulldozer’s force overpowers the ground, its effects are
destructive. Where the ground’s firmness resists the
bulldozer’s force, the bulldozer might be used constructively
– using it to reveal the ground as firm. Descartes thus
uses sceptical doubts to test the firmness of candidates put forward
for the foundations of knowledge.
According to at least one prominent critic, this employment of
sceptical doubt is unnecessary and excessive. Writes Gassendi:
Here, Gassendi singles out two features of methodical doubt –
its universal and hyperbolic character. In reply,
Descartes remarks:
Evidently, Descartes holds that the universal and
hyperbolic character of methodical doubt is helpful to its
success. Further appeal to the architectural analogy helps elucidate
why.
Consider first the universal character of doubt – the
need “to demolish everything completely and start again right
from the foundations.” The point is not merely to apply doubt to
all candidates for perfect knowledge, but to apply doubt
collectively. Descartes offers the following analogy:
That even one falsehood would be mistakenly treated as a genuine first
principle – say, the belief that the senses are
reliable, or that ancient authorities should be trusted
– threatens to spread falsehood to other beliefs in the system.
A collective doubt helps avoid such mistakes. It ensures that the
method only approves candidate first principles that are unshakable in
their own right: it rules out that the appearance of unshakability is
owed to logical relations with other principles, themselves not
subjected to doubt.
How is the hyperbolic character of methodical doubt supposed
to contribute to the method’s success? The architectural analogy
is again helpful. Suppose that an architect is vigilant in employing a
universal/collective doubt. Suppose, further, that she attempts to use
bulldozers for constructive purposes. A problem nonetheless arises.
How big a bulldozer is she to use? A light-duty bulldozer might be
unable to distinguish a medium-sized boulder, and immovable bedrock.
In both cases, the ground would appear immovable. Descartes
takes the solution to lie in using not light-duty, but
heavy-duty tools of demolition – the bigger the
bulldozer, the better. The lesson is clear for the epistemic builder:
the more hyperbolic the doubt, the better.
A potential problem remains. Does not the problem of the
“light-duty bulldozer” repeat itself? No matter how firm
one’s ground, might it not be dislodged in the face of a yet
bigger bulldozer? This raises the worry that there might not
be unshakable ground, as opposed to ground which is
yet unshaken. Descartes’ goal of utterly
indubitable epistemic ground may simply be elusive.
Perhaps the architectural analogy breaks down in a manner that serves
Descartes well. For though there is no most-powerful literal
bulldozer, perhaps epistemic bulldozing is not subject to this
limitation. Descartes seems to think that there is a
most-powerful doubt – a doubt than which none more
hyperbolic can be conceived. The Evil Genius Doubt (and equivalent
doubts) is supposed to fit the bill. If the method reveals epistemic
ground that stands fast in the face of a doubt this
hyperbolic, then, as Descartes seems to hold, this counts as epistemic
bedrock if anything does.
Hence the importance of the universal and hyperbolic
character of the method of doubt. Gassendi’s suggestion that we
forego methodical doubt in favor of a “simple and brief
statement to the effect that [we’re] regarding [our] previous
knowledge as uncertain” misses the intended point of the
method.
Descartes’ method of doubt has been subject to numerous
objections – some fair, others less so. Rendered in the terms
Descartes himself employs, the method is arguably less flawed than its
reputation. Let us consider some of the common objections. Two such
objections are suggested in a passage from the pragmatist Peirce:
Note, however, that the procedure of the Meditations is not
that universal doubt is supposed to flow simply from adherence to a
maxim; to the contrary, the doubt is supposed to flow from careful
attention to positive reasons for doubt – recall the express
resolution to find “at least some reason for doubt” in
one’s prior opinions. Descartes introduces sceptical arguments
precisely in acknowledgement that we need such reasons:
A second objection is suggested by Peirce’s reference to a
“doubt in our hearts.” Here, we should distinguish two
kinds of doubt, in terms of two kinds of ways that doubt can defeat
knowledge. Some doubts purport to undermine one’s conviction or
belief – call these ‘belief-defeating’
doubts. Other doubts purport to undermine one’s justification
(whether or not they undermine belief) – call these
‘justification-defeating’ doubts. What Peirce
calls a ‘doubt in our hearts’ is strongly suggestive of a
belief-defeating doubt. Is Peirce therefore right that only
belief-defeating doubts can undermine knowledge? Longstanding
traditions in philosophy acknowledge that there may be truths we
believe in our hearts (as it were), but which we do not know.
This is one of the intended lessons of methodical doubt. The sceptical
scenarios are supposed to help us appreciate that though we believe
that 2+3=5, and believe that we’re awake, and believe
there’s an external world, we may nonetheless lack perfect
knowledge. As already noted, Descartes writes of external world doubt
that “no sane person has ever seriously doubted” such
matters – a remark perhaps best understood in terms of
belief-defeating doubt. Justification-defeating doubts are sufficient
to undermine perfect knowledge, and this is the sort of doubt put
forward in the First Meditation.
A related objection has the method calling not merely for doubt, but
for disbelief or dissent. One of Gassendi’s objections reads in
this manner. He seems to take Descartes to be urging us, quite
literally, to “consider everything as false,” a strategy
which, as he says to Descartes, “made it necessary for you to
convince yourself” of the sceptical hypotheses. Based on
Descartes’ most careful statements, however, his method does not
require a dissent from the statements it undermines. Rather, the
method urges us to “hold back [our] assent from opinions which
are not completely certain and indubitable just as carefully as [we]
do from those which are patently false” (Med. 1, AT 7:18, CSM
2:12, cf. AT 7:461).
Finally, a common objection has it that the universality of doubt
undermines the method of doubt itself, since, for example,
the sceptical hypotheses themselves are dubious. Descartes
thinks this misses the point of the method: namely, to extend doubt
universally to candidates for knowledge, but not also to the
very tools for founding knowledge. As he concedes: “there may be
reasons which are strong enough to compel us to doubt, even though
these reasons are themselves doubtful, and hence are not to be
retained later on” (Replies 7, AT 7:473f, CSM 2:319).
Further reading: On foundationalism: for Descartes’
treatment, see Discourse, First Meditation, and Seventh
Objections and Replies; for its treatment by ancients, see Euclid
(1956) and Aristotle (Posterior Analytics); by interpreters
of Descartes, see Sosa (1997a) and Van Cleve (1979). On Cartesian
inference, see Gaukroger (1989) and Hacking (1980). On methodical
doubt: for Descartes’ treatment, see Rules,
Discourse, First Meditation, and Seventh Replies; by
commentators, see Frankfurt (1970), Garber (1986), Larmore (2014),
Newman (2006), Williams (1983), and Wilson (1978). On needing reasons
for doubt (contrary to direct voluntarism), see Newman (2007). On the
analysis-synthesis distinction (closely related to issues of doubt and
methodology): see the Second Replies (AT 7:155ff); see also Arnauld
(1964, 4:2f), Curley (1986), Galileo (1967, 50f), Hintikka (1978), and
Newman (2019).
Historically, there are at least two distinct dream-related doubts.
The one doubt undermines the judgment that I am presently
awake – call this the ‘Now Dreaming Doubt’. The
other doubt undermines the judgment that I am ever awake
(i.e., in the way normally supposed) – call this the
‘Always Dreaming Doubt’. A textual case can be made on
behalf of both formulations being raised in the
Meditations.
Both doubts appeal to some version of the thesis that the experiences
we take as dreams are (at their best) qualitatively similar to those
we take as waking – call this the ‘Similarity
Thesis’. The Similarity Thesis may be formulated in a variety of
strengths. A strong Similarity Thesis might contend that some dreams
seem experientially similar to waking, even on hindsight subsequent to
waking; a weaker rendering of the thesis might contend merely that
dreams seem similar to waking while having them, but
not upon waking. Arguably, the sceptical doubt is equally potent on
either rendering. Even so, on the most natural reading, the First
Meditation passage seems to suggest the stronger view, with its
reference to “exactly similar thoughts”:
As for the range of experiences that we can suppose dreams able to
imitate, Descartes looks to hold that every kind of sensory
experience is subject to the doubt. He writes: “every sensory
experience I have ever thought I was having while awake I can also
think of myself as sometimes having while asleep” (Med. 6, AT
7:77, CSM 2:53).
The Similarity Thesis is sufficient to generate straightaway the Now
Dreaming Doubt. Since I can think of a dream as being qualitatively
similar to my present experience, then, for all I know, I am now
dreaming.
Recall that Descartes’ method requires only a
justification-defeating doubt, not a belief-defeating doubt. To lack
perfect knowledge of my being awake, I need not give up my
belief that I’m awake; nor need that belief be false
– I might, in fact, be awake. The Now Dreaming Doubt
does its epistemic damage so long as it undermines my reasons for
believing I’m awake. And at this stage of the
Meditations, Descartes thinks that it does: “there are
never any sure signs by means of which being awake can be
distinguished from being asleep” (Med. 1, AT 7:19, CSM
2:13).
The conclusion – that I don’t perfectly know that
I’m now awake – has widespread sceptical consequences. For
if I don’t know this, then neither do I know that I’m now
“holding this piece of paper in my hands,” to cite an
example the meditator had supposed to be “quite
impossible” to doubt. Reflection on the Now Dreaming Doubt
changes his mind. He comes around to the view that, for all he knows,
the sensible objects of his present experience are mere figments of a
vivid dream.
Much ado has been made about whether dreaming arguments are
self-refuting. According to an influential objection, similarity
theses presuppose that we can reliably distinguish dreams and
waking – we need first to distinguish them, in order to compare
them; yet the conclusion of dreaming arguments entails that we
cannot reliably distinguish. Therefore, if the conclusion of
such an argument is true, then the premise invoking the Similarity
Thesis cannot be. Some formulations of dreaming arguments are indeed
self-refuting in this way. Of present interest is whether all
are – specifically, whether Descartes makes the mistake.
Interestingly, he does not. His formulation presupposes simply the
truism that we do, in fact, make a distinction between dreaming and
waking (never mind whether reliably). He states the relevant premise
in terms of what we think of as dreams, versus what we
think of as waking: “every sensory experience I have
ever thought I was having while awake I can also
think of myself as sometimes having while asleep” (AT
7:77, CSM 2:53, italics added). This formulation avoids the charge of
self-refutation, for it is compatible with the conclusion that we
cannot reliably distinguish dreams and waking.
Does Descartes also put forward a second dreaming argument, the Always
Dreaming Doubt? There is strong textual evidence to support this (see
Newman 1994), though it is by no means the standard interpretation.
The conclusion of the Always Dreaming Doubt is generated from the very
same Similarity Thesis, together with a further sceptical assumption,
namely: that for all I know, the processes producing what I take as
waking are no more veridical than those producing what I take as
dreams. As the meditator puts it: 
The aim of the Always Dreaming Doubt is to undermine not whether
I’m now awake, but whether so-called “sensation” is
produced by external objects even on the assumption that I am
now awake. For in the cases of both waking and dreaming, my cognitive
access extends only to the productive result, but not the
productive process. On what basis, then, do I conclude that
the productive processes are different – that external objects
play more of a role in waking than in dreaming? For all I know, both
sorts of experience are produced by some subconscious faculty of my
mind. As Descartes has his meditator say:
The sceptical consequences of the Always Dreaming Doubt are even more
devastating than those of the Now Dreaming Doubt. If I do not know
that “normal waking” experience is produced by external
objects, then, for all I know, all of my experiences might be
dreams of a sort. For all I know, there might not be
an external world. My best evidence of an external world derives from
my preconceived opinion that external world objects produce my waking
experiences. Yet the Always Dreaming Doubt calls this into
question:
The two dreaming doubts are parasitic on the same Similarity Thesis,
though their sceptical consequences differ. The Now Dreaming Doubt
raises the universal possibility of delusion: for any one of
my sensory experiences, it is possible (for all I know) that the
experience is delusive. The Always Dreaming Doubt raises the
possibility of universal delusion: it is possible (for all I
know) that all my sensory experiences are delusions (say, from a
God’s-eye perspective).
Though dreaming doubts do significant demolition work, they are
light-duty bulldozers relative to Descartes’ most power
sceptical doubt. What further judgments are left to be undermined?
Following the discussion of dreaming, the meditator tentatively
concludes that the results of empirical disciplines “are
doubtful” – e.g., “physics, astronomy,
medicine,” and the like. Whereas:
Early in the Third Meditation, it emerges that even truths this
“simple and straightforward” are subject to hyperbolic
doubt (AT 7:35f, CSM 2:25). And immediately following the above First
Meditation passage, Descartes introduces his most hyperbolic doubt
– the hypothesis of an all-powerful deceiver.
There is variation in the interpretation of the doubt, even concerning
the number of deceivers Descartes means to be citing. I suggest that a
natural reading of the First Meditation passages provides for a
unified account of a deceiver hypothesis. The passage represents the
meditator as having long believed in a creator who’s both
all-powerful and all-good. Here’s the thinking that seems to
follow from such belief. A creator with these attributes would not
allow its creatures to be deceived about the existence of the external
world, nor about such transparent truths as that 2+3=5. But likewise,
neither should a creator with these attributes allow its creatures
ever to be deceived. Yet they are. Since even occasional
deception seems to pose a reductio on the very existence of
an all-powerful, all-good creator, the implication is that the creator
(if there be one) must be lacking in either power or goodness. Suppose
the creator is all-powerful but not all-good – i.e., an
“evil genius” of sorts. In that case, it seems we might be
deceived about even the most evident of matters.
This summary offers a coherent basis for a truly hyperbolic doubt. And
notice that the summary makes good sense of both of the following
First Meditation passages, suggesting each is part of a continuous
worry about the very same deceiver who’s all-powerful, but not
all-good:
And yet firmly rooted in my mind is the long-standing opinion that
there is an omnipotent God who made me the kind of creature that I am.
How do I know that he has not brought it about that there is no earth,
no sky, no extended thing, no shape, no size, no place, while at the
same time ensuring that all these things appear to me to exist just as
they do now? What is more, since I sometimes believe that others go
astray in cases where they think they have the most perfect knowledge,
may I not similarly go wrong every time I add two and three or count
the sides of a square, or in some even simpler matter, if that is
imaginable? But perhaps God would not have allowed me to be deceived
in this way, since he is said to be supremely good. But if it were
inconsistent with his goodness to have created me such that I am
deceived all the time, it would seem equally foreign to his goodness
to allow me to be deceived even occasionally; yet this last assertion
cannot be made. (AT 7:21, CSM 2:14)
I will suppose therefore that not God, who is supremely good and the
source of truth, but rather some malicious demon [mauvais
génie] of the utmost power and cunning has employed all
his energies in order to deceive me. (AT 7:21, CSM 2:15)
Some commentators take these passages to introduce two separate
deceivers – distinguishing the evil genius (mauvais
génie) from the deceiving God (cf. Gouhier 1937, 163). But
this introduces needless complication without sufficient textual
justification. The deceptions of both deceivers derive from having
supreme power, while lacking in goodness. And note that Descartes
expresses ambivalence as to whether even to refer to a deceiver as
“God”: while invoking hyperbolic doubt, the Second
Meditation references the deceiver as “a God, or whatever I may
call him” (AT 7:24, CSM 2:16). In any case, a single deceiver
hypothesis will hereafter be assumed, referring to it by its popular
designation, the “Evil Genius Doubt.”
It is tempting to assume that the Evil Genius Doubt draws its
sceptical force from the “utmost power” attributed to the
deceiver. Clear texts suggest a different reading. Descartes contends
that an equally powerful doubt derives from the supposition that we
are not the creatures of an all-powerful creator. Recall that the
above reductio reasoning implies simply that the creator
cannot be both all-powerful and all-good. Suppose, then, that we
give-up the assumption that the creator is all-powerful. The passage
continues:
That is, this assumption, too, generates hyperbolic sceptical
consequences. Descartes makes the same point in a parallel passage of
the Principles:
Descartes’ official position is that the Evil Genius Doubt is
merely one among multiple hypotheses that can motivate the more
general hyperbolic doubt. (See Cunning 2014, 68ff, and Hatfield 2006,
126, for variations on this theme.) Fundamentally, the more general
doubt is about our cognitive nature, that is, about the
possibility our minds are flawed. The First Meditation texts are
somewhat ambiguous on this count. But later passages are very clear (a
theme we’ll develop more fully in
 Section 4.3).
What is essential to the doubt is not the specific story about the
origin of our cognitive wiring; it’s instead the realization
– regardless the story – that for all we know, our
cognitive wiring is flawed. Even so, I regularly speak in terms of the
evil genius (following Descartes’ lead), as a kind of
mnemonic for the more general doubt about our cognitive nature.
Having introduced the Evil Genius Doubt, the First Meditation program
of demolition is not only hyperbolic but universal.
As the meditator remarks, I “am finally compelled to admit that
there is not one of my former beliefs about which a doubt may not
properly be raised” (Med. 1, AT 7:21, CSM 2:14f). As will
emerge, the early paragraphs of the Third Meditation clarify a further
nuance of the Evil Genius Doubt – a nuance consistently observed
thereafter. Descartes clarifies, there, that the Evil Genius Doubt
operates in an indirect manner (a topic to which we return in
 Section 4.3).
Further reading: On Descartes’ sceptical arguments, see
Bouwsma (1949), Cunning (2014), Curley (1978), Hatfield (2006),
Larmore (2014), Newman (1994), Newman and Nelson (1999), Williams
(1986 and 1995). For a contrary reading of the Evil Genius Doubt, see
Gewirth (1941) and Wilson (1978). For a more general philosophical
treatment of dreaming arguments, see Dunlap (1977) and Williams
(1978).
Famously, Descartes puts forward a very simple candidate as the
“first item of knowledge.” The candidate is suggested by
methodical doubt – by the very effort at thinking all
my thoughts might be mistaken. Early in the Second Meditation,
Descartes has his meditator observe:
As the canonical formulation has it, I think therefore I am
(Latin: cogito ergo sum; French: je pense, donc
je suis) – a formulation does not expressly appear in the
Meditations. Descartes regards the
‘cogito’ (as it is often referred to) as the
“first and most certain of all to occur to anyone who
philosophizes in an orderly way” (Prin. 1:7, AT8a:7,
CSM 1:195). Is the great certainty of the cogito supposed to
attach to the “I think,” the “I am,” or the
“therefore” (i.e., their logical relation)? Presumably, it
must attach to all of these, if the cogito is to play the
foundational role Descartes assigns to it. But this answer can seem to
depend on whether the cogito is understood as an inference or
an intuition – an issue we address below.
Testing the cogito by means of methodical doubt is supposed
to reveal its unshakable certainty. Hyperbolic doubt helps me
appreciate that the existence of my body is subject to doubt, whereas
the existence of my thinking is not. The very attempt at thinking
away my thinking is indeed self-stultifying.
The cogito raises numerous philosophical questions and has
generated an enormous literature. The most significant ongoing debate
concerns whether Descartes intends the cogito to be an
intuition (i.e., roughly, self-evident), or instead an
inference.
In an influential 1962 paper, Jaakko Hintikka’s argues that it
should be understood non-inferentially, as a performative utterance.
On his analysis, I exist doesn’t follow logically from
I think, nor does Descartes suppose otherwise. Rather, the
transition from I think to I exist is non-logical
– indeed, the statement that “I do not exist” is not
logically incoherent. The key point, according to Hintikka, is that
the very act of thinking that statement – the cognitive
performance – is existentially incoherent: I cannot
both think the statement and believe it to be true. Hintikka
takes the emphasis on “cogito” as intended “to
express the performatory character of Descartes’s insight; it
refers to the ‘performance’ (to the act of thinking)
through which the sentence ‘I exist’ may be said to verify
itself” (1962, 17).
The following Second Replies text can seem supportive of a
non-inferential reading:
However, as Margaret Wilson correctly observes, “the claim that
the cogito is an inference … is not equivalent to the
claim that it is a syllogism” (1978, 56). The passage only
expressly rejects the effort to understand the cogito in
terms of syllogism, but not necessarily in terms of inference.
Further, it should be noted that inferential interpretations need not
reject that the cogito counts also as an intuition.
There’s no inconsistency in claiming a self-evident grasp of a
proposition that has inferential structure. It is indeed widely held
among philosophers that modus ponens is self-evident, yet it
contains an inference. In short, that a statement contains an
inference does not entail that one’s acceptance of it is
grounded in inference – a fact applicable to the
cogito. Curley helpfully notes that Descartes
“consistently blurs the distinction between inferences and
propositions by referring to the whole formula ‘I think,
therefore I am’ as a truth, a first principle, a proposition,
and a conclusion” (1978, 79). Kenny adds that, for Descartes,
“what is from one point of view intuited is from another point
of view deduced” (1968, 55), citing Rules 3 as
support.
A related point concerns the absence of an express
‘ergo’ (‘therefore’) in the Second
Meditation account – as if indicating the absence of inference
in that passage. Arguably, the Second Meditation passage is the one
place (of his various published treatments ) where Descartes
explicitly details a line of inferential reflection leading up to the
conclusion that I am, I exist. His other treatments
merely say the ‘therefore’; the Second Meditation
unpacks it.
Whatever the cogito’s inferential status, it is worth
noting a twofold observation of Barry Stroud: “a thinker
obviously could never be wrong in thinking ‘I
think’,” moreover, “no one who thinks could think
falsely that he exists” (2008, 518).
Further issues about the cogito are worth clarifying –
let’s cover a few points in summary fashion. First, a
first-person formulation is essential to the certainty of the
cogito. Third-person claims, such as “Icarus
thinks,” or “Descartes thinks,” are not unshakably
certain – not for me, at any rate; only the occurrence
of my thought has a chance of resisting hyperbolic doubt.
There are a number of passages in which Descartes refers to a
third-person version of the cogito. But none of these occurs
in the context of establishing the actual existence of a particular
thinker (in contrast with the conditional, general result that
whatever thinks exists).
Second, a present tense formulation is essential to the certainty of
the cogito. It’s no good to reason that “I
existed last Tuesday, since I recall that I was thinking on that
day.” For all I know, I’m now merely dreaming about that
occasion. Nor does it work to reason that “I’ll continue
to exist, since I’m now thinking.” As the meditator
remarks, “it could be that were I totally to cease from
thinking, I should totally cease to exist” (Med. 2, AT 7:27, CSM
2:18). The privileged certainty of the cogito is grounded in
the “manifest contradiction” (AT 7:36, CSM 2:25) of trying
to think away my present thinking.
Third, the certainty of the cogito depends on being
formulated in terms of cogitatio – i.e., my thinking,
or awareness/consciousness more generally. Any mode of thinking is
sufficient, including doubting, affirming, denying, willing,
understanding, imagining, and so on (cf. Med. 2, AT 7:28). My
bodily activities, however, are insufficient. For instance,
it’s no good to reason that “I exist, since I am
walking,” because methodical doubt calls into question the
existence of my legs. Maybe I’m just dreaming that I have legs.
A simple revision, such as “I exist, since it seems
I’m walking,” restores the anti-sceptical potency (cf.
Replies 5, AT 7:352; Prin. 1:9).
Fourth, a caveat is in order. That Descartes rejects formulations
presupposing the existence of a body commits him to no more than an
epistemic distinction between the ideas of mind and body, but not
(yet) an ontological distinction (as in mind-body dualism). Indeed, in
the passage following the cogito, Descartes has his meditator
say: 
In short, the intended epistemic success of the cogito does
not presuppose any particular mind-body ontology.
Finally, Descartes’ reference to an “I”, in the
“I think,” is not intended to presuppose the existence of
a substantial self. In the very next sentence following the
initial statement of the cogito, the meditator says:
“But I do not yet have a sufficient understanding of what this
‘I’ is, that now necessarily exists” (AT 7:25, CSM
2:17). As Stephen Menn writes:
The cogito purports to yield certainty that I exist
insofar as I am a thinking thing, whatever that turns out
to be. The ensuing discussion is intended to help arrive at an
understanding of the ontological nature of the thinking subject.
More generally, we should distinguish issues of epistemic and
ontological dependence. In the final analysis, Descartes thinks he
shows that the occurrence of thought depends (ontologically) on the
existence of a substantial self – to wit, on the existence of an
infinite substance, namely God (cf. Med. 3, AT 7:48ff). But he denies
that an acceptance of these ontological matters is epistemically prior
to the cogito: its certainty is not supposed to depend
(epistemically) on the abstruse metaphysics that Descartes thinks he
eventually establishes. (See Vinci 1998 for an alternative
reading.)
If the cogito does not presuppose a substantial self, what
then is the epistemic basis for injecting the “I” into the
“I think”? Some critics have complained that, in referring
to the “I”, Descartes begs the question by presupposing
what he means to establish in the “I exist.” Among the
critics, Bertrand Russell objects that “the word ‘I’
is really illegitimate.” Echoing the 18th century thinker, Georg
Lichtenberg, Russell writes that Descartes should have, instead,
stated “his ultimate premiss in the form ‘there are
thoughts’.” Russell adds that “the word
‘I’ is grammatically convenient, but does not describe a
datum.” (1945, 567) Accordingly, “there is pain” and
“I am in pain” have different contents, and Descartes is
entitled only to the former.
One effort at reply has it that introspection reveals more than what
Russell allows – it reveals the subjective character of
experience. On this view, there is more to the experiential story of
being in pain than is expressed by saying that there is
pain: the experience includes the feeling of pain plus a
point-of-view – an experiential addition that’s
difficult to characterize except by adding that “I” am in
pain, that the pain is mine. Importantly, my awareness of
this subjective feature of experience does not depend on an awareness
of the metaphysical nature of a thinking subject. If we take Descartes
to be using ‘I’ to signify this subjective character, then
he is not smuggling in something that’s not already there: the
“I”-ness of consciousness turns out to be (contra Russell)
a primary datum of experience. Though, as Hume persuasively argues,
introspection reveals no sense impressions suited to the role
of a thinking subject, Descartes, unlike Hume, has no need to derive
all our ideas from sense impressions. Descartes’ idea of the
self does ultimately draw on innate conceptual resources.
But how could ideas deriving from the subjective character of
experience justify a substantive metaphysical conclusion about the
existence of a real self? On one plausible line of reply, Descartes
does not yet intend to be establishing the metaphysical
result; rather, the initial intended result is merely epistemic, but
not (yet) fully justified. This line of interpretation does, of
course, imply that the cogito does not initially count as
perfect knowledge – an issue to which we now turn.
The extraordinary certainty and doubt-resistance of the
cogito marks an Archimedean turning point in the
meditator’s inquiry. However, there are interpretive disputes
about whether Descartes intends the cogito to count –
at its initial introduction, prior to the arguments for God – as
fully indubitable, and therefore as perfect knowledge. It is
quite common to interpret the cogito as being the first item
of perfect knowledge. In
 Section 6.1
 we’ll explore how such interpretations (i.e., Bounded Doubt
Interpretations) render Descartes broader argument. But here, I want
to develop the textual case for holding that even the cogito
is undermined by Evil Genius Doubt.
There is no disputing that Descartes characterizes the cogito
as the “first item of knowledge [cognitione]”
(Med. 3, AT 7:35, CSM 2:24), and as the first “piece of
knowledge [cognitio]” (Prin. 1:7, AT 8a:7, CSM
1:195). Noteworthy, however, is the Latin terminology Descartes uses
in these characterizations (‘cognitio’ and its
cognates). As noted at the outset, Descartes is a contextualist in the
sense of invoking the notion of knowledge in divergent
contexts that presuppose very different epistemic standards. Of
particular interest is that he expressly clarifies that contexts aptly
characterized in terms of cognitio-talk do not necessary
count as perfect knowledge:
This alone does not prove that the cogito is not intended to
count as perfect knowledge. However, it does undercut the argument
whereby calling it the “first item of knowledge”
shows that Descartes intends it as perfect knowledge.
More generally, a wide range of clear texts support (what I’ll
call) the No Atheistic Perfect Knowledge Thesis – a thesis with
implications for the debate about the cogito. Consider the
following texts, each arising in a context of clarifying the
requirements of perfect knowledge (italics are added):
For if I do not know this [i.e., “whether there is a God, and,
if there is, whether he can be a deceiver”], it seems that I can
never be quite certain about anything else. (Med. 3, AT 7:36,
CSM 2:25)
I see that the certainty of all other things depends on this
[i.e., “that the supreme being exists”], so that without
it nothing can ever be perfectly known [perfecte
sciri]. (Med. 5, AT 7:69, CSM 2:48)
[I]f I were unaware of God … I should thus never have true and
certain knowledge [scientiam] about anything, but
only shifting and changeable opinions. (Med. 5, AT 7:69, CSM 2:48)
Thus I see plainly that the certainty and truth of all
knowledge [scientiae] depends uniquely on my awareness of the
true God, to such an extent that I was incapable of perfect knowledge
[perfecte scire] about anything else until I became
aware of him. (Med. 5, AT 7:71, CSM 2:49)
These texts make a powerful case that nothing else can be
perfectly known prior to establishing that we’re
created by an all-perfect God, rather than an evil genius. These texts
make no exceptions. The first text is particularly noteworthy, because
it comes at the end of a paragraph expressly citing the
cogito. As Curley writes:
Descartes looks to hold that hyperbolic doubt is utterly unbounded
– i.e., that it undermines all manner of propositions,
including thereby the proposition that “I exist.”
We can indeed read the opening paragraphs of the Third Meditation as
intended to clarify not that the cogito is perfectly known,
but instead the following two-fold point: First, that what underwrites
the cogito’s epistemic impressiveness is
clarity and distinctness. Second, that even
cognitions this impressive can be undermined by Evil Genius Doubt, and
thus lack the full indubitability of perfect knowledge.
Regarding the first point, the Third Meditation opens with meditator
attempting to build on the apparent success of the cogito.
What are the internal marks of this impressive perception –
what is it like to have perception that good? The answer:
The next two paragraphs help clarify (among other things) what
Descartes takes to be epistemically impressive about clear and
distinct perception, but absent from external sense perception. Of
external sensation, the third paragraph offers this:
Though we regularly form judgments based on external sensation, they
are easily undermined by sceptical doubt, as shown by the Now Dreaming
Doubt. By contrast, our clear and distinct perceptions enjoy a
perceptual “strength” enabling us to ward off even the
Evil Genius Doubt (at least, so it might seem). The fourth paragraph
offers this:
Prima facie, this excerpt suggests that multiple propositions are
– at this pre-theistic stage of the broader argument –
fully indubitable, thereby counting as perfect knowledge. But there is
more to the paragraph.
This brings us to the second point noted above, namely, that even
cognitions this impressive can be undermined by Evil Genius Doubt
– an outcome clarified in the final lines of this same
paragraph:
In order to appreciate the subtleties of this pivotal fourth paragraph
of the Third Meditation, we need to clarify the indirect
manner in which Evil Genius Doubt operates on clear and distinct
perception.
How could a doubt undermine the cogito? Part of its
impressiveness is that I cannot think about my existence without
affirming it, yet I cannot doubt my existence without thinking about
it. In short, I simply cannot doubt the proposition “I
exist” – or so it appears.
Seeming to reinforce further the suspicion that the cogito
cannot be doubted is a more general thesis Descartes holds concerning
the doubt-resistance of any matters that are clearly and
distinctly perceived:
[T]he nature of my mind is such that I cannot but assent to these
things, at least so long as I clearly perceive them. (Med. 5, AT 7:65,
CSM 2:45)
[M]y nature is such that so long as I perceive something very clearly
and distinctly I cannot but believe it to be true. (Med. 5, AT 7:69,
CSM 2:48)
How, then, is it possible to doubt such matters? According to one
interpretation, the answer is that we cannot doubt them
directly, however, we can doubt them in an indirect
manner. That is, rather than directing the doubt at particular such
propositions, as that I exist, or that 2+3=5, the doubt is
instead directed at the cognitive faculties by which we
apprehend such propositions. By way of analogy, consider that if a
calculator were defective, it would cast doubt on any calculations it
generated. Likewise, if my own mind were in some sense defective, this
would cast doubt on any matters I apprehended – no matter how
evident those matters might seem. By directing the doubt at the
veracity of my own cognitive faculties, I do thereby
indirectly doubt the particular propositions apprehended by
means of those faculties.
A wealth of texts support that this is how the Evil Genius Doubt is
intended to operate. Consider these (italics are added):
[Perhaps some God could have given me a nature such that I was
deceived even in matters which seemed most evident.
(Med. 3, AT 7:36, CSM 2:25)
I can convince myself that I have a natural disposition to go
wrong from time to time in matters which I think I perceive
as evidently as can be. (Med. 5, AT 7:70, CSM 2:48)
I saw nothing to rule out the possibility that my natural
constitution made me prone to error even in matters which
seemed to me most true. (Med. 6, AT 7:77, CSM 2:53)
[T]he most serious doubt [arises] from our ignorance about whether our
nature might not be such as to make us go wrong even in
matters which seemed to us utterly evident. (Prin.
1:30; AT 8a:16, CSM 1:203)
As each passage conveys, the doubt is directed not at the particular
object level propositions undermined, but at the possibility of our
having a defective cognitive nature. (In this vein, Carriero helpfully
refers to the doubt under the heading, ‘imperfect-nature
doubt’ (2009, 27), rather than Evil Genius Doubt.) As each
passage also conveys, the doubt effectively undermines even the
“most evident” of matters. Because the doubt is indirect,
it’s blind to the particular propositions it undercuts. The
relevant question does arguably shift from, “How could
a doubt undermine the cogito?”, to “How could
this doubt fail to undermine even the cogito?”
Indeed, the first of the above passages expressly includes the
cogito with the list of example propositions being indirectly
called into doubt – this, in the pivotal fourth paragraph of the
Third Meditation:
The suggestion is of an epistemic schizophrenia, of sorts, depending
on whether one’s attention is directed at the object level
propositions, or instead at the possibility of our having defective
cognitive faculties:
Moments of epistemic optimism: While I am directly attending
to a proposition, perceiving it clearly and distinctly, I enjoy an
irresistible cognitive luminance and my assent is compelled.
Moments of epistemic pessimism: When no longer directly
attending – no longer perceiving the proposition clearly and
distinctly – I can entertain the sceptical hypothesis that such
feelings of cognitive luminance are epistemically worthless, indeed
arising from a defective cognitive nature.
Granted, this indirect doubt is exceedingly hyperbolic. Even so, it
entails that we lack the full indubitability requisite to
perfect knowledge. Descartes thus closes the pivotal fourth paragraph,
clarifying that because of the Evil Genius Doubt, nothing
(yet) meets the epistemic standard of perfect knowledge:
A later Third Meditation passage – but one occurring prior to
the arguments for God – can be taken to suggest a very different
interpretation. On this alternative account, some of the matters we
clearly and distinctly perceive are fully indubitable,
thereby counting as perfect knowledge even prior to knowledge of God.
The passage has Descartes drawing a distinction between what is
revealed by the natural light, and what is taught by
nature:
The passage makes clear that the cogito is revealed by the
natural light. On the interpretation at issue, Descartes’ point
is that such matters admit of a privileged sort of doubt-resistance,
whereby they “cannot in any way be open to doubt.” On this
understanding, the scope of Evil Genius Doubt is bounded, in
that not all propositions are vulnerable to the doubt. This is to say
that some propositions, including the cogito, may be fully
indubitable, thus satisfying the requirements of perfect knowledge
– even for atheists.
Defenders of an unbounded doubt interpretation would offer a
different analysis of the passage. First, we saw that Descartes
earlier claimed that what grounds the extraordinary certainty of the
cogito is that “there is simply a clear and distinct
perception.” Yet, that earlier claim is surprising, if the point
of the above passage is that the natural light is
epistemically superior to mere garden variety clarity and
distinctness. A remark Descartes makes to Hobbes is relevant:
“As everyone knows, a ‘light in the intellect’ means
transparent clarity of cognition.” (Replies 3, AT 7:192, CSM
2:135) This suggests that “natural light” references are
simply another way of talking about clear and distinct perception. On
this point, Carriero notes: “I do not see an important
distinction for Descartes between something’s being revealed to
me by the light of nature and my perceiving clearly that thing’s
being the case” (2008, 305). Note further that a bounded doubt
interpretation of this passage is at odds with the numerous other
passages we’ve examined indicating that even the cogito
is vulnerable to the Evil Genius Doubt.
How, then, do unbounded doubt interpreters deal with this passage? In
context, the point of the natural light passage is not to draw a
distinction between two grades of clear and distinct perception;
it’s instead to clarify the distinction between the kind of
probabilistic reasoning the meditator had invoked in prior remarks,
and the irresistible evidentness accompanying our very best
cognitions, such as the cogito. We can indeed take the point
of the passage to apply to moments of careful attention: even while
directly attending to the probabilistic matters (taught by nature), we
recognize that there are grounds for doubt; whereas, when directly
attending to our epistemically best cognitions (revealed by the
natural light), we simply cannot doubt them. This reading renders the
passage continuous with our reading of the other passages. Again, in
the pivotal fourth paragraph of the Third Meditation: “when I
turn to the things themselves which I think I perceive very clearly, I
am so convinced by them that I spontaneously declare: let whoever can
do so deceive me, he will never bring it about that I am nothing, so
long as I continue to think I am something”; i.e.,
while directly attending to them, the matters revealed by the
natural light “cannot in any way be open to doubt.” And
yet, upon diverting attention, they fall prey to the Evil Genius
Doubt.
Further reading: For important passages in Descartes’
handling of the cogito, see the second and third sets of
Objections and Replies. In the secondary literature, see Beyssade
(1993), Broughton (2002), Carriero (2009), Cunning (2007), Curley
(1978), Frankfurt (1966), Hintikka (1962), Kenny (1968), Markie
(1992), Peacocke (2012), Sarkar (2003), Stroud (2008), Vendler (1984),
Vinci (1998), Williams (1978), and Wilson (1978).
Recall that Descartes characterizes the cogito as an
Archimedean point, of sorts, in his constructive efforts at finding
something “certain and unshakeable.” It is clear how the
cogito serves this role on interpretations rendering it as
immune to the Evil Genius Doubt. In what sense is it an Archimedean
point on interpretations rendering it vulnerable to doubt? Insofar as
the cogito is the first cognition noticed to resist any
efforts at a direct doubt, it can be said to play an
Archimedean role. For it exemplifies the kind of cognitions Descartes
employs in his constructive efforts, arguing for a solution to the
sceptical problem.
Descartes indeed uses the cogito to clarify the epistemically
privileged status of clear and distinct perception, even formulating
clarity and distinctness as underwriting a general rule for
discovering truth. The passage occurs in the second paragraph of the
Third Meditation:
I shall refer to this general rule the ‘C&D Rule’.
Though interpretations differ, the context of the passage indicates
the rule is treated as provisional – i.e., further work
will be needed before the rule can be regarded as finally established.
On two counts, the announcement of the rule is carefully tinged with
caution, in anticipation of the revelation to come (two paragraphs
later) that even clearly and distinctly perceived matters are
vulnerable to the Evil Genius Doubt. First, the passage notes that
being clearly and distinctly perceived “would not be enough to
make me certain of the truth of the matter,” if the truth of
such matters could be undermined. Second, the announcement includes an
important qualification, in saying that it does “now seem”
(videor) that this is a justified rule. Because it soon
emerges that the Evil Genius Doubt undermines the veracity of the
rule, Descartes assumes the burden of trying to establish the
rule – a proof he takes to occur not in this early Third
Meditation passage, but only later, after having argued for an
all-perfect God: “in the Fourth Meditation it is proved that
everything that we clearly and distinctly perceive is true”
(Synopsis, AT 7:15, CSM 2:11).
 (Section 5.3
 discusses Descartes’ Fourth Meditation argument for the C&D
Rule.)
If even clear and distinct perception is subject to doubt, how is the
meditator to make progress? How can he construct arguments in the
effort to solve the sceptical problem? This brings into focus the
issue of whether Descartes’ procedure is viciously
circular. For it seems that in the very process of
arguing for a truth rule, Descartes is already employing that
very rule. For now, we’ll set side this issue of circularity
(returning to it in
 Section 6).
In his strategy for making constructive arguments, Descartes builds on
the fact that clearly and distinctly perceived matters appear to us to
be utterly telling, i.e., while our perception is clear and
distinct. So, by employing none other than premises and reasoning that
are clearly and distinctly perceived, we can make rational progress
– this, notwithstanding that those very same proofs fall
vulnerable to indirect doubt, once our attention is no longer clear
and distinct. The following Fifth Meditation passage illustrates the
point:
Of course, Descartes will need some sort of final solution to the
problem of ongoing indirect doubt. In the meantime, he has his
meditator attempting to move forward, constructing anti-sceptical
arguments.
The broader argumentative strategy is revealed at the end of the
pivotal fourth paragraph of the Third Meditation: “in order to
remove even this slight reason for doubt, as soon as the opportunity
arises I must examine whether there is a God, and, if there is,
whether he can be a deceiver.” So, in the effort to establish
the C&D Rule, the meditator makes arguments to the conclusion that
his creator is not an evil genius, but an all-perfect creator who
would not allow him to be deceived about what he clearly and
distinctly perceives.
The broader argument unfolds in two main steps. The first main step
involves Third Meditation arguments for the existence of of an
all-perfect God. From these arguments the meditator concludes:
There is much of interest in Descartes’ Third Meditation
arguments for an all-perfect creator God. (Note that the Fifth
Meditation advances a further argument for God.) In the interests of
space, and of focusing on epistemological concerns, however, these
arguments will not be considered here. (For an overview of
Descartes’ proofs, see Nolan (2014) and Nolan and Nelson
(2006).)
The second main step involves an argument from the premise (now
established) that an all-perfect God exists, to the general veracity
of the C&D Rule – whereby, whatever is clearly and
distinctly perceived is guaranteed to be true. It is this second main
step of the broader argument to which we now turn.
It might seem that a separate argument for the C&D Rule is
unneeded – that having demonstrated a non-deceiving God, the
veracity of the rule is a straightforward consequence. But this is too
fast. Why should only the C&D Rule be a straightforward
consequence, but not also a more general infallibility of all
our judgments? Essentially this point is made in the First Meditation,
at the introduction of the Evil Genius Doubt. As we saw, the meditator
there observes that what seems to follow from the standard view
– whereby God “is said to be supremely good,” rather
than a deceiver – is that God would not allow us ever
to be mistaken in our judgments:
In short, the most straightforward consequence of an all-perfect
creator would seem to be the universal rule: If I form a judgment,
then it is true. Yet quite clearly, this rule
doesn’t hold. What emerges is an instance of the problem of
evil, here applied to judgment error. As the passage reasons:
These First Meditation remarks set the stage for the discussion that
comes in the Fourth Meditation. Descartes needs a theodicy for error
– theodicy being an effort to explain how God is
compatible with evil. The theodicy needs to show that the existence of
an all-perfect God is compatible with some forms of judgment error,
but not others; somehow, God allows error in our sensory judgments,
while guaranteeing the inerrancy of judgments based on clear and
distinct perception. In contrast with the First Meditation setting,
the context of the Fourth Meditation comes on the heels of a
demonstration of the existence of an all-perfect God. The argument of
the Fourth Meditation thus begins by reviewing the problem where the
First Meditation left it, but in the light of the meditator’s
newfound conclusion – “to begin with, I recognize that it
is impossible that God should ever deceive me.” The passage
continues:
Seeking to resolve the problem, the meditator investigates the causes
of error. In the course of the discussion, Descartes puts forward his
theory whereby judgment arises from the cooperation of the
intellect and the will: the role of the intellect is
to consider a perceptual content – i.e., something seeming to be
the case, thereby functioning as a possible judgment; the role of the
will is to give assent (or dissent), or withhold assent, to the
perceptual content under consideration.
The investigation concludes that the blameworthy cause of error lies
in our improper use of our will. Neither the intellect nor the will is
inherently defective (though each is, of course, finite), nor is there
inherent defect in the design of how they cooperate – i.e.,
their design does not render error inevitable. The design does make
for the possibility of error, in that “the scope of the will is
wider than that of the intellect”: my will is able to assent to
more kinds of matters than just those that I clearly and distinctly
understand; “but instead of restricting it within the same
limits, I extend its use to matters which I do not understand”
(AT 7:58, CSM 2:40). In short, actual mistakes of judgment arise from
user error:
The theodicy that emerges is a version of the freewill defense.
Accordingly, we should thank God for giving us freewill, but the cost
of having freewill is the possibility of misusing it. Since error is
the result of misusing our freewill, we should not blame God.
Not only is the theodicy used to explain the kinds of error God
can allow, it serves to clarify the kinds of error God
cannot allow. From the latter arises a proof of the C&D
Rule. God can allow errors that are my fault, but not errors
that would be God’s fault. On occasions when my
perception is clear and distinct, my assent is involuntary and thus
not a result of a misuse of my freewill. In such cases,
assent is a necessary consequence of my cognitive nature – a
point made in many passages, as we’ve seen: “our mind is
of such a nature that it cannot help assenting to what it clearly
understands” (AT 3:64, CSMK 147). Since, on occasions of clarity
and distinctness, my assent is the unavoidable consequence of my
God-given cognitive nature, God would properly get the blame if those
judgments resulted in error. Therefore, they are not in error; indeed
they could not be. That an evil genius might have created me
casts doubt on my clear and distinct judgments. That, instead, an
all-perfect God created me guarantees that these judgments are true. A
clever strategy of argument thus unfolds – effectively inverting
the usual reasoning in the problem of evil:
The first premise is argued in the Third Meditation. The second
premise arises from the discussion of the Fourth Meditation. The
result is a divine guarantee of the C&D Rule. Whatever I perceive
clearly and distinctly is guaranteed true, because I am the creature
of an all-perfect God.
The broader case to overcome radical doubt is not yet complete. The
meditator is now in position to reproduce a demonstration – each
step of which he clearly and distinctly perceives – supporting
the grand conclusion that he’s the creation of an all-perfect
God who would not allow him to be mistaken about whatever he perceives
clearly and distinctly. However, when he’s no longer clearly and
distinctly perceiving the steps of the demonstration, the grand
conclusion is vulnerable to the lingering Evil Genius Doubt. It seems
that perfect knowledge is not yet within his grasp. Moreover, the
demonstration itself looks suspiciously circular – the so-called
Cartesian Circle (a problem to which we now turn).
Further reading: On discussions of truth criteria in
the 16th and 17th centuries, see Popkin (1979). On the dubitability of
clear and distinct perception (including the cogito), see
Carriero (2009, 339ff), Newman and Nelson (1999).
Students of philosophy can expect to be taught a longstanding
interpretation according to which Descartes’ broader argument is
viciously circular. He first argues from clearly and distinctly
perceived premises to the conclusion that an all-perfect God exists;
he then argues from the premise that an all-perfect God exists to the
conclusion that whatever is clearly and distinctly perceived is true.
The worry is that he presupposes the C&D Rule in the effort to
prove the C&D Rule. Despite its prima facie plausibility,
Descartes scholarship generally resists the vicious circularity
interpretation, based on numerous textual considerations. But even
putting those texts to the side, it should be surprising that the
project would be viciously circular. As Thomas Lennon notes:
Consider first what every plausible interpretation must concede: that
the two main steps of the broader argument unfold in a manner
suggestive of a circle – let us indeed refer to them as
‘arcs’. The Third Meditation arguments for God define one
arc:
The Fourth Meditation argument defines a second arc:
That the broader argument unfolds in accord with these two steps is
uncontroversial. The question of interest concerns whether, strictly
speaking, these arcs form an epistemic circle. The statement
of Arc 1 admits of considerable ambiguity. How one resolves this
ambiguity determines whether the arcs strictly form a circle.
Let’s begin by clarifying what Arc 1 would have to mean to
generate vicious circularity. We’ll then consider the main
alternative interpretations of that arc by which commentators avoid a
vicious circle.
Vicious Circularity interpretation:
Arc 1: The conclusion that an all-perfect God exists
is derived from premises that are clearly and distinctly perceived
– i.e., premises that are accepted only because of having
first accepted the general veracity of propositions that are clearly
and distinctly perceived.
Arc 2: The general veracity of propositions that are
clearly and distinctly perceived is derived from the conclusion that
an all-perfect God exists.
Thus rendered, Descartes’ broader argument is viciously
circular. The italicized segment of Arc 1 marks an addition to the
original statement of it, thereby clarifying the circularity reading.
Interpreted in this way, Descartes begins his Third Meditation proofs
of God by presupposing the general veracity of clear and distinct
perception. That is, he starts by assuming the C&D Rule and then
uses the rule in the course of demonstrating it. Evidently, this way
of reading Descartes’ argument has pedagogical appeal, for it is
widely taught (outside of Descartes scholarship) despite the absence
of serious textual merit. If there is one point of general agreement
in the secondary literature, it is that the texts do not sustain this
interpretation.
How then should Arc 1 be understood? There are countless
interpretations that avoid vicious circularity, along with numerous
schemes for cataloguing them. For present purposes, let’s
catalogue the various accounts according to two main kinds of
non-circular strategies that commentators attribute to Descartes. (The
secondary literature offers multiple variations of each of these main
kinds of interpretations, though the variations won’t here be
explored.)
Bounded Doubt interpretations:
Arc 1: The conclusion that an all-perfect God exists
is derived from premises that are clearly and distinctly perceived
– indeed, premises belonging to a special class of truths
that are fully immune to doubt prior to establishing the general
veracity of propositions that are clearly and distinctly
perceived.
Arc 2: The general veracity of propositions that are
clearly and distinctly perceived is derived from the conclusion that
an all-perfect God exists.
Again, the italicized segment marks an addition to the original
statement of Arc 1. Call this a ‘Bounded Doubt’
interpretation, because this kind of interpretation construes
hyperbolic doubt as bounded. More precisely, the Evil Genius
Doubt is (on this reading) bounded in the sense that its sceptical
potency does not extend to all judgments: a special class of truths is
outside the bounds of doubt. Exemplary of this special class are the
cogito and, importantly, the premises of the Third Meditation
proofs of God. Propositions in this special class can be perfectly
known, even by atheists.
On this interpretation, there is no vicious circularity in the broader
argument, because the truths serving as premises in the arguments for
the C&D Rule are perfectly knowable independently of that rule.
That is, throughout the arguments of Arcs 1 and 2, the premises
employed count as perfectly knowledge prior to the knowledge
of the C&D Rule they help establish.
Proponents of this interpretation are apt to cite Third Meditation
passage distinguishing what’s revealed by the natural
light, and what’s taught by nature (see
 Section 4.3).
 In order to extend perfect knowledge beyond the privileged class of
truths (revealed by the natural light), it is necessary to establish
the general veracity of the C&D Rule. Thus, the need (on this
interpretation) for Arc 2 in the broader project.
The other main kind of interpretation avoids circularity in a
different manner. Let’s consider that alternative.
Unbounded Doubt interpretations:
Arc 1: The conclusion that an all-perfect God exists
is derived from premises that are clearly and distinctly perceived
– i.e., premises that are accepted despite being vulnerable
to Evil Genius Doubt, because our cognitive nature compels us to
assent to clearly and distinctly perceived propositions.
Arc 2: The general veracity of propositions that are
clearly and distinctly perceived is derived from the conclusion that
an all-perfect God exists.
Again, the italicized segment marks an addition to the original
statement of Arc 1. Let’s call this an ‘Unbounded
Doubt’ interpretation, because this kind of interpretation
construes hyperbolic doubt as unbounded. More precisely, the
Evil Genius Doubt is (on this reading) unbounded in the sense that it
undermines all manner of judgments – even the
cogito, even the premises of the Third Meditation proofs of
God – when the mind is no longer attending to them clearly and
distinctly. Insofar as the meditator assents to the steps of these
proofs, he does so not because of having an understanding of clear and
distinct perceptions as being guaranteed true, but because the mind
cannot but assent to them while attending clearly
and distinctly.
Importantly, if doubt is thus unbounded there is no circularity. For,
on this reading of Arc 1, the arguments therein do not presuppose the
general veracity of the C&D Rule. The premises contributing to the
conclusion of an all-perfect God remain vulnerable to hyperbolic
doubt. Throughout this stage of the inquiry, none of the
meditator’s judgments based in clear and distinct perception
constitutes perfect knowledge. It is the unboundedness of hyperbolic
doubt that underwrites the No Atheistic Perfect Knowledge Thesis.
A central feature of this interpretation is worth repeating. It is
natural for critics to ask why the arguments of Arc 1 are
accepted by the meditator if, indeed, Evil Genius Doubt
remains in play. The answer lies in our earlier discussion of the
indirect manner in which the doubt undermines clear and
distinct perception
 (Section 4.3).
 While clearly and distinctly attending to a proposition, the
mind cannot but assent: “my nature is such that so long as I
perceive something very clearly and distinctly I cannot but believe it
to be true.” Therefore, while the meditator attends to the steps
of the Third Meditation arguments for God, he cannot but accept them.
However, the meditator does not (yet) have perfect knowledge of those
premises, nor of their conclusions. How, then do those matters finally
rise to the status of perfect knowledge? We return to this issue,
below. At present, the focus is on the issue of circularity.
Though bounded and unbounded doubt interpretations both avoid vicious
circularity, each confronts further difficulties, both textual and
philosophical. Avoiding the charge of vicious circularity marks the
beginning of the interpreter’s work, not the end. Bounded doubt
interpreters must explain why, in the first place, the Evil
Genius Doubt’s potency does not extend to propositions in the
special class. Unbounded doubt interpreters must explain why, in the
final analysis, the Evil Genius Doubt eventually loses it
undermining potency. Let’s consider each of these further
problems.
Granting a bounded doubt interpretation, why – in the first
place – does the Evil Genius Doubt’s potency not extend to
propositions in the special class? How is it that the doubt
does undermine the proposition “that two and three
added together make five,” but not the proposition
“that there must be at least as much [reality] in the efficient
and total cause as in the effect of that cause”? The first
proposition is included in the list of examples that are
undermined by the Evil Genius Doubt (see the fourth paragraph of the
Third Meditation). The second proposition is a premise in a Third
Meditation argument for God – a proposition immune to doubt,
according to bounded doubt interpretations. What is supposed to be the
relevant difference between these propositions? Given the indirect
manner in which Evil Genius Doubt operates, there seems no clear
explanation of why the doubt succeeds in undermining the first
proposition but is somehow resisted by the second. Further awkward for
this interpretation is that the cogito is included in the
list of examples that that same fourth paragraph passage implies is
vulnerable to doubt.
Granting an unbounded doubt interpretation, why – in the final
analysis – does the Evil Genius Doubt eventually lose its
undermining potency? Putting the point ironically: Why doesn’t
the Evil Genius Doubt undermine the very arguments intended to refute
the Evil Genius Doubt, as soon as the mind is no longer attending to
those premises? Consider Descartes’ own explanation of how
hyperbolic doubt undermines the conclusions of arguments once their
premises are no longer in the mind’s view:
So, when we’re no longer clearly and distinctly perceiving the
steps of an argument, we do not “possess the same firm and
immutable conviction” of its conclusion. But precisely such
moments are when hyperbolic doubt does its undermining work. This
means that upon diverting attention from the premises of Arcs 1 and 2,
it is then possible to run the Evil Genius Doubt on their conclusions.
It would thus seem that unbounded doubt interpretations leave us in a
Sisyphus-like predicament. According to the myth, each time Sisyphus
pushes his boulder near to the top of the hill, the boulder somehow
slips away, rolling to the very bottom, and the whole process must
start all over. By carefully constructing the arguments of Arcs 1 and
2, the meditator gains anti-sceptical momentum, pushing his project
near to the goal of perfect knowledge. But each time, once his
attention is diverted from the steps of the arguments, he finds
himself back at the bottom of the hill, wondering about the
credibility of those proofs that had seemed so evident: that is, the
question now arises “as to whether we possess the same firm and
immutable conviction concerning these conclusions, when we simply
recollect that they were previously deduced from quite evident
principles.” As Michael Ayers writes:
Let’s turn to an account that purports to solve this problem
with unbounded doubt interpretations.
Again, the hard question for unbounded doubt interpretations: Why, in
the final analysis, does the Evil Genius Doubt eventually lose it
undermining potency? One recent unbounded doubt interpretation (Newman
and Nelson 1999) offers a solution, including an explanation of why
Descartes waits until the end of the Fifth Meditation to claim final
victory over the sceptical problem. Here is a sketch of the
account.
Descartes claims that his final solution to the sceptical problem
makes it “impossible for us ever to have any reason for doubting
what we are convinced of.” We’ve seen that the sticking
point in the account is indirect doubt. Descartes rejects
that we could overcome the problem via uninterrupted clear and
distinct perception: “my nature is also such that I cannot fix
my mental vision continually on the same thing, so as to keep
perceiving it clearly; and often the memory of a previously made
judgement may come back, when I am no longer attending to the
arguments which led me to make it.” At such moments of
inattention, an indirect doubt remains possible, so long as we can
make sense of the evil genius scenario, or any other scenario wherein
we have a defective cognitive nature. It thus seems that a final
solution to the problem would need, somehow, to make it no longer
possible to make sense of the relevant sceptical scenarios. Indeed,
the interpretation has it the sceptical scenarios become
self-evidently incoherent. We come to have an utterly basic
apprehension that we’re the creation of an all-perfect creator
who would not allow us to be deceived about what we clearly and
distinctly perceive.
The needed apprehension of God would need to be self-evident. For
suppose my apprehension is grounded in a demonstration. In that case,
it’s possible to think of the conclusion of that demonstration
without also thinking of the premises; and on such occasions, my
confidence in the demonstration is vulnerable to an indirect doubt.
Thus, the needed apprehension of God is a self-evident, clear and
distinct conception that renders – as literally unthinkable
– the very sceptical scenarios that underwrite indirect
doubt.
A useful analogy lies in the doubt-resisting character of the
cogito. If I attempt a direct doubt of own my
existence, the effort is self-stultifying; I immediately apprehend
that I must exist, in order to attempt the doubt. What Descartes needs
is a similarly strong and immediate doubt-resisting outcome in
connection with attempts at an indirect doubt. That is, on
occasions of trying to undermine clearly and distinctly perceived
matters – e.g., by doubting God’s existence, or
benevolence, or the like – the very effort at doubt would be
immediately thwarted.
Multiple texts suggest that this is the account Descartes intends, and
that the Fifth Meditation is the locus of the meditator’s
discovery of an enhanced, apprehension of God. The Fifth Meditation
introduces various themes about innate truths, including the positive
epistemic effects of repeated meditation: truths initially noticed
only by means of inference might eventually come to be apprehended
self-evidently. In the build-up to the passage claiming that the Evil
Genius Doubt is finally and fully overcome, Descartes writes:
Descartes reiterates the theme in the Second Replies:
These passages convey that one’s apprehension of God eventually
upgrades from being inferential, to being transparently self-evident.
Granting that the meditator has achieved an apprehension of God of
this kind, it plausibly explains why Descartes would think he’s
achieved a final solution to the sceptical problem. Given his newfound
epistemic standing, the meditator would be unable to make coherent
sense of the Evil Genius Doubt. His clear and distinct perceptions
would be fully indubitable, thereby counting as perfect knowledge.
The interpretation helps explain two passages wherein Descartes
purports to be detailing the final solution to the sceptical problem.
In both passages, he can seem simply to be asserting that
sceptical doubts are impossible, as if having forgotten the
indirect manner in which his own hyperbolic doubt operates.
But if we take Descartes to be assuming that the apprehension of God
has become utterly self-evident, both passages make more sense. The
one passage arises in the Second Replies, in the context of rebutting
an objection to the effect that, in the final analysis, it remains
possible to doubt clear and distinct perception. Descartes replies
that the objector is “still stuck fast” in doubts
“put forward in the First Meditation,” but “very
carefully removed in the succeeding Meditations,” adding:
The other passage arises in the Fifth Meditation, in the concluding
summary explanation of how the sceptical problem is finally overcome.
Importantly, on the present interpretation, is the context in which
the summary explanation occurs: namely, on the heels of revealing the
newly discovered thesis, that nothing “is more self-evident than
the fact that the supreme being exists.” In that context,
Descartes explains that a final solution to the sceptical problem has
been achieved.
Absent a self-evident apprehension of God, the two passages appear
inexplicable, with Descartes seeming to misunderstand the sceptical
implications of his own Evil Genius Doubt. But on the self-evident God
interpretation, both passages read as a summary of the anti-sceptical
effects of it being impossible to conceive of God as a deceiver. As
Descartes writes to Voetius, the very thought of God as a deceiver
“implies a conceptual contradiction – that is, it cannot
be conceived” (May 1643 letter, AT 8b:60, CSMK 222). The
interpretation also makes sense of why the final victory over
scepticism is announced not at the end of the Fourth Meditation, but at
the end the Fifth – after the further result concerning an
enhanced, self-evident apprehension of God.
Michael Della Rocca has recently argued that a further circle arises
from considerations in the Fourth Meditation – a problem he
suspects is “more difficult to get out of than the traditional
problem of circularity” (2011, 98). To help clarify this further
circle, Della Rocca focuses on a twofold question:
As Della Rocca understands the broader Fourth Meditation argument, the
claim that we should assent only to what we clearly and distinctly
perceive is an essential step in the ongoing argument to establish the
divine guarantee of clear and distinct perception. Since this step
presupposes the eventual conclusion, that conclusion is based on
circular reasoning:
Perhaps we can avoid this alleged circle. The linchpin of Della
Rocca’s charge of circularity is his contention that
“Descartes’s reason for saying that we should assent only
to clear and distinct ideas is that such ideas are guaranteed to be
true and ideas that are not clear and distinct are not guaranteed to
be true” (2011, 97). Though Descartes can be read in this way,
the texts support the following alternative understanding of the
broader argumentative narrative. In the First Meditation, the
meditator initially resolves that he should withhold assent to
anything which is “not completely certain and indubitable”
(AT 7:18, CSM 2:12). Early in the Third Meditation, having reflected
on the epistemic impressiveness of the cogito, the meditator
discovers that all, but only, clear and distinct
perceptions are utterly assent-compelling. As a practical consequence,
his initial resolve effectively implies that he should assent only to
clear and distinct perceptions – not because of presupposing the
conclusion of the eventual proof of the C&D Rule, but because
these are the only perceptions to which he can’t but
assent. This provides a practical answer to Della Rocca’s
question, concerning why we should “not assent to ideas that are
not clear and distinct and why is there no such obligation not to
assent to clear and distinct ideas.” It is in the Fourth
Meditation that the meditator purports to demonstrate the divine
guarantee of the C&D Rule. However, no step of that demonstration
presupposes that clear and distinct perceptions have already been
established as true; i.e., the conclusion of the demonstration is not,
as Della Rocca contends, “based on the claim that clear and
distinct ideas are guaranteed to be true.” Rather (as we saw in
 Section 5.3),
 the conclusion purports to be based on an analysis of the respective
contributions of the intellect and the will, to judgment formation.
Summarizing the key steps:
Granted, the meditator needs each of the demonstrative steps to be
clearly and distinctly perceived. However, he needs this not because
of presupposing the conclusion to be proved, but in order to be in
compliance with his own initial resolve, stated in the First
Meditation.
Central to the above account avoiding Della Rocca’s circle is
(among other claims) the thesis that clear and distinct perceptions
are assent-compelling – i.e., as Descartes writes, that
“the nature of my mind is such that I cannot but assent to these
things, at least so long as I clearly perceive them.” It it thus
worth noting that Della Rocca wavers on whether Descartes holds this
thesis: he interprets a remark in Descartes’ correspondence (9
Feb 1645, AT 4:173, CSMK 245) to suggest “that we can withhold
assent from even a current clear and distinct perception” (2006,
155).
We noted in
 Section 1.1
 that Descartes’ clearest statements appear to indicate a
justified belief analysis of perfect knowledge. Consider
again the relevant Second Replies passage:
The last part of the passage emphasizes two conditions: a belief
condition, expressed in terms of conviction, and a
justification condition, expressed in terms of indubitability
or unshakability – “conviction based on a reason so strong
that it can never be shaken by any stronger reason.”
Conspicuously missing is any further condition stipulating that the
conviction must be true. The passage does clarify, of
anything that would count as perfect knowledge, that it is
“completely accepted as true”; that we are
“convinced that it is true,” indeed, that we are
“firmly convinced.” But these remarks speak to the belief
condition, not the justification condition. Indeed, the passage is
plausibly read even more strongly: i.e., not merely as omitting
mention of a truth condition, but as confirming some broad possibility
that what we regard as indubitable truths are,
“absolutely speaking, false.”
Why, then, is Descartes dismissive of the stated objection, indicating
that it shouldn’t “bother” us? His remarks indicate
that he takes the possibility in question as simply a further
iteration of Evil Genius Doubt – “I see that you are still
stuck fast in the doubts which I put forward in the First
Meditation.” Whether a deceiving God is really
possible, it’s something Descartes has argued to be unimaginable
for perfect knowers, i.e., for successful graduates of the
Meditations – “it is impossible to imagine that
he [God] is a deceiver.” On a plausible reading, therefore,
Descartes is dismissive of the objection not on metaphysical grounds
of absolute impossibility, but on epistemic grounds of
indubitability: the “alleged ‘absolute
falsity’,” noted in the objection, should in no way
“bother us” because our conviction is “so firm that
it is quite incapable of being destroyed.”
Why does Descartes not add a truth condition, thereby ensuring that
beliefs counting as perfect knowledge are true? In an influential 1970
book, Harry Frankfurt offers a provocative answer. He argues that
Descartes’ goal, truth-wise, is to establish the consistency of
our beliefs, but not their correspondence with an external reality.
Writes Frankfurt:
Frankfurt thinks that Descartes’ novel plan involves arguing
that our best rational efforts show that our best rational efforts are
logically consistent: it is “an attempt to show that there are
no good reasons for believing that reason is unreliable – that
the mistrust of reason is not supported by reason and that it is
accordingly irrational” (1970, 175). Frankfurt adds that
“the conception of truth involved in [Descartes’] question
about the truth of what is clearly and distinctly perceived is, in
other words, a conception of coherence rather than of
correspondence” (1970, 170).
Frankfurt’s coherentist interpretation is at odds with a number
of textual and doctrinal considerations. Descartes writes to Mersenne
that “the word ‘truth’, in the strict sense, denotes
the conformity of thought with its object” (16 Oct 1639, AT
2:597, CSMK 139). The suggestion here is of some version of a
correspondence theory. Also, on the most straightforward reading of
the epistemic moves in the Meditations, Descartes is
presupposing that at least some truths involve extramental
metaphysical relations. Consider that Evil Genius Doubt is,
fundamentally, a worry not about whether our various clear and
distinct judgments cohere, but about whether they accurately
represent an extramental reality – i.e., a doubt about
“whether things do in reality correspond to our perception of
them” (Replies 4, AT 7:226, CSM 2:159). Interestingly, Frankfurt
himself came to renounce the interpretation:
How then should we interpret the Second Replies passage, and how
should we understand the absence of a truth condition? I suggest that
the lack of a truth condition need not reflect an indifference about
truth, as opposed to a view about how a concern for truth is properly
expressed in an account of knowledge. We can understand Descartes as
wanting a fully internalist account whereby all
conditions of knowledge are accessible to the would-be knower. Putting
the point another way, if the question of whether the
conditions of knowledge had been met were answerable only by
“God or an angel,” it would impose an unacceptably
externalist element on the theory. On a justified
belief rendering, his account of perfect knowledge is
fully internalist; yet, with the addition of a truth condition, it is
not – at least, not given a correspondence theory of
truth, in the context of metaphysical realism. Importantly, then, in
attributing to Descartes a justified belief account, we need not
thereby attribute to him an indifference concerning truth.
Rather, we can attribute to him the view that the way properly to
express one’s concern for truth is by enforcing high
justificatory standards. Again, from that same passage:
One possible objection to a justified belief account is expressed by
Lennon, who worries that on such accounts the desired cognitive state
(indubitability) “could as well be achieved by a pill”;
adding that “Descartes would not be satisfied with such a pill
because his aim is not just to arrive at certainty, but truth, which
he cannot help but think he has achieved” (2008, 167). (Cf.
Hatfield 2006, 135, who expresses a related objection.)
Granted, if the pill simply prevented me from apprehending any reasons
for doubting my beliefs, we’d be loath to regard such beliefs as
knowledge. Descartes himself makes a related point in connection with
an atheist geometer who happens never to doubt his beliefs, simply
because the Evil Genius Doubt never occurs to him:
Presumably, Descartes’ point holds whether the doubt simply
never occurs to him, or is instead prevented from occurring to him by
a pill. But note that the objection is telling only insofar as the
requisite indubitability is understood as merely
psychological. Yet clear texts indicate that Descartes regards
clear and distinct perception as having epistemic import beyond mere
doubt-resistance. His use of light metaphors, including the
association of clarity and distinctness with the natural
light, strongly convey a form of rational insight. In
his view, our inability to doubt the matters we clearly and distinctly
perceive is not simply a causal result of our cognitive nature;
it’s also a rational result of what such perception enables us
to understand.
Consider a revised version of Lennon’s worry. Imagine that the
magic pill is so magical as to instill in us a clear and distinct
understanding of the matters we perceive – i.e., assume the pill
functions as an alternative cognitive route to clear and distinct
perception. In that case, the desired cognitive state is
indeed “achieved by a pill.” Yet, it seems Descartes can
happily accept the result.
Another possible objection is that Descartes’ high justificatory
standards generate a de facto truth condition: because having
Cartesian certainty entails that one’s beliefs are
true, truth is a necessary condition of knowledge. But this objection
misses a key point. As suggested in the Second Replies passage,
Cartesian certainty – understood in terms of
indubitability – does not, strictly speaking, rule out
the broad possibility that we are in error. The notions of
indubitability and truth are different: that
“p is indubitable” entails not that
“p is true,” but that “there can be no
reasons for doubting p.” Descartes’ final
solution to the Evil Genius Doubt entails not that an evil genius
cannot be, but that it cannot be coherently
conceived. And that it cannot be coherently conceived, thinks
Descartes, gives us “everything that we could reasonably
want” – not because such coherence is the goal, but
because of what it establishes, truth-wise.
Further reading: For Descartes’ response to the charges
of circularity: see the Fourth Replies. For texts concerning his final
solution to hyperbolic doubt: see Fifth Meditation; Second Replies;
letter to Regius (24 May 1640). For a treatment of the Fourth
Meditation proof of the C&D Rule, see Newman (1999). For
discussions of the role of the Fifth Meditation in the eventual,
self-evident apprehension of God, see Newman and Nelson (1999), Nolan
(2005), and Nolan and Nelson (2006). For examples of unbounded doubt
interpretations, see Carriero (2009), Curley (1978 and 1993), DeRose
(1992), Loeb (1992), Newman (2012), Newman and Nelson (1999), Sosa
(1997a and 1997b), and Van Cleve (1979). For examples of bounded doubt
interpretations, see Broughton (2002), Doney (1955), Della Rocca
(2005), Kenny (1968), Morris (1973), Rickless (2005), and Wilson
(1978). For alternative schemes for cataloguing interpretations, see
Hatfield (2006) and Newman and Nelson (1999). For an anthology devoted
largely to the Cartesian Circle, see Doney (1987). For discussions of
the role of truth in perfect knowledge, see Frankfurt (1970 and 1978),
Hatfield (2006), Lennon (2008), Loeb (1992), and Newman and Nelson
(1999).
The opening line of the Sixth Meditation makes clear its principal
objective: “It remains for me to examine whether material things
exist” (AT 7:71, CSM 2:50). At this juncture, the meditator
perfectly knows of his own existence and of God’s. It follows
that there’s an external world with at least one object, namely,
God. However, the existence of an external material world
remains in doubt. Establishing the existence of material bodies is not
a straightforward matter of perceiving them, because, in
Descartes’ view, “bodies are not strictly perceived by the
senses” (see
 Section 9.1).
In his eventual argument, Descartes’ strategy for proving an
external material world has two main parts: first, he argues for the
externality of the causes of sensation; second, he argues for
the materiality of these external causes. (Calling the ideas
in question “sensations” can seem circular, if one
conceives of sensations as having a physiological component. But note
that for Descartes, “what is called ‘having a sensory
perception’,” strictly encompasses only a mental aspect.
Med. 2, AT 7:29, CSM 2:19) From these two steps, it follows that there
exists an external material world. Let’s consider each phase of
the argument.
Descartes builds on a familiar line of argument in the history of
philosophy, itself appealing to the involuntariness of sensations. The
familiar argument is first articulated in the Third Meditation.
Speaking of his apparently adventitious ideas (sensations), the
meditator remarks:
Though some such involuntariness argument has convinced many
philosophers, the inference does not hold up to methodical doubt, as
the meditator explains:
We first examined this passage in regards to the Always Dreaming
Doubt. That doubt raises the problem of the existence of external
things. For all I know, my “waking” experiences are
produced not by external things, but by processes similar to those
producing my dreams. This sceptical hypothesis explains why the
familiar involuntariness argument fails: the inference presupposes
exactly what is at issue – namely, whether involuntarily
received sensory ideas are produced by external things, rather than by
a subconscious faculty of my mind.
Many philosophers have assumed that we lack the epistemic resources to
solve this sceptical problem. For example, Hume writes:
Interestingly, Descartes would agree that experiential
resources cannot solve the problem. By the Sixth Meditation, however,
Descartes purports to have the innate resources he needs to
solve it – notably, innate ideas of mind and body. Among the
metaphysical theses he develops is that mind and body have wholly
distinct essences: the essence of thinking substance is pure thought;
the essence of body is pure extension. In a remarkable maneuver,
Descartes invokes this distinction to refute the sceptical worry that
sensations are produced by a subconscious faculty of the mind:
“nothing can be in me, that is to say, in my mind, of which I am
not aware,” and this “follows from the fact that the soul
is distinct from the body and that its essence is to think” (13
Dec 1640 letter to Mersenne, AT 3:273, CSMK 165f). This result allows
Descartes to supplement the involuntariness argument, thereby
strengthening the inference. For from the additional premise that
nothing can be in my mind of which I am unaware, it follows
that if sensations were being produced by some activity in my mind,
I’d be aware of that activity on the occasion of its operation.
Since I’m not thus aware, it follows that the sensation
I’m having is produced by a cause external to my mind. As
Descartes writes, this cause
It follows that my sensations are caused by external world objects
– i.e., objects external to my mind. It remains to be shown that
these external causes are material objects.
On Descartes’ analysis, there are three possible options for the
kind of external thing causing sensations:
That is, the cause is either infinite substance (God), or finite
substance; and if finite, then either corporeal, or something else.
Descartes thinks he eliminates options (a) and (c) by appeal to God
being no deceiver:
This is a problematic passage. The “great propensity” here
cited is not the irresistible compulsion of clear and distinct
perception. (If it were, the conclusion that sensation is caused by
material objects would follow straightaway from this clear and
distinct perception, via the C&D Rule.) But unless each step of
the argument is clearly and distinctly perceived, Descartes should not
be making the argument. Adding to the difficulties of the passage, he
expressly cites the conclusion as following from the fact that
“God is not a deceiver,” implying that he thinks this
inference is supported by a divine guarantee.
On one kind of interpretation, Descartes relaxes his epistemic
standards in the Sixth Meditation (cf. Schmitt 1986, 493f). He no
longer insists on perfect knowledge, now settling for probabilistic
arguments. Though no decisive texts support the interpretation, it
does find some support. For instance, in the Synopsis to the
Meditations, Descartes writes of his Sixth Meditation
arguments:
The remark can be read as a concession that the Sixth Meditation
arguments are weaker than the earlier arguments about minds and God
– that these later arguments do not “prove what they
establish.” Of course, one need not read the remark this way.
And other texts are unfavorable to this interpretation. For example,
in the opening paragraphs of the Sixth Meditation, Descartes considers
a probabilistic argument for the existence of external bodies. Though
he accepts the proposed account as offering the best explanation, he
nonetheless dismisses it for the express reason that it grounds
“only a probability” – it does not provide the
“basis for a necessary inference that some body exists”
(AT 7:73, CSM 2:51). This is a puzzling dismissal, assuming Descartes
has relaxed his standards to probable inference.
The relaxed standards interpretation falls short for another reason.
It leaves unexplained why Descartes cites a divine guarantee for the
conclusion that sensations are caused by material objects.
On another kind of interpretation, the troubling passage appealing to
a “great propensity” does not mark a relaxing of epistemic
standards. Instead, Descartes is extending the implications of his
discussion of theodicy in the Fourth Meditation to encompass further
cases of natural belief – such beliefs deriving from our
God-given cognitive nature. It was noted above
 (Section 5.2)
 that Descartes thinks the divine guarantee of the C&D Rule
follows, in part, from the fact that God wouldn’t allow us to be
mistaken if the assent is a natural consequence of our God-given
cognitive nature. Suppose Descartes holds that there are further cases
in which an all-perfect God would not allow us to be in error, in part
because the beliefs in question arise naturally from our God-given
cognitive nature. And suppose the further cases involve a
natural propensity to believe which cannot be
corrected by our cognitive faculties. Given these assumptions,
the resulting rule for truth would look something like the
following:
This rule is more expansive than the C&D Rule, in that it
licenses more kinds of judgments. Clauses (i) and (ii) are tailored to
the problematic passage wherein, as we’ve seen, Descartes
invokes two conditions: “God has given me no faculty at all
for recognizing any such source for these ideas; on the contrary,
he has given me a great propensity to believe that they are
produced by corporeal things.” If this is on the right
interpretive track, then Descartes needs some way to justify this
rule. Assuming a proof similar in structure to the proof of the
C&D Rule, the justification might run as follows:
If Descartes affirms premise 2, it explains why he thinks he’s
entitled to this more expansive rule, and without relaxing his
epistemic standards. Indeed, a number of texts indicate that he holds
some version of premise 2. In the relevant Sixth Meditation passage,
Descartes adds that from “the very fact that God is not a
deceiver” there is a “consequent impossibility of there
being any falsity in my opinions which cannot be corrected by some
other faculty supplied by God” (AT 7:80, CSM 2:55f). In another
passage he writes that we would be “doing God an
injustice” if we implied “that God had endowed us with
such an imperfect nature that even the proper use of our powers of
reasoning allowed us to go wrong” (Prin. 3:43, AT
8a:99, CSM 1:255). And in the Second Replies, Descartes addresses case
of judgments that “could not be corrected by any clearer
judgements or by means of any other natural faculty,” adding
that “in such cases I simply assert that it is impossible for us
to be deceived” (Replies 2, AT 7:143f, CSM 2:102f). These
passages make a strong case that something like premise 2 is in play,
indeed implying that God’s benevolent nature entails a more
expansive rule of truth than the C&D Rule. As will emerge,
Descartes looks again to call on this more expansive rule in
his effort to prove that he is not dreaming.
Earlier, we noted another apparent problem in the Sixth Meditation
passage wherein Descartes concludes that the external cause of
sensation is something corporeal. One of his premises cites a
great propensity to believe, yet the propensity is not itself
the irresistible compulsion of clear and distinct perception. Does not
the methodic procedure of the Meditations restrict Descartes
to clear and distinct premises? By way of reply, distinguish (a) that
my sensation has an external cause, and (b) that I have a great
propensity to believe my sensation has an external cause. In
context, the meditator lacks clear and distinct perception of (a).
However, the relevant premise of the argument (as opposed to its
conclusion) is not (a), but (b). And there is no principled reason
that the meditator cannot clearly and distinctly perceive this
premise.
A final observation. It is often unnoticed that the conclusion of
Descartes’ argument for the existence of an external material
world leaves significant scepticism in place. Granting the success of
the argument, my sensations are caused by an external material world.
But for all the argument shows – for all the broader argument of
the Meditations shows, up to this point – my mind might
be joined to a brain in a vat, rather than a full human body.
This isn’t an oversight on Descartes’ part. It’s all
he thinks the argument can prove. For even at this late stage
of the project, the meditator has not yet established himself to be
awake – a line of inquiry to which we now turn.
Further reading: For a variation of the Sixth Meditation
argument for the existence of the external material world, see
Descartes’ Prin. 2.1. See also Friedman (1997), Garber
(1992), and Newman (1994). On the respects in which the Sixth
Meditation inference draws on Fourth Meditation work, see Newman
(1999). For an interpretation of the Sixth Meditation argument
that’s consistent with a direct realist interpretation, see
Carriero (2009, 146ff).
By design, the constructive arguments of the Meditations
unfold even though the meditator remains in doubt about being awake.
This of course reinforces the ongoing theme that perfect knowledge
does not properly encompass judgments of external sense. (The judgment
that an external corporeal world exists is not strictly a judgment of
external sense – as if knowing its existence simply by sensing
it. Rather, as we’ve seen, the judgment arises from an complex
inference about the possible causes of sensations.) In the closing
paragraph of the Sixth Meditation, Descartes revisits the issue of
dreaming. He claims to show how, in principle – even if not
easily in practice – it is possible to achieve perfect knowledge
that one is presently awake.
A casual reading of that final paragraph might suggest that Descartes
offers a naturalistic solution to the problem (i.e., a
non-theistic solution), in the form of a continuity test: since
continuity with past experiences holds only of waking but not
dreaming, checking for the requisite continuity provides a test for
ascertaining that one is awake. The following remarks can be read in
this way:
This naturalistic “solution” prompts two obvious
criticisms, both raised by Hobbes in the Third Objections. First, the
solution runs contrary to Descartes’ No Atheistic Perfect
Knowledge Thesis: since the continuity test (on the naturalistic
reading of it) does not invoke God, it thus appears, as Hobbes notes,
“that someone can know he is awake without knowledge of
the true God” (AT 7:196, CSM 2:137). Second, it seems that one
could dream the requisite continuity: one could “dream
that his dream fits in with his ideas of a long series of past
events,” thus undermining the credibility of the continuity test
(AT 7:195, CSM 2:137).
Mirroring our discussion in
 Section 7.2,
 one kind of interpretation has Descartes relaxing his epistemic
standards. He’s aware that the naturalistic solution does not
stand up to methodic doubt, but he’s not attempting to overcome
the Now Dreaming Doubt with perfect knowledge. A problem for this
interpretation is that it doesn’t square with the following
reply Descartes makes to Hobbes’ first objection: “an
atheist can infer that he is awake on the basis of memory of his past
life” (via the continuity test); but “he cannot know that
this criterion is sufficient to give him the certainty that he is not
mistaken, if he does not know that he was created by a non-deceiving
God” (Replies 3, AT 7:196, CSM 2:137). Evidently,
Descartes’ solution is not supposed to be available to the
atheist. Taken at face value, this reply rules out a relaxed standards
interpretation; it indeed rules out any interpretation involving a
naturalistic solution to the problem of dreaming.
On closer inspection, the Sixth Meditation passage puts forward not a
naturalistic solution, but a theistic one. The meditator
finally concludes that he’s awake because, as the passage
explicitly reads, “God is not a deceiver” (AT 7:90, CSM
2:62).
How does his argument go? Recall, in the proof of the external
material world
 (Section 7.2),
 that Descartes mysteriously invokes the following (divinely
guaranteed) truth rule:
The dreaming passage looks to have Descartes again invoking this rule.
The passage opens with the meditator observing the following:
Referring to the worry that he’s presently dreaming as
exaggerated suggests that condition (i) is met – i.e.,
suggests that the present circumstance includes a “natural
propensity” to believe he’s awake. As such, he needs only
to establish condition (ii), and he’ll have a divine guarantee
of being awake. Here, notice that an important theme of the above
passage concerns the meditator’s faculties for correcting
sensory error – a theme suggestive of condition (ii). In
context, Descartes’ appeal to the continuity test is perhaps
best understood in conjunction with condition (ii). As the meditator
says (speaking of his apparently waking experience):
Central to the inference is the meditator’s effort to check the
correctness of his belief, by means of his various faculties. The
cases like these to which Descartes refers look to be those
where conditions (i) and (ii) are both satisfied. Recall what
Descartes writes in conjunction with the proof of the external
material world: from “the very fact that God is not a
deceiver” there is a “consequent impossibility of there
being any falsity in my opinions which cannot be corrected by some
other faculty supplied by God” (AT 7:80, CSM 2:55f). Perhaps,
therefore, we can understand Descartes’ theistic solution to the
Now Dreaming Doubt as building on the same rule he employs in
his proof for the external material world.
What about Hobbes’s other objection – in effect, that one
could dream both (i) and (ii)? Descartes’ response:
“A dreamer cannot really connect his dreams with the ideas of
past events, though he may dream that he does. For everyone admits
that a man may be deceived in his sleep.” (AT 7:196, CSM 2:137)
Perhaps Descartes thinks the situation with dreaming parallels that of
waking life: those who are sufficiently tired, or otherwise
perceptually inattentive, “cannot really” perceive truths
clearly and distinctly, though it may seem to them that they
do. Whether in waking or dreaming, the Fourth Meditation theodicy has
God allowing us to make judgment errors, provided that they are
correctable. Descartes is committed to holding that when our
perception is confused, we can in principle come to discover the
confusion – even if not easily. When we lack clear and distinct
perception, we are at fault (not God) for any resulting judgments, in
part because we can discover that our perception is confused.
Descartes needs it that the same principle holds even while dreaming.
(And again, nearly the entirety of the Meditations unfolds
under the supposition that, for all we know, we may presently be
dreaming.) For the case at hand – i.e., the possibility of
mistakenly judging that I’m awake, while in a dream
– Descartes needs it that we could, in principle, discover that
we’re mistaken. Apropos of condition (ii), therefore, is whether
God has provided us a faculty by which to discover that we’re
dreaming, on occasions when we wrongly believe ourselves to be awake.
Evidently, Descartes thinks so, as he tells Gassendi:
Importantly, Descartes does not say we can easily correct the
mistake of dreaming that we’re awake. To the contrary,
the Sixth Meditation treatment of the Now Dreaming Doubt closes with a
concession that his solution is perhaps more theoretical than
practical:
Thus the importance of Descartes’ First Meditation remark that
“no danger or error will result” from the program of
methodical doubt, “because the task now in hand does not involve
action” (AT 7:22, CSM 2:15). Methodical doubt should not be
applied to practical matters. Prudence dictates that when making
practical decisions I should assume I’m awake, even if I
don’t perfectly know that I’m awake. Judgment errors made
while mistakenly assuming I’m awake couldn’t have
actual practical consequences, unlike those made while mistakenly
assuming I’m dreaming.
Further reading: See Newman (1999), Williams (1978), and
Wilson (1978).
Descartes holds that our judgments about our own minds are
epistemically better-off than our judgments about bodies. In our
natural, pre-reflective condition, however, we’re apt to confuse
the sensory images of bodies with the external things themselves, a
confusion leading us to think our judgments about bodies are
epistemically impressive. The confusion is clearly expressed
(Descartes would say) in G. E. Moore’s famous claim to knowledge
– “Here is a hand” – along with his more
general defense of common sense:
In contrast, Descartes writes:
Methodical doubt is intended to help us appreciate the folly of the
commonsensical position – helping us recognize that perception
of our own minds is “not simply prior to and more certain
… but also more evident” than perception of our own
bodies (Prin. 1:11, AT 8a:8, CSM 1:196). “Disagreement
on this point,” writes Descartes, comes from “those who
have not done their philosophizing in an orderly way”; from
those who, while properly acknowledging the “certainty of their
own existence,” mistakenly “take ‘themselves’
to mean only their bodies” – failing to “realize
that they should have taken ‘themselves’ in this context
to mean their minds alone” (Prin. 1:12, AT 8a:9, CSM
1:196).
In epistemological contexts, Descartes underwrites the
mind-better-known-than-body doctrine with methodical doubt. For
example, while reflecting on his epistemic position in regards both to
himself, and to the wax, the Second Meditation meditator says: 
Other reasons may motivate Descartes as well. He may take the doctrine
to be closely allied to a representational theory of sense perception.
Accordingly, our sense organs and nerves serve as literal mediating
links in the causal chain generating perception: they stand between
(both spatially and causally) external things themselves, and the
brain events occasioning our perceptual awareness (cf. Prin.
4:196). In veridical sensation, the objects of immediate sensory
awareness are not external bodies themselves, nor are we immediately
aware of the states of our sense organs or nerves. Rather, the objects
of immediate awareness are – whether in veridical sensation, or
in dreams – the mind’s own ideas. Descartes
indeed holds that the fact of physiological mediation helps explain
delusional ideas, because roughly the same kinds of physiological
processes that produce waking ideas are employed in producing
delusional ideas:
Various passages of the Meditations lay important groundwork
for this theory of perception. For instance, one of the messages of
the wax passage is that sensory awareness does not reach to external
things themselves: 
Descartes thinks we’re apt to be “tricked by ordinary ways
of talking” (ibid.). In ordinary contexts we don’t say
that it seems there are men outside the window; we say that
we see them. Nor, in such contexts, are our beliefs about
those men apt to result from conscious, inferentially complex
judgments, say, like this one: “Well, I appear to be awake, and
the window pane looks clean, and there’s plenty of light
outside, and so on, and I thus conclude that I am seeing men outside
the window.” Even so, our ordinary ways of speaking and thinking
often mislead. Descartes’ view is that the mind’s
immediate perception does not, strictly speaking, extend beyond
itself, to external bodies. This is an important basis of the
mind-better-known-than-body doctrine. In the concluding paragraph of
the Second Meditation, Descartes writes:
The understanding of ideas as the only immediate objects of awareness
arises in a number of texts. In the Sixth Meditation, while discussing
sense perception and our ideas of external things, Descartes writes
that the mind’s sensation extends strictly and immediately only
to the ideas: “the ideas were, strictly speaking, the only
immediate objects of my sensory awareness [solas proprie et
immediate sentiebam]” (AT 7:75, CSM 2:52). In the Second
Replies, Descartes defines thought “to include
everything that is within us in such a way that we are immediately
aware of it”; while defining idea in terms of the
“immediate perception” that makes us “aware of the
thought” (AT 7:160, CSM 2:113). And in the Third Replies he
writes: “I make it quite clear in several places … that I
am taking the word ‘idea’ to refer to whatever is
immediately perceived by the mind” (AT 7:181, CSM 2:127).
Complicating an understanding of such passages is that Descartes
scholarship is divided on whether to attribute to him some version of
an indirect theory of perception, or instead some version of a direct
theory. According to indirect perception accounts, in normal sensation
the mind’s perception of bodies is mediated by an awareness of
its ideas of those bodies. By contrast, direct perception
interpretations allow that in normal sensation the mind’s ideas
play a mediating role, though this role doesn’t have ideas
functioning as items of awareness; rather, the objects of direct
awareness are the external things, themselves. On both accounts, ideas
mediate our perception of external objects. On direct theory accounts,
the mediating role is only a process role. By analogy, various brain
processes mediate our perception of external objects, but in the
normal course of perception we are not consciously aware of
those processes; and likewise for the mind’s ideas,
according to direct perception accounts. On one recent version of an
indirect perception interpretation, sensory ideas mediate our
perception of the external bodies they’re of, in much the same
way that pictures (or other representational media) mediate our
perception of what they portray (Newman 2009). More generally,
Descartes seems to view all ideas as mental pictures, of a sort. As he
writes: “the term ‘idea’ is strictly
appropriate” only for thoughts that “are as it were the
images of things” (Med. 3, AT 7:37, CSM 2:25); he adds that
“the ideas in me are like {pictures, or} images” (Med. 3,
AT 7:42, CSM 2:29). 
Indirect perception interpretations have figured prominently in the
history of Descartes scholarship. A number of recent commentators,
however, have challenged this traditional view. For example, John
Carriero’s recent book on Descartes defends a direct perception
interpretation: “I don’t read Descartes as holding that I
am (immediately) aware only of my sensory ideas and only subsequently
(and perhaps indirectly) aware of bodies or their qualities”
(2009, 25). Thus on Carriero’s reading, Descartes’ broader
argument rebutting our doubts about the external world is not to be
understood as an effort to get on the other side (as it were) of our
ideas:
We have seen that the proper use of our cognitive faculties requires
us to withhold assent except when our perception is clear and distinct
– that forming judgments in accord with the C&D Rule
provides the only guarantee of truth. Let’s apply this to
introspective judgments. Suppose that the present contents of my mind
include a confused array of ideas – say, a confused assemblage
of auditory ideas, or color ideas, or perhaps I am presently flooded
with a confused assortment of ideas of emotion. In such cases, the
proper use of my faculties requires me to withhold judgment about the
present state of my mind.
It is surprising, therefore, to learn that on the standard view among
scholars, Descartes holds a strong view of privileged access
guaranteeing the truth of all introspective judgments about
the present contents of our own minds. On the standard view, Descartes
holds an infallibility thesis whereby judgments about our own mental
states cannot be mistaken, if based on introspective awareness: if I
seem to be in mental state x, then I am in
x. (A variety of related doctrines are also attributed to
him, including the indubitability of the mental –
roughly, that introspective judgments are indubitable; and
omniscience with respect to the mental – roughly, that
one has knowledge of every true proposition about one’s own
present contents of consciousness. There is some variation in the way
these doctrines are formulated in the literature.)
At least two lines of argument are widely cited in support of this
standard interpretation. One draws on the transparency doctrine. The
other draws on texts claimed to provide support. Let’s examine
both.
The transparency doctrine has it that we are aware of everything
occurring in our minds – this, a result of Descartes’ view
that thinking constitutes the whole essence of
mind:
Add to this that, unlike with external sensation, there is no
introspective appearance/reality gap, and there can seem to be no room
for introspective errors. Zeno Vendler explains:
Kenny adds:
Those who question the interpretation are apt to note that from the
fact that I have awareness of whatever is occurring in my mind, it
does not follow that I have distinct awareness. If
what’s occurring in my mind is a confused muddle of ideas, then
I’ll be aware of a confused muddle of ideas. But in that case,
forming a judgment about the present state of my mind is a recipe for
error – i.e., given the Fourth Meditation account of proper
judgment. Because simpler ideas are generally easier to render clear
and distinct, it can perhaps seem that I enjoy introspective
infallibility concerning them. For example, while looking at a clear
blue sky, it may seem unmistakable that I’m presently having an
idea of blue. But suppose that while looking at multicolored sunset, I
form an introspective judgment about precisely which color
ideas are occurring in my mind. Must Descartes say that such judgments
are infallible? Noteworthy is that he writes, of “sensations,
emotions and appetites,” that “we are frequently wrong in
our judgements concerning them”; adding, that we can avoid such
errors “provided we take great care in our judgements concerning
them to include no more than what is strictly contained in our
perception – no more than that of which we have inner
awareness” (Prin 1:66, AT 8a:32, CSM 1:216).
Consider another case that’s at odds with the standard
interpretation. Were Descartes committed to introspective
infallibility, then he should say that we could never be
mistaken as to whether our occurring ideas are ideas of
sensation, or instead ideas of imagination occurring
in a dream. Yet as we’ve seen, he takes dreaming-based
scepticism utterly seriously.
What about the textual line of argument regularly cited in support of
the standard interpretation? Consider two Meditations
passages that can seem to entail the infallibility thesis.
I certainly seem to see, to hear, and to be warmed. This
cannot be false; what is called “having a sensory
perception” is strictly just this, and in this restricted sense
of the term it is simply thinking. (Med. 2, AT 7:29, CSM 2:19)
Now as far as ideas are concerned, provided they are considered solely
in themselves and I do not refer them to anything else, they cannot
strictly speaking be false; for whether it is a goat or a chimera that
I am imagining, it is just as true that I imagine the former as the
latter. As for the will and the emotions, here too one need not worry
about falsity; for even if the things which I may desire are wicked or
even non-existent, that does not make it any less true that I desire
them. (Med. 3, AT 7:37, CSM 2:26)
Prima facie, it is plausible to take such passages to entail that if
if I seem to be having an idea of blue, or an idea of a
noise, or of warmth, etc., then I am. Indeed, one might take
such passages to convey that judgments to this effect “cannot be
false” because introspective judgments are infallible.
But note the continuation of the second passage: “Thus the only
remaining thoughts where I must be on my guard against making a
mistake are judgements.” That is, these passages can be read in
a very different. Accordingly, a mere seeming “cannot
be false” because it is not the kind of mental state that
could be false; on Descartes’ view, falsity
arises not simply from the mind’s awareness of its ideas, but
from judgments – i.e., from acts of will assenting to those
items of awareness. Read in this way, these passages anticipate the
Fourth Meditation theory of judgment:
Arguably, Descartes’ mind-better-known-than-body
doctrine is intended as a comparative rather than a
superlative thesis. We have seen that, for Descartes, the
only superlative perceptual state is that of clarity and distinctness.
The only guarantee of truth in our introspective judgments is, like
all other judgments, when they are based on clear and distinct
perception: if I clearly and distinctly perceive myself to be in
mental state x, then I am in x.
Further reading: On Descartes’ theory of ideas, see
Carriero (2009), Chappell (1986), Hoffman (1996), Jolley (1990),
Nadler (2006), Nelson (1997), Newman (2009 and 2011), and Smith
(2014). On Descartes’ doctrine that the mind is better known
than the body, see Jolley (2013), LoLordo (2005), and Nolan and
Whipple (2005). On the infallibility thesis, see Alanen (2003),
Broughton (2008), Curley (2006), Kenny (1968), McRae (1972), Vendler
(1972), Wilson (1978). 