Descartes was born in La Haye on March 31, 1596 of Joachim Descartes
and Jeanne Brochard. He was one of a number of surviving children (two
siblings and two half-siblings). His father was a lawyer and
magistrate, which apparently left little time for family. Descartes’
mother died in May of the year following his birth, and he, his full
brother and sister, Pierre and Jeanne, were left to be raised by their
grandmother in La Haye. At around ten years of age, in 1606, he was
sent to the Jesuit college of La Flèche. He studied there until 1614,
and in 1615 entered the University of Poitiers, where a year later he
received his Baccalaureate and License in Canon & Civil Law. For
the history and the text of his thesis, see the following supplementary
document:
In 1618, at the age of twenty-two, he enlisted in the army of Prince
Maurice of Nassau. It is not known what his duties were exactly,
though Baillet suggests that he would have very likely been drawn to
what would now be called the Corps of Engineers (Baillet, Livre 1,
Chapitre 9, p. 41). This division would have engaged in applied
mathematics, designing a variety of structures and machines aimed at
protecting and assisting soldiers in battle. Sorell, on the other
hand, notes that in Breda, where Descartes was stationed, the army
“doubled as military academy for young noblemen on the Continent”
(Sorell, p. 6). And, Gaukroger notes that the education of the young
noblemen was structured around the educational model of Lipsius
(1547–1606), a highly respected Dutch political theorist who received
a Jesuit education at Cologne (Gaukroger, pp. 65–6). Although
the historical records point to there being a military presence in
Breda, there is no definitive evidence that speaks for there being a
full-fledged “academy”. There are reasons for thinking that Descartes
may have been a soldier, but the majority of biographers suggest that
it is more likely that his duties were oriented more toward
engineering or education.
While stationed at Breda, Descartes met Isaac
Beeckman (1588–1637). Notes that Descartes kept related to his
correspondence reveal that he and Beeckman had become more than simple
acquaintances—their relationship was more one of teacher and student
(Descartes being the latter). This relationship would rekindle in
Descartes an intense interest in the sciences. In addition to
discussions about a wide variety of topics in natural science, a direct
result of certain questions posed by Beeckman compelled Descartes to
write the Compendium Musicae. Among other things, the
Compendium attempted to work out a theory of harmony rooted
in the concepts of proportion or ratio, which (along the lines of the
ancients) attempted to express the notion of harmony in mathematical
terms. It would not be published during Descartes’ lifetime. As for
Beeckman, Descartes would later downplay his influence.
After Descartes left the army, in 1619, his whereabouts for the next
few years are unknown. Based on what he says in the Discours de la
Methode (Discourse on the Method), published in 1637,
there is speculation that he spent time near Ulm (Descartes apparently
attended the coronation of Ferdinand II in Frankfurt in 1619). There is
some evidence suggesting that he was in France in 1622, for it
was at this time that property he had inherited was sold—the proceeds
of which would provide him a simple income for many years. There is
some speculation that between 1623 and 1625 he visited Italy. Descartes
emerges in 1625 in Paris, his notes revealing that he was in contact
with Father Marin Mersenne (1588–1648), a member of the Order of
Minims. This relationship would prompt Descartes to make public his
thoughts on natural philosophy (science). It is by way of Mersenne that
Descartes’ work would find its way into the hands of some of the best
minds living in Paris--for instance, Antoine Arnauld (1612–1694), Pierre
Gassendi (1592–1655), and Thomas Hobbes (1588–1679).
In 1628 Descartes left Paris. At this time he seems to have been
working on the Regulae ad Directionem Ingenii (Rules for
the Direction of the Mind), a work that he would abandon, some
speculating around the time of the move from Paris. It is worth noting
that relatively recently a copy of the Rules was discovered
in a library at Cambridge University. Scholars are unsure how it got
there. Currently, based on what it includes, it is thought that this
manuscript represents the work as it stood when Descartes had
abandoned it in 1628. The later Amsterdam printing (1701) and a copy
that Leibniz acquired from Clerselier (c. 1670) make certain
advancements over what is found in the Cambridge manuscript. So, it
appears that Descartes picked up the work again. Some have speculated
that this may have happened after a visit in 1635 from John Dury
(1596–1680) and Samuel Hartlib (1600–1662), where Hartlib
reports that Dury had returned to England with copies of some of
Descartes’ works (Fallon, pp. 9f); the speculation being that
the recently discovered manuscript is related to something brought
back by Dury. The meeting took place in The Hague. Dury and Hartlib
were friends of the Cambridge philosopher Henry More
(1614–1687), with whom Descartes had corresponded, and of others
in More’s circle, including John Milton
(1608–1674). Perhaps the copy was made during the visit and
brought back to Cambridge. (In any event, this is a new and
interesting development in Descartes scholarship.) In 1630 Descartes
moved to Amsterdam. There he worked on drafts of
the Dioptrique (the
Optics) and the Meteors (the Meteorology),
which were very likely intended to be a part of a larger work, Le
Monde (The World). In 1632 he moved again, this time to
Deventer, to apparently teach Henry Reneri (1593–1639) his physics. It
is also during his stay in Deventer that Descartes probably worked on a
final draft of the Traite de l’homme (Treatise on
Man), which in connection to the Optics and the
Meteorology was probably originally intended to be a part of
The World.
When The World had become ready for publication in 1633, upon
hearing of the Church’s condemnation of Galileo (1564–1642) in the
same year, Descartes decided against its publication. For, the world
system he had adopted in the book assumed, as did Galileo’s, the
heliocentric Copernican model. In a letter to Mersenne, dated November
1633, Descartes expresses his fear that were he to publish The
World, the same fate that befell Galileo would befall him. And,
although this is something that he understandably would want to avoid,
some scholars question Descartes’ expressed concern, for his living
in the Netherlands would have kept him out of reach of Catholic
authorities. The World appears to have been constituted of
several smaller, but related, works: a treatise on physics, a treatise
on mechanics (machines), a treatise on animals, and a treatise on
man. Although much of The World has been lost, some of it
seems to have survived in the form of essays attached to
the Discourse which, as was mentioned earlier, would be
published four years later, in 1637. And, some of it was published
posthumously. Arguably, Constantijn Huygens (1596–1687) received what
Descartes refers to as “three sheets” of
The World, along with a letter dated 5 October 1637. These
“sheets” deal primarily with mechanics.
Around 1635, at the University of Utrecht, Reneri began teaching
“Cartesian” physics. Also during this year, a domestic
servant by the name of Helene gave birth to a baby girl,
Francine. Genevieve Rodis-Lewis claims that Francine was born 19 June
1635 (Rodis-Lewis, p. 40). According to a baptismal record, dated 28
July 1635, Descartes is named the father (AT I 395n). However,
Gaukroger claims that the baptismal date was 7 August 1635 (Gaukroger,
p. 294). In 1636 Reneri acquired an official chair in Philosophy at
the University of Utrecht, and continued to build a following of
students interested in Cartesian science. Around March of 1636, at the
age of forty, Descartes moved to Leiden to work out the publishing of
the Discourse. And, in 1637 it is published.  With
the Discourse out and a following of students building in
Utrecht, Descartes seems to have turned his attention from career to
family. In a letter dated 30 August 1637 we find him apparently
working out an arrangement for Francine, but strangely refers to her
as his “niece”—which suggests that he did not want
certain people to know that he was a father (or that Francine had been
born out of wedlock). Gaukroger suggests that despite this apparent
denial of paternity, Descartes not only corresponds with Francine, but
in 1637 brings her and Helene to his new home at Santpoort or
Egmond-Binnen (Gaukroger, pp. 294, 332).
The Discourse is the first published work of Descartes’,
coming some four years after he had abandoned
The World. The Discourse is important for many reasons. For
instance, it tells us what Descartes himself seems to have thought of
his early education, and in particular, his early exposure to
mathematics. Roger Ariew suggests that these reflections are not so much
those of the historical Descartes, as much as they are those of a
persona Descartes adopts in telling the story of the
Discourse (Ariew, pp. 58–63). Uncontested, however, is the
view that the Discourse sketches out the metaphysical
underpinnings of the Cartesian system. And, as a bonus, it has three
works that are attached to it that are apparently added so as to
exemplify the method of inquiry it develops (though admittedly it is
unclear how the method is applied in these essays). The attached essays
are the Optics, the Meteorology, and Le
Geometrie (the Geometry). As was suggested earlier, the
Optics and Meteorology were very likely versions of
works originally intended for The World.
It should be stressed that the three attached essays are important
independent of the Discourse, for they contain much worth
studying. In the Optics, for example, Descartes works out his
laws of refraction, and within this context, what would later be called
Snell’s Law (which Descartes seems to have worked out as early as
1632). Further, although the Geometry would seem to have come out of
nowhere, there is evidence in Descartes’s notes to himself, from which
Clerselier reconstructed some of Descartes’s correspondence, that he
had been working on some version of it as early as 1619. In a letter to
Beeckman, dated 26 March 1619, for example, Descartes discusses the
subject matter that is found in the Geometry, and in a letter
dated 23 April 1619, he explicitly mentions the book’s title. It is in
this work that Descartes shows how certain geometrical problems can be
solved by way of algebraic equations.
The significance of the sort of connection that Descartes made between
geometry and algebra was great indeed, for without it the
mathematization of the physics and the development of the calculus
might not have happened when they did—a generation later via Sir
Isaac Newton (1642–1727) and Gottfried Leibniz
(1646–1716). It should be noted, however, that as groundbreaking
as this work may have been, contrary to the claims of many, nowhere in
the Geometry is a “Cartesian Coordinate System”
ever developed (that is, the x-y coordinate system
taught to today’s students of algebra), nor is he the originator
of other mathematical concepts that bear his name, for example, the
“Cartesian Product”. Carl Boyer notes that various
concepts that lead to analytic geometry are found for the first time
in the Geometry, and that the
Geometry’s mathematical notation is still used today. But, he
argues, although Cartesian geometry is taken by many to be synonymous
with analytic geometry, the fact is that the fundamental aim of
Descartes’ system is quite different from that of contemporary
analytic geometry (Boyer, pp. 370–1). And so, the claim that Descartes
is the originator of analytic geometry, at least as we understand it
today, overstates the case. As Boyer rightly points out, however, this
does not diminish the importance of the work in the history of
mathematics.
In 1639 Descartes began writing the Meditations. And, in 1640
he returned to Leiden to help work out its publication. During the
year, Descartes’ daughter, Francine, died. There is evidence
suggesting that he was called away from Leiden around the time of her
death, returning soon after. Some have speculated that he left Leiden
to be at her side. Also during this year, Descartes’ father and
sister died. Descartes’ relationship with his father (and
brother) was of the sort that Pierre, his brother, failed to even
bother him with the news of their father’s death. Rather, it
seems to have been in a letter from Mersenne that Descartes first
learns of it. In a follow up letter to Mersenne, dated 3 December
1640, Descartes expresses regret in not having been able to see his
father before his death. But, he refuses to leave Leiden to attend his
father’s funeral, and instead stays to complete the publishing
of the Meditations. 
Today, the Meditations is by far Descartes’s most popular
work—though this would not have been the case in Descartes’
day. This work is important to today’s scholar for many reasons, not the
least of which is its including as an attached text written objections
from some of the best minds living in Paris. Mersenne sent the
Meditations to philosophers and theologians for
criticism. The list of critics includes: Caterus, Hobbes, Arnauld,
Gassendi, and Mersenne himself, with several other unnamed readers who
raised their objections through Mersenne. A later edition would
include an objection from Bordin.  Descartes replied to each critic,
and the result was an appended text referred to as “The Objections and
Replies.” The second edition contains seven sets in all.
The Meditations opens by developing skeptical questions
concerning the possibility of knowledge. Through a series of several
carefully thought out meditations, the reader establishes (along with
the author) the groundwork for the possibility of knowledge
(scientia).  Descartes is not a skeptic, as some have insisted, but
uses skepticism as a vehicle to motivate his reader to
“discover” by way of philosophical investigation what
constitutes this ground. In the Second Replies, Descartes refers to
this style of presentation as the “analytic” style. There
were two styles of presentation: analytic and synthetic. It is
important not to confuse these terms with those, say, used by
Kant. For Descartes the analytic style of presentation (and inquiry)
proceeds by beginning with what is commonly taken to be known and
discovering what is necessary for such knowledge. Thus, the inquiry
moves from what is commonly known to first principles. The
“discovery” moves in such a way that each discovery is
based on what was discovered before. By contrast, the synthetic style
of presentation begins by asserting first principles and then to
determining what follows.  Prompted by Mersenne, Descartes sketches
out in the Second Replies a synthetic rendering of
the Meditations.
In establishing the ground for science, Descartes was at the same time
overthrowing a system of natural philosophy that had been established
for centuries—a qualitative, Aristotelian physics. In a letter
to Mersenne, dated 28 January 1641, Descartes says “these six
meditations contain all the foundations of my physics. But please do
not tell people, for that might make it harder for supporters of
Aristotle to approve them. I hope that readers will gradually get used
to my principles, and recognize their truth, before they notice that
they destroy the principles of Aristotle.” Unlike his earlier
work, The World, the Meditations parts ways with the
“old” science without explicitly forwarding controversial
views, like that of the Copernican heliocentric model of the solar
system. Specifically, the Cartesian view denies that physics is
grounded in hot, cold, wet, and dry. It argues that contrary to
Aristotle’s view, such “qualities” are not
properties of bodies at all. Rather, the only properties of bodies
with which the physicist can concern him or herself are size, shape,
motion, position, and so on—those modifications that
conceptually (or logically) entail extension in length, breadth, and
depth. In contrast to Aristotle’s “qualities,” the
properties (or modes) of bodies dealt with in Cartesian physics are
measurable specifically on ratio scales (as opposed to intensive
scales), and hence are subject in all the right ways to mathematics
(Buroker, pp.  596–7). This conception of matter, conjoined with
the sort of mathematics found in the Geometry, allies itself
with the work of such Italian natural philosophers as Tartaglia,
Ubaldo, and Galileo, and helps further the movement of early thinkers
in their attempts to establish a mathematical physics.
Descartes’ letter to the “learned and distinguished
men” of the Sorbonne, which is appended to
the Meditations, suggests that he was trying to pitch
the Meditations as a textbook for the university. Though the
endorsement of the Learned Men would not have guaranteed that
the Meditations would be accepted or used as a textbook, it
could certainly be viewed as an important step to getting it
accepted. Unlike today’s notion of a textbook, in
Descartes’ day “textbooks” were intended mostly for
teachers, not students. Typically, at the close of a teacher’s
career, his notes would be published for the benefit of those who
would go on to teach such course material. The awkwardness of
Descartes’s seeking the acceptance and use of his
Meditations by teachers is amplified by the fact that he was
not a teacher himself. Consequently, his seeking “textbook” status
would have very likely been viewed by those Learned Men as being a bit
pretentious. He was, it could be said, a freelancer with no academic or
political ties to the university (outside of his connection to
Mersenne). And, he certainly lacked the credentials and reputation of
someone like a Eustachius, whose widely used textbook of the period is
of the sort the Meditations was in all likelihood aimed at
replacing. Although the Meditations seems to have been
endorsed by the Sorbonne, it was never adopted as a text for the
university.
Soon after his encounter with the Sorbonne, Descartes’ public life
was further complicated by the Dutch theologian, Gisbert Voetius
(1588–1676). Voetius had attacked Regius, a Dutch physician who taught
medicine at the University of Utrecht, for his having taught certain
“Cartesian” ideas that conflicted with traditional theological
doctrine. Regius was friend to both Reneri and Descartes, and was a
strong adherent to Descartes’s philosophical views. Voetius tried to
have Regius removed from his position as professor, and attacked not
only Descartes’ work but his character. In his defense Descartes
entered into the debate. The controversy would leave Regius confined
to teaching medicine, and his published defense of (his conception of)
Cartesian thought would be officially condemned by Voetius, who in
five years time would rise to the position of University rector. At
the end of the debate, which off and on lasted about five years, the
situation ultimately became desperate for Descartes. He feared being
expelled from the country and of seeing his books burned.  He would
even seek protection by asking the Prince of Orange to intervene and
quell Voetius’ attack.
In 1643, at the age of forty-seven, Descartes moved to Egmond du
Hoef. With the Voetius controversy seemingly behind him (though, as
mentioned above, it would again raise its head and climax five years
down the road), Descartes and Princess Elisabeth of Bohemia began to
correspond. In this exchange, Princess Elisabeth probed Descartes on
the implications of his commitment to mind-body dualism. During this
time, he completed a final draft of a new textbook, which he had begun
three years earlier, the Principia Philosophiae
(Principles of Philosophy), and in 1644 it was published. He
dedicated it to Princess Elisabeth.
The Principles is an important text. The work is divided into
four Parts, with five hundred and four articles. Part One develops
Descartes’ metaphysics. Although it would appear to be a quick run
through of the Meditations, there are a number of
dissimilarities. For example, the order of presentation of the proofs
for God’s existence, which some have argued is significant, found in
the Third and Fifth Meditations, is reversed in the
Principles. The principles introduced in Part Two are based
on the metaphysics of Part One. And, the subsequent physics developed
in Parts Three and Four is based upon the principles of Part
Two. Although the physics turns out to be unsound, the
Principles nevertheless inspired such great thinkers as
Robert Boyle (1627–1691), Edmond Halley (1656–1742), and Isaac
Newton. As an important side note, it must be stressed that even
though Descartes had throughout his career put a great deal of
emphasis on mathematics, the physics developed in the
Principles does not appear to be a mathematical
physics. Rather, it is traditionally taken to be a conceptual project
with only a hint of empirical overtones—a physics rooted entirely in
metaphysics. Arguably, however, Descartes’ work on enumeration, order,
and measure in the Rules provides the conceptual machinery
necessary for establishing a ‘mathematical’
physics—a conceptual machinery that is carried over to the
Principles (Smith 2003, 2010). Two parts, never completed, were
originally intended to deal with plants, animals, and man. In light of
this and what Descartes says in a 31 January 1642 letter to the
mathematician Constantijn Huygens, it is plausible to think that the
Principles would have looked something like The
World had it been completed as planned.
One of the more controversial positions the Principles
forwarded, at least according to Newton, was that a vacuum was
impossible. Descartes’ rejection of the possibility of a vacuum
followed from his commitment to the view that the essence of body was
extension. Given that extension is an attribute, and that nothing
cannot possess any attributes (AT VIIIA 25; CSM I 210), it follows
that “nothingness cannot possess any extension” (AT VIIIA 50; CSM I
231). So, any instance of extension would entail the presence of some
substance (AT VIIIA 25; CSM I 210). In other words, vacuum, taken as
an extended nothing, is a flat contradiction. The corporeal
universe is thus a plenum, individual bodies separated only by their
surfaces. Newton argued in his De Gravitatione
and Principia that the concept of motion becomes problematic
if the universe is taken to be a plenum. Another controversial
position was Descartes’ insistence that matter is infinitely
divisible.  Gassendi, and later Cordemoy, argued that there must be a
bottom, a ‘substance,’ to the physical universe upon which
the being of all corporeal things depend. In line with the ancient
atomist Epicurus, they argued that if matter was infinitely divisible,
so dividing it would show that there was no bottom—and so,
corporeality would not be substantial. So, if corporeality is
substantial, as Descartes himself had claimed, there must be a minimum
measure of extension that could not be divided (by natural means,
anyway). And so, there are atoms.  But, this conclusion is something
that Descartes explicitly rejects in the
Principles.
In 1646, as a result of the probings of Princess Elisabeth, Descartes
completed a working draft of Passions de l’ame (Passions
of the Soul). During this year another prominent political figure
began to correspond with Descartes, Queen Christina of Sweden. And,
Regius published what he took to be a new and improved version of
Cartesian science, which as we now know would draw the wrath of
Voetius. But Regius did not stop there, for he seemed to have found
important differences between his “Cartesian” view and that of
Descartes’, and attempted to separate the two, publishing a broadsheet
that listed twenty-one anti-Cartesian theses (which his version of
“Cartesian” science rejected). In response to this, Descartes wrote a
single-page printed defense that was posted on public kiosks for all to
read. Published in 1648, the Notae in Programma Quoddam
(Notes on a Program-also referred to as Comments on a
Certain Broadsheet) is Descartes’ public defense. However, as
mentioned earlier, tensions mounted as a result of the public exchange
and Descartes felt his way of life in the Netherlands to be threatened.
As luck would have it, an admirer and friend of Descartes’—Chanut, who
worked for Queen Christina’s court—and Queen Christina herself began
probing Descartes about the possibility of coming to Sweden. And, after
a not too lengthy correspondence, Queen Christina offered Descartes a
position in her court. For many reasons, which would certanily include
those related to his concerns about Voetius, Descartes accepted the
offer. And, in 1649 he left for Sweden. 
Queen Christina at first required very little from Descartes.
However, according to Gaukroger, this would change. For, after he had
some time to settle in, she ordered him to do two things: first, to put
all of his papers in order, and secondly, to put together designs for
an academy (Gaukroger, p. 415). Arguably, Descartes had some idea of
how the latter might be done by way of his experience in Breda. In
January of 1650 Queen Christina began to require Descartes to give her
lessons in philosophy. These apparently would begin at five in the
morning and would last for about five hours. They were given three days
a week (Gaukroger, p. 415). During this time Descartes published the
Passions, the work having emerged primarily from his
correspondence with Princess Elisabeth (to whom he had dedicated the
Principles). One aim of the Passions was to explain
how the emotional (and thus moral) life of a human being was connected
to the soul’s being essentially united to a body. Simply put, a
’passion of the soul’ is a mental state (or thought) that
arises as a direct result of brain activity. Such passions can move us
to action. Since this is so, Descartes suggests that one needs to learn
to control one’s passions, for they can move one to perform vicious
acts. Critics of Descartes, including Elisabeth, argued that
Descartes’ metaphysical commitments put real pressure on the view
expounded in the Passions. For, according to Descartes’
metaphysics, the nature of mind is to think and the nature of body is
to be extended in length, breadth, and depth. One view concerning
causation, a view that Descartes’s critics seemed to have attributed to
him, is that one thing causes another to move, for example, by way of
contact. Contact, in this context, seems to be possible only by way of
surfaces. Now, bodies, since they are extended and thus have surfaces,
can come into contact with one another and thus can cause one another
to move. However, if minds are not extended, they lack surfaces. And,
if they lack surfaces, there is no way in principle for bodies to come
into contact with them. Thus, there is no way in principle for bodies
to move minds, and vice versa. That is, minds and bodies cannot in
principle causally interact. And so, if the view expounded in the
Passions requires that bodies and minds be capable of causal
interaction, and Descartes’ metaphysical commitments make such
interaction impossible, Descartes’ metaphysics puts a great deal of
pressure on the view expounded in the Passions.
Although things seemed to be moving forward, they were not going as
well as one would have hoped. In a letter to Bregy, for instance, dated
15 January 1650, Descartes expresses reservations about his decision to
come to Sweden. He sees himself to be “out of his element,” the winter
so harsh that “men’s thoughts are frozen here, like the water” (AT V
467; CSMK III 383). Given the sentiment expressed in the letter, this
remark was probably intended to be as much Descartes’s take on the
intellectual climate as it was about the weather. In early February,
less than a month after writing Bregy, Descartes fell ill. His illness
quickly turned into a serious respiratory infection. And, although at
the end of a week he appeared to have made some movement towards
recovery, things took a turn for the worse and he died in the early
morning of 11 February 1650. He was fifty-three years old.