The following historical trajectory motivates the characteristic
features and certain treatments of determinables and determinates;
those interested in cutting to the contemporary chase can skip to
§2 with little loss of continuity.
The terminology of determinables and determinates stems from ancient
and scholastic treatment of the definition of a species, as analyzable
into two parts: a genus, or generic part of an essence—the
pars determinabilis essentiae, and the differentia, or
differentiating part of an essence—the pars determinans
essentiae. As we’ll see, the terminology and its original
application eventually went separate ways, with the genus-species
relation standardly being treated in conjunctive terms (with a given
species being identified with the conjunction of a genus and one or
more differentia), and determination being treated as a distinctive
non-conjunctive specification
 relation.[1]
Some recent commentators have suggested that the notion of
determination has a precursor in ancient times. For example, one
commentator has proposed that Aristotle’s preferred treatment of
the relation between kinds and forms (a.k.a.  genus and species)
involves key features of determination (Granger 1984). Granger
suggests that Aristotle’s conception of a form/species evolves
from a conjunctive conception (as in Topics VI.3.
140a27–29) to one on which differentia entail their associated
kind/genus rather than conjunctively supplementing it. Granger
motivates the non-conjunctive conception on grounds that
“Aristotle clearly maintains that [...] the genus does not exist
apart from its species, or exists merely as matter” (1984: 15);
in turn, he takes this conception to indicate that 
genus and differentia are best viewed in terms of determinable and
determinate. […] A determinate […] is not a conjunction
of its determinable and something else logically distinct from its
determinable. (1984: 19)
Salmieri (2008) offers further support for this interpretation, citing
another important feature of determination—namely, that
determinates differ specifically in respect of their determinable. As
Salmieri puts it, 
Certain things are not merely other than one another—as
blue is other to both loud and
inflation—but are different from or “opponent
to” one another, as blue is different from
red. (2008: 78) 
And he sees this distinction as operative in Aristotle’s
(Metaphysics I.3-4) remarks:
But difference (διαφορὰ)
and otherness (ἐτερότης) are
distinct (ἄλλο). For, while the
other and that which it is other than are not necessarily other in
something (for everything that is some being is either other or the
same), the different differs from something in something, so that
it’s necessary for there to be something the same in which they
differ. This same thing is a kind or form; for every different thing
differs either {i} in kind or {ii} in form [...]. (1054b22–31
cf.  1018a9–15; translation quoted from Salmieri 2008, 79) 
The previous features—non-conjunctive entailment of the less by
the more specific, the specification’s being somehow “in
respect of” the less specific, and the more specific
features’ being opponent to one other—are indeed
characteristic features of determination, contrasting with the
conjunct-conjunction and disjunction-disjunct relations (modulo
deflationary strategies; we won’t always carry this qualification
forward). As such, there is at least a case here for Salmieri’s
claim that “we ought to recognise Aristotle as the originator of
this distinction” (2008: 79).
Throughout the scholastic and modern periods the genus-species and
genus-differentia relations are often treated in what Prior (1949)
calls “a confused blending” of the conjunct-conjunction
and determination relations. In the modern period motivations for
distinguishing the latter relations become increasingly salient.
One motivation stems from Leibniz’s observation that a
conjunctive treatment of the genus-species relation does not fix a
direction of specification, since one can as easily take the
differentia to be the genus, as vice versa (see Nouveaux
Essais, III, iii, 10, Langley’s translation, 313). Johnson
(1924) interprets Descartes and Spinoza as attempting to ensure
asymmetry by means of attributes and modes (see
Descartes, Principles of Philosophy I.53;
Spinoza, Ethics 1p8s1 and Ep. 50), which Johnson suggests are
“almost equivalent” to the notions of determinable and
determinate: 
What I call a determinable is almost equivalent to what they call an
attribute, and my determinate almost equivalent to their mode of an
attribute. (1924: III, v. 1) 
Prior (1949) similarly sees Spinoza as aiming to ensure asymmetry by
means of something like determination:
If Leibniz brought consistency into the medieval view of the
distinctness of genus and differentia by making the relation between
them symmetrical, Spinoza brought consistency into the medieval view
of the asymmetry of the relation between them by denying their
distinctness. Spinoza’s “modes” are not new
qualities added to his “attributes”, or qualities formed
by the addition of something else to them, but determinations of them.
(1949: 7)
Prior also sees Locke as relying on the distinctive incompatibility of
same-level determinates as making sense of why “any subject may
have of each sort of primary qualities but one particular at
once”, and similarly for “all sensible ideas peculiar to
each sense” (Locke, Essay, IV iii 5).
In the work of Locke and other empiricists, we also see precursors of
certain contemporary anti-realist or reductivist accounts on which
determinable attributions either indeterminately refer to determinate
properties (as Berkeley [1710] suggests, more generally, for
‘abstract’ terms), or on which determinable attributions
are (merely) ways of classifying determinates. Prior’s
description of Locke’s view might be seen as compatible with
either approach: 
Though we speak of an object as colored, what is there being referred
to is not really a quality of the object but a quality of one of its
qualities; what is meant is that one of its qualities belongs to the
class “colors”. (Prior 1949: 8–9) 
The terminology of ‘determinables’ and
‘determinates’ as indicative of a distinctive relation is
first found in Volume I, Chapter XI—‘The
Determinable’—of W. E. Johnson’s Logic
(1921):
I propose to call such terms as color and shape
determinables in relation to such terms as red and
circular which will be called determinates; and, in
introducing this new terminology, to examine the distinction between
the relation of red to color and the relation of
Plato to man …. (1921: I, xi, 1)
Johnson’s discussion is also the first systematic attempt to
characterize the key features of determinables, determinates, and
their relation (see esp. 1921: 173–185), though as below, he is
not always clear about whether these features apply to properties or
rather to predicates. See Prior (1949) and Poli (2004) for detailed
discussion of Johnson’s views and his influence on later
authors.
Some of these features are familiar, including that determination is a
specification relation: 
To predicate color or shape of an object obviously characterises it
less determinately than to predicate of it red or circular; (Johnson
1921: I, xi, 1) 
that this specification is non-conjunctive: 
there is a genuine difference between that process of increased
determination which conjunctivally introduces foreign adjectives, and
that other process by which without increasing, so to speak, the
number of adjectives, we define them more
 determinately;[2]
 (Johnson 1921: I, xi, 3) 
that same-level determinates are incompatible: 
if any determinate adjective characterises a given substantive, then
it is impossible that any other determinate under the same
determinable should characterise the same substantive; (Johnson 1921:
I, xi, 4) 
and that same-level determinates are moreover “opponent”:
the unique and peculiar kind of difference that subsists between the
several determinates under the same determinable […] does not
subsist between any one of them and an adjective under some other
determinable. (Johnson 1921: I, xi, 1) 
Johnson moreover develops these features, suggesting, for example,
that opponent differences often reflect that determinates are
comparable: 
many determinates under the same determinable [are such] that the
differences between different pairs of determinates can be compared
with one another […]; e.g. the difference between red and
yellow is greater than that between red and orange. (Johnson 1921: I,
xi, 4) 
Attention to determinate comparability leads Johnson to suggest that
determinables may be determined along multiple
“dimensions”:
[A] color may vary according to its hue, brightness and saturation; so
that the precise determination of a color requires us to define three
variables which are more or less independent of one another in their
capacity of co-variation; but in one important sense they are not
independent of one another, since they could not be manifested in
separation. The determinate color is therefore single, though complex
…. (1921: I, xi, 4)
That determinables may have multiple determination dimensions is an
important observation, which plays a foundational role in
Funkhouser’s (2006) model of determination (see
 §3.6.1).
Two other aspects of Johnson’s discussion are worth noting.
First, he denies that determinables are in any sense shared by
determinates: “the ground for grouping determinates under one
and the same determinable is not any partial agreement between
them” but rather “the special kind of difference”
(1921: I, xi, 1) distinguishing opposing
 determinates.[3]
 As we’ll see, this is a choice point for contemporary accounts.
Second, Johnson assumes that while limits in our perceptual or
instrumental capabilities require that we characterize objects in
determinable terms, it is nonetheless a 
universally adopted postulate that the characters of things which we
can only characterise more or less indeterminately, are, in actual
fact, absolutely determinate. (1921: I, xi, 5) 
The assumption that determinable characterization reflects (mere)
epistemic, perceptual, or representational limits remains common, and
pushes towards giving one or other deflationary account of
determinables. This is another choice point: on some contemporary
accounts determinables are both real and irreducible to
determinates.
In this sub-section, we discuss certain comparatively recent
contributions which influentially shaped the present understanding of
determination.
Prior’s (1949) two-part discussion of determinables and
determinates is historically rich and philosophically subtle.
Interestingly, he suggests that the difference between determinates is
brute, admitting no explanation: 
we can say that the red and the blue agree in being colored, but of
their difference we can only say either that their color is different,
or that one is red and the other blue. (1949: 5–6) 
Some have seen this sort of statement as broadly contradictory, in
suggesting that what makes determinates similar (e.g., color)
is also that in virtue of which they are different (“of their
difference we can only say … that their color is
different”);
 see §3.2.
Prior also considers and rejects Johnson’s assumption that
determinates are similar only in respect to their unique form of
difference, rather suggesting (c.f. Salmieri’s discussion of
Aristotle, above) that determinates are similar “in respect
of” that determinable:
[I]t seems to me that determinates under the same determinable have a
class unity […]. Determinates under the same determinable have
the common relational property […] of characterising whatever
they do characterise in a certain respect. Redness, blueness, etc.,
all characterise objects, as we say, “in respect of their
color”; triangularity, squareness, etc., “in respect of
their shape”. And this is surely quite fundamental to the notion
of being a determinate under a determinable. (1949: 13)
That determinates characterize objects in respect of their
determinables is indeed a key feature of determination, though there
remains disagreement about how best to metaphysically articulate this
feature (e.g., as involving shared determinables or not).
Prior takes this feature to push against deflationary approaches on
which determinables exist, at best, merely to classify the having of
determinate properties. On the contrary, he maintains, if determinates
are unified by characterizing objects in a certain respect, then 
the “respects in which objects are to be characterised”,
to which determinable adjectives refer, are related to the objects not
less but more intimately than the determinate qualities which
“characterise” them. (1949: 13)
Moving on, Searle (1959) usefully highlights that determination
appears to contrast not just with the conjunct-conjunction relation,
but also with the disjunction-disjunct relation:
[C]learly not any two terms which stand in the relation of greater to
less specific ipso stand in the relation of determinate to
determinable: “yellow” is in some sense more specific than
“yellow or angry” but it is not a determinate of
“yellow or angry” in the sense in which it is a
determinate of “color”. (1959: 141–2)
Searle also offers an explicit criterion of determination:
For any two terms \(A\) and \(B\), \(A\) is a determinate of \(B\) if
and only if \(A\) is a non-conjunctive specifier of \(B\), and \(A\)
is logically related to all other non-conjunctive specifiers of \(B\)
[where] any two terms are logically [i.e., conceptually] related if
either entails the other or either entails the negation of the other.
(1959: 148)
Interestingly, this criterion doesn’t rule out that \(B\) is a
disjunction of its determinates (‘non-conjunctive
specifiers’), so long as the determinates stand in the requisite
conceptual entailment relations. Note also that Searle moves fluidly
between talk of determinable properties and talk of determinable
‘terms’; until recently, this sort of slide was
common.
Searle notes, as well, that the structure of determinables and
determinates in the same family may give rise to “levels”
of determinates ordered by degree of specificity; as he says,
“we would like some way of showing that e.g., “red”
and “yellow” are on the same level as determinates of
“color” whereas “scarlet” is on a different
and lower level” (1959: 145). Here too he offers a
criterion:
Two terms \(A\) and \(B\) are same level determinates of \(C\) if and
only if they are both determinates of \(C\) and neither is a specifier
of the other. (1959: 149)
Next, Armstrong's investigations into the metaphysics of properties (in, e.g., his 1978a,b,
1989, 1997, and 2010) are notable, first, in treating determination as an explicitly
metaphysical relation, and second, in raising to salience the important
question of whether determinables are ontologically reducible to
determinates, asked against the commonly accepted background
assumption that reality itself is maximally determinate. As
we’ll see, Armstrong’s own position on this score swings
from reductionism (1987) to non-reductionism (1997), and back again
(2010).
Finally, Yablo’s (1992) is notable in offering a modal account
of determination as a relation of asymmetric dependence, and in
extending determination to particulars (events) as well as
properties. Since asymmetrical necessitation now serves as a common
minimal characterization of determination, it’s worth seeing how
Yablo motivates this approach. He starts by observing a parallel
between intuitive characterizations of identity and of determination,
as holding between properties:
\(P\) is identical to \(Q\) iff: for a thing to be \(P\) is for it to
be \(Q\).
\(P\) determines \(Q\) iff: for a thing to be \(P\) is for it to be
\(Q\), not simpliciter, but in a specific way.
The parallel is useful in suggesting that determination is, like
identity, a particularly intimate relation, in that
determinables and determinates types and/or tokens may not be wholly
distinct, and also in suggesting a modal treatment of determination. Hence
just as the characterization of identity is illuminated by the
following modal condition (stemming from the principle of the indiscernibility of identicals):
so too is the characterization of determination illuminated by the
following modal condition:
The parallel also suggests that an account of determination
needn’t impose conditions on conceptual entailment relations (as
Searle’s did): just as Kripke’s (1980) results undermine
the need for a conceptual entailment requirement on identity (e.g.,
water might be identical with H\(_2\)O even if ‘water’ and
‘H\(_2\)O’ don’t conceptually entail each other),
“we should discount the traditional doctrine’s conceptual
component and reconceive determination in wholly metaphysical
terms” (Yablo 1992: 253). That said, as Yablo admits, asymmetric
necessitation alone is insufficient to characterize determination
(since, e.g., allowing conjunctions to determine their conjuncts). We
will later consider various ways of filling in the modal conditions,
including Yablo’s own essence-based approach
 (§3.5.1).
Yablo’s discussion is also notable in highlighting an important
seeming feature of determinables and determinates, according to which
they do not causally compete:
[No causal exclusion principle can] apply to determinates and their
determinables—for we know that they are not causal rivals.
[…] any credible reconstruction of the exclusion principle must
respect the truism that determinates do not contend with their
determinables for causal influence. (1992: 259)
This feature is key to a recently popular strategy for solving the problem
of mental causation—an intriguing application which raised to
salience the potential usefulness of determination for metaphysical
and other philosophical purposes (see §5.2).
We are now in position to list the features commonly taken to
characterize determinables, determinates, and their
 relation;[4]
 the presentation is in terms of properties, and may require
adjustment to apply to entities of other categories
 (see §2.2).
 This is not a minimal or axiomatic set: some features follow from
others; moreover, there are cases to be made that some of these
features do not hold in full generality. In addition, how to
metaphysically understand these features varies, in ways we will
discuss down the line.
Increased specificity: If \(P\) is a determinate of
(‘determines’) \(Q\), then to be \(P\) is to be \(Q\), in
a specific way.
Determination relates properties that are more or less specific,
relative to each other. For example, red is a determinate of
color; scarlet is a determinate of red.
Irreflexivity, Asymmetry, Transitivity: For
no \(P\) does \(P\) determine \(P\); If \(P\) determines \(Q\), then
\(Q\) does not determine \(P\); if \(R\) determines \(P\), and \(P\)
determines \(Q\), then \(R\) determines \(Q\).
These features, characteristic of strict partial orderings, follow
just from Increased specificity. For example,
scarlet does not determine itself, since no property can be
more specific than itself. If scarlet determines
red, then red does not determine scarlet,
since red cannot be both less and more specific than
scarlet. And if to be scarlet is to be red, in a
specific way, and to be red is to be colored, in a specific
way, then to be scarlet is to be a yet more specific way of
being colored, such that scarlet determines
color.
Relative, leveled determination: Except for minimally
specific determinables and maximally specific determinates, a
property’s characterization as determinable or determinate is
relative. Relatedly, determinables can be determined at different
‘levels’ of specificity.
For example, red is a determinate of color, but a
determinable of scarlet; red, blue, and
yellow determine color at one level of
specification; scarlet, navy, and buttercup
determine color at another (more finely grained) level of
specification.
Determination ‘in respect of’ determinables: If
\(P\) determines \(Q\), \(P\) is more specific than \(Q\) in respect
of \(Q\).
The increase in specificity associated with determinates is, more
specifically, ‘in respect of’ the
 determinable.[5]
 For example, if red determines color, red
is more specific than color in respect of color.
Determination in respect of a determinable is sometimes further
explicated as involving specification along one or more
‘determination dimensions’ of the determinable—for
example, the determination dimensions of color are commonly
supposed to be hue, saturation, and
brightness.
Determinate similarity/comparability: If \(P\) and \(R\) are
different same-level determinates of a determinable \(Q\), then \(P\)
and \(R\) are similar, and moreover comparable, in respect of
\(Q\).
That determination is ‘in respect of’ determinables gives
rise to similarity and systematic comparability relations among
determinates. For example, determinates of
color—red, blue, orange,
etc.—are all similar in being colors, and any two colors are
comparable in this respect: red is more similar to
orange than to blue in respect of color,
and so on.
Non-conjunctive specification: if \(P\) determines \(Q\),
then \(P\) is not identical with any conjunctive property conjoining
\(Q\) with any property or properties independent of \(Q\).
The increase in specificity associated with determinates does not
involve conjoining or otherwise combining the determinable with
another property independent of the determinable. For example,
red is not appropriately understood as the conjunction of
color and another property independent of
color.
Non-disjunctive specification: if \(P\) determines \(Q\),
then \(Q\) is not identical with any disjunctive property disjoining
\(P\) with any property or properties independent of \(P\).
The increase in specificity associated with determinates does not
involve disjunctive elimination. For example, color is not a
disjunction of red and some other property or properties
independent of red.
Determinable inheritance: For every determinable \(Q\) of a
determinate \(P\): if \(x\) has \(P\) at a time \(t\) then \(x\) must
have \(Q\) at \(t\).
Objects must have every determinable of any determinates they have. For
example, if something is scarlet, then it must also be both red and
colored.
Requisite determination: If \(x\) has \(Q\) at a time \(t\),
then for every level \(L\) of determination of \(Q\): \(x\) must have
some \(L\)-level determinate \(P\) of \(Q\) at \(t\).
Objects must have a determinate of every determinable they have. For
example, if something is colored, then it must be some specific color
(e.g., red).
Multiple determinates: For every determinate \(P\) of a
determinable \(Q\), there is a determinate \(R\) of \(Q\) that is
distinct from, but at the same level of specificity as, \(P\).
With determinate specificity comes multiplicity or diversity. For
example, color has multiple determinates (red,
blue, yellow, and so on); red has multiple
determinates (scarlet, crimson, burgundy,
and so on).
Determinate incompatibility: If \(x\) has determinate \(P\)
of determinable \(Q\) at time \(t\), then \(x\) cannot have, at \(t\),
any other determinate \(R\) of \(Q\) at the same level of specificity
as \(P\).
For example, an object cannot be both red and blue all over, at a
 time.[6]
 Determinate incompatibility is moreover ‘opponent’ in
that same-level determinates are exclusive
 alternatives.[7]
Unique determination: If \(x\) has a determinable \(Q\) at a
time, then \(x\) has a unique—one and only one—determinate
\(P\) at any given level of specification at that time.
Unique determination is entailed by Requisite
determination and Determinate incompatibility.
Asymmetric modal dependence: if \(P\) is a determinate of
\(Q\), then if \(x\) has \(P\) then \(x\) must have \(Q\), but for
some \(y\), \(y\) might have \(Q\) without having \(P\).
For example, anything that is scarlet must be red, but something might
be red without being scarlet (it might rather be, e.g., burgundy).
Asymmetric dependence is entailed by Determinable
inheritance, Requisite determination, and Multiple
determinates.
Causal compatibility: Determinables and determinates do not
causally compete.
For example, if a given patch is both red and
scarlet, there is no in-principle difficulty with both
red and scarlet being causally efficacious
vis-á-vis the pecking of a pigeon trained to peck at
any red patch.
Motivated as they are by a limited range of paradigm cases, not all of
these features may be characteristic of determination in the strong
sense of being required for the holding of that relation, as opposed
to being typically or generally true of some or most instances of the
relation (or its relata).
For example, Johansson (2004) observes that if property is an
determinable of color, then Determinate
incompatibility (hence Unique determination) will fail,
noting that on this score “Johnson […] generalized too
quickly” (2004: 117); what is rather true is that “for
some ontological determinables […] two determinates
cannot possibly exist in the same space-time region” (2004:
118). Armstrong offers other cases of purportedly compatible
determinates, involving odors, tastes, or sounds: “a sauce may
be both sour and sweet. A bell may have a tone which is composed of
both a fundamental and a number of higher overtones” (1978b:
113; see also Fales 1990, Sanford 2014, and Massin 2013).
It may also be questioned whether all determinates of determinables
can be systematically compared, as per Determinate
similarity/comparability. It is unclear, for example, whether
being pentagonal is more or less similar in respect of
shape to being square or being sextagonal.
It is also unclear whether all determinates of smell admit of
systematic comparability (is the smell of pine more similar to the
smell of rose or of violet?), though recent empirical work identifying
the dimensions of “smell space” (see, e.g., Mamlouk &
Martinetz 2004) may reveal an underlying structure of the sort
(appealing to hue, saturation, and brightness) that serves as an
underlying basis for ordering determinate colors (which work might
also serve as a basis for responding to Armstrong, above). The
question of whether all determinables may be systematically ordered
with respect to their determinables, either explicitly or implicitly,
matters to whether determinate/determinable relations can be modeled
in spatial terms along lines proposed by Funkhouser (2006)
 (see §3.6.1).
Unique determination and Requisite determination may
also admit of exceptions. Wilson (2013) argues that even for
paradigmatic determinables such as color, Unique
determination is not generally correct, since the case of an
iridescent feather is reasonably interpreted as one in which the
feather is (a) colored, (b) red from one perspective, and (c) blue
from another perspective, such that no one determinate shade is
non-arbitrarily identified as “the” unique determinate
determining the determinable color had by the feather
(rather, she suggests, the determinates are had, at best, in
relativized
 fashion).[8]
 More generally, she argues that there can be failures of Unique
determination due either to there being too many candidate
determinates (as in the feather case) or to there being too few or
none, contra Requisite determination (as might be the case
for certain quantum phenomena; see below). Fales observes that
Requisite determination 
appears to admit of exceptions in the case of certain objects of
mental acts: for example, as regards the number of spots on an
imagined or a hallucinated speckled hen. (1990: 167) 
Similarly, Rosen and Smith (2004) suggest that considerations of
vagueness indicate that an object may have a determinable without
determinately having any corresponding determinate, and Bokulich
(2014) and Wolff (2015) suggest that cases of value indeterminacy in
quantum mechanics are promisingly seen as involving undetermined
determinables
 (see §5.3).
Finally, as we will see in
 §3.4,
 a reductive approach to determinables, along lines of, e.g., Bigelow
and Pargetter (1990), Clapp (2001), Rodriguez-Pereyra (2002), Antony
(2003), and Massin (2013), takes these to be disjunctive properties
having associated determinates as disjuncts; disjunctive reductionists
uniformly reject Non-disjunctive specification as ever true
of determination or its relata.
Though paradigm cases of determination (involving color,
shape, mass, and so on) appear to hold between
monadic property types, it is straightforward to extend the notion to
relations—e.g., distance. Hence Johansson says that
while the restriction to monadic types is ‘traditional’,
I do not think there are any good reasons for the restriction.
[…] Relational concepts, just like property concepts, can be
fitted into determinable-determinate trees. (2000: 117) 
More controversially, determination has been taken to hold between
entities of ontological (including representational) categories going
beyond properties and relations.
To start, as above, historical discussion of determinables and
determinates (in, e.g., Johnson 1921) moves fairly freely between talk
of these as representational (linguistic/conceptual) and as
metaphysical. In some such cases, the target is plausibly a properly
metaphysical
 distinction.[9]
 In other cases—e.g., in empiricist treatments—the
characterization of determination in representational terms is clearly
intended to be metaphysically deflationary. We will later revisit
reasons for and against taking determinables or determination at
metaphysical face value
 (§3.1,
 §3.2).
Modulo deflationary concerns, there does not appear to be any
in-principle barrier to allowing that determination can hold between
entities of other
 categories.[10]
 Determination has been extended to actions or episodes (see, e.g.,
Mulligan 1992 and Cruse 1995: chap. 6), events (Yablo 1992), fields (von Wachter
2000), tropes (Funkhouser
2006), states (Fine 2011), and substances (Massin 2013). That said,
one might maintain that some such entities can be related by
determination since falling under or in part constituted by
determinable and determinate properties. Whatever one’s position
on what ontological categories the relata of determination can fall
under, there are (as per metaphysical usual) different available
understandings of the categories at
 issue.[11]
Another question pertaining to ontological categories concerns whether
some or all specification relations are themselves determinates of a
more general relation determinable; Johansson (2000: sec. 8) endorses
such a view.
We turn now to canvassing contemporary accounts of determinables,
determinates, and their relation. The main varieties of contemporary
ontological accounts are anti-realist accounts, on which determinables
do not exist; reductive accounts, on which determinables exist but are
metaphysically reducible to (that is, identical with) some or other
construction of determinates; and non-reductive accounts, on which
determinables exist and are not metaphysically reducible to any
construction of determinates. Non-reductive accounts furthermore split
into versions on which determinables are (always) less fundamental
than associated vis-á-vis determinates, and accounts
on which determinables can be as fundamental as, or even more fundamental than,
determinates; we reserve treatment of this further issue for
 §4.
 A different sort of contemporary account is directed not so much at
the ontological question(s) as at elucidating certain structural or
broadly logical aspects of determination or associated relata.
As background for the ontological accounts to come, we start with a
number of considerations commonly taken to provide prima facie support
for taking determinables to exist, and to moreover be ontologically
irreducible (again: not identical to any construction of) to
determinates. We then consider some preliminary motivations for
deflationary (anti-realist or reductive) treatments of determinables.
One might wonder whether the motivations for
taking determinables to exist might be presented independently of the
motivations for taking determinables to be irreducible; but this proves
difficult, for there simply isn’t enough daylight between the
initial motivations for existence and for irreducibility to prise them
apart. The presentation thus reflects that the motivations for
reducibility (or for anti-realism) come later, as pushing against
taking the prima facie appearances of irreducible determinables at
face value.
There are perceptual, scientific, causal, semantic, and metaphysical
considerations weighing in prima facie favor of determinables’
existing and moreover being metaphysically irreducible to
determinates. Again, these motivations are preliminary; as we’ll
see down the line, anti-realists and reductionists take there to be
good reasons to resist taking the seeming appearances of existence
and/or irreducibility at face value
(see §3.2).
Perception provides one source of support for there being
determinables, which on the face of it are not appropriately taken to
be reducible to determinates. The best motivations here are indirect,
since bare claims that we can perceive determinables as distinct from
determinates are 
disputable.[12] 
One such motivation appeals to Sorites
phenomena as indicating that we fail to perceive fully determinate
instances of many properties, including colors, tones, and
textures. As Fales puts it, this 
is a conclusion which seems forced upon us by the fact that each
member of a series of colors, etc., may be perceptually
indistinguishable from its immediate neighbors but easily
distinguishable from more distant members of the series. (1990:
 172)[13]
A second indirect perceptual motivation for existing and irreducible
determinables reflects that our perception of macro-objects typically
fails to register microdeterminate details. For example,
shape is a paradigmatic determinable, but we do not perceive
the shapes of trees, tables, and the like, in microscopic detail. In
re this and the Sorites motivation, it is worth noting that even if
perceived objects are themselves maximally determinate, perceptual
experience may still motivate irreducible determinables; as Wilson
notes, 
Perhaps the (instances of) properties perceived are really maximally
determinate, and only perceptual features or modes of presentation are
determinable; but features of perceptual experience are also aspects
of reality, so the larger point remains. (2012: 5)
A third indirect perceptual motivation for irreducible determinables
is that these best explain our being able to perceive that different
determinates are similar in the relevant determinable respect. Hence
Fales suggests that since we are able “to notice or be aware
of” the similarity between different shades of red, 
it seems clear that red is observable every time we observe an
instance of a shade of red, even though it is not separable from that
shade, but is in the shade. (1990: 172) 
Both fundamental physical
and special-scientific posits and laws appear to be characterized, at
least in part, in determinable terms. As Armstrong (1997) and French
(2014) observe, it is natural to see fundamental physical laws as
relating determinables, such as mass and charge, or to themselves be
determinable
 relations.[14]
 And in the special sciences, for example, the features of molecules
relevant to chemical interactions abstract from the precise details of
atomic position and momentum, and features of thermodynamic systems
near critical points abstract from compositional and other micro-level
details (see Batterman 1998). More generally, the posit
of existing and irreducible determinables in both fundamental and
special sciences is in line with a principle of explanation pervasive
in the sciences, according to which good explanations do not cite
unnecessary details (see, e.g., Strevens
 2004).[15]
Determinables appear to
be causally unspecific, in having fewer powers—in being able to
contribute to causing fewer effects, in the circumstances—than
their associated determinates. For example, red has the power
to get Sophie the pigeon, who pecks at any red thing, to peck; but
red doesn’t have the power to get Sophie’s picky
cousin Alice, who pecks only at scarlet patches, to peck—for a
red patch might be not scarlet, but burgundy (see Yablo 1992, Wilson
1999, and Shoemaker 2001). Such a lack of causal specificity, combined
with a principle of individuation of scientific properties according
to which they are (perhaps only contingently) distinguished by
different sets of powers, has been taken to support not just the
existence but the irreducibility of determinable features.
 On a simple and in some
sense default semantics, a sentence of the form ‘\(a\) is
\(F\)’ is true just in case the entity picked out by \(a\) has
the property picked out by \(F\). Hence if ‘This ruby is
red’ is true then on the default semantics the predicate
‘red’ refers to the determinable red.
 As previously, Johansson (2000) posits determinables as providing
a metaphysical basis for perceived similarity among
determinates. Wilson (2012) argues, more generally, that determinables
may be considered ‘natural’ in the
‘joint-carving’ sense of Lewis (1983) in virtue of
providing a non-gerrymandered basis for objective similarity among
determinates.
Again, each of the motivations in (3.1.1) – (3.1.5) is
preliminary. If the seeming appearance of there being irreducible
determinables can be defended against objections, however, the
philosophical work these can do in encoding distinctively unspecific
aspects of reality (as per the applications in 
§5) would constitute additional positive support
for their posit.
The main preliminary motivations against determinables existing
or being metaphysically irreducible to determinates reflect concerns
that such determinables would be unparsimonious, give rise to causal
overdetermination, and/or violate the supposition that reality is
ultimately or fundamentally maximally determinate. These concerns and
associated support for anti-realist (‘eliminativist’) or
realist reductionist accounts are similar to those sometimes brought
to bear against irreducible higher-level (e.g., special scientific)
goings-on.
Reality as maximally determinate. One objection to
irreducible determinables appeals to the supposition that reality
itself is maximally determinate, such that there are no irreducible
determinable properties; as Armstrong maintains, “[a]ll
universals must be determinate” (1978b: 117). Relatedly, many
suppose that there is no “vagueness” in the world; as
Lewis maintains, “[t]he only intelligible account of vagueness
locates it in our thought and language” (1986: 212).[16]
Determinables as failing to track exact similarity. Armstrong
takes “the powerful truism that universals are strictly
identical in their distinct instantiations” to support the claim
that “properties that are lowest determinates […] are
good candidates for being universals” (1997: 49). More weakly,
one might maintain that the best reason for positing properties,
however understood, is as explaining exact similarity (in a given
respect) between objects. Supposing so, one might moreover maintain
that only determinates exist, on grounds that particulars having
determinable properties might fail to exactly resemble in determinate
respects (e.g., red objects might be different shades of
 red).[17]
Determinables as ontologically or causally redundant.
Irreducible determinables have been taken to be ontologically and
causally redundant, since determinates which we have independent
reason to posit can explain or do anything that determinables
purportedly explain or do. Hence Massin (2013) maintains against
Johansson (2000) that perceived inexact resemblances between
determinates can explain the “seen unity of the determinate
colors”, and Gillett and Rives maintain that determinables are
causally unnecessary:
[P]ositing instances of determinate properties offers the best
explanation for the causal relations we observe in the world
[…] Should we also accept that there are instances of
determinable properties corresponding to predicates such as ‘is
colored’ or ‘is charged’? […] There is a
clear concern that it is ontologically profligate to take two
properties to be contributing causal powers, a determinable and its
determinate, where one, the determinate, would apparently suffice.
(2005: 487)
Heil (2003) levels similar complaints.
Determinables as inducing causal overdetermination. Related
to the concern about causal redundancy is the concern, again pressed
by Gillett and Rives (2005), that irreducible broadly scientific
determinables induce problematic causal overdetermination. To start,
if such determinables exist, they need to earn their causal
 keep.[18]
 But following the concern about causal redundancy, determinables
simply reproduce the powers of their determinates, allowing instances
of distinct properties to give rise to the same effect on a given
occasion. And while such overdetermination sometimes occurs, as in
firing squad or double-rock-throw cases, this is not the right model
for determinables and
 determinates.[19]
Determinables as incoherent. Armstrong (1978a: 106–7,
117–18) argues that determinables are incoherent, in
constituting the respect in which associated determinates are both
similar and dissimilar (see Elder 1996: 151 for
 discussion).[20]
 Fales (1990: 174) sees the concern as incorrectly presupposing that
determinables are second-order properties of or relations between
determinates. Massin (2013) thinks the concern depends on whether the
similarity at issue is exact or inexact; if inexact, there is no
problem (“[t]wo things that are imperfectly similar in their
colour can be imperfectly dissimilar in their colour”) but if
exact—in virtue, e.g., of determinables being exactly similar
constituents of determinates—then incoherence follows, since
differences between determinates must be explained by what
“remains” once the shared determinable is removed, but we
cannot make sense of such removal.
While motivated by the previous concerns, anti-realists about
determinables also aim to explain or explain away (or
“debunk”) at least some seeming motivations for
determinables. A common debunking strategy appeals to something like
Berkeley’s (1710) claim that it is a mistake to suppose that
general terms denote abstract
 ideas.[21]
 For example, Heil (2003) echoes Berkeley’s claim, taking
seeming semantic reasons for positing determinables to reflect an
uncritical tendency to suppose that “we can ‘read
off’ features of reality from our ways of speaking about
it” (207), such that even if, e.g., the predicate ‘is
red’ truly applies to some objects (tomatoes, apples, rubies) we
should not take this to be in virtue of their possessing the
“very same property”.
Different positive anti-realist accounts of determinate terms or
concepts and their function are available. Berkeley endorses a
schematic account, on which general terms/concepts indeterminately
refer to determinate features—here, generality is placed in
language or mind, rather than
 world.[22]
 Heil (2003) also endorses a schematic approach, offering a pragmatic
account of the function of determinable terms, as reflecting that we
happen to have perceptual systems suited for tracking certain inexact
similarities between objects having (ultimately highly complex)
determinate properties. That the ‘work’ determinable terms
do consists in tracking inexact similarities between objects or
determinates is a common theme in three alternative anti-realist
accounts. First is Searle’s (1959) account, on which
determinable terms are higher-order predicates of determinate
 predicates.[23]
 Second is Mill’s account of determinable predicates as 
names not of one single and definite attribute, but of a class of
attributes. Such is the word color, which is a name common to
whiteness, redness, etc. (1843/1973: I.ii.5) 
Third is Armstrong’s account, first offered in his 1978a and
developed in his 1997, according to which 
For a particular to “instantiate” a determinable is
[…] for it to instantiate just one of a class of
universals’ […] having the determinable property entails
no more than having one of the determinate properties. (1997: 53)
One concern with anti-realist accounts has to do with the source of
classification of determinates under a determinable term or concept.
As above, this is usually taken to involve inexact resemblance, but if
inexact resemblance is primitive, then objections of the sort leveled
against resemblance nominalist treatments of inexact resemblance may
arise, mutatis mutandis (see Fales [1990: 117–20] for
discussion, and Rodriguez-Pereyra [2002] for a recent response). An
alternative means of classification of determinates appeals to
“naturalness” (as per Lewis 1983) as a primitive property
binding determinates into classes, but this approach incurs
ontological commitment and, it might be complained, is not clearly
explanatory. Perhaps the most developed approach to determinate
classification is Armstrong’s, on which “the resemblance
of determinate universals is constituted by partial identity, where
the greater the resemblance the greater degree of identity”
(1997: 51), such that, for example, determinate lengths resemble in
virtue of sharing unit length
 universals.[24]
 Armstrong argues that his account makes sense of various features of
determination: Determinate opponent incompatibility is
accommodated since, e.g., an object’s length cannot be identical
to different sums of unit lengths; Determinate
similarity/comparability is accommodated since different
determinate lengths share some but not all unit lengths;
Asymmetric dependence is accommodated since specific sums of
unit lengths entail the having of length, but not vice versa.
It has been complained, however, that his account cannot handle
the full range of
 cases.[25]
A second concern is that the presupposition that all properties are
ultimately maximally determinate violates certain possible and
potentially actual conceptions of natural reality. For example, if
objects fill space, and space is both continuous and gunky (i.e., such
that every entity has proper parts), then the shapes and locations of
objects will be indefinitely subject to further determination (see
Salmieri 2008: 78,
 n47).[26]
 And certain interpretations of quantum mechanics
 (see §5.3
 for further discussion) and certain field-theoretic understandings of
fundamental particles as having infinitely extensible boundaries
(reflecting these particles’ being constituted by
long-range interactions) suggest that natural reality is to some
extent irreducibly determinable.
A third, related concern is that it is unclear how the eliminativist
can accommodate (or debunk) all the motivations for determinables. It
remains unclear, for example, how to explain Sorites phenomena if all
properties—including perceptual modes of presentation—are
maximally determinate.
Reductionists take determinables to exist but to be reducible to
determinates—that is, to be identical to classes or broadly
logical constructions of (ultimately maximal) determinates.
The most common reductionist strategy takes determinables to be
identical to disjunctions of (ultimately maximal) determinates (see,
e.g., Bigelow and Pargetter 1990; Clapp 2001; Rodriguez-Pereyra 2002;
Antony
 2003;[27]
 and Massin 2013). On this view, for example, color is
identical to a disjunctive property having every maximally specific
color shade as a disjunct.
Disjunctivism explains several features of determination:
Requisite determination is accommodated since the instancing
of a disjunction requires the instancing of a disjunct;
Determinable inheritance is accommodated since the instancing
of a disjunct entails the instancing of any associated disjunctions
(see Rodriguez-Pereyra 2002, Massin 2013); Causal
compatibility is accommodated via the identity of determinable
(disjunctive) and determinate (disjunct) instances. And while
disjunctivism violates Non-disjunctive specification,
disjunctivists preserve some contrast by stipulating that
determinables are a special sub-class of the class of disjunctive
properties—ones having resembling determinates as disjuncts.
Other stipulations may be required to accommodate Determinate
incompatibility, Determination ‘in respect of’
determinables, and Unique determination.
Three concerns face disjunctivist accounts, besides concerns that the
required stipulations are unexplanatory, and that reality may not be
(ultimately, entirely) maximally determinate. The first reflects
reasons for rejecting disjunctive properties. One such
reason—namely, Armstrong’s concern that “disjunctive
properties offend against the principle that a genuine property is
identical in its different particulars” (1978a: 20)—may be
put aside if the disjuncts at issue are genuinely resembling, as
proponents of disjunctivism suppose. This response will not, however,
satisfy those taking disjunctions to be mere logical constructions,
with no metaphysical import.
The second concern is that taking the disjuncts identified with
determinates to be genuinely resembling, as is needed in order to
answer Armstrong’s concern and to provide an alternative basis
for the contrast flagged in Non-disjunctive specification,
will open the door to looking for a source of the supposed
commonality, which source might well end up being an irreducible
determinable. Here again the question of how best to treat the inexact
resemblance between determinates is pressing.
The third concern is that a disjunctive account cannot accommodate all
the prima facie motivations for determinables. Again, our perceptions
of and thoughts about determinables do not appear to be perceptions of
or thoughts about disjunctions of maximal determinates. Rosen (2010)
presses this point, noting that a “suggestive line of thought
weighs against” disjunctivism, as per a case in which someone
familiar with many shades of blue has no conception of
cerulean (indeed, is perhaps even incapable of thinking of
this shade), but where this deficit “would not prevent him from
being competent with the word ‘blue’, or from knowing a
great deal about the color blue” (2010: 128).
Bigelow and Pargetter’s (1990) relational account aims to
explain both why determinates are similar and why they differ. They
see irreducible determinables as insufficient unto this task, on
grounds, first, that taking determinables to be irreducibly distinct
from but necessarily accompanied by determinates introduces
unexplained necessary connections (1990: 118), and second, that
determinables alone don’t explain differences between
determinates (1990: 54, 58; see also Armstrong 1978b: 113). Bigelow
and Pargetter rather suggest that what it is for determinates to
“fall under a common determinable” is for the determinates
to instantiate second-degree relations of difference from one another,
and for pairs of these differences to in turn instantiate third-degree
proportions (1990: 58–62).
Besides the usual concerns with reductive accounts, two concerns
attach to a relational approach. The first is that attention to the
way in which determinates differ doesn’t in itself serve to
characterize the way in which determinates resemble. As Elder puts it,
although properties such as being blue or rich or stabbingly painful
do come in different degrees or intensities, there is more that is
common to the various precise “values” of these properties
than just that they differ from one another in graduated ways. (1996:
155) 
The second is that, as Elder also observes, from the metaphysical
irreducibility of determinables to determinates, it doesn’t
follow that their necessary connection is mysterious: if 
the various determinates […] each embodies the same property as
the others […] it is hard to see any great mystery in the fact
that possession of any one of these determinate shades necessarily
goes with possession of the relevant determinable. (1996: 157) 
Also worth noting is that concerns about necessary connections
typically arise from acceptance of Hume’s Dictum, according to
which there are no metaphysically necessary connections between
distinct existences; but post-empiricist motivations for believing
this principle are unclear (see MacBride 2005 and Wilson 2010).
We turn now to accounts on which determinables are taken to irreducibly
exist. These accounts are typically implemented under the assumption
that determinables are less fundamental than—are metaphysically
posterior to—determinates. In
 §4
 I’ll consider whether determinables may be as fundamental as
determinates, and whether certain of the non-reductive accounts to
follow are compatible with fundamental as well as non-fundamental
determinables.
Yablo (1992) takes asymmetrical necessitation (i.e., Asymmetrical
dependence) as a neutral modal basis for theorizing about
determination: 
\(P\) determines \(Q\) just in case the traditional relation’s
first, metaphysical component is in place, where this consists
primarily in the fact that \(P\) necessitates \(Q\) asymmetrically.
(1992: 253, note 23) 
Since reductionists also accept Asymmetric dependence, a
modal account requires supplementation if it is to be
non-reductive.
Yablo does go beyond asymmetric necessitation in considering how
(token, particular) events—the assumed relata of the causal
relation—might stand in the determination relation; his approach
appeals to the notion of essence of an event, and to the idea that the
essence of one such event might be included in or subsumed by the
essence of another:
Determination involves the idea that the requirements associated with
one thing include the requirements associated with another; and
although properties are requiremental on their face, particulars are
not. Hence the need for a notion of individual essence, where
essential properties of a thing are those it cannot exist without.
[T]he essence of a thing is supposed to be a measure of what is
required in order to be that thing. Thus if more is required to be
\(y\) than to be \(x\), this should be reflected in an inclusion
relation between their essences:
When \(q\)’s essence is a subset of \(p\)’s essence, \(p\)
is said to subsume \(q\) (\(p \geq q\)); and \(p\) determines \(q\)
(\(p > q\)) when the inclusion is strict. (1992: 261)
Given the role essences play in individuation, this approach promises
to characterize determinable events in properly non-reductive terms,
at both the type and token levels, and might be extended to a more
general non-reductive account of determinables, capable of
accommodating the range of motivations for irreducible determinables.
Taking determinables to have essences contained within determinate
essences would also clearly explain various features of determination,
including (besides Asymmetric dependence, which is presumably
still in force), Determinable inheritance and
Determination ‘in respect of’ determinables. More
needs to be said, however if an appeal to essences is to explain
certain other features of determination, including Non-conjunctive
specification, Requisite determination, Determinate
opponent incompatibility, and—importantly for Yablo’s
intended application of determination to the problem of mental
causation;
 see §5.2—Causal compatibility.
Causal and powers-based accounts of determination are typically
motivated by the problem of mental/higher-level causation, expressed
by the question: How can higher-level properties bring about effects,
as they seem to do, given that the physical properties upon which
these higher-level properties depend are sufficient to cause these
effects? As we’ll see in
 §5.2,
 different causal accounts provide different answers to this question.
An important choice point, which I’ll track here, concerns
whether determinable and determinate instances are taken to be
token-identical.
Though MacDonald and MacDonald (1986) don’t officially offer an
account of determination, they were the first to see determination as
useful for addressing the threat of causal overdetermination.
Effectively, they suggest that the relation between mental and
physical properties is analogous to determination: in both cases the
properties at issue are, they maintain, type-distinct but token-identical, thus
avoiding problematic overdetermination while preserving type-level
causal relevance. Here and elsewhere, token-identity accounts of
determinables and determinates do not clearly accommodate certain of
the (e.g., perceptual) motivations for irreducible determinables;
token-identity accounts are also subject to an extension of
Horgan’s (1989) concerns with reductive accounts of mental
states, according to which, insofar as the causal relata are
ultimately located particulars (events, objects, property instances),
the efficacy of determinables qua determinable—that is,
qua distinctively unspecific—requires that determinable
and determinate tokens as well as types be distinct.
The first explicitly causal theory of determination is Fale’s (1990) account of
‘determinable or generic’ and ‘specific’
universals, on which the former have a proper subset of the
‘causal relations’ of the latter:
If \(S\) and \(S'\) are specific universals and \(G\) is a
determinable or generic universal under which they both fall, then the
causal relations between \(G\) and other universals are a subset of
the causal relations between \(S\) and other universals; and also a
subset of the causal relations between \(S'\) and other universals.
For \(S\) and \(S'\) to be species of a common genus is for them to
share some subset of causal relations, which subset can itself
constitute the causal essence of a universal, such as \(G\). For \(S\)
and \(S'\) to be distinct species is for this subset to be a proper
subset of the causal relations which characterize \(S\), and also of
the causal relations which characterize \(S'\): there must be some
causal relation which \(S\) has, but not \(S'\), and some causal
relation which \(S'\) has, but not \(S\). (1990: 175)
A subset-of-causal-relations account of generic/determinable
universals promisingly accommodates many features of determination,
for reasons similar to those attaching to powers-based accounts,
below. It also ensures the metaphysical irreducibility of a
generic/determinable type to any specific/determinate type, by the
principle of the indiscernibility of identicals (if \(G\) has only a
proper subset of causal relations of \(S\), \(G\) cannot be identified
with \(S\)); and if this proper subset relation is preserved at the
level of tokens, it will also block token-identity. More needs to be
said, however, if this account is to ensure accommodation of
Non-disjunctive specification (and more generally, if it is
to block the metaphysical reducibility of determinable types to
certain constructions of determinate types), since one might suggest
(as a variation of the theme of Antony 2003) that disjunctive types,
like Fales’s generic types, also have the causal relations in
the intersections of their disjunctions. More problematic is that
Fales’s account does not provide a clear basis for accommodating
Non-conjunctive specification, since as stated it is
compatible with a given determinate/species’ being conjunctively
analyzable into (for example) a genus and differentia, each associated
with a proper subset of the powers of the species. Even so,
Fales’ account of determination is a clear precursor of
Yablo’s (1992) essence-based
 account[28]
 and the powers-based account, to be next discussed.
The first explicitly powers-based account of determination is offered
by Wilson (1999), as an application of a powers-based approach to the
metaphysical dependence (a.k.a. ‘realization’) at issue in
physicalism. She first motivates attention to powers (rather than
supervenience or epistemic notions, in particular) as a properly
metaphysical basis for characterizing realization; she then argues
that a variety of seemingly diverse non-reductive physicalist
accounts, including Yablo’s determinable-based account, are
similar in aiming to ensure that the powers of a realized property are
a proper subset of those of its realizing property (properties), in
particular. Hence:
One way to make [Yablo’s] conjecture more plausible is to put
the point in terms of the causal powers of the properties involved.
[…] the reason why “determinables and their determinates
are not causal rivals” is because it is plausible, in the case
of determinables and determinates, that each causal power of the
determinable is identical to a causal power of its determinate.
[Moreover, and for example,] the property of being scarlet, which is a
determinate of the property of being red, evidently has more causal
powers than the property of being red. (1999: 47)
These considerations suggest the following first-pass powers-based
account of determination:
Powers-based determination (first pass): Property \(P\)
determines property \(Q\) iff \(Q\) is associated with a [non-empty]
proper subset of the token powers associated with \(P\).
On this approach, a determinate is more specific than its determinable
(as per Increased specificity) in being associated with a
more specific set of powers. Clarke (1999), Shoemaker (2001, 2007),
and Clapp (2001) also maintain that determination is a case-in-point
of a non-reductive realization relation satisfying the proper subset
condition on powers, where the powers associated with a given
determinable property are those in the intersection of the sets of
powers associated with its determinates.
Wilson (2012) moreover argues, contra MacDonald and MacDonald (1986),
Ehring (1996), and others, that determinables and determinates are
token-distinct, since if they were token-identical, then determinable
instances would be associated with more powers than are associated
with their type—but that would be reason for denying that the
instance was of the determinable type. 

This consideration also pushes against taking determinable types to be
metaphysically reducible to (identified with) disjunctive or other
constructions from determinates, since such reductive strategies
entail that instances of determinables and determinates are
token-identical. As such, and in particular, a powers-based approach
accommodates Non-disjunctive specification.
Proponents of powers-based accounts have different ways of
accommodating Non-conjunctive specification.
On Shoemaker’s version of a powers-based account of
realization/determination, Non-conjunctive determination is
stipulated:
Property \(X\) realizes property \(Y\) just in case the conditional
powers bestowed by \(Y\) are a subset of the conditional powers
bestowed by \(X\) (and \(X\) is not a conjunctive property having
\(Y\) as a conjunct). (2001: 78).
Wilson (2009) rather accommodates Non-conjunctive
specification by requiring that the powers in the complement of
the sets associated with a determinate and any of its determinates,
respectively, do not constitute a set associated with any property, as
per her second-pass formulation:
Powers-based determination (second pass): Property \(P\) determines
property \(Q\) iff \(Q\) is associated with a [non-empty] proper
subset of the powers associated with \(P\), and the set of powers had
by \(P\) but not by \(Q\) is not (uniquely) associated with any property.
In addition to Non-conjunctive specification
and Non-disjunctive specification, a powers-based account of
determination neatly accommodates most standard features of
determination. Causal compatibility is accommodated, since
every power of a determinable instance is token-identical with a power
of an associated determinate. A powers-based account also satisfies
Asymmetry, Irreflexivity, and Transitivity,
which are inherited as features of the proper subset relation between
powers. Determinable inheritance is accommodated in that in
having a determinate property with an associated set of powers, an
object will thereby have the determinables associated with proper
subsets of the determinate’s powers (assuming that properties
are at least contingently individuated by associated powers; see below
for further discussion). Determination ‘in respect of’
determinables and Determinate similarity/comparability
are accommodated by determinates’ sharing the powers of their
associated determinable but having further powers, where the powers of
the determinable constitute the respect in which determinables are
similar, and powers had by determinates but not the determinable serve
as a basis for ordering the determinates by degree of similarity
(i.e., determinates sharing more powers will be more similar). That
said, more could be said about how the sharing of determinable powers
makes sense of how these additional powers count as being ‘in
respect of’ the determinable and its powers, and as providing a
basis for ordering by
 similarity.[29]
 Accommodation of Determinable similarity/orderability also
provides a basis for responding to concerns that irreducible
determinables make no sense, since we cannot ‘get a grip’
on the difference-makers of determinates
 (see §3.2):
 on a powers-based view, the difference-makers are, comprehensibly,
the powers in the complement of determinate and determinable sets. A
powers-based account does not itself ensure the accommodation of
either Requisite determination or Unique
 determination,[30]
 but these omissions may ultimately be a virtue
 (see §5.3).
A powers-based approach to determination faces two main concerns. One
is that the view requires endorsement of a controversial “causal
theory” of properties, on which these are (following, e.g.,
Shoemaker 1980) essentially and exhaustively constituted by their
powers; for if properties have non-causal quiddities (primitive
identities, which float modally free of powers), satisfaction of the
proper subset condition on powers won’t guarantee that
determinables are ‘nothing over and above’ determinates
(see, e.g., Melnyk 2006: 141–43 and McLaughlin 2007), since the
status of the determinable’s ‘quiddity’ is not
thereby treated; nor will it explain Determinable
inheritance, since satisfaction of the condition on powers is
compatible with the absence of the determinable quiddities. Here it is
worth noting that while certain proponents (e.g., Clarke, Shoemaker,
Clapp) presuppose a causal theory of properties, such a commitment may
be dispensable: since non-causal quiddities are scientifically
inaccessible and besides the point of solving the problem of
higher-level causation
 (see §5.2),
 their presence or absence is irrelevant to the status
of determination (and more generally, realization) as a relation
between broadly scientific properties (see Wilson 2011).
A second concern with a powers-based approach is that, in
applying only to broadly scientific goings-on, it doesn’t make
sense of determination as holding between abstracta or other entities
lacking powers. In response, a proponent of a powers-based account
might try to extend the approach beyond specifically causal powers to
one involving non-causal functional roles associated with, e.g., being
a number (determinable), and being a prime number (determinate). This
extension remains speculative, however; at present the account is not
fully general.
It is natural to think of irreducible determinables as in some sense
shared parts or constituents of determinates. Such a view would
provide a natural way of accommodating Determinate
similarity, Determinable inheritance, and other
features. A powers-based view might be seen as taking determinables or
associated powers to be constituent parts of determinates; here we
consider non-powers-based constitutional accounts.
Johansson (2000, 2004) endorses a constitutive account of
determinables—more precisely, of ‘maximal’
determinables (such as color, shape, and smell) located at the top of
a determination hierarchy—taking Determinate similarity
and Determinate gradability as its starting point. It is, he
says, characteristic of determinables and determinates that “two
different determinates of the same determinable can always be
continuously connected” (2000: 108), in a way providing the
basis for the gradeable resemblance of the determinates. Conversely,
Johansson maintains, determinates under wholly different determinables
are not connected in this fashion: “No color-determinate
resembles more closely a shape-determinate or volume-determinate than
any other” (2000: 108). This ‘gap’ between
determinables acts as a criterion, whereby a determinable is posited
if and only if there is such a gap—hence it is that only maximal
determinates exist, by lights of Johansson’s criterion. In cases
where a determinable is appropriately posited, the determinable is
shared by its determinates and explains their similarity; for example,
all color-determinates have the determinable property color
in common (Johansson 2000: sec. 3). Johansson’s view is a mixed
eliminativist/non-reductionist view, since he assumes that any
non-maximal determinables do not exist, but are merely “man-made
constructions” (2000: 113). Such a view is unmotivated, however,
since even in the absence of a ‘comparability gap’ between
same-level determinates (e.g., yellow and red, or yellow and scarlet),
one might still suppose that the difference between yellow and red (or
scarlet) is not a matter of convention. Another concern with
Johansson’s account reflects that the mere posit of a shared
determinable does not (as Bigelow and Pargetter [1990] and Massin
[2013] have observed) in itself make sense of determinable
differences, though perhaps the appeal to the ‘continuous
connection’ between determinates can do some work here.
Worley (1997) sketches a different sort of a constitution-based
account, as a way of supplementing Yablo’s (1992) asymmetrical
necessitation account. She illustrates with triangularity, analyzed as
involving the constituent features associated with being a closed,
three sided plane figure, which features can vary in ways associated
with equilateral, isosceles, and scalene triangles, among others.
Worley sees this as motivating a model of determination on which
“the constituents of each determinable are proper subsets of the
constituents of each of their determinates”, such that, e.g.,
the determinable triangular and the determinate
equilateral triangular would share features such as
three-sided and closed plane figure, but the latter
would be additionally constituted by equilateral. As Worley
observes, this account accommodates various features of determination,
including Determinable inheritance: 
There can be no metaphysically possible world in which an instance of
a determinate can fail to be an instance of its determinable, since
anything which is an instance of a determinate will be so in virtue of
having certain features, which features will also be sufficient to
make that object an instance of the determinable. (1997: 290) 
The shared constituent features also provide a basis for
Determination ‘in respect of’ determinates and
Determinate similarity/comparability, and perhaps the
additional features of the determinates can provide a basis for
Determinate incompatibility. The main concern with
Worley’s account is that it doesn’t accommodate
Non-conjunctive determination, and in fact seems to require
its denial.
‘Grounding’ is a recently-introduced primitive relation or
notion of metaphysical dependence, taken to be operative in any
context where such dependence is at issue (either as holding between
facts or propositions pertaining to some goings-on, or between worldly
goings-on themselves). Proponents of Grounding typically take
determination to be a paradigm case of such dependence, with
determinables being Grounded in determinates. For example, Correia
suggests that “the determinate features of a thing” are
the Grounds of “the determinable features of a thing”
(2005: 49–50); Schaffer (2016b) takes a case of determination as
the primary exemplar of his ‘structural equations’
approach to Grounding; and Rosen (2010) endorses the following
principle:
Determinable-Determinate Link: If \(G\) is a determinate of
the determinable \(F\) and \(a\) is \(G\), then \([Fa] \leftarrow
[Ga]\)
Here, \([Fa] \leftarrow [Ga]\) stands for ‘the fact that \(Fa\)
is Grounded in the fact that \(Ga\)’.
Though Grounding is primitive, proponents stipulate that it has
various features—most commonly, those of a strict partial order,
in which case a Grounding-based account of determination will satisfy
Asymmetry, Irreflexivity, and
 Transitivity.[31]
 The also-common assumption that Grounding entities metaphysically
necessitate Grounded entities accommodates Determinable
inheritance. How to accommodate other features (including
Non-conjunctive specification, Non-disjunctive
specification, Determination ‘in respect of’
determinables, and so on) is less clear, since Grounding
doesn’t itself distinguish determination from other dependence
relations.
Correspondingly, the overriding concern with a Grounding-based account
is that primitive Grounding alone fails to shed any substantive light
on determination, instead simply registering the common supposition
that determinables metaphysically depend on determinates in a way
conforming to certain stipulated formal features. This concern is a
case-in-point of the more general concern raised in Wilson (2014),
according to which Grounding is too abstract to shed any useful
metaphysical light on its own. Some proponents of Grounding attempt to
provide more substance to a Grounding-based account of determination
by deriving or modeling the claim that determinables are Grounded in
determinates, but whether these attempts succeed is unclear; see,
e.g., Schaffer’s (2016a,b) suggestion that determination can be
modeled using the apparatus of structural equations (à
la Pearl 2000 and Spirtes and Scheines 1993), and reasons to
resist that suggestion offered by Koslicki (2016) and Wilson
(2016).
We now discuss three accounts which are best seen as elucidating
certain structural or broadly logical features of determination or
determinates.
Funkhouser’s (2006) property-space account (see his 2014 for
further exposition) starts by filling in what it is to have a
determinable “in a specific way” (Increased
specificity) by attention to ‘determination
dimensions’—features along which a determinable may be
determined, such as, e.g., hue, saturation, and
brightness in the case of color. The suggested
methodology for identifying determination dimensions of a given
determinable is broadly empirical, and involves inquiring after
“the ways in which determinates under the determinable \(X\) can
differ from one another with regard to their \(X\)-ness” (2006:
551), which suggestion picks up on both Determination ‘in
respect of’ determinables and Determinate
incompatibility.
Funkhouser then offers a model on which determination dimensions,
assumed to have discrete or continuous ranges of values, serve as
coordinate axes of a ‘property space’ for a given
determinable. The space as a whole corresponds to the determinable;
points in the space correspond to maximal determinates, associated
with specific assignments of values to each determination dimension;
subspaces of the space correspond to less than maximal determinates
(which themselves may be determinables relative to contained subspaces
or points). For example, color has determination dimensions
hue, saturation, and brightness, such that,
e.g., red determines color if and only if the
property space of red is a proper subspace of the property
space of color. More generally:
Property \(B\) determines property \(A\) iff 
‘Non-determinable necessities’ are those features of a
determinable not allowing for variation (e.g., being three-sided, in
the case of triangularity); condition (2) registers that sharing of
non-determinable necessities is also required for determination, in
addition to the increase in specificity associated with conditions (1)
and (3), registering that determinates differ with respect to the
values of one or more determination dimensions associated with the
determinable.
Modeling determinates as subspaces of a determinable space
accommodates many features of determination, including, to start,
Increased specificity, Determination in-respect-of
determinables, Asymmetry, Irreflexivity, and
Transitivity. Determinate incompatibility follows
from subspaces’ being disjoint; Determinate
similarity/comparability may be elucidated by reference to
metrics on the spaces, whereby subspaces of a determinable space may
be nearer or further apart. Funkhouser also aims to accommodate
Causal compatibility by taking determinable and determinate
instances (tropes) to be identical.
With this latter claim, Funkhouser’s account moves into
ontological territory, and might be plausibly seen as a sophisticated
variation on a disjunctivist or other reductionist theme—say,
one elucidating the internal dimensional structure of determinate
disjuncts vis-á-vis associated
 determinables.[32]
 In any case, as with reductive accounts, Funkhouser’s
assumptions that reality is ultimately maximally determinate and that
determinable and determinate instances are token-identical are subject
to challenge as either empirically inadequate or such as to not
properly accommodate the perceptual and other motivations for
determinables. That said, it seems likely that the structural aspects
of Funkhouser’s approach could be preserved even if these
assumptions are relaxed, such that, e.g., ‘points’ in a
property space aren’t taken to correspond to maximal
determinates (see note 45).
Denby (2001) presents a metric-space account of
“determinables-together-with-their-determinates”, which
“identifies abundant determinables and determinates with impure
sets and the having relation with a set-theoretical relation”
(2001: 316). Determinables are defined as follows:
\(F\) is a determinable iff \(F\) is a pair \(\langle S, f\rangle\)
where:
Here a determinable is thought of as a “classification” of
particulars. The metric space \(S\) is a collection of points together
with a “distance” relation on these points; it defines the
possible classificatory locations and how they are related. Each point
corresponds to a determinate of that determinable, and the distance
relation provides a measure of the similarities among them. The
function \(f\) maps each concrete particular in its domain to a unique
point in the metric space.
Determinates are defined as follows:
\(F\) is a determinate iff \(F\) is a pair \(\langle D, E_i\rangle\)
where
In set-theoretic terms, a determinate is thought of as a
“centered” classification of particulars, defined by a
determinable and by the determinate’s extension. Denby moreover
sees determinables as ultimately categorizing the possession of
maximal or “sparse”
 determinates;[33]
 as such, he interprets his model along anti-realist or reductionist
lines.
This approach to determinables and determinates is attractive, Denby
argues, in that sets are ontologically unproblematic and their
identity-conditions and relations well-understood (and similarly for
functions and metric spaces), and in that the account accommodates
“the pre-theoretic intuitions about the logical relations among
properties” (2001: 310), including Unique
 determination,[34]
Determinate
 similarity/comparability,[35]
 and Determinate incompatibility. The primary
concerns here are again those associated with anti-realist or
reductive views of determinables, though as with Funkhouser’s
account it might be that the broad structure of Darby’s metric
conception of determinables is compatible with a non-reductivist
reading.
Fine’s aim in his 2011 is to characterize “what it is for
the world to possess the kind of structure that it has when the
determinate/determinable distinction is in play” (2011: 162),
taking as inspiration Wittgenstein’s post-Tractarian view, on
which 
the atomic propositions might exhibit the kind of dependence that is
characteristic of the way in which different determinants of a given
determinable are exclusive of one another. (2011: 161) 
Fine’s project reflects the usefulness of Determinate
incompatibility for his truthmaker semantics (Fine
2012a,b)—most notably, in providing a non-similarity-based
account of the worlds entering into counterfactual deliberation, with
the general idea being that a counterfactual world will be just like
the actual world but for the replacement of some actual state \(s\)
with a state \(s'\) that is a determinate under the same determinable
as \(s\). As such, Fine’s ultimate aim is to provide a
definition of the ‘co-determinable’ relation between
states—a task which “avoids the tricky question of saying
what exactly a determinable is” (2011: 184), though certain
structural characterizations of determinables fall out of his account.
Since Fine’s approach to characterizing determinable-determinate
structure is rather intricate, we direct the interested reader to the
attached
 footnote.[36]
It is commonly assumed that determinables, if they exist, are less
fundamental than determinates. Of course, this assumption is true on
reductionist
 accounts;[37]
 but even those taking determinables to be irreducible to determinates
often suppose that the latter are prior to the former. In this section
we canvass reasons for and against taking determinates to be
metaphysically prior to determinables.
One criterion of priority takes it to be sufficient for some goings-on to be less
fundamental than some others that the former are asymmetrically
necessitated by (or “metaphysically supervene on”) the
latter. As per Asymmetrical dependence, it is characteristic
of determinates that they asymmetrically necessitate their associated
determinables, thanks to the distinctively unspecific nature of
determinables. Hence Armstrong says: 
A point to be taken very seriously is that because determinates entail
the corresponding determinable, the determinable supervenes on the
determinates, and so, apparently, is not something more than the
determinates. (1997: 50)
Asymmetric necessitation appears to be insufficient for
non-fundamentality, however, as is reflected in standard concerns that
supervenience is too weak to guarantee nothing-over-and-aboveness
(see, e.g., Horgan 1993 and McLaughlin and Bennett
2005). Nor is asymmetric necessitation necessary for the holding of a
priority relation, as Fine’s (1994) case of Socrates and the
singleton set of Socrates shows. As such, one can reasonably deny that
the asymmetric necessitation of determinables by determinates
establishes that determinables are less fundamental than
determinates.
Even accepting the criterion, one can question whether it shows that
determinates are metaphysically prior to determinables. As French
(2014) observes, while determinable instances do not entail any
particular determinate instances, there is nevertheless
‘two-way’ entailment: every determinate instance entails
determinable instances, and every determinable instance entails some
determinate instance. One might respond that the word
‘some’ expresses residual asymmetry in priority as opposed
to simply reflecting that determinables are less specific than
determinates, but as French notes, “those who exclude
determinables from the fundamental base need to show what specificity
has to do with fundamentality” (2014: 284).
Another criterion takes more fundamental properties to be more
‘natural’, in the terminologically
 inapropos[38]
 meaning of Lewis (1983), in making for greater objective resemblance
between their possessing particulars than do less fundamental
properties. This conception appears to deem determinables less
fundamental than determinates: since determinables are less specific
than their associated determinates, particulars sharing a given
determinate property (e.g., scarlet) will be more objectively
similar in the relevant respect than will be particulars sharing an
associated determinable property (e.g., red). As Wilson
(2012) notes, however, objective resemblance can hold between
properties as well as particulars; hence even granting that
determinates make for more objective resemblance between particulars,
one can reasonably maintain that among the perfectly natural joints
are those associated with 
determinables.[39] 
Such a consideration would support McDaniel's (2010) supposition that
the increase in specificity at issue in determination differs from
that at issue in the disjunction-disjunct relation, in that
determinables, unlike disjunctions, are as natural as their
specifications.
Finally, consider a criterion of fundamentality—associated with
intuitive “all God had to do” scenarios—according to
which fundamental entities fix all the rest. This criterion again
seems to support taking determinates to be prior to determinables, for
once the specific, or determinate, facts are fixed, then, it seems,
more general/determinable facts are thereby fixed, with the latter
being at best ontologically real abstractions from the former. By way
of contrast, fixing the determinable facts does not fix the
determinate facts (as is reflected in Asymmetric
dependence).
As Wilson (2012) argues, however, that determinable facts are fixed by
determinate facts is undermined by attention to the constitutive modal
fact about any given determinable instance—say, that instance of
red—that it is of a type that might have been
differently determined—say, by scarlet rather than
maroon. Here the suggestion is that no determinate fact or
complex combination of such facts can provide a non-gerrymandered
basis for such a constitutive modal fact.[40]
One response is to maintain that a fundamental base need only ground
the contingent non-modal facts at a world, as Schaffer (2004: 90)
suggests; if so, then the failure of determinate instances to ground
certain modal facts about determinable instances won’t impugn
the priority of determinates. Still, one might maintain
that a supposed “ground” for some entity which failed to
provide a metaphysical basis for modal facts constitutive of the
entity would be incomplete, at best. As French puts it, 
fixing the non-modal facts and leaving modal flexibility out of the
picture would yield an incomplete inventory. And the most obvious way
of fixing the modal facts would be to include the determinables
themselves in the fundamental base. (2014: 284) 
There is a worry that this line of
thought will overgenerate, in that many higher-level features and
objects (e.g., tables) are to some extent constitutively modally
flexible; a possible response is that whether the line of thought
applies to a given case will depend on whether the basis for the modal
flexibility is itself derivable or otherwise clearly generated by
lower-level goings-on.
The previous considerations suggest that some determinable features of reality might be
fundamental, or as fundamental as determinate features. This result
raises several questions, answers to which have implications for our
understanding of determinables and determinates, and of the
fundamental.
One question pertains to whether the determinates associated with
fundamental determinables are also part of the fundamental base. It
seems so; for even granting that determinates cannot completely ground
determinables, determinates seem also to be needed to be existential
witnesses for more specific goings-on. In that case, a further
question arises concerning how determinables and determinates jointly
participate in a fundamental base. Wilson (2012) suggests that a model
for understanding such joint founding may be found in the sciences,
and more specifically in how general scientific laws combine with
initial or boundary conditions (15–16), an analogy developed by
French, who maintains that “scientific determinables and
determinates jointly enter into the fundamental base for everything
else” (2014: 285)
A further question concerns whether existing non-reductionist accounts
of determinables can make sense of these being fundamental. On the
face of it, there is no special difficulty with accommodating
fundamental determinables on either powers-based or constitution-base
accounts of determination, or with such accounts’ making sense
of joint determinable/determinate founding. On Johansson’s
(2000) account, for example, it might be that determinates depend on
determinables in that the latter are constitutive parts of the former
(nota bene: not obeying weak supplementation), and
determinables depend on determinates in that, modulo gappy quantum
indeterminacy
 (see §5.3),
 determinable instances must be parts of some determinate whole.
That determinables and determinates may be jointly fundamental has
implications for our understandings of fundamentality and metaphysical
dependence. Fundamental entities are commonly assumed to be
independent, in being wholly distinct, and (relatedly, as per
‘Hume’s Dictum’) in being such that each can either
exist together or exist apart. But if determinables and determinates
can be equally fundamental, this understanding is incorrect; for given
the intimate relationship between determinables and determinates, to
say that these are equally fundamental is evidently not to say either
that they are wholly distinct or (even granting Hume’s Dictum)
modally independent. Moreover, if determinables and determinates can
mutually found each other, other stipulated suppositions are called
into question—e.g., that the fundamental entities are those that
do not depend on any other entities, and that metaphysical dependence
is asymmetric.
The possibility of fundamental determinables also bears on various
first-order metaphysical topics. For example, Paul (2002, 2012)
endorses a one-category ontology (‘mereological bundle
theory’), on which properties and relations are fundamental, and
property composition is “the fundamental glue” (2012:
242). Paul allows that determinables might be among the fundamental
properties and relations (note 22), and moreover suggests that such
posits may be required to accommodate theories couched in terms of
properties and relations which are “extremely abstractly
specified” (2012: 245).
We now canvass three among many topics in metaphysics where attention
to determinables and determinates has played a significant
 role.[41]
As mentioned previously, several philosophers have seen determinables
and determinates as relevant to our understanding of laws of nature in
both physics and the special sciences. Armstrong (1997) argues that
irreducible determinables are needed to make sense of functionally
specified laws in physics. Consider Newton’s law of
gravitation:
As Armstrong notes (see also Fales 1990: 61 and French 2014),
substitution of the determinable quantities \(F\), \(M\), and \(D\)
with determinate values gives rise to “a law which stands as
determinate to the original, determinable, law” (1997: 63). One
might try to provide an anti-realist or reductionist treatment of
these seemingly determinable laws. Armstrong (1997) argues, however,
that such deflationary treatments cannot make sense of the role of
functional laws in sustaining counterfactuals, at least if properties
are Aristotelian universals, whose existence depends upon their being
instantiated; for then there will typically (and perhaps necessarily,
for the case of continuous quantities) be gaps in the actual
instantiations of functional laws. As such, the unity of determinates
in these cases involves not just partial identities (as discussed in
 §3.4)
 but “strictly identical second-order properties”, which
are the “real […] determinables” (1997: 247).
Functional laws of nature are then taken to be relations between these
determinable universals.
French offers a structuralist account of laws of nature as expressing
determinable relations. As regards the above law, he says:
If we insert specific values […], we obtain a determinate
instance of the law, expressing the relation that holds between
determinate properties. So, the law as a whole can be regarded as
expressing a determinable relation, which can be made determinate in
specific situations. (2014: 300)
Again, French allows that determinable laws/relations may be
fundamental. Reflecting that one reason for taking (some)
determinables to be fundamental is that these are partly constituted
by modal facts pertaining to their possible determinations, French
moreover suggests that the determinable nature of laws provides a
basis for physical modality: 
these determinate instances correspond to solutions that can be
represented by (more) specific models of the theory, and it is the
shared structure between these models that yields the relevant
physical modality. The relationship between the more generic and more
specific models can be captured by that between determinables and
determinates. (2014: 300)
Another application of determination to the metaphysics of laws
concerns whether these are contingent, in having at best a restricted
physical or nomological modality, or rather are metaphysically
necessary. Kistler (2005) argues that such laws are metaphysically
necessary, first arguing that the quantities in ‘laws of
association’ such as the ideal gas law are reasonably seen as
different determinables of the same determinate states, such that such
laws are necessary; then generalizing on the base of systematicity
considerations to other kinds of
 laws.[42]
How can mental goings-on bring about physical effects, as they seem to
do, given that the physical realizers of mental goings-on are already
sufficient to cause these effects? This question gives rise to the
problem of mental (more generally, higher-level) causation, encoding
two threats: first, that mental properties, if efficacious, give rise
to problematic causal overdetermination; second, that avoiding
overdetermination requires that mental properties be causally excluded
by their realizers. Overdetermination and exclusion are avoided if
mental and physical goings-on are identical, but in that case it
seems that mental goings-on are not efficacious qua mental
(see Horgan 1989); as Yablo puts it: “Mental events are
effective, maybe, but not by way of their mental properties”
(1992: 249). Moreover, type
identity seems at odds with the multiple realizability of mental
properties.
Some, including MacDonald and MacDonald (1986), Yablo (1992), Wilson
(1999), and Shoemaker (2001), have suggested that a better response
proceeds by taking mental properties to be determinables of their
physical
 realizers.[43] 
The appeal to determination reflects various
features of determinates and determinables, including Causal
compatibility. As Yablo says, 
[W]e know that [determinables and determinates] are not causal rivals.
[…] Determinables and their determinates, like objects and
their parts, are guaranteed to be on the same team. (1992: 259) 
Moreover, determinables are typically multiply determined, and given
that determinables and determinates are type- and perhaps also
token-distinct, one can argue
 (see §3.5)
 that determinables are distinctively efficacious. If mental
properties are determinables of physical realizers, these features are
inherited: as causal non-competitors, overdetermination is avoided
while accommodating multiple realizability, compatible with the
distinctness and distinctive efficacy of mental properties. Similar
considerations apply to other higher-level goings-on, in which case
realization might be determination, more generally.
A determinable-based approach to realization is subject to two main
concerns (besides those generally targeting a powers-based account;
 see §3.5), 
each aiming to show that realization cannot be determination, since
realization lacks some key feature of determination (see Ehring 1996;
Funkhouser 2006, 2014; Walter 2007; and Worley 1997). First is the
argument from mental multiple realizability, according to which such
realizability effectively violates Determination ‘in respect
of’ determinables (entailing that determinates differ in
respect of determinables), since 
Mental properties are said to be multiply realizable precisely because
distinct physical realizers can be exactly the same with respect to
the mental property they realize, (Walter 2007: 219) 
in which case 
[T]he physical realizers of the mental will not differ mentally at
all, as they should if they are determinates of the requisite mental
states. (Ehring 1996: 474) 
Second is the argument from mental superdeterminates, according to
which a mental property could be maximally specified qua
mental—as, e.g., a precise state of searing pain (Ehring), or a
belief maximally specified along the dimensions of content and
confidence (Funkhouser); but if realization is determination, this
would falsely imply that mental super-determinates could be further
determined.
Wilson (2009) responds to these concerns by analogical attention to
color metamerism, in which colors of the same hue, saturation and
brightness can differ in respect of color, and are moreover reasonably
taken to have physical determination dimensions. One metameric moral
is that properties such as color may have physical
determination dimensions; a second is that which determination
dimensions are had by a given higher-level property may be
science-relative. Applying the morals: there is no in-principle
problem with mental properties’ having physical determination
 dimensions;[44]
 moreover, which dimensions are associated with mental properties may
be science-relative. This allows accommodation of mental multiple
realizability: mental properties with diverse physical realizers can
be exactly alike, relative to the determination dimensions associated
with psychology, compatible with these mental properties being
different, relative to a lower-level physical science distinguishing
these realizers. And given that different sciences may treat a single
determinable as having different determination dimensions, mental
properties may be super-determinate relative to a purely psychological
science, while being further determined relative to a lower-level
science.
A powers-based implementation of the metameric
 morals[45]
 also provides a basis for a response to a third objection, due to
Worley (1997), according to which the constituents of beliefs are not
constituents of their physical realizers, as they would have to be if
(as per Worley’s constitution-based account;
 see §3.5)
 beliefs were determinables of physical
 determinates.[46]
 Supposing that constituents are associated with sets of powers, the
content of a belief may be a constituent of its physical realizers,
after all—not qua content per se, but
qua the relevant subset of powers.
Many phenomena appear to be indeterminate: macro-objects (clouds,
mountains) appear to have imprecise boundaries; the future, it seems,
might be genuinely open; on certain interpretations of quantum
mechanics, some properties of a system (e.g., position and momentum,
orthogonal spin components) cannot jointly have precise values. In
these and other cases there are reasons to think that the
indeterminacy is metaphysical, as opposed to merely semantic or
epistemic. Elder (1996) suggests that determinables might be useful
for purposes of making sense of “the idea that corresponding to
(at least some) vague predicates there really are, in the world, vague
properties” (1996: 150). Wilson (2013) more
specifically argues that determinables and determinates provide the
basis for an account of metaphysical indeterminacy (MI) having several
advantages, including being reductive, compatible with classical
logic, and such as to make systematic sense of MI in a wide range of
cases, as follows:
Determinable-based MI: For a SOA to be metaphysically
indeterminate in a given respect \(R\) at a time \(t\) is for the SOA
to constitutively involve an object (entity) \(O\) such that (i) \(O\)
has a determinable property \(P\) at \(t\), and (ii) for some level
\(L\) of determination of \(P\), \(O\) does not have a unique
level-\(L\) determinate of \(P\) at \(t\).
One application of Determinable-based MI is to macro-object
boundary MI; here the conditions are satisfied in ‘glutty’
fashion, reflecting that macro-objects typically have multiple
overlapping realizers, as with Mount Everest and the multiple
overlapping aggregates of rock in its vicinity at any given time. On
the suggested approach, Mount Everest has a determinable boundary
property, but no unique determinate boundary property, since there are
too many candidate determinates of the determinable, associated with
the comparatively precise boundaries of its realizing aggregates (at
best, these determinate boundaries can be attributed to Mount Everest
in relativized
 fashion).[47]
Determinable-based MI is also usefully applied to the case of
value indeterminacy on (some interpretations of) quantum mechanics. As
Darby (2010) and Skow (2010) argue, ‘metaphysical
supervaluationist’ accounts of MI (see Akiba 2004, Barnes 2010,
Williams 2008, and Barnes and Williams 2011) cannot accommodate such
MI. On these accounts MI is effectively understood as primitive
unsettleness about which maximally precise world or state of affairs
is the case; but as Darby and Skow observe, such an approach cannot
model quantum MI, since the Kochen-Specker theorem rules out
simultaneously assigning definite values to all properties of a
quantum system.
By way of contrast, Determinable-based MI is compatible with
the Kochen-Specker theorem (and more generally, Heisenberg’s
uncertainty principle), since as discussed by Bokulich (2014) and
Wolff (2015), one way for a given determinable to fail to be uniquely
determined is if no candidate determinate is present or instantiated,
as the Kochen-Specker theorem suggests can be the case. As Wolff puts
it for the case of spin value indeterminacy: 
Permitting the instantiation of determinables without determinates
helps to describe this phenomenon, because we can say that \(x\)-spin
and \(y\)-spin are determinables with two determinates each, and
[after a spin-\(z\) measurement] neither of these determinates is
instantiated even though the determinables “spin-\(x\)”
and “spin-\(y\)” are. (2015:
 385)[48]
As Wolff goes on to note, a determinable-based account doesn’t
resolve all the mysteries associated with quantum MI; on the other
hand, our experiential and theoretical familiarity with determinables
goes considerable distance towards rendering such MI
intelligible—offering, along the way, a nice case-in-point of
how determinables may be useful for purposes of illuminating the
structure of natural reality.