We can see some of Dewey’s abiding concerns in political philosophy
sketched in some of his early, overtly Idealist work.  In texts such
as “The Ethics of Democracy” (EW1) and “Christianity and
Democracy” (EW4), Dewey elaborates a version of the Idealist
criticisms of classical liberal individualism. For this line of
criticism, classical liberalism envisages the individual as an
independent entity in competition with other individuals, and takes
social and political life as a sphere in which this competitive
pursuit of self-interest is coordinated. By contrast, the Idealists
rejected this view of social and political life as the aggregation of
inherently conflicting private interests. Instead, they sought to view
individuals relationally: individuality could be sustained only where
social life was understood as an organism in which the well-being of
each part was tied to the well-being of the whole. Freedom in a
positive sense consisted not merely in the absence of external
constraints but the positive fact of participation in such an
ethically desirable social order. On this foundation, Dewey rebuts
Henry Maine’s bleak assessment in Popular Government that
democracy is the rule of the ignorant majority. While it is important
that voters can reject their rulers and so control them to some
extent, democracy is not simply a form of government defined by the
distribution of the franchise or majority rule. Rather what matters,
as Dewey puts it, is the way that the majority is formed. To
understand that requires grasping what Maine misses, in Dewey’s view:
that “men are not isolated non-social atoms, but are men only when in
intrinsic relations” to one another, and the state in turn only
represents them “so far as they have become organically related to one
another, or are possessed of unity of purpose and interest” (“The
Ethics of Democracy”, EW1, 231-2). Democracy is a form of
moral and spiritual association that recognizes the contribution that
each member can make in his or her particular way to this ethical
community. And each of us can contribute to this community since we
each only become the individuals we are through our engagement in the
institutions and practices of our society.
Other important themes also appear in these early
statements. Democracy is not “simply and solely a form of government”,
but a social and personal ideal; in other words, it is not only a
property of political institutions but of a wide range of social
relationships. This ideal is common to a range of social spheres, and
should take [“industrial, as well as civil and political” forms (“The
Ethics of Democracy”, EW1, 246).  Through democracy in this
expansive and ideal sense,
While the Christian conception of democracy recedes (but does not
entirely disappear) in Dewey’s later work, the idea that
democracy should be viewed as a form of relationship that encompasses
and unifies different spheres of social life remains
important. Dewey’s later work is more questioning of the traditional
ethical standards and ideals that he appeals to in an essay like “The
Ethics of Democracy”, and he is sharply critical of what he sees as
the residual Kantianism in Green’s idealism, although the
general orientation remains: individuals are not presocial atoms, and
democracy is more than a method of majority rule through voting; it is
also a social and ethical ideal.
At the core of Dewey’s later work is his pragmatist or
“experimentalist” notion of what he calls intelligence or inquiry as
problem-solving. This has reached its apogee in the successes of
modern science, medicine, and engineering, but in Dewey’s naturalistic
and historical view is continuous with, and arises from, mundane
processes of inquiry and problem-solving or, as he put it in a text
for educationalists, with How We Think (MW6,
LW8). The goal of an inquiry is not to arrive at a certain
picture of the nature of things, but to come up with an inevitably
provisional solution to the practical and intellectual problem that
sparked it – to resolve problematic situations. Inquiry should be
understood as part of our struggle with an objectively precarious but
improvable environment. Inquiry is demanded by what he calls an
“incomplete” or “problematic” situation, that is, one in which our
inherited habits and standard ways of doing things run into trouble,
perhaps through our actions’ having unexpected consequences, through
new needs and desires, or through conflict with others. These
challenges prompt us to step back, identify the problem we are
confronted with, and reflect on what to do next. Modern societies have
an awesome exemplar of successful inquiry, in the natural sciences
which, Dewey argues, have been progressive and cumulative, giving us
greater and greater understanding and control of the natural
world. This has above all been the result of their
experimental character, in which no intellectual element is
taken to be beyond rational scrutiny. Theories and hypotheses are
invented, used, tested, revised, and so on. At the same time, new
methods for the invention, use, testing and revision of theories and
hypotheses are developed and refined, and so are new standards for
evaluating theories and hypotheses. What counts as success in inquiry
is some practice’s meeting these standards, but these standards
themselves may be judged in the light of how they square with ongoing
practices of inquiry. In this way, the methods used by science are not
fixed but themselves have a history and develop progressively and
sometimes in unexpected ways. A crucial dimension of the experience
that has established these standards and practices is social or
communal, as we must look to the community of our fellow inquirers for
testing and confirmation of our findings.
Dewey’s conception of inquiry is intended as a general model of
reflective intelligence: we struggle with problems in all sorts of
areas of human experience, including art and ethics. Accordingly he
rejects non-cognitivism about values and holds that values can be true
or false in his pragmatic sense, responsive to reasons and corrigible
in the light of experience. He argues that we should generally think
of values as reflective responses to problematic situations, with the
aim of providing means for what Dewey calls their “directed
resolution” (most fully in these terms in the late work,  Theory of
Valuation  (LW13)). As his treatment of art within this
framework suggests, Dewey’s view of problem-solving is far from being
only narrowly “practical”. Practical inquiry encompasses instrumental
reasoning about means: so if we our path to the beach is blocked by a
giant rock (the problematic situation) we can reflect on what it would
involve to take another route, to climb the rock, to dynamite it,
etc., (and can imaginatively rehearse the options). But it also
includes reflective criticism of ends: if the journey now has to
include arduous rock-climbing, we may reconsider how important our end
of getting to the beach is. Inquiry as practical judgment involves
reflecting on, and revising our ends, in the light of what is involved
for us in achieving them, and this often leads us creatively to
transform our values and to develop new ends.
In keeping with this pragmatic naturalism, Dewey’s ethical writings
approach moral theory in a distinctive way. Moral theories are
generated in contingent historical circumstances, are responsive to
the particular needs and conflicts of those circumstances, and reflect
their prejudices and assumption. Ideas that were functional for a
particular social order can cease to make sense or become
dysfunctional as that order changes. Mistaking contingent social
products for unchangeable features of human nature or psychology is
one of the core occupational hazards of moral philosophers. Famously,
for example, he thinks that the philosophical preference for
“intrinsic” goods of contemplation and related values such as
aesthetic purity originally reflect a form of Greek society structured
around a slave class and a leisured class but is reproduced (with
increasing difficulty) in other class-divided societies.
Dewey isn’t a sceptic about inherited moral theory. Rather, he
sees it as as a repertoire of conceptual resources and tools that we
have for dealing with the problems of value judgement in a world of
plural and changing values. In Ethics, Dewey and James
H. Tufts offer an interpretation of different canonical value
theories, teleology, deontology and virtue ethics as providing
contrasting methodological orientations for identifying, describing
and solving problems. Instead of asking which of these approaches best
captures “our intuitions” and so should be used as an unvarying
standard to guide decision-making in concrete situations, Dewey argues
that no one approach constitutes a theoretically adequate guide to how
to act in particular situations. Instead, these provide standpoints
from which agents can identify and analyze problems, sift important
from unimportant considerations, and appraise our raw preferences and
alternative plans of action. Conflict among these approaches cannot be
resolved in theory, only in practice, if at all, where an agent must
make “the best adjustment he can among forces which are genuinely
disparate” (“Three Independent Factors in Morals”, MW5,
288). This rejection of fixed moral standard should also not be
confused with ethical “neutrality” on Dewey’s part, as
we’ll see when we turn to his political theory.  
Values, Dewey suggests, can be viewed as constructs to solve
practical problems. Like an outmoded piece of technology, a past value
which was once constructed to address a problem in one set of
circumstances can outlive its usefulness, and become a hindrance to
the capacity of those in the present to deal with their practical
needs and worries. This, Dewey believes, is the case with values of
classical liberalism. These have come to block the capacity to resolve
social problems in a way compatible with what he takes to be
liberalism’s core commitment to individual liberty. It is in this way
that “the slogans of liberalism in one period can become the
bulwarks of reaction” in the next (“Logical Method and
Law”, MW15, 76). He develops this thought in discussing
the relation of individual and society, the character and value of
freedom, and the scope of legitimate social and political action.
Dewey criticises classical liberalism for conceiving of the individual
as “something given, something already there”, prior to
society and for viewing social institutions merely as instruments for
coordinating the interests of pre-social individuals. Instead, he
argues, social institutions are “means for creating
individuals” (Reconstruction in Philosophy, MW12,
190-192). In this way, classical liberalism exemplifies what Dewey
describes as “the most pervasive fallacy of philosophical thinking”
(“Context and Thought”, LW5, 5). This is the tendency to
divide up experienced phenomena, and to take the distinct analysed
elements to be separate existences, independent both of the analysis
and of each other. That this abstraction is in particular
circumstances essential for inquiry is an important theme in
Dewey’s philosophy. But this abstraction goes wrong “whenever
the distinctions or elements that are discriminated are treated as if
they were final and self-sufficient” (“Context and Thought”,
LW5, 7), as when classical liberalism treats the individual
as “something given”. Instead, he argues, a genuine:
The abstraction of the individual from social context in classical
liberalism shapes its ethics. If the individual is thought of as
existing prior to social institutions, then it is easier to envisage
securing freedom for the individual in purely negative terms as solely
consisting in the removal of external impediments on individual
action, such as legal restrictions on freedom of speech. By contrast,
Dewey argues that, while removal of external constraints may often be
important for supplying the conditions of liberty, liberty in the
sense in which it is a value for liberals does not consist in the mere
absence of external constraint. For classical liberalism or “old
individualism”, the individual is viewed as surrounded by a protective
cordon of rights, which define his or her freedom. Freedom is taken to
consist in the absence of some intentional constraint on the
individual’s ability to pursue his or her chosen goals. For Dewey,
this negative view of freedom is at the root of the wider social,
ethical and political defects of this form of individualism (“Religion
and Morality in a Free Society”, LW15, 181). What is valuable
about freedom is not the negative absence of interference but the
positive “power to be an individualized self” (The Public and Its
Problems, LW2, 329).
Three features of Dewey’s view of individuality in this sense are most
prominent: individuality is reflective, it is social, and it must be
exercised in order to be enjoyed. The first point is that freedom is
held to consist in the capacity and willingness on the part of a
person to reflect on her or his own goals, aims and projects, and to
revise them as a result of this reflection. Individuality in what we
may call a weak sense is universally possessed and consists in the
distinctive patterns of response to the environment that each person
displays, “a distinctive way of feeling the impacts of the world and
of showing a preferential bias in response to these impacts”
(Individualism Old and New, LW5, 121). In the
stronger sense in which it is a value for liberals, according to
Dewey, individuality consists in the personal capacity for
choice, “the most characteristic activity of a self”
(Ethics, 2nd edition, LW7, 285). This is
not a matter of arbitrarily or whimsically plumping for one option
rather than another, for Dewey.  Rather, choice that is expressive of
individuality in the strong sense involves intelligent criticism of
options. Accordingly, we can understand why Dewey claims that “to
foresee future objective alternatives and to be able by deliberation
to choose one of them and thereby weigh its chances in the struggle
for future existence, measures our freedom” (Human Nature and
Conduct, MW14, 210). Second, freedom as individuality is
social: it is thought to involve participation in shaping the social
conditions that bear on individuality. As Dewey puts it in The
Public and Its Problems, liberty “is that secure release and
fulfilment of personal potentialities which take place only in rich
and manifold association with others: the power to be an
individualized self making a distinctive contribution and enjoying in
its own way the fruits of association” (The Public and Its
Problems, LW2, 329).  Freedom in its fullest sense,
then, is only possible in a canonical form of social order, in which
all take part in shaping the conditions of common life. Third, this is
what has been called an exercise rather than an
opportunity concept of freedom. For some positive theories of
liberty, including Dewey’s, it is a necessary condition of an agent’s
being free that he or she should actually pursue those ends outlined
by that theory as constitutive of the good – that is, he or she
should exercise the opportunity: I am in possession of my liberty in
this valuable sense for Dewey only if I actually act in these
ways.
This account of the character and value of freedom was for Dewey, as
for the Idealists and New Liberals that he drew on and for later
writers on negative and positive liberty such as Isaiah Berlin, flowed
into a debate about the proper scope of social and political
action. The classical identification of liberty with negative liberty
bolsters the identification of freedom with the sphere of life outside
the scope of political action. By contrast, for Dewey the scope of
legitimate social and political action had to be determined
experimentally: laissez-faire should not be assumed to be the
default position for a liberal, according to Dewey, since what he
called intelligent social control or social action (rather, it should
be noted, than state control) is often a requirement of positive
liberty or individuality, in modern industrial
conditions. Unsurprisingly, this drew a hostile reception from
advocates of a negative concept of liberty such as F. A. Hayek. The
identification of freedom with individuality in Dewey’s sense allows
the necessary means for achieving individuality to be understood as
necessary conditions of freedom. So, for example, throughout his life
he argued that education to produce undocile, unservile citizens was
essential, in the name of individuality. More pointedly, Dewey argued,
particularly in the 1930s, that a socialized economy was necessary for
individuality. Dewey drew on a wide range of sources to flesh out his
conception of social action or social control, including the utopian
Edward Bellamy and British guild socialist G. D.  H. Cole. While much
of his writing is unstructured and occasional – and spread
across many different contexts over a long period – rather than
systematic or prescriptive in a very specific way, Dewey supported
social reforms that tended to strengthen workers’ rights, including
rights to form and join unions, and to take strike action, and the
extension of democratic control in the workplace, in the name of
freedom as individuality.  
Since both positive liberty and the idea of social control have been
thought to have worrying authoritarian implications, and Dewey is
sometimes thought of as a technocrat, it is worth emphasising the
liberal and democratic character of Dewey’s conception of social
action. Individuality as an ethical ideal requires that individuals
find their own way, and not have particular doctrines or social roles
imposed on them.  Dewey doesn’t think that the liberal rights
protected in the name of individual liberty (such as freedoms of
speech, thought, movement, and so on) should be dispensed
with. Furthermore, viewing liberty through the prism of individuality
only opens up the possibility of political action in the name of
liberty, but it does not itself require it. Finally, and in contrast
to technocratic critics of laissez-faire such as Walter
Lippmann, Dewey argues that an extensive form of democracy is
essential for social action, and he vests little faith in experts.
While democracy is the key organising concept of Dewey’s political
philosophy, it is one that he thinks of in a very unusual way. As he
puts it in Democracy and Education, it is “more than a form
of government; it is primarily a mode of associated living, of
conjoint communicated experience” (Democracy and Education,
MW 9 p. 93). What does Dewey mean by this kind of claim?
One place to start is with Dewey’s most developed and distinctive work
in political theory, The Public and Its Problems, which is in
part a response to Walter Lippmann’s influential sceptical attack on
democratic theory in books such as Public Opinion (1922) and
The Phantom Public (1925). Lippmann (who like Dewey was
influenced by William James and who shared many philosophical and
political commitments with Dewey at an earlier stage of his career)
agrees that contemporary moral and political thinking has not caught
up with the modern world. Unlike Dewey, however, Lippmann thinks that
understanding the complexity and opacity of modernity requires us to
set aside the democratic illusion that citizens are “omnicompetent”,
and instead embrace the legitimacy of decision-making by qualified
experts. The force of this critique of democracy for Dewey in part
derives from its deployment of his own intellectual strategy for ends
with which he vehemently disagrees. Dewey’s response to this is to
point out that experts have their own biases, and need correction from
those who have to live with the consequences of their
decisions. Although Dewey can sometimes appear to sound dismissive
about what he calls the “political machinery” of democracy such as the
vote and majority rule, he never regards this as inessential or
disposable. At the minimum, for Dewey, this machinery helps to protect
individuals from putative experts about where the interests of people
lie. A class of experts will inevitably slide into a class whose
interests diverge from those of the rest and becomes a committee of
oligarchs. So “the strongest point to be made in behalf of even such
rudimentary political forms as democracy has attained, popular voting,
majority rule and so on, is that to some extent they involve a
consultation and discussion which concerns social needs and troubles”
(The Public and Its Problems, LW2, p. 364). Taken in
isolation, this way of viewing the desirability of democratic
political machinery seems instrumental and minimal; instrumental, in
that the desirability of democracy derives from its protecting the
interests of each individual against the depredations of an elite
class, and minimal, in that the rationale for popular participation is
limited to the need to keep the elite informed about where the shoe
pinches, if its policies are not to be misguided. While Dewey
sometimes refers rather scathingly to the “machinery” conception of
democracy, he is committed to improving this machinery (by supporting
the equal distribution of the franchise, for example) rather than
merely dismissing it as unimportant. The real target of his ire is the
exclusive identification of democracy with a particular current set of
political institutions, particularly only with elections and majority
rule. As in the case of the defunct idea of liberalism, Dewey thinks
of this as a once liberating conception that now contains an inbuilt
conservative bias that prevents more imaginative institutional
thinking.
Democracy is more than merely a means to check on political leaders
and administrators or call them to account. Dewey thinks that this
misses out the importance of democracy for a much wider range of
social institutions than this narrow view captures, including the
workplace. It is “superficial” to think that “government is located in
Washington and Albany. There is government in the family, in business,
in the church, in every social group” which regulates the behaviour of
its members (“Democracy and Educational Administration”,
LW11, 221). The scope of democracy, in the sense of the range
of institutions to which it applies, should not be construed
narrowly. If our individuality is shaped by the wide range of
institutions that make up our social habitat, as Dewey thinks, then
the rules and norms governing these institutions are too important to
us to be left to chance, dogma, tradition or inherited hierarchy. So
restricting democratic scrutiny and control to a single sphere of
social life would be a mistake.
   
Further, as Dewey says, “[d]emocracy is only estimable through the
changed conception of intelligence that forms modern science”
(“Intelligence and Morals”, MW4, 39); that is, through his
conception of inquiry. Democracy is a method for identifying and
solving the common problems confronted by communities. democracy is
understood as consisting in and as providing the conditions for
experimental inquiry. Robust inquiry requires that we must have access
to all the available evidence and arguments. If we want our inquiry to
be successful, we should not prejudge its outcomes, by excluding
sources of experience that allow us to explore and correct our
hypotheses. By contrast,
Although the “democratic faith” suggests that we are all capable of
meaningfully contributing to critical inquiry, the development of
habits of intelligent conduct isn’t taken for granted: they can
be degraded by social disempowerment, propaganda and ideology.  And,
as we’ve seen, they are in any case viewed as hard-won
achievements of schooling and a generally supportive society.
 
Democratic societies are thought of as both seeking to attain
desirable goals, and arguing over how to do so, and also as arguing
over what a desirable goal is. In other words, democratic politics is
not simply a channel through which we can assert our interests (as it
is for the first argument), but a forum or mode of activity in which
we can arrive at a conception of what our interests are. Accordingly,
like recent deliberative democrats, Dewey ascribes a central
importance to discussion, consultation, persuasion and debate in
democratic decision-making. As the experimentalist conception of
inquiry insists, this does not imply that we need a priori
criteria in order to establish if this process has been
successful. Rather, criteria for what counts as a satisfactory
solution may be hammered out in the process of searching for
one. Democracy is experimental for Dewey in that it allows, or should
allow, a profound questioning of the idées fixes of
the established order, even if, of course, much democratic politics
will not take the form of such questioning. 
  
Dewey views democracy as an ideal of associated life in the sense that
as an ideal it reconciles individual and collective
interests. As he describes this ideal,
We can understand Dewey this way. In working out what to do,
individuals and groups are confronted by dilemmas about what to
do. Some of us (such as a gang of thieves, in Dewey’s example)
address these problems in ways that promote certain kinds of growth
and development (you can flourish as a thief) but ultimately frustrate
their members and their own goals, since these activities inherently
generate conflict with other individuals and groups. It is only a
democratic community, Dewey believes, which allows each member fully
to realize her potentialities without conflict and coercion. For the
individual, democracy means having a share in directing the activities
of the group, while for the group it demands liberation of the
potentialities of the individual members in harmony with their common
interests. Yet even at his most optimistic, Dewey doesn’t
imagine away differences of opinion, conflicts of interest and value
pluralism as ineliminable features of social and political life. Even
when his epistemological standards are adhered to, “[d]ifferences of
opinion in the sense of differences of judgment as to the course which
it is best to follow, the policy which it is best to try out, will
still exist” (The Public and Its Problems, LW2,
362).  Democracy as public discussion is viewed as the best way of
dealing with the conflict of interests in a society:
 
On Dewey’s death, obituarists eulogized him as the authoritative
American philosopher of democracy. Both during his life and
subsequently, he has been a more controversial figure than this
reputation would suggest. In part, this reflects his profile and
fecundity. Precisely because he ranged so prominently across such a
wide intellectual terrain, Dewey has been a point of reference and
target for commentators in all the fields he explored: his educational
writings in particular became a default fons et origo of the
alleged ills ascribed to schemes of progressive education by their
critics. Further, across a long and active career as a public
intellectual, Dewey adopted bold and controversial political positions
on deeply divisive issues, including (for example) robustly supporting
US entry into the First World War and later opposing intervention in
the Second World War, which also attracted fierce opprobrium as well
as support.
Dewey’s pragmatism was always highly contentious and by the
mid-twentieth century to some extent staled in the face of stimulating
new research programmes, such as logical empiricism, the Frankfurt
School, existentialism, and other approaches. To skeptics in
democratic theory, following in the tracks of Lippmann and other of
Dewey’s contemporaries such as Reinhold Niebuhr, Dewey’s radical and
unconventional idea of democracy is extravagantly optimistic about the
epistemic capacities of the individual citizen and of democratic
institutions. 
The philosopher who probably did the most singlehandedly to promote
the recrudescence of interest in Dewey’s thinking after this period of
relative marginality, Richard Rorty, found in his work an
historically-minded questioning of epistemological foundations and
aspirations to a God’s-eye point of view that of course provided
fodder for Rorty’s own project. Yet, in relation to political
philosophy, Rorty’s skeptical postmodern liberal ironism glossed over
the detailed architecture of Dewey’s ethical and political theory, and
made very little both of Dewey’s own naturalistic confidence in the
mutually supportive and progressive character of scientific method and
democracy. Even among those philosophers who have been keen to draw on
the pragmatist tradition as a resource for more positively elaborating
a political theory than Rorty was inclined to there are important
figures, such as Cheryl Misak, who seek foundations for their view
elsewhere, notably in Peirce’s view of the precondition of belief, and
express doubts about what they see as Dewey’s less clearly grounded
ethical commitments. However, others such as Hilary and Ruth Anna
Putnam and Philip Kitcher more wholeheartedly identify with, and try
to develop, the commitments of Dewey’s pragmatic naturalism, in
thinking through the relationship between scientific inquiry, ethics
and democracy. In part, recent increased engagement with Dewey’s
political philosophy from philosophers across a range of traditions,
including epistemic democrats, such as Elizabeth Anderson, and
Frankfurt School critical theorists, such as Axel Honneth, flows from
an interest in developing a fuller understanding of democracy as a
method of social learning. Dewey’s political philosophy remains an
important reference point and source of inspiration for thinkers who
seek to explore radical forms of democratic liberalism.  