Diagrams or pictures probably rank among the oldest forms of human
communication. They are not only used for representation but can also
be used to carry out certain types of reasoning, and hence play a
particular role in logic and mathematics. However, sentential
representation systems (e.g., first-order logic) have been dominant in
the modern history of logic, while diagrams have largely been seen as
only of marginal interest. Diagrams are usually adopted as a heuristic
tool in exploring a proof, but not as part of a
 proof.[2]
 It is a quite recent movement among philosophers, logicians,
cognitive scientists and computer scientists to focus on different
types of representation systems, and much research has been focussed
on diagrammatic representation systems in particular.
Challenging a long-standing prejudice against diagrammatic
representation, those working on multi-modal reasoning have taken
different kinds of approaches which we may categorize into three
distinct groups. One branch of research can be found in philosophy of
mind and cognitive science. Since the limits of linguistic forms are
clear to those who have been working on mental representation and
reasoning, some philosophers and cognitive scientists have embraced
this new direction of multi-modal reasoning with enthusiasm and have
explored human reasoning and mental representation involving
non-linguistic forms (Cummins
 1996;
 Chandrasekaran et al.
 1995).
 Another strand of work on diagrammatic reasoning shows that there is
no intrinsic difference between symbolic and diagrammatic systems as
far as their logical status goes. Some logicians have presented case
studies to prove that diagrammatic systems can be sound and complete
in the same sense as symbolic systems. This type of result directly
refuted a widely-held assumption that diagrams are inherently
misleading, and abolished theoretical objections to diagrams being
used in proofs (Shin
 1994;
 Hammer
 1995a).
 A third direction in multi-modal reasoning has been taken by computer
scientists, whose interest is much more practical than those of the
other groups. Not so surprisingly, those working in many areas in
computer science—for example, knowledge representation, systems
design, visual programming, GUI design, and so on—found new and
exciting opportunities in this new concept of ‘heterogeneous
system’ and have implemented diagrammatic representations in
their research areas.
We have the following goals for this entry. First of all, we would
like to acquaint the reader with the details of some specific
diagrammatic systems. At the same time, the entry will address
theoretical issues, by exploring the nature of diagrammatic
representation and reasoning in terms of expressive power and
correctness. The case study of the second section will not only
satisfy our first goal but also provide us with solid material for the
more theoretical and general discussion in the third section. The
fourth section presents another case study and considers it in light
of the third section’s general discussion. As mentioned above,
the topic of diagrams has attracted much attention with important
results from many different research areas. Hence, our fifth section
aims to introduce various approaches to diagrammatic reasoning taken
in different areas.
For further discussion, we need to clarify two related but distinct
uses of the word ‘diagram’: diagram as internal mental
representation and diagram as external representation. The following
quotation from Chandrasekaran et al.
 (1995:
 p. xvii) succinctly sums up the distinction between internal versus
external diagrammatic representations:
As we will see below, logicians focus on external diagrammatic
systems, the imagery debate among philosophers of mind and cognitive
scientists is mainly about internal diagrams, and research on the
cognitive role of diagrams touches on both forms.
The dominance of sentential representation systems in the history of
modern logic has obscured several important facts about diagrammatic
systems. One of them is that several well-known diagrammatic systems
were available as a heuristic tool before the era of modern logic.
Euler circles, Venn diagrams, and Lewis Carroll’s squares have
been widely used for certain types of syllogistic reasoning (Euler
 1768;
 Venn
 1881;
 Carroll
 1896).
 Another interesting, but neglected, story is that a founder of modern
symbolic logic, Charles Peirce, not only revised Venn diagrams but
also invented a graphical system, Existential Graphs, which has been
proven to be equivalent to a predicate language (Peirce
 1933;
 Roberts
 1973;
 Zeman
 1964).
These existing diagrams have inspired those researchers who have
recently drawn our attention to multi-modal representation. Logicians
who participate in the project have explored the subject in two
distinct ways. First, their interest has focused exclusively on
externally-drawn representation systems, as opposed to internal mental
representations. Second, their aim has been to establish the logical
status of a system, rather than to explain its heuristic power, by
testing the correctness and the expressive power of selective
representation systems. If a system fails to justify its soundness or
if its expressive power is too limited, a logician’s interest in
that language will fade (Sowa
 1984;
 Shin
 1994).
In this section, we examine the historical development of Euler and
Venn diagrams as a case study to illustrate the following aspects:
First, this process will show us how one mathematician’s simple
intuition about diagramming syllogistic reasoning has gradually been
developed into a formal representation system. Second, we will observe
different emphases given to different stages of extension and
modification of a diagrammatic system. Thirdly and relatedly, this
historical development illustrates an interesting tension and
trade-off between the expressive power and visual clarity of
diagrammatic systems. Most importantly, the reader will witness
logicians tackle the issue of whether there is any intrinsic reason
that sentential systems, but not diagrammatic systems, could provide
us with rigorous proofs, and their success in answering this question
in the negative.
Hence, the reader will not be surprised by the following conclusion
drawn by Barwise and Etchemendy, the first logicians to launch an
inquiry into diagrammatic proofs in logic,
This conviction was necessary for the birth of their innovative
computer program Hyperproof, which adopts both first-order
languages and diagrams (in a multi-modal system) to teach
elementary logic courses (Barwise & Etchemendy
 1993
 and Barwise & Etchemendy
 1994).
Leonhard Euler, an 18th century mathematician, adopted closed curves
to illustrate syllogistic reasoning (Euler
 1768).
 The four kinds of categorical sentences are represented by him as
shown in Figure 1.
For the two universal statements, the system adopts spatial relations
among circles in an intuitive way: If the circle labelled
‘A’ is included in the circle labelled
‘B,’ then the diagram represents the information
that all A is B. If there is no overlapping
part between two circles, then the diagram conveys the information
that no A is B.
This representation is governed by the following
 convention:[3]
The power of this representation lies in the fact that an object being
a member of a set is easily conceptualized as the object falling
inside the set, just as locations on the page are thought of as
falling inside or outside drawn circles. The system’s power also
lies in the fact that no additional conventions are needed to
establish the meanings of diagrams involving more than one circle:
relationships holding among sets are asserted by means of the same
relationships holding among the circles representing them. The
representations of the two universal statements, ‘All
Aare B’ and ‘No A is
B,’ illustrate this strength of the system.
Moving on to two existential statements, this clarity is not
preserved. Euler justifies the diagram of “Some A is
B” saying that we can infer visually that
something in A is also contained in B since part of
area A is contained in area B (Euler 1768: 233).
Obviously, Euler himself believed that the same kind of visual
containment relation among areas can be used in this case as well as
in the case of universal statements. However, Euler’s belief is
not correct and this representation raises a damaging ambiguity. In
this diagram, not only is part of circle A contained in area
B (as Euler describes), but the following are true: (i) part
of circle B is contained in area A (ii) part of
circle A is not contained in circle B (iii) part of
circle B is not contained in circle A. That is, the
third diagram could be read off as “Some B is
A,” “Some A is not B,”
and “Some B is not A” as well as
“Some A is B.” In order to avoid this
ambiguity, we need to set up several more
 conventions.[4]
Euler’s own examples nicely illustrate the strengths and
weaknesses of his diagrammatic system.
Example 2. No A is B. All
C are B. Therefore, no C is A.
In both examples, the reader can easily infer the conclusion, and this
illustrates visually powerful features of Euler diagrams. However,
when existential statements are represented, things become more
complicated, as explained above. For instance:
Example 3. No A is B. Some
C is A. Therefore, Some C is not
B.
No single diagram can represent the two premises, since the
relationship between sets B and C cannot be fully
specified in one single diagram. Instead, Euler suggests the following
three possible cases:
Euler claims that the proposition ‘Some C is not
B’ can be read off from all these diagrams. However, it
is far from being visually clear how the first two cases lead a user
to reading off this proposition, since a user might read off “No
C is B” from case 1 and “All B
is C” from case 2.
Hence, the representation of existential statements not only obscures
the visual clarity of Euler Circles but also raises serious
interpretational problems for the system. Euler himself seemed to
recognize this potential problem and introduced a new syntactic
device, ‘*’ (representing non-emptiness) as an attempt to
repair this flaw (1768: Letter 105).
However, a more serious drawback is found when this system fails to
represent certain compatible (that is, consistent) pieces of
information in a single diagram. For example, Euler’s system
prevents us from drawing a single diagram representing the following
pairs of statements: (i) “All A are B”
and “No A is B” (which are consistent if
A is an empty set). (ii) “All A are
B” and “All B are A”
(which are consistent when A = B). (iii) “Some
A is B” and “All A are
B”. (Suppose we drew an Euler diagram for the former
proposition and try to add a new compatible piece of information,
i.e., the latter, to this existing diagram.) This shortcoming is
closely related to Venn’s motivation for his own diagrammatic
system (see
 Section 3.1
 for other shortcomings of Euler’s system).
Venn’s criticism of Euler Circles is summarized in the following
passage:
Because of its strictness, Euler’s system sometimes fails in
representing consistent pieces of information in a single diagram, as
shown above. In addition to this expressive limitation, Euler’s
system also suffers other kinds of expressive limitations with respect
to non-empty sets, due to topological restrictions on plane figures
(see
 Section 3.1).
Venn’s new system
 (1881)
 was to overcome these expressive limitations so that partial
information can be represented. The solution was his idea of
‘primary diagrams’. A primary diagram represents all the
possible set-theoretic relations between a number of sets, without
making any existential commitments about them. For example, Figure 2
shows the primary diagram about sets A and B.
According to Venn’s system, this diagram does not convey any
specific information about the relation between these two sets. This
is the major difference between Euler and Venn diagrams.
For the representation of universal statements, unlike the visually
clear spatial containment relations in the case of Euler diagrams,
Venn’s solution is ‘to shade them [the appropriate areas]
out’ (Venn
 1881:
 122). By using this syntactic device, we obtain diagrams for
universal statements as shown in Figure 3.
Venn’s choice of shading might not be absolutely arbitrary in
that a shading could be interpreted as a visualization of set
emptiness. However, it should be noted that a shading is a new
syntactic device which Euler did not use. This revision gave
flexibility to the system so that certain compatible pieces of
information may be represented in a single diagram. In the following,
the diagram on the left combines two pieces of information, “All
A are B” and “No A is
B,” to visually convey the information “Nothing
is A.” The diagram on the right, which represents both
“All A are B” and “All B
are A,” clearly shows that A is the same as
B:
In fact, using primary diagrams also avoids some other expressivity
problems (to do with spatial properties of diagram objects) discussed
below, in
 Section 3.
 Surprisingly, Venn was silent about the representation of existential
statements, which was another difficulty of Euler diagrams. We can
only imagine that Venn might have introduced another kind of a
syntactic object representing existential commitment. This is what
Charles Peirce did about twenty years later. 
Peirce points out that Venn’s system has no way of representing
the following kinds of information: existential statements,
disjunctive information, probabilities, and relations. Peirce aimed to
extend Venn’s system in expressive power with respect to the
first two kinds of propositions, i.e., existential and disjunctive
statements. This extension was completed by means of the following
three devices. (i) Replace Venn’s shading representing emptiness
with a new symbol, ‘o’. (ii) Introduce a symbol
‘x’ for existential import. (iii) For disjunctive
information, introduce a linear symbol ‘-’ which connects
‘o’ and ‘x’ symbols.
For example, Figure 4 represents the statement, ‘All A
are B or some A is B’, which neither
Euler’s nor Venn’s system can represent in a single
diagram.
The reason that Peirce replaced Venn’s shading for emptiness
with the symbol ‘o’ seems to be obvious: It would not be
easy to connect shadings or shadings and ‘x’s in order to
represent disjunctive information. In this way, Peirce increased the
expressive power of the system, but this change was not without its
costs.
For example, the following diagram represents the proposition
‘Either all A are B and some
A is B, or no A is B and
some B is not A’:
Reading off this diagram requires more than reading off visual
containment among circles (as in Euler diagrams) or shadings (as in
Venn diagrams), but also requires extra conventions for reading
combinations of the symbols ‘o,’ ‘x,’ and
lines. Peirce’s new conventions increased the expressive power
of single diagrams, but the arbitrariness of its conventions and more
confusing representations (for example, the above diagram) sacrificed
the visual clarity which Euler’s original system enjoys. At this
point, Peirce himself confesses that ‘there is a great
complexity in the expression that is essential to the meaning’
(Peirce
 1933:
 4.365). Thus, when Peirce’s revision was completed, most of
Euler’s original ideas about visualization were lost, except
that a geometrical object (the circle) is used to represent (possibly
empty) sets.
Another important contribution Peirce made to the study of diagrams
starts with the following remark:
Peirce was probably the first person to discuss rules of
transformation in a non-sentential representation system. In the same
way that the rules of algebra tell us which transformations of symbols
are permitted and which are not, so should the rules of diagram
manipulation. Some of Pierce’s six rules needed more
clarification and turn out to be incomplete—a problem which
Peirce himself anticipated. However, more importantly, Peirce did not
have any theoretical tool—a clear distinction between syntax and
semantics—to convince the reader that each rule is correct or to
determine whether more rules are needed. That is, his important
intuition (that there could be transformation rules for diagrams)
remained to be justified.
Shin
 (1994)
 follows up Peirce’s work in two directions. One is to improve
Peirce’s version of Venn diagrams, and the other is to prove the
soundness and the completeness of this revised system.
Shin’s work alters Peirce’s modifications of Venn diagrams
to achieve an increase in expressive power without such a severe loss
of visual clarity. This revision is made in two stages: (i) Venn-I:
retains Venn’s shadings (for emptiness), Peirce’s
‘x’ (for existential import) and Peirce’s connecting
line between ‘x’s (for disjunctive information). (ii)
Venn-II: This system, which is proven to be logically equivalent to
monadic predicate logic, is the same as Venn-I except that a
connecting line between diagrams is newly introduced to display
disjunctive information.
Returning to one of Euler’s examples we will see the contrast
among these different versions clearly:
Euler admits that no single Euler diagram can be drawn to represent
the premises, but that three possible cases must be drawn.
Venn’s system is silent about existential statements. Now,
Peirce’s and Shin’s systems represent these two premises
in a single diagram as follows:
In the case of Shin’s diagram, Venn’s shading convention
for emptiness, as opposed to Peirce’s ‘o’, much more
naturally leads the reader to the inference “Some C is
not B” than in the case of Peirce’s diagram.
However, Venn-I cannot express disjunctive information between
universal statements or between universal and existential statements.
Retaining Venn-I’s expressive power, Venn-II allows diagrams to
be connected by a line. Peirce’s confusing looking diagram above
is equivalent to the following Venn-II diagram:
In addition to this revision, Shin
 (1994)
 presented each of these two systems as a standard formal
representation system equipped with its own syntax and semantics. The
syntax tells us which diagrams are acceptable, that is, which are
well-formed, and which manipulations are permissible in each system.
The semantics defines logical consequences among diagrams. Using these
tools, it is proven that the systems are sound and complete, in the
same sense that some symbolic logics are.
This approach has posed a fundamental challenge to some of the
assumptions held about representation systems. Since the development
of modern logic, important concepts, e.g., syntax, semantics,
inference, logical consequence, validity, and completeness, have been
applied to sentential representation systems only. However, none of
these turned out to be intrinsic to these traditional symbolic logics
only. For any representation system, whether it is sentential
or diagrammatic, we can discuss two levels, a syntactic and a semantic
level. What inference rules tell us is how to manipulate a given unit,
whether symbolic or diagrammatic, to another. The definition of
logical consequence is also free from any specific form of a
representation system. The same argument goes for the soundness and
the completeness proofs. When a system is proven to be sound, we
should be able to adopt it in proofs. In fact, much current research
explores the use of diagrams in automated theorem proving (see
Barker-Plummer & Bailin
 1997;
 and Jamnik et al.
 1999).
It is interesting and important to notice that the gradual changes
made from Euler Circles through to Shin’s systems share one
common theme: to increase both the expressive and logical power of the
system so that it is sound, complete, and logically equivalent to
monadic predicate logic. The main revision from Euler to Venn
diagrams, introducing primary diagrams, allows us to represent partial
knowledge about relations between sets. The extension from Venn to
Peirce diagrams is made so that existential and disjunctive
information may be represented more effectively.
Both Venn and Peirce adopted the same kind of solution in order to
achieve these improvements: to introduce new syntactic objects, that
is, shadings by Venn, and ‘x’s, ‘o’s, and
lines by Peirce. However, on the negative side, these revised systems
suffer from a loss of visual clarity, as seen above, mainly because of
the introduction of more arbitrary conventions. The modifications from
Peirce to Shin diagrams concentrate on restoring visual clarity, but
without loss of expressive power.
Hammer and Shin take a different path from these revisions: To revive
Euler’s homomorphic relation between circles and
sets—containment among circles represents the subset relation
among sets, and non-overlapping of regions represents the disjoint
relation—and at the same time, to adopt Venn’s primary
diagrams by default. On the other hand, this revised Euler system is
not a self-sufficient tool for syllogistic reasoning, since it cannot
represent existential statements. For more details of this revised
system, refer to (Hammer & Shin
 1998).
This case study raises an interesting question for further research on
diagrammatic reasoning. Throughout the different developments of Euler
diagrams, increasing its expressive power and enhancing its visual
clarity seem to be complementary to each other. Depending on purposes,
we need to give priority to one over the other. Hammer and
Shin’s alternative system provides a simple model for the
development of other efficient non-sentential representational
systems, a topic that has been receiving increasing attention in
computer science and cognitive science.
While it is often possible to afford diagrams the same logical status
as formulae (as argued above), there are still important differences
(which can have ramifications for correctness of the system) between
diagrams and traditional linear proof calculi. An important point to
note about diagrams (cf. Russell
 1923)
 is that spatial relations between objects in a diagram can be used to
represent relations between objects in some other domain. Sequential
languages (e.g., symbolic logics, natural languages), however, use
only the relation of concatenation to represent relations between
objects. The peculiar representational use of spatial relations in the
case of diagrams is direct and intuitive, as seen in the development
of Euler Diagrams above, but also has its perils—as we shall
discuss. Spatial constraints, being peculiar to diagrammatic systems,
can be expected to be an important source of both their strengths and
weaknesses. Psychological considerations concerning human capacities
for visual processing of information, and skill at qualitative spatial
reasoning, also have ramifications for the effectiveness of reasoning
with diagrams, but we shall not survey them here. 
A particular distinguishing feature of diagrams is that they obey
certain “nomic” or “intrinsic” constraints due
to their use of plane surfaces as a medium of representation. The idea
is that sentential languages are based on acoustic signals which are
sequential in nature, and so must have a compensatingly complex syntax
in order to express certain relationships—whereas diagrams,
being two-dimensional, are able to display some relationships without
the intervention of a complex syntax (Stenning & Lemon
 2001).
 Diagrams exploit this possibility—the use of spatial relations
to represent other relations. The question is; how well can spatial
relations and objects represent other (possibly more abstract) objects
and relations?
Logical reasoning with diagrams is often carried out in virtue of
their depiction of all possible models of a situation, up to
topological equivalence of the diagrams (this, of course, depends on
the particular diagrammatic system in use). A single diagram is often
an abstraction over a class of situations, and once a suitable diagram
has been constructed, inferences can simply be read off the
representation without any further manipulation. In some diagrammatic
systems (e.g., Euler Circles) inference is carried out by constructing
diagrams correctly and reading information off them. The complexity of
using inference rules in a symbolic logic is, in these cases, replaced
by the problem of drawing particular diagrams
 correctly.[5]
 For instance, an Euler Circles diagram ventures to capture
relationships between sets using topological relationships between
plane regions in such a way that that it depicts all the possible ways
that a certain collection of set-theoretic statements could be true.
This has two important consequences: (1) if a certain diagram cannot
be drawn then the described situation must be impossible (termed
“self-consistency”), and (2) if a certain relationship
between diagram objects must be drawn, then the corresponding relation
can be inferred as logically valid. (See the numerous examples in
 Section 2.)
 This phenomenon is often termed a “free-ride” (Barwise
& Shimojima
 1995).
 This style of diagrammatic reasoning is thus dependent on a
particular representational use of diagrams—that they represent
classes of models. If a particular class of models cannot be
represented by a diagrammatic system, then those cases will not be
taken into account in inferences using the system, and incorrect
inferences might be drawn. This fact makes the representational
adequacy of diagrammatic systems, restricted by their spatial nature,
of paramount importance, as we shall now explore.
The representational use of the spatial relations in the plane
constrains diagrammatic representation, and therefore reasoning with
diagrams, in certain important ways. In particular, there are
topological and geometrical (let us lump them together as
“spatial”) properties of diagrammatic objects and
relations which limit the expressive power of diagrammatic systems.
For instance, in graph theory it is known that some simple structures
cannot be drawn in the plane. For example, the graph
K5 is the graph consisting of 5 nodes, each joined
to the other by an arc. This graph is non-planar, meaning that it
cannot be drawn without at least two of the arcs crossing. This is
just the sort of constraint on possible diagrams that limits the
expressive power of diagrammatic systems. Now, since diagrammatic
reasoning can occur by enumeration of all possible models of a
situation, this representational inadequacy (a type of incompleteness)
renders many diagrammatic systems incorrect if they are used for
logical reasoning (e.g., see the critique of Englebretsen
 1992
 in Lemon & Pratt
 1998).
Perhaps the most simple example of this is due to Lemon and
 Pratt[6]
 (see e.g.,
 1997).
 Consider Euler Circles—where convex regions of the plane
represent sets, and overlap of the regions represents non-empty
intersection of the corresponding sets. A result of convex topology
known as Helly’s Theorem states (for the 2 dimensional case)
that if every triple of 4 convex regions has a non-empty intersection
then all four regions must have a non-empty intersection.
To understand the ramifications of this, consider the following
problem:
Note that, in terms of set-theory, only trivial consequences follow
from these premises. However, an Euler diagram of the premises, such
as Figure 5, leads to the incorrect conclusion that
A ∩ B 
∩ C  ∩ D 
≠ ∅ (due to the quadruple overlap region in the centre
of the diagram): 
In other words, a user of Euler Circles is
 forced[7]
 to represent a relationship between the sets which is not logically
necessary. This means both that there are logically possible
situations which the system cannot represent, and that a user would
make incorrect inferences if they relied on the system for reasoning.
More generally, this type of result can be generated for many
different types of diagrammatic system, depending on the particular
spatial relations and objects which they use in representation—a
research programme which is ongoing.
For example, using non-convex regions (e.g., “blobs”
instead of circles) leads to a similar problem, only that non-planar
graphs are involved instead of Helly’s Theorem. A similar result
concerns linear diagrams for syllogisms Englebretsen
 1992,
 where lines are used to represent sets, points represent individuals,
point-line intersection represents set-membership, and intersection of
lines represents set-intersection. Again, planarity constraints
restrict the expressive power of the system and lead to incorrect
inferences.
Atsushi Shimojima’s “constraint hypothesis” perhaps
best sums all this up:
As discussed above, much of the interest in diagrams has been
generated by the claim that they are somehow more
“effective” than traditional logical representations for
certain types of task. Certainly, for example, a map is a greater aid
to navigation than a verbal description of a landscape. However, while
there are certainly psychological advantages to be gained through the
use of diagrams, they are (as in the case of Euler Circles) often
ineffective as representations of abstract objects and relationships.
Once a purely intuitive notion, non-psychological claims about
“efficacy” of diagrammatic systems can be examined in
terms of standard formal properties of languages (Lemon et al.
 1999).
 In particular, many diagrammatic systems are self-consistent,
incorrect, and incomplete, and complexity of inference with the
diagrams is NP-hard. By way of contrast, most sentential logics, while
able to express inconsistencies, are complete and
 correct[8]
 .
On the other hand, not being able to represent contradictions could
provide us with interesting insights about the nature of diagrammatic
representation. If a central goal of a language is to represent the
world or a state of affairs, then representing contradictions or
tautologies is called into question. Neither contradictions nor
tautologies are part of the world. How can we draw a picture, or take
a picture, of the contradiction that “it is raining and it is
not raining”? How about the picture of the disjunctive
information “it is either raining or not raining”? Now, we
seem to be much closer to Wittgenstein’s classic picture theory
of language (Wittgenstein
 1921).
Mathematicians have used, and continue to use, diagrams extensively.
The communication of mathematical concepts and proofs—in
textbooks, on blackboards—is not uniformly sentential. Figures
and pictures are common. In line with the prevailing conception of
logic as essentially sentential, however, they are not usually thought
to play a role in rigorous mathematical reasoning. Their use is taken
to be limited to enhancing comprehension of a proof. They are not
standardly believed to form any part of the proof itself. 
The attitude is well illustrated by the standard assessment of
Euclid’s methodology in the Elements. In no
mathematical subject are diagrams more prominent than in the
elementary geometry Euclid develops in the text. The proofs of the
subject seem to be in some sense about the diagrams of triangles and
circles that appear with them. This is especially the case with the
geometric proofs of the Elements. Diagrams for Euclid are not
merely illustrative. Some of his inference steps depend on an
appropriately constructed diagram. On the standard story, these steps
indicate gaps in Euclid’s proofs. They show how Euclid did not
fully carry out the project of developing geometry axiomatically.
Ken Manders set out to explode this story with his seminal work
“The Euclidean diagram”
 (2008 [1995]).
 His analysis of Euclid’s diagrammatic proof method reveals that
Euclid employs diagrams in a controlled, systematic way. It thus calls
into question the common, negative assessment of the rigor of the
Elements. Moreover, the specifics of Manders’ analysis
suggest that the proofs of the text can be understood to adhere to a
formal diagrammatic logic. This was subsequently confirmed by the
development of formal diagrammatic systems designed to characterize
such a logic. The first of these was FG (presented in
Miller
 2007),
 followed by the system Eu (Mumma
 2010).
This section is devoted to explicating Manders’ analysis and the
formal systems that have emerged from it. After a brief survey of how
Euclid’s diagrams have been viewed through the centuries,
Manders’ picture of their role in geometric proofs is presented.
A description of how the systems FG and
Eu render this picture in formal terms and
characterize a logic of Euclidean diagrams then follows.
The elementary geometry of the Elements was taken to be
foundational to mathematics from its inception in ancient Greece until
the 19th century. Accordingly, philosophers concerned with
the nature of mathematics found themselves obliged to comment on the
diagrammatic proofs of the text. A central issue, if not the central
issue, was the generality problem. The diagram that appears
with a Euclidean proof provides a single instantiation of the
type of geometric configurations the proof is about. Yet properties
seen to hold in the diagram are taken to hold of all the
configurations of the given type. What justifies this jump from the
particular to the general?
As an illustration, consider the proof for proposition 16 of book I of
the Elements. 
The proposition is:
Euclid’s proof is:
The proof seems to refer to the parts of the diagram given with the
proof. Nevertheless the proof does not purport to establish something
just about the triangle in the diagram, but something about all
triangles. The diagram thus serves to represent, in some way, all
triangles.
The role of diagrams as representations is remarked upon by Aristotle
in book A, chapter 10 of the Posterior Analytics:
The geometer bases no conclusion on the particular line he has drawn
being that which he has described, but [refers to] what is illustrated
by the figures. (The translation is by T. Heath, found in Euclid 1956:
vol. I, p.119)
Aristotle does not in passage confront the question of how the
geometer uses diagrams to reason about what they illustrate. A few
centuries later Proclus does in his commentary on the
Elements. Proclus asserts that passing from a particular
instance to a universal conclusion is justified because geometers
… use the objects set out in the diagram not as these
particular figures, but as figures resembling others of the same sort.
It is not as having such-and-such a size that the angle before me is
bisected, but as being rectilinear and nothing more…Suppose the
given angle is a right angle…if I make no use of its rightness
and consider only its rectilinear character, the proposition will
apply equally to all angles with rectilinear sides. (A Commentary
on the First Book of Euclid’s Elements, Morrow
 1970:
 207))
The place of diagrams in geometry remained an issue into the early
modern period. Major philosophical figures in the 17th and
18th centuries advanced positions on it. Anticipating the
predominate modern view, Leibniz asserts:
…it is not the figures which furnish the proof with geometers,
though the style of the exposition may make you think so. The force of
the demonstration is independent of the figure drawn, which is drawn
only to facilitate the knowledge of our meaning, and to fix the
attention; it is the universal propositions, i.e., the definitions,
axioms, and theorems already demonstrated, which make the reasoning,
and which would sustain it though the figure were not there. (1704
 New Essays:
 403)
In the introduction to his Principles of Human Knowledge
(1710, section 16), Berkeley reiterates 13 centuries later
Proclus’s take on the generality problem. Though one always has
a particular triangle ‘in view’ when working through a
demonstration about triangles, there is ‘not the least
mention’ of the particular details of the particular triangle in
the demonstration. The demonstration thus proves, according to
Berkeley, a general proposition about triangles. 
The most developed, and predictably most complex and difficult,
account of geometric diagrams in the modern period can be found in
Kant. Kant saw something of deep epistemological significance in the
geometer’s use of a particular diagram to reason about a
geometric concept. In reasoning in this way, the geometer
considers the concept in concreto, although non-empirically,
but rather solely as one it has exhibited a priori, i.e.,
constructed, and in which that which follows from the general
conditions of the construction must also generally of the object of
the constructed concept. (1781, Critique of Pure Reason,
A716/B744.)
For contrasting views of what passages like these reveal about where
diagrams fit in Kant’s philosophy of geometry, see Shabel
 2003
 and Friedman
 2012.
 
In the 19th century geometry and mathematics as a whole
underwent a revolution. Concepts far more abstract and general than
those found in the Elements (e.g., non-Euclidean geometries,
sets) emerged. Not only did questions about the nature of
Euclid’s diagrammatic method lose their urgency, the method came
to be understood as mathematically flawed. The latter view found its
most precise expression in the groundbreaking work of Moritz Pasch,
who provided the first modern axiomatization of elementary geometry in
Pasch
 (1882).
 In it, Pasch showed how the subject could be developed without
reference to diagrams or even to the geometric concepts diagrams
instantiate. The methodological norm guiding the work is nicely
expressed in the following often-quoted passage:
In fact, if geometry is genuinely deductive, the process of deducing
must be in all respects independent of the sense of the
geometrical concepts, just as it must be independent of figures; only
the relations set out between the geometrical concepts used
in the propositions (respectively definitions) concerned ought to be
taken into account. (Pasch
 1882:
 98; emphasis in original. The translation here is from Schlimm
 2010)
The norm has since entrenched itself both in mathematics and in
philosophical discussions of mathematics. It is its entrenchment in
the latter that Manders opposes in Manders
 2008 [1995].
 In the account he develops of ancient geometry, the necessity of
consulting a diagram in a proof does not indicate a deductive gap.
Rather, diagram and text together form a rigorous and deductive
mathematical proof.
To explain the division of labor between text and diagram in ancient
geometry, Manders distinguishes between the exact and
co-exact properties of geometric diagrams in Manders
 2008 [1995].
 Underlying the distinction is a notion of variation. The
co-exact conditions realized by a diagram ‘are those
conditions which are unaffected by some range of every continuous
variation of a specified diagram.’ Exact conditions, in
contrast, are affected once the diagram is subject to the smallest
variation. Roughly, a diagram’s co-exact properties comprise the
ways its parts define a finite set of planar regions, and the
containment relations between these regions. A prominent exact
relation is the equality of two magnitudes within a diagram. For
example, only the slightest change to the position of CF in the
diagram for proposition 16 is required to make the angles BAE and ECF
unequal.
Manders’ key observation is that Euclid’s diagrams
contribute to proofs only through their co-exact properties.
Euclid never infers an exact property from a diagram unless it follows
directly from a co-exact property. Relations between magnitudes which
are not exhibited as a containment are either assumed from the outset
or are proved via a chain of inferences in the text. This can easily
be confirmed with the proof of proposition 16. The one inference that
relies on the diagram is the second to last inference of the proof.
The inference, specifically, is that angle ACD is greater than angle
ACF. This, crucially, is based on seeing from the diagram that angle
ACD contains angle ACF. There are many other relations
asserted to hold in the proof. Though the diagram instantiates them,
they are explicitly justified in the text. And with these relations,
the relata are spatially separated magnitudes. 
It is not difficult to hypothesize why Euclid would have restricted
himself in such a way. It is only in their capacity to represent
co-exact properties and relations that diagrams seem capable of
functioning effectively as symbols of proof. The exact properties of
diagrams are too refined to be easily reproducible and to support
determinate judgments. As Manders puts it
The practice has resources to limit the risk of disagreement on
(explicit) co-exact attributions from a diagram; but it lacks such
resources for exact attributions, and therefore could not allow them
without dissolving into a disarray of irresolvably conflicting
judgements. (Manders
 2008 [1995]:
 91–92)
Manders’ insights lead naturally to the idea that Euclid’s
arguments could be formalized in a manner similar to the way Venn
diagrams have been formalized in Shin
 1994.
 The co-exact information carried by Euclid’s diagrams is
discrete. When a diagram is consulted for this information, what
matters about it is how its lines and circles partition a bounded
planar region into a finite set of sub-regions. This opens the door to
conceptualizing Euclid’s diagrams as part of the syntax
of Euclid’s proof method. 
Realizing this conception in a formal system of proof amounts, as in
Shin
 1994,
 to specifying the syntax and semantics of diagrams. On the syntactic
side, this means defining Euclid’s diagrams as formal objects
precisely, and giving rules whereby diagrams as formal object figure
in derivations of Euclid’s propositions. On the semantic side,
this means specifying how derivable expressions are to be interpreted
geometrically, or in other words how exactly are they to be understood
as representing Euclid’s propositions.
The semantic situation with Euclid’s diagrams is thus different
from that with Venn’s. Venn diagrams are used to prove
logical results. The inferences made with them are topic
neutral. Euclid’s diagrams on the other hand are used to prove
geometrical results. The inferences made with them are topic
specific. In particular, though the objects of plane Euclidean
geometry are abstract (e.g., geometric lines are breadthless), they
are still spatial. Consequently, issues surrounding the spatiality of
diagrams and representational scope do not arise with Euclid’s
diagrams as they do, for instance, with Euler diagrams. In the case of
geometry, in fact, the spatiality of diagrams counts in their favor.
Spatial constraints on what is possible with geometric configurations
are also operative with spatial Euclidean diagrams.
Nevertheless, as recognized in the philosophical commentary on
Euclid’s geometry from antiquity onward, there are with
Euclidean diagrams issues of representational scope to contend with.
What is the justification for treating properties of a single
geometric diagram as representative of all the configurations in the
range of a proof? How can a single diagram prove a general result?
Manders’ exact/co-exact distinction provides the basis for a
partial answer. The co-exact properties of a diagram can be shared by
all geometric configurations in the range of a proof, and so in such
cases one is justified in reading off co-exact properties from the
diagram. In a proof about triangles for instance, variation among the
configurations in the range of the proof is variation of exact
properties—e.g., the measure of the triangles’ angles, the
ratios between their sides. They all share the same co-exact
properties—i.e., they all consists of three bounded linear
regions which together define an area.
This is not a full answer because Euclid’s proofs typically
involve constructions on an initial configuration type. With the proof
of proposition 16, for example, a construction on a triangle with one
side extended is specified. In such cases, a diagram may adequately
represent the co-exact properties of an initial configuration. But the
result of applying a proof’s construction to the diagram cannot
be assumed to represent the co-exact properties of all configurations
resulting from the construction. One does not need to consider complex
geometric situations to see this. Suppose for instance the initial
configuration type of a proof is triangle. Then the
diagram
serves to represent the co-exact properties of this type. Suppose
further that the first step of a proof’s construction is to drop
the perpendicular from a vertex of the triangle to the line containing
the side opposite the vertex. Then the result of carrying this step
out on the diagram
ceases to be representative. That the perpendicular falls within the
triangle in the diagram is a co-exact feature of it. But there are
triangles with exact properties different from the initial diagram
where applying the construction step results in a perpendicular lying
outside the triangle. For example, with the triangle
the result of applying the construction step is
And so, carrying out a Euclidean construction on a representative
diagram can result in an unrepresentative diagram. A central task of
formalizing Euclid’s diagrammatic proofs is accounting for
this—i.e., providing with its rules a method for distinguishing
general co-exact features from non-general ones in diagrammatic
representations of constructions. The systems FG and
Eu take two different approaches to this task. 
Employing the method of FG, one must produce with a
diagram every case that could result from the construction. A
general co-exact relation of the construction is then one that appears
in every case. FG’s demand that every case be
produced would, of course, be of a little interest if it did not also
provide a method for producing them all. The method
FG provides depends on the fact that lines and
circles in the system’s diagrams are defined in purely
topological terms. Their resulting flexibility makes it possible to
formulate and implement in a computer program a general method for
generating
 cases.[9]
The lines and circles of Eu diagrams are not
similarly flexible. Accordingly, it cannot resolve the generality
problem via case-analysis as FG does. The central
idea of its approach is to allow diagrams to hold partial information
from the outset. Within an Eu derivation, the diagram
produced by a proof’s construction has an initial content
consisting in all the qualitative relations of the proof’s
initial diagram. The qualitative relations concerning objects added by
the construction cannot be read off the diagram immediately. Those
that can be read off the diagram must be derived by the system’s
 rules.[10]
The differences between the FG and
Eu approaches to formalizing Euclid’s
constructions can be understood as representing different general
conceptions of the role of diagrams in mathematics.
FG embodies a conception where diagrams concretely
realize a range of mathematical possibilities. They support
mathematical inference by furnishing direct access to these
possibilities. Eu in contrast embodies a conception
where diagrams serve to represent in a single symbol the various
components of a complex mathematical situation. They support
mathematical inference by allowing the mathematical reasoner to
consider all these components in one place, and to focus on those
components relevant to a proof.
Despite the formal limitations of some diagrammatic systems noted
above, many different systems are currently used in a wide variety of
contexts; logic teaching, automated reasoning, specifying computer
programs, reasoning about situations in physics, graphical user
interfaces to computer programs, and so on. In general, it is not yet
known how effective (in the above sense) many of these diagrammatic
systems are. We now give a brief survey of other diagrammatic systems
and their uses, as well as the more philosophical issues raised by the
debate over the status of diagrammatic reasoning. 
It is worth noting that many mathematicians and philosophers proposed
diagrammatic systems, often with a didactic motivation. Some systems,
like Lewis Carroll’s in “The Game of Logic”
 (1896)
 are variants on the proposals of Euler and Venn. Others, like Frege
 (1879),
 used lines rather than plane regions. (For a description of
Frege’s notation, see the section on Complex Statements and
Generality in the entry on
 Gottlob Frege.
 See also Englebretsen
 1992.)
 Carroll’s system supersedes Venn’s in that the
complements of sets are explicitly represented as regions of the
diagram, rather than being left as the background region against which
the circles appear. This means that Carroll’s system is able to
draw inferences about relations between complements of properties, at
the expense of representing some properties as disjoint (i.e.,
non-connected) regions. This shift closely mirrors the shift in logic
from subject-predicate argumentation to a function-argument
representation (Stenning
 1999).
Peirce, a founder of modern quantified logic, also invented a
graphical system, called Existential Graphs, which is logically
equivalent to predicate logic. Along with Don Robert’s
pioneering work on Existential Graphs and John Sowa’s creative
application of Peirce’s graphs, recently a group of diagrammatic
researchers provided more diverse approaches to Existential Graphs in
a broader theoretical context (Shin
 2003).
 
On a more practical theme, AI researchers, one of whose main concerns
is the heuristic power of representation systems in addition to their
expressive power, have been debating about different forms of
representation for decades (Sloman
 1971,
 1985,
 1995).
 Hence, they have welcomed discussions of the distinct role of visual
reasoning and have recently hosted interdisciplinary symposiums on
diagrammatic reasoning at AI
 conferences.[11]
 At the same time, realizing that human beings adopt different
representation forms depending on the kinds of problems they face,
some AI researchers and design theorists have practiced
domain-specific approaches to bringing in problem-tailored
representation
 forms.[12]
For instance, Harel
 (1988)
 invented higraphs to represent system specifications in computer
science. This idea has been taken up in industrial applications (e.g.,
UML, in Booch et al.
 1998).
 Barker-Plummer & Bailin
 (1997)
 present a case study in developing computers which can carry out the
kind of analogical reasoning that humans perform when proving certain
mathematical theorems. More recently, an interesting result has been
presented by Mateja Jamnik of Alan Bundy’s Mathematical
Reasoning Group at Edinburgh (Jamnik
 2001).
 Jamnik shows how a semi-automatic formal proof system can perform
some of the perceptual inferences which humans find so natural. For
instance, that the sum of the first n odd natural numbers is
n squared is easily seen by decomposing an n
× n grid into
“ells” (Jamnik et al.
 1999).
Scholars at the University of Brighton has been carrying out
interesting projects both in developing diagrammatic systems and in
applying visual tools in software development, see the link in the
 Other Internet Resources section.
It should also be mentioned that scientists such as chemists and
physicists also use diagrams in order to perform certain computations.
Feynman diagrams, for example, are used to perform calculations in
sub-atomic physics. More recently, formal diagrammatic reasoning has
been developed for quantum theory (Coecke & Kissinger
 2017).
 In Knot Theory (which has applications in physics, Kauffman
 1991)
 the three Reidemeister Moves are diagrammatic operations which make
up a complete calculus for proving knots equivalent. Not surprisingly,
Knot diagrams have attracted interest from researchers (De Toffoli
& Giardino
 2014).
 The crucial role of diagrams and diagrammatic reasoning in the
abstract mathematics of category theory has also been investigated
(Halimi
 2012;
 De Toffoli
 2017).
 
Do our mental representations have diagram-like or picture-like
entities as components? This question has a long history both in
philosophy and in psychology, independently of each other. More
recently, however, some philosophers have participated in this
“imagery debate”, one of the most time-honored
controversies in psychology, and some cognitive psychologists find
certain epistemological theories in philosophy useful to support their
views on the issue.
The nature of mental representation has been one of the perennial
topics in philosophy, and we can easily trace back philosophical
discussions on images and mental representation to ancient
 times.[13]
 The writings of Hobbes, Locke, Berkeley, and Hume concern themselves
in large part with mental discourse, the meaning of words, mental
images, particular ideas, abstract ideas, impressions, and so on.
Descartes’ well-known distinction between imagining and
conceiving something has generated much discussion about the unique
role of visual images in mental representations. The development of
cognitive science in the 20th century naturally has brought certain
group of philosophers and psychologists closer and we find a number of
authors whose works easily belong to both disciplines (Block
 1983;
 Dennett
 1981;
 Fodor
 1981).
Imagery based on introspection was the main focus in the early
development of psychology until the behavioristic approach became
predominant in the discipline. During the era of behaviorism, anything
related to mental inspection, including images, was excluded from any
serious research agenda. Finally when the topic of mental images made
a comeback in psychology in 1960s, researchers adopted a more humble
agenda for mental imagery than before: Not all mental representations
involve imagery, and imagery is one of many ways of manipulating
information in the mind. Also, thanks to the influence of behaviorism,
it is acknowledged that introspection is not enough to explore
imagery, but a claim about mental imagery needs to be confirmable by
experiments in order to show that we successfully externalize mental
events. That is, if what a certain mental introspection tells us is
genuine, then there would be observable external consequences of that
mental state.
Thus the contemporary imagery debate among cognitive scientists is
about the claim that picture-like images exist as mental
representations and about how we interpret certain
 experiments.[14]
Kosslyn
 (1980,
 1994) and other pictorialists (Shepard & Metzler
 1971)
 present experimental data to support their position that some of our
mental images are more like pictures than a linear form of language
(for example, natural languages or artificial symbolic languages) in
some important aspects, even though not all visual mental images and
pictures are of exactly the same kind. By contrast, Pylyshyn
 (1981)
 and other descriptionalists (Dennett
 1981)
 raise questions about the picture-like status of mental images and
argue that mental images are formed out of structured descriptions. To
them, mental images represent in the manner of language rather than
pictures and, hence, there are no picture-like visual mental
images.
Both sides of the debate sometimes used a philosophical theory as a
supporting factor. For example, pictorialists in the imagery debate
found the modern sense-datum theory in philosophy quite close to their
point of view. By the same token, the critics of the sense-datum
theory argued that the mistaken pictorial view of mental images arises
mainly from our confusion about ordinary language and claimed that
mental images are epiphenomena.
Without being heavily involved in the imagery debate, some researchers
have focused on a distinct role that diagrams or pictures—as
opposed to traditional sentential forms—play in our cognitive
activities. (Shin
 2015;
 Hamami & J. Mumma
 2013)
 Based on the conjectures that humans adopt diagrammatic or spatial
internal mental representations in their reasoning about concrete or
abstract situations (see Howell
 1976;
 Sober
 1976),
 some cognitive scientists have concentrated on the functions of
images or diagrams in our various cognitive activities, for example,
memory, imagination, perception, navigation, inference,
problem-solving, and so on. Here, the distinct nature of “visual
information,” which is obtained either through internal mental
images or through externally drawn diagrams, has become a major topic
of research. Even though most of these works assume that there are
mental images (that is, they accept the pictorialists’ claim),
strictly speaking they do not have to commit themselves to the view
that these images exist as basic units in our cognition.
Descriptionalists do not have to discard discussions of the functions
of images, but only need to add that these images are not primitive
units stored in our memory, but formed out of structured descriptions
more like the sentences of a language (see Pylyshyn
 1981).
A search for the distinct role of diagrams has led researchers to
explore the differences among different forms of external or internal
representations, and mainly between diagrammatic and sentential
representations. Many important results have been produced in
cognitive science. Starting from Larkin and Simon’s classic case
study
 (1987)
 to illustrate a difference between informational and computational
equivalence among representation systems, Lindsay’s work locates
where this computational difference lies, which he calls a
‘non-deductive’ method. As briefly pointed out above, this
inference process is called ‘free ride’ by Barwise and
Shimojiima
 (1995),
 i.e., the kind of an inference in which the conclusion seems to be
read off automatically from the representation of premises. In Gurr,
Lee, and Stenning
 (1998)
 and Stenning and Lemon
 (2001),
 there is an explanation of the uniqueness of diagrammatic inference
in terms of a degree of ‘directness’ of interpretation,
and it is argued that this property is relative, and hence that
“some rides are cheaper than others”. Having the role of
graphs in mind, Wang and Lee
 (1993)
 present a formal framework as a guideline for correct visual
languages. At this point, we are very close to applied aspects of
research in multi-modal reasoning—design theory and AI
research—by providing these disciplines with computational
support for visual reasoning.
Related to the issue of imagistic mental representation is the
examination of the semantics of various diagrammatic systems and what
they can teach us about the nature of languages in general (e.g.,
Goodman
 1968).
 For instance, Robert Cummins
 (1996),
 amongst others, argues that too little attention has been given to
diagrammatic representations and that focus on a notion of
“structural representation” more akin to diagrammatic
representation can help to explicate the nature of representation
itself. We believe that the considerations presented above give us
some empirical handle on this type of claim at least—depending
on the imagistic objects and relations used, patterns of incorrect
inference should be predictable and detectable. An important, if
little-known, article on this theme is Malinas
 1991.
 Here Malinas explores the concepts of pictorial representation and
“truth in” a picture via the notion of resemblance, and
considers various semantic puzzles about pictorial representation. He
develops Peacocke’s “Central Thesis” of depiction
(Peacocke
 1987),
 where experienced similarities between properties of pictorial
objects and their referents in the visual field give rise to the
relation of depiction. He goes on to provide a formal semantics for
pictures which is “analogous to a semantics for an ideal
language”.
We began by motivating the philosophical interest of diagrams, by way
of their role in human reasoning and their relation to the study of
language in general, and multi-modal information processing. We then
explained the trade-off between expressive power and visual clarity of
diagrammatic systems, by examining the historical development of
diagram systems from Euler and Venn, through Peirce’s work, to
recent work by Shin and Hammer. It was argued that diagrammatic
systems can be afforded the same logical status as traditional linear
proof calculi. We then explained some of the potential pitfalls of
diagrammatic representation and reasoning, by examining spatial
constraints on diagrammatic systems and how they can affect
correctness and expressive power. We closed by surveying other
diagrams systems, the interest in diagrams generated in computer
science and cognitive science, and gave an introduction to the imagery
debate in the philosophy of mind. 