The name ‘Dialectical school’ is used for a group of
philosophers active from the later 4th to the mid
3rd centuries BC who are referred to as members of the
Dialectic sect (hairesis) or as dialecticians
(dialektikoi) in some later ancient sources (Diogenes Laertius
[DL] 1.19). They were traditionally counted among the philosophers of
the Megaric school (founded by Euclides of Megara, author of
Socratic dialogues ), but may have formed an independent branch of this
sect. Together with the Megarics, Cyrenaics and Cynics they count
among the minor Socratic schools. Their main philosophical interest was
in dialectical skill and accomplishment, including the development and
resolution of logical paradoxes. They also made several important
positive contributions to the development of propositional logic. It is
uncertain whether the members of the Dialectical school were connected
by an institution comparable to other ancient philosophical schools, or
whether their union under one name in later reports was based more
loosely on their common philosophical interest in dialectic.
Here is a rough chronological list of the members of the Dialectical
school. Clinomachus of Thurii, a pupil of Eubulides of Miletus, is
named as founder of the sect, but may have been given this title only
in hindsight (DL 1.19 and 2.112, Sedley 1977 n.16). Euphantus of
Olyntus, another pupil of Eubulides, probably born before 349 BC, may
have been the earliest member of the sect. The name ‘Dialectical
school’ is reported to have been introduced by its member
Dionysius of Chalcedon, active around 320 BC. The most important
philosopher of the sect is Diodorus Cronus, who taught in Athens and
Alexandria around 315-284 BC. He left no writings. His most famous
pupil is Zeno of Citium, founder of the Stoa. The dialectician
Aristides belongs to the same generation as Diodorus Cronus. Alexinus
(c. 339-265) may have belonged to the sect. The second important
philosopher of the dialectical school is the logician Philo (sometimes
referred to as Philo of Megara, although we do not know his city of
origin); he studied with Diodorus. He wrote a dialogue
Menexenos and possibly was the author of a work On
Signs and a work On Schemata. All of these are lost.
Diodorus Cronus’ five daughters Menexene, Argeia, Theognis,
Artemisia and Pantacleia are all said to have been logicians, and thus
may have belonged to the school. Finally, the dialectician Panthoides
flourished c.280-275 BC, and the dialecticians Aristoteles and
Artemidorus can be dated around 250 BC.
Original philosophical contributions are testified only for Diodorus
Cronus and Philo, in the areas of logic, language and theory of motion
(for Diodorus' contributions in the latter two areas see entry
Diodorus Cronus); their views on logic were influential on
Stoic logic, which in turn anticipated many of the developments in
20th century logic. Philosophers of the Dialectic sect had
an impact also on Epicurean, Peripatetic, and Sceptic philosophy, and
seem to have interacted in discussion with members of most Hellenistic
philosophical schools. Diodorus Cronus’ modal theory and his
Master Argument served as a major philosophical inspiration for
Arthur Prior.
All we know about the so-called founder of the so-called Dialectical
school, Clinomachus of Thurii, is that he was the first who wrote about
predicates (katêgorêmata) and propositions
(axiômata) and the like (DL 2.112). Our evidence for
Diodorus and Philo confirms that they, too, conceived of logic as a
logic of propositions. It was the Stoics who systematically developed a
logic of propositions and devised subtle classifications of predicates.
(By contrast, Aristotle's logic had been a logic of terms, where
subject and predicate terms were in principle interchangeable.) The
logic of the Dialectical school thus was a precursor of Stoic
logic.
At the time of Diodorus and Philo a distinction between simple and
non-simple propositions was in circulation among the minor Greek
Socratic philosophical sects (DL 2.139). Simple propositions were
divided into affirmations and negations (ibid.). Among
non-simple propositions, which were thought to be composed of simple
ones, conditionals, disjunctions and conjunctions were distinguished.
Disjunctions or conditionals featured as premises in many of the
logical paradoxes and sophisms which members of the Dialectical school
discussed. It is likely that Diodorus and Philo examined the
truth-conditions of all three kinds of non-simple propositions;
however, we know their views only for the case of the conditional (see
below sect. 3).
Their treatment of conditionals and modalities implies that —
like most Hellenistic philosophers — Diodorus and Philo worked
with a concept of proposition that differs from ours in that it allows
truth-values to change over time. For instance, the standard example
for a simple proposition, ‘It is day’, does not contain a
covert fixed date or definite time determination; rather, it ranges
over times, changing its truth-value twice daily, all the while
remaining the same proposition. Thus we may think of propositions as
they were understood by Hellenistic philosophers as functions of time.
Diodorus Cronus can perhaps also be credited with the beginnings of
temporal logic, as both his theory of the conditional and his accounts
of the modalities are built on logically relevant temporal properties
of propositions (see below sects. 3.2 and 4.2). Moreover, he
distinguished between propositions in the present tense like
‘Helen has three husbands’ and ‘These men are
marrying’ and propositions in a tense of completion (the aorist),
‘Helen had three husbands’ and ‘These men
married’, and observed that it is possible for propositions like
the latter two to be true, without there ever having been a time at
which a corresponding one of the former type was true (Sextus Empiricus
[SE], Against the Physicists 2.97-8).
Apart from the various logical puzzles and sophisms, there are only
two topics on which we can be sure of a positive contribution to logic
by members of the Dialectical school. These are the positions of
Diodorus and Philo on the theory of conditionals and on modal logic.
Both topics involve notorious difficulties and were extensively and
intensely discussed by Hellenistic logicians; so much so that the
disputes became part of the general knowledge of the intelligentsia of
the time (SE, Against the Grammarians 309-10). Moreover, the
theory of modalities was believed to have far-reaching results for
other areas of philosophy.
In the debate about the conditional (sunêmmenon) the
point of disagreement concerned the right truth-conditions of a
conditional (Cicero, Academics II 143). This controversy was
played out against the background of a common acceptance of what counts
as a conditional, and what its function is. Conditionals were
understood to be non-simple propositions containing one proposition as
antecedent and one as consequent. The antecedent has the particle
‘if’ prefixed to it; the standard form is ‘If p,
q’. A conditional serves to manifest the relation of consequence
(akolouthia): it announces that its consequent follows from
(akolouthein) its antecedent (Sextus Empiricus, Against
the Logicians 2.110-112). This relation of consequence was also
commonly taken to manifest the relation between premises and conclusion
in a valid argument.
Philo's criterion for the truth of a conditional is
truth-functional. Later in antiquity, it was generally accepted as a
minimal condition for the truth of a conditional. Philo maintained that
a conditional is false when and only when its antecedent is true and
its consequent false, and true in the three remaining cases: whenever
the antecedent is false, and when both antecedent and consequent are
true (SE, Against the Logicians 2.113-114). Thus this notion
of a conditional comes very close to that of modern material
implication. (It is not the same, since truth for Hellenistic
philosophers is relativized to times.) Philo's suggestion is remarkable
in that it deviates noticeably from the ordinary language understanding
of conditional sentences and requires abstraction on the basis of a
concept of truth-functionality.
Remarkable as it is, Philo's view has the following two drawbacks:
First, as in the case of material implication, for the truth of the
conditional no connection of content between antecedent and consequent
is required. Thus, for example, during the day ‘If virtue
benefits, it is day’ is Philonian true. This introduces a variant
of the so-called ‘paradoxes of material implication’
(Relevance Logic, Conditionals 2.3; Lemmon 59-60,
82). The presentation of Philo's view in our sources shows that the
ancients were aware of this problem (SE, ibid. 113-117).
Second, due to the time-dependency of Hellenistic propositions, Philo's
criterion implies that conditionals can change their truth-value over
time: for instance, ‘If it is day, it is night’ is true at
night, but false during the day. This is counter-intuitive as regards
the ordinary use of if-sentences. Moreover, as the concept of a
conditional was also meant to provide for logical consequence between
premises and conclusion, this leads to the problematic result that
arguments can in principle change from being valid to being invalid and
vice versa.
For Diodorus, a conditional proposition is true if it neither was
nor is possible that its antecedent is true and its consequent false
(SE, Against the Logicians 2.115-117). The reference to time
in this account (‘was … is possible’) suggests that
the possibility of a truth-value change left open by Philo's
truth-condition was one of the factors to be improved on.
We do not know whether Diodorus had his own modal notions in mind
when talking about possibility in his criterion, or just some
pre-technical, general concept of possibility, or whether he perhaps
intended to cover both (Denyer 1981, 39-41; Sedley 1977, 101-2). (The
verb used here for being possible, endechesthai differs from
the word used for possibility in Diodorus' modal theory, which is
dunaton.) If one assumes that he had his own modal notions in
view when giving this account (see sect. 4.2 below), his
truth-criterion for the conditional stands in the following relation to
Philo's: a conditional is Diodorean true now if and only if it is
Philonian true at all times. Diodorus has, as it were, quantified the
Philonian criterion over time. The conditional ‘If I walk, I
move’ is now true because at no time is the antecedent true and
the consequent false. Thus for Diodorus, a conditional cannot change
its truth-value. If it is true (false) at one time, it is true (false)
at all times. If on the other hand one assumes that Diodorus had some
unspecified general notion of possibility in mind when producing his
account, the criterion will be correspondingly less specific. However,
it would presumably still be a minimal requirement that it is never the
case that the antecedent is true and the consequent false.
Diodorus' criterion bears some resemblance to the modern concept of
strict implication. In particular, it shares some of its disadvantages
in that we encounter a parallel to the ‘paradoxes of strict
implication’ (Relevance Logic, Lemmon, 153-4). As in
Philo's case, no connection of content is required between antecedent
and consequent. This time, whenever either the antecedent is impossible
or the consequent necessary, the conditional will be true, regardless
of whether there is any relevant connection between the two constituent
propositions. So for instance ‘If the earth flies, Axiothea
philosophizes’ would be true for Diodorus, since the antecedent
was considered impossible (DL 7.75). One example given of a
Diodorean-true conditional, ‘If it is not the case that there are
indivisible elements of things, then there are indivisible elements of
things’ (SE, Outlines of Pyrrhonism 2.111), suggests
that there was some awareness of these paradoxes in antiquity. In any
event, the Stoic Chrysippus developed a system of relevance
logic in which neither the ‘paradoxes of material
implication’ nor the ‘paradoxes of strict
implication’ occur.
Modal logic is the second topic where we have evidence about the
positions of Philo and Diodorus and their influence on the Stoics
(Kneale and Kneale 1962, 117-28; Bobzien 1993). Although the modalities
were generally discussed under the heading of ‘On things
possible’, the Hellenistic modal systems were each built on a set
of four modalities: possibility, impossibility, necessity and
non-necessity. The matter of dispute was which system was the right
one; that is, which one adequately described the modalities inherent in
the world. In connection with this, an extra-logical concern provided
additional fuel to the debate: the belief that if propositions stating
future events that will not happen all turn out to be impossible, the
freedom and choices of individuals would be curtailed. This is a
variation on the problem of logical determinism which is known from
Aristotle's On Interpretation 9. Several of the sophisms
devised and discussed by the Dialectical school touch upon this issue
— the Mower Argument, the Lazy Argument (Bobzien 1998, 78-81,
180-233), and the Master Argument.
For Diodorus and Philo, as for the Stoics the modalities were
primarily considered as properties of propositions or states
of affairs. There is no discussion of modal propositions, i.e. of
propositions that contain modal operators, such as ‘It is
possible that it is day’ or ‘It is necessary that virtue
benefits’, nor of iterated modalities.
Philo's view on possibility has survived in several other sources
(Alexander, On Aristotle's Prior Analytics 184; Philoponus,
On Aristotle's Prior Analytics 169) but only in one are his
accounts of all four modal notions reported:
So according to Boethius the basic feature of Philonian modalities
is some intrinsic capability of the propositions to be or not to be
true or false. That this feature is intrinsic is plain from the phrases
‘by its own nature’ and ‘in itself’. In one
source, both phrases are used to characterize Philonian possibility
(Simplicius, On Aristotle's Categories 195); hence
both phrases may have originally applied to all four accounts.
In all sources the concept of possibility stands out, and so it
seems likely that Philo built his set of modal notions on a concept of
internal consistency, as given in his account of possibility. Philo's
modal concepts are thus defined by resort to another, perhaps more
basic, modal concept. As to the kind of consistency Philo had in mind,
we learn nothing more. Notwithstanding this, there can be little doubt
that Philo's modal concepts satisfy a number of basic requirements
which normal systems of modern modal logic tend to satisfy, too. (I
assume here that Philo accepted the principle of bivalence, as we have
no contrary information.) These requirements are:
According to Philo's accounts, a proposition that is not capable of
falsehood must be true; one that is true must be capable of being true;
etc.
This can be directly read off the definitions.
This holds for Philo's accounts, if one neglects the difference in
the two phrases ‘in itself’ and ‘by its own
nature’ or assumes that originally both were part of all the
definitions. Then a proposition is not capable of being false precisely
if its contradictory is not capable of being true, etc.
In Philo's system this amounts to the fact that every proposition is
either incapable of falsehood, or incapable of truth, or capable of
both. The fact that Philo's modal accounts — and those of
Diodorus and the Stoics — satisfy these four requirements is of
course no proof that the ancients consciously reflected upon all of
them or regarded them all as principles with which their modal theories
had to comply.
We know a little more about Diodorus' modal theory (in addition to
the passages cited for Philo, see Epictetus, Dissertations
2.19, Cicero, On Fate 12, 13, 17; Plutarch, Stoic
Refutations 1055e-f). Still, again only one text reports all four
definitions of Diodorus' modal notions:
Two of these modal accounts are disjunctions, the other two are
conjunctions. Provided that Diodorus accepted the principle of
bivalence, these definitions, too, satisfy the modal requirements (i)
to (iv) above, as can be checked easily.
Apart from that, Diodorus' modalities are of a very different kind
from Philo's. There is no modal expression hidden anywhere in his
accounts. Instead, which Diodorean modality a proposition has depends
wholly on the range of truth-values it has at present and in the
future. For example, if a proposition is always true from now on, it is
now both necessary and possible; if it is, from now on, sometimes true
but not always, it is possible, but not necessary. Hence it is not the
case — as is sometimes assumed — that for Diodorus, every
proposition is either necessary (and possible) or impossible (and
non-necessary). There are propositions that are contingent in the sense
of being both possible and non-necessary, namely all those which will
change their truth-value at some future time. The proposition ‘It
is day’ is such a case.
The dependency of Diodorus' modal notions on the propositions’
truth-values-at-times implies that some propositions can change their
modality from possible to impossible and from non-necessary to
necessary. For instance, if we assume that the proposition
‘Artemisia is five years old’ is now true, then that
proposition is now possible; but it will presumably be impossible at
some future time, namely once Artemisia has reached the age of six,
since from then on it will never be true again (assuming linearity of
time).
We do not know what motivated Diodorus to introduce his modal
 notions.[1]
 But we know that Hellenistic philosophers
generally regarded Diodorus' modal notions as jeopardizing freedom
— a since they rule out the possibility that something that never
happens, or is never true, is nonetheless possible. Thus, if ‘Dio
goes to Corinth’ is and will be false, then ‘Dio goes to
Corinth’ is impossible, and then, or so the thought went, it is
impossible for Dio to go to Corinth. In this context it becomes plain
why our sources stress the fact that something can be Philonian
possible without ever being true or obtaining.This is the relevant
difference from Diodorus with respect to logical determinism, the point
being that Philo's modalities, unlike Diodorus’, do not unduly
limit the scope of contingency.
Diodorus’ definition of that which is possible can be split
into two distinct claims: first that everything that either is or will
be true is possible, and second, that everything that is possible
either is or will be true. The first statement was not questioned by
Hellenistic philosophers. It is the second statement that was and is
considered counterintuitive and in need of justification; it is this
claim which Diodorus attempted to back up with his Master Argument
(Alexander, On Aristotle's Prior Analytics 183.34-184.6;
Epictetus, Dissertations 2.19).
Despite being widely known in antiquity, the argument has not come
down to us; all we have is one brief passage:
This is usually understood as implying that the argument was
grounded on statements (I) and (II), and had (IV), which is the
contradictory of (III), as conclusion; and this is about as far as the
passages lead us. But how did the argument run? A viable reconstruction
has to satisfy a number of more or less trivial conditions. It must
make use of the principles (I) and (II) handed down in Epictetus; in
addition to these, it must make use solely of premises plausible to the
Stoics; and it must appear valid. For we know that different Stoic
philosophers attempted to refute (I) or (II), but we do not hear of
anyone questioning the truth of any other premise or the validity of
the argument. Moreover, the reconstruction must employ only the logical
means and concepts available in antiquity; in particular the notions of
proposition, consequence, and modalities used must fit in with the
logic of the time, and it must be possible to formulate the argument in
ordinary language. Finally, the restored argument should not have a
complexity which precludes its presentation at a social gathering,
since it appears that people enjoyed discussing the Master argument
over dinner (Epictetus, Dissertations. 2.19.8).
The following is an informal reconstruction of the Master Argument
which has the advantage of being historically credible and in keeping
with the above constraints. (A version of this type of reconstruction
was first presented by Arthur Prior (Prior 1955).) The
Epictetus passage suggests that the argument was presented in terms of
propositions and their modalities, and so will the reconstruction.
Other sources present Diodorus' modalities as modalities of states of
affairs, and alternative versions of the Master argument can be
produced accordingly. (The difference between propositions and states
of affairs is often blurred in ancient testimonies of logic.)
In line with Diodorus’ modal definition, the general
conclusion of the argument (IV) may be reformulated as
The first statement is less clear. It runs
The Greek term used for ‘past’
(parelêluthos) is a standard Stoic expression for past
propositions, meaning not that the proposition itself subsisted in the
past, but that it is in some sense about the past. The principle occurs
also in Cicero, together with some explication:
From this passage we may infer that it was a peculiarity of all past
true propositions that they cannot change their truth-value to
falsehood; and that because of this they are necessary. This suggests
that the past true propositions at issue do not include all
propositions in the past tense, but that they were those propositions
which correspond to some past state or event. For instance, the true
past proposition ‘I went to Athens’ corresponds to the
event of my having gone to Athens. It can never become false, once it
is true. Assume that I went to Athens last month. Then the proposition
‘I went to Athens’ is not only true now, it will also be
true tomorrow, the day after, and in fact always from now on. The truth
of the proposition is based on the fact that there has been a case of
my going to Athens, and — whatever happens from now on —
this cannot unhappen. (One can bring out this feature more clearly by
reformulating the proposition as ‘It has been the case that I
went to Athens’). On the other hand, the proposition ‘You
have not been to Athens’ does not correspond to a past state or
event. Suppose that up to now you never went to Athens. Then the
proposition is true now. Now suppose in addition that you will go to
Athens next week. After you have gone there, the proposition ‘You
have not been to Athens’ is no longer true. Hence it is not
necessary now. (This proposition cannot be correctly paraphrased as
‘It has been the case that you were not in Athens’). We may
hence reformulate statement (I) as
The second statement that functions as a premise in the argument
is
This was accepted by Aristotle and, with the exception of
Chrysippus, by all Hellenistic logicians. At least by the Stoics it was
understood as
This amounts to the statement that if a proposition is impossible
and follows from some other proposition, then this other proposition is
impossible, too.
The following reconstruction assumes that, in addition to (I) and
(II), the argument rests on a couple of further principles, which might
have been generally taken to be valid and thus not worth mentioning, or
else which might have been generally accepted by the Stoics and for
this reason omitted by Epictetus. The first additional principle is
For instance, if I am in Athens now, then it has always in the past
been the case that I would be in Athens (at some time). This principle
gains historical plausibility from the fact that we find a version of
it in Aristotle (On Interpretation 9, 18b9-11), and that
another version of it was accepted by the Stoics (Cicero, On
Divination 1.125). The second additional principle is
This statement is based on the idea that if a proposition presently
neither is nor will be true, and you step back in time, as it were,
then the formerly present ‘not being true’ turns into a
future ‘not going to be true’, so that from the point of
view of the past, the proposition will never be true, and the
corresponding state of affairs will never be the case. (This is assumed
to hold at least for the past moment that immediately precedes the
present.) This principle has some plausibility to it. There is some
evidence that it may have been discussed in antiquity (Becker 1961,
253-5).
Next the construction of the argument: Fallacies and sophisms were
generally presented by means of an example which stands in for the
general case, and it is plausible that this was so for the Master
Argument as well. Overall, the argumentation then proceeded as follows:
you assume of a chosen proposition that it neither is nor will be true;
next, by employing (I), (II), (V) and (VI), you deduce that this
proposition is impossible. Then you generalize the result to all
propositions, since nothing in the argument hinges on the fact that
this particular proposition was selected. A suitable example can be
found in Alexander's passage on Diodorus' notion of possibility and the
Master Argument: the proposition ‘I am in Corinth.’ The
argument then starts with the assumption that
The conclusion to be demonstrated is that
By (VI) it follows from (1) that
By (I) (‘all past truths are necessary’), it follows
from (2) that
But since necessity of a proposition is equivalent to the
impossibility of its contradictory (modal requirement (iii) above),
from (3) it follows that
Now, according to (V), it holds that
This is equivalent to
Now we can apply (II) (‘the impossible follows from the
impossible’) to (4) and (5′), and obtain as a result
that
And this is precisely what the Master argument was meant to show.
Moreover, this argument appears to be valid.
Where does the argument go wrong? The ancients went in for
criticizing (I) and (II), and one may indeed wonder whether (I) covers
cases of the kind to which it has been applied above. But there are
also a couple of things questionable with (V) and (VI). With a certain
continuum theory of time, it turns out that (VI) does not hold for
those — few — cases in which the proposition at issue has
started to be false only at the present moment (Denyer 1981, 43 and
45). More importantly, (V) and its variants seem to smuggle in a
deterministic assumption. On one or another of these grounds, then, one
may attempt to hold the Master Argument unsound, and so to reject
Diodorus' own account of the possible as what either is or will be
true.