The word ‘dialetheism’ was coined
by Graham Priest and Richard Routley (later Sylvan) in 1981 (Priest et al 1989, p. xx). The inspiration for
the name was a passage in Wittgenstein’s Remarks on the Foundations
of Mathematics, concerning Russell’s paradox (see also below):
A dialetheia is a two-way truth, facing both truth and falsity like a Janus-headed figure.
Unfortunately, Priest and Routley forgot to agree how to spell the
‘ism’, and versions with and without the ‘e’
appear in print. 
In philosophy, there tends not to be a distinction between a view being inconsistent and being incoherent. Both are unacceptable. Since dialetheism claims that some inconsistency can be maintained without incoherence, these two concepts must be disentangled. For a start, dialetheism should be distinguished from so-called trivialism, that claim that all sentences are true, and hence all contradictions are true too (Kabay 2010). Dialetheism is the view that some contradictions are true. 
A trivialist must be a dialetheist, since a trivialist accepts every claim.
But since ‘some’ does not imply ‘all’, the converse is not the case: a
dialetheist typically claims that only some (and, usually, very specific)
sentences are dialetheias, not that all of them are. Trivialism is by all accounts incoherent, and so is minimally what counts as unacceptable even for someone who thinks that some contradictions are true.
How to allow inconsistency without incoherence is one of the main
topics of dialetheim. A standard
solution consists in subscribing to the view that deductive logical consequence is
 paraconsistent.  A
logical consequence relation \(\vdash\) is explosive if,
according to it, a contradiction entails everything (ex
contradictione quodlibet: for all \(A\) and \(B\): 
\(A,\neg A \vdash B\)).  It is paraconsistent if and only if (iff) it is not
explosive. By adopting a paraconsistent logic, a dialetheist can
countenance some contradictions without being thereby committed to
countenancing everything and, in particular, all contradictions.  The
development of paraconsistent logics has contributed to the most
recent developments (and acceptance of the legitimacy) of
dialetheism.
Dialetheism should, however, be clearly distinguished from
paraconsistency. Whereas dialetheists must embrace some paraconsistent logic or other to avoid
trivialism, paraconsistent logicians need not be dialetheists: they
may subscribe to a non-explosive view of entailment for other reasons.
Within paraconsistency, one may distinguish (at least) four grades of paraconsistent involvement (Beall and Restall 2006, p.80):
Most people working on paraconsistent logics have commitments at the lower grades of the spectrum. The unifying thought behind
paraconsistency is gentle-strength: logical consequence should not validate arbitrary conclusions following indiscriminately from inconsistent premises. This may simply be because entailment must preserve more than just truth, e.g., information content, topicality, or some meaningful connection between premises and conclusion. Or it may be that a paraconsistent logician simply need not assume anything about truth in order to provide a working treatment of inconsistency as it may arise in databases, legal situations, works of fiction, theory change, belief-revision, etc. 
Stepping up, full-strength paraconsistentists treat inconsistent models, in which contradictions hold, as useful mathematical tools without committing to them as representing real possibilities. 
And stepping up again, industrial-strength paraconsistentists may hold that, though truth at the actual world is consistent, still entailment must preserve what holds in peculiar non-actual situations, some of which may be inconsistent (see Berto, 2007a, Ch. 5, and Priest, Beall and Armour-Garb, 2004, p. 6). The first three levels appear to be independent of dialetheism. (But for reason to worry that there is a ‘slippery slope’ from gentle to dialetheic paraconsistency, see Priest 2000. For particular worries about model theory, see Asmus 2012, and in the modal case, Martin 2015.)
At the top of the spectrum, dialethiec paraconsistency holds that some contradictions are, in some sense, true in the actual world.
Even among full-fledged dialetheists, differences remain, for example,
in what is meant by “true”, e.g., on whether they subscribe to a 
 deflationary theory of truth, 
a correspondence view, a view in which true contradictions are merely semantic, or something else. 
We will come back to this point in section 6 below.
We said at the outset that dialetheism challenges the LNC. Now this claim needs some qualification, since forms of the 
LNC are, in fact, accepted as a general logical law in dialetheism, at least in versions based in e.g. the paraconsistent logic LP. 
Dialetheism as set out by Priest takes all instances of the schema \(\neg(A \wedge \neg A)\) to be true, as well as taking as true some sentences that are inconsistent with it, namely, true sentences whose negations are true: dialetheias. According to such versions of dialetheism, all contradictions are false and some are true: dialetheism is itself a dialetheia (‘Concluding self-referential postscript’ to Priest 1979, p. 203).
Much of the ongoing discussion about dialetheism involves not just the LNC but its dual, the Law of Excluded Middle (LEM). (See section 3.2 below.) The LEM says (informally) that for every sentence \(A\), either \(A\) or \(\neg A\) is true (we bracket here views that disentangle the LEM from Bivalence). 
Dialetheism is the thesis that there are truth value gluts, challenging the LNC; the dual position, challenging the LEM, is that there are truth value gaps. It is a subtle issue, which we will not discuss
here, whether a gap should count as lacking any 
truth value, or as having a non-classical value distinct from both truth and
falsity, and similarly whether a glut has two truth values, or some third ‘glutty’ value. In any case, these dual approaches are nowadays labelled
paracomplete versus (paraconsistent) dialetheic theories of truth.
(The paraconsistent/paracomplete terminology is not entirely happy: see Ripley 2015a, footnote 1; but is now standard.)
Priest’s logic includes the LEM and he rejects the existence of gaps in Priest 1987/2006, ch.1. Other approaches are both paracomplete and paraconsistent; they include a place for both gaps and gluts. The case for and against dialetheism turns as much on the status of the LEM as the LNC; see Beall and Ripley 2018.
While the word ‘dialetheism’ is relatively new, the idea is not. In this section we note some points in the history of philosophy where true contradictions appear salient, either explicitly or implicitly. (Much of this scholarship is due originally to Priest and Routley 1983, and Priest 1995/2002.) Then we address methodological issues to do with historical interpretation, and give a quick sketch of more recent history.
Aristotle takes a number of the Presocratics to endorse dialetheism, and with
apparent justification. For example, in Fragment 49a, Heraclitus says:
“We step and do not step into the same rivers; we are and we are
not” (Robinson, 1987, p. 35). Protagorean relativism may be
expressed by the view that man is the measure of all things; but according
to Aristotle, since “Many men hold beliefs in which they
conflict with one another”, it follows that “the same
thing must be and not be” (1009a10–12). The Presocratic
views triggered Aristotle’s attack in Metaphysics, Book
\(\Gamma\). Chapter 4 of this Book contains Aristotle’s defence of the
LNC. As we said above, historically Aristotle was almost completely
successful: the LNC has been orthodoxy in Western Philosophy ever
since.
As an aside, and as mentioned above, there is an often-remarked upon duality between truth-value gaps and truth-value gluts (Parsons 1990). And yet, 
it is perhaps worth noting that in Metaphysics \(\Gamma\)
(Chapter 7) Aristotle also defends the dual of the LNC, the Law of
Excluded Middle, LEM, particularly in the version which has nowadays
been distinguished as the Law of Bivalence: for any \(A\), it is
necessary for (at least) one of \(A\) and \(\neg A\) to be
true. But the LEM has often had a less secure place in Western
Philosophy than the LNC, in spite of the numerous obvious dualities
between the two principles. Aristotle himself, at least according to one interpretation, appears to
attack the Law in De Interpretatione, Chapter 9, when he
comes to the famous subject of future contingents.
Despite the orthodoxy about the LNC since Aristotle, during the Middle Ages the problem
of seemingly true contradictions surfaced in connection to the
paradoxes of divine omnipotence—for instance: can God make
a stone too heavy for Him to lift? (See Cotnoir forthcoming.) We find St. Pier Damiani getting close to dialetheism in the De divina omnipotentia, by
blaming St. Girolamus for having claimed that God cannot overturn the
past and twist what happened into something that didn’t happen. Since
God lives an eternal present, denying Him power over the past equates
to denying Him power over current and future events, which is
blasphemous. So God must have the power of making what is done
undone. Later on, Nicholas of Cusa placed at the core of his
book De docta ignorantia the idea that God is
coincidentia oppositorum: as a truly infinite being, He
includes all opposite and incompatible properties, therefore being
all things, and none of them: God has all properties, including
contradictory ones (Heron, 1954, I.4).
In the Critique of Pure Reason, Kant argues that some contradictions, the antinomies of pure reason (concerning time, space, and other categories), are produced by an illicit use of pure concepts; nevertheless, he also holds such an illicit use
to be a “natural and inevitable illusion” (Kant, 1781, p.
300)—a side effect of reason’s pursuit of completeness in
knowledge. 
Reasoning about the world as a whole, a totality which is never given to us as such, can lead us to apparently dialetheic conclusions: e.g. that it has a beginning in time and a limit in
space, and that it has no beginning nor limits in space, that it is
infinite in space and time. Both horns assume the opposite thesis and
seemingly perform a reductio. (In Kantian terms, the “transcendental
illusion” begins when we turn what should just be a regulative
ideal into a limit-object.) According to Kant, at least in
one way of resolving the antinomies, the fallacy lies in treating the
world as a whole as an object—in mistaking a subjective
“condition”, as Kant says, for an objective reality.
Now, according to Hegel such a conception has something to be said for
it as well as against it. Kant has a point in showing, via the
antinomies, that dialectics is “a necessary function of
reason”, and in defending “the necessity of the
contradiction which belongs to the nature of thought
determinations” (Hegel, 1831, p. 56). However, Kant takes from this only the familiar result that reason is incapable of knowing the Absolute,
that is, actual reality. A dialetheic interpretation holds that, on the contrary, we should abandon such
“tenderness for the things of this world”, and the idea
that “the stain of contradiction ought not to be in the essence
of what is in the world; it has to belong only to thinking
reason” (Hegel, 1830, p. 92). On a dialetheic interpretation, contrary to what Kant held, the
Kantian antinomies are not a
reductio of the illusions of reason; they are perfectly sound
arguments, deducing the dialetheic nature of the world. (For a
reconstruction of this Kantian-Hegelian debate, see Part II of Priest
2002.)
In non-Western traditions, there are more overt examples of what appears to be dialetheic thought. 
In ancient Indian logic/metaphysics, there were standardly four possibilities to be
considered on any statement at issue: that it is true (only), false
(only), neither true nor false, or both true and false. 
Some logicians added a fifth possibility: none of these. Both
positions were, arguably, called catushkoti (Priest 2002, ch.16; Deguchi et al 2008; Tillemans 2009.) The Jains went even
further and advocated the possibility of contradictory values of the
kind: true (only) and both true and false (see Smart 1964). 
Contradictory utterances are a commonplace in Daoism, perhaps most famously in Laozi (Lao-Tsu): on one translation,
a statement which appears to be speaking about the true Way. The Zhuangzi says: “That which makes things has no boundaries with
things, but for things to have boundaries is what we mean by saying
‘the boundaries between things’. The boundaryless boundary is the
boundary without a boundary” (Mair, 1994, p. 218). When Buddhism and
Daoism fused to form Chan (or Zen, to give it its Japanese name), a
philosophy arose in which contradiction plays a central role. The very
process for reaching enlightenment (Prajna) is a process, according to
Suzuki (1969, p. 55), “which is at once above and in the process of
reasoning. This is a contradiction, formally considered, but in truth,
this contradiction is itself made possible because of Prajna.”
Recent discussions of dialetheism have centered on Buddhist thought in particular, where some interpreters argue that texts invoke outright contradictions. For example, in the Mahayana tradition, Nagarjuna presents many passages similar in form to:
On a dialetheic interpretation, advocated by Priest, Garfield, and Deguchi (see Priest 2002 ch.16, Deguchi et al 2008), readers should take Nagarjuna and others in the Madhyamaka school at their word—not as invoking some sort of mysticism, but as affirming the nature of reality. This is most salient in Nagarjuna’s doctrine of emptiness (sunyata), that all things are empty or lacking independent existence (svabhava). Since all things are empty, it follows that emptiness is empty too; or, more prosaically, “The ultimate truth is that there is no ultimate truth” (Siderits 2007, p.182; Priest 2002, p.260). These utterances, if true, would appear to be self-contradictory, and therefore dialetheias. 
For work on dialetheism in Buddhism, see the collections Garfield et al 2009 and Tanaka et al 2015. For discussion as to whether dialetheism is the appropriate way to interpret Buddhist texts, see the papers in Tanaka 2013. For more general difficulties see the entry on comparative philosophy: Chinese and Western.
Interpreting the philosophers we have mentioned is a
sensitive issue. 

Many commentators have suggested that the seemingly contradictory
utterances of the philosophers in question are not really
contradictory. There are a number of standard devices that may be
employed to block a dialetheic interpretation. One is to question, in the case of non-English sources, whether the apparently contradictory translation is correct. Another is to claim that the contradictory utterance is to
be taken as having some non-literal form of meaning, e.g., that it is
a metaphor, or a way of pointing towards some higher, ineffable truth. 
Another is to claim that the contradictory assertion is
ambiguous in some way, and that it is true on one disambiguation or respect, false in another.
This last technique is
called parameterisation: when
one is confronted with a seemingly true contradiction, \(A \wedge \neg A\), treat the suspected
dialetheia \(A\), or some of its parts, as having different
meanings, and hence as ambiguous (maybe just contextually
ambiguous). For instance, if one claims that \(P(a) \wedge \neg P(a)\), parameterisation holds that one is
in effect claiming that \(P_1 (a) \wedge \neg P_2 (a)\) (e.g. elephants are big and not big, because they are big in the context of land animals on Earth, but not big in the context of stars and planets). In the
Metaphysics, Aristotle hints that a critic of the LNC
is playing with the equivocal meanings of some words: “for to each definition there might be assigned a different
word” (1006b 1–2).
No one would dispute that contradictory utterances are sometimes best construed parametrically. (Again, dialetheists do not claim that all contradictory statements are true.) The question is whether parameterisation is the best approach
in the case of the philosophers we have mentioned; answering this in a dialetheic context is a matter for
detailed case-by-case consideration. A defender of the dialetheic interpretation would say that consistent parameterisation produces an inaccurate and
distorted version of the views of the philosopher in question. In any
case, even if parameterisation is always possible, this does not impact arguments for or against the LNC. An a priori claim that contradictions
can always be avoided by parameterisation does not show, without begging the question, the correctness of such interpretations: sometimes parameterisation may be the best thing to do,
but independent justification should be given on each occasion.
In the second half of the twentieth century, with the rapid development of paraconsistent logics, came the modern form of dialetheism. 
In 1966, Asenjo published a short note, “A Calculus of Antinomies”, based on his 1954 PhD dissertation; the opening line reads
Here, having two truth values would mean being both true and false, a glut, or what Asenjo calls (following Kant) an antinomy. Asenjo simply seems to assume without further ado that there are antinomies, and in Asenjo and Tamburino 1975 asserts that they are “useful logical entities”, especially for dealing with paradoxes in mathematical contexts. Born in Buenos Aires, Asenjo came to the University of Pittsburg in 1963 as a professor in the mathematics faculty, where he was in contact with logicians such as Belnap, Anderson, their student Dunn (who thanks Asenjo in his 1966 PhD thesis, that also toys with true contradictions), and nearby, Meyer. By the mid-1970s, Richard Routley (Sylvan), in collaboration with Meyer, was developing a ‘dialectical’ position that rebukes what they call “the consistency hypothesis” and accepts some statements as both true and false (Routley and Meyer 1976; Routley 1977, 1979). In 1979, Priest’s paper “The Logic of Paradox”, developed eventually into the book In Contradiction (1987/2006), presented what are now the most famous arguments for dialetheism. In the collaboration between Priest and Routley, the contemporary dialetheic program was launched. Much of Priest and Routley’s early joint work is summarised in Priest et al 1989 (also available as Priest and Routley 1983). More recent developments are canvassed below.
Probably the master argument used by modern
dialetheists invokes the logical
 paradoxes of self-reference.
It is customary to distinguish between two families of such
paradoxes: semantic and set-theoretic. The former family typically
involves such concepts as truth, denotation,
definability, etc; the latter, such notions as
membership, cardinality, etc. After Gödel’s and
Tarski’s well known formal procedures to obtain non-contextual
self-reference in formalized languages, it is difficult to draw a sharp
line between the two families, among other things, because of the fact
that Tarskian semantics is itself framed in set-theoretic terms.
Nevertheless, the distinction is commonly accepted within the relevant
literature.
Russell’s paradox is 
the most famous of the set-theoretic paradoxes; it arises when
one considers the set of all non self-membered sets, the Russell set. Cantor’s paradox arises in connection with the universal set. The most famous of the semantic paradoxes is the 
Liar paradox. 
Although cases for the existence of dialetheias
can be made from almost any paradox of self-reference, we will focus
only on the Liar, given that it is the most easily understandable and
its exposition requires no particular technicalities.
In its standard version, the Liar paradox arises by reasoning on the
following sentence:
(1): (1) is false
where the number to the left is the name of the sentence to the right.
As we can see, (1) refers to itself and tells us something about (1)
itself. Its truth value? Let us reason by cases. Suppose (1) is true:
then what it says is the case, so it is false. Then, suppose (1) is
false: this is what it claims to be, so it is true. If we accept the
aforementioned Law of Bivalence, that is, the principle according to
which all sentences are either true or false, both alternatives lead to
a contradiction: (1) is both true and false, that is, a dialetheia,
contrary to the LNC.
The paradox can also be produced without any direct self-reference,
but via a short-circuit of sentences. For instance, here is a looped
Liar:
(2a): (2b) is true
(2b): (2a) is false
If what (2a) says is true, then (2b) is
true. However, (2b) says that (2a) is false …. And so on: we
are in a paradoxical loop. This is as old as Buridan (his Sophism no. 9: Plato saying ‘What Socrates says is true’; Socrates replying ‘ What Plato says is false’).
Paradoxes of this kind have been known since antiquity (the standard Liar is attributed to the Greek philosopher Eubulides,
probably the greatest paradox-producer of antiquity). But they were
thrown into prominence by developments in the foundations of
mathematics around the turn of the twentieth century. In the case of
each paradox, there appears to be a perfectly sound argument ending in
a contradiction. If the arguments are sound, then dialetheism is true.
Of course, many have argued that the soundness of such arguments is
merely an appearance, and that subtle fallacies may be diagnosed in
them. Such suggestions were made in ancient and medieval logic; but
many more have been made in modern logic—indeed, attacking the
paradoxes has been something of a leitmotiv of modern logic.
And one thing that appears to have come out of this is how resilient
the paradoxes are: attempts to solve them often simply succeed in
relocating the paradoxes elsewhere, as so called
‘strengthened’ forms of the arguments show. Let us have a
look.
A radical solution, which never won big consensus but has been revitalised in recent times (Pleitz 2018), has it that there just cannot be meaningful self-rererential sentences. Various works (notably Martin 1967, van Fraassen 1968, Kripke
1975, Field 2008) have proposed to solve the Liar paradox by
dismissing Bivalence, whereby some sentences are
neither true nor false, and the Liar is one such truth value
‘gap’.
Truth value gaps, and the
inclusion of the Liar among them, are differently motivated in the
various approaches. But the common core thought is the following: even though
the Liar is a sentence such that, if it were true, it would be false,
and vice versa, no explicit contradiction according to which
it is both true and false need follow. We can avoid the contradiction
by rejecting the idea that truth and falsity are the only two options
for a sentence: the Liar is neither. For a comparative survey of the two kinds of approach, see Beall and
Ripley 2018.
These approaches face difficulties with the so-called
‘strengthened’ Liars—sentences such as the
following:
(3): (3) is not true.
(4): (4) is false or neither true nor false.
Now these sentences should be, on the gappy theorist’s non-bivalent approach,
either true, or false, or neither. But, for instance, if (3) is true,
then things are as it claims they are; therefore, (3) is not true
(either false or truth-valueless). If (3) is false, or neither true
nor false, in both cases it is not true; but this is precisely what it
claims to be; therefore, it is true. We seem to have to conclude that
(3) is both true and not true, contrary to the LNC. A similar line of
reasoning goes for (4).
According to Priest the strengthened Liars show that a single feature
of the semantic paradox underlies its different formulations. The
totality of sentences is divided into two subsets: the true ones, and
their ‘bona fide complement’—call it
the Rest. Now the essence of the liar is “a particular
twisted construction which forces a sentence, if it is in the bona
fide truths, to be in the Rest (too); conversely, if it is in the
Rest, it is in the bona fide truths” (Priest 1987, p. 23). The
standard Liar, ‘This sentence is false’, is just a
particular instance of this, producing a contradiction within the
bivalent framework, in which the Rest is identified with the set of
the false sentences. We can try to resolve the problem by
admitting sentences that are neither true nor false, so that the false
ones become a proper subset of the Rest. However, the strengthened
Liars show that we can use the notions introduced to solve the
previous paradox to re-describe the Rest. Once the set of sentences is partitioned into a trichotomy
(true, false, and neither true nor false), the disjunctive
‘This sentence is false or neither true nor false’ embraces the whole Rest, i.e. the new(ly described) complement
of the set of the true sentences. What about adding more values? If there is some fourth thing that a sentence can be, besides true, false, and neither true nor false, we can always take
the notion
fourth thing and produce another strengthened Liar:
(5): (5) is false, or neither true nor false, or the fourth thing.
See Kirkham 1992, pp. 293–4.
These strengthened liars are also called revenge liars, and the general phenomenon we have just witnessed has become known as revenge; see Beall 2007, e.g. the introduction, and Cook 2007, among other essays. 
 There is no generally agreed upon solution to the semantic paradoxes. One typical way out attempted by the supporters of truth value gaps, for instance, consists in
denying that the notion of gap, or defective
sentence, or sentence whose truth value is
indeterminate, can be fully expressed in the language for which
they are proposing their theory of truth. The strengthened paradoxes
then seem to force the consistent theorist to admit that the proposed
theory was formulated in a language different from, and expressively
more powerful than, the one whose semantics it was supposed to
express. This entails a limitation of the Tarskian T-schema
characterising truth, i.e., of the
equivalence
where
‘\(Tr\)’ is the truth predicate for the relevant
language, and \(\langle A\rangle\) is the appropriate name of
sentence \(A\). This approach makes a rigid distinction between an
object language and its metalanguage. Such a distinction was
introduced by Tarski to expel the Liar paradox from formalized
languages—but Tarski himself insisted that his solution is inapplicable to natural languages, which do not appear to depend upon some
metalanguage for their semantics. As Kripke admits at the end
of Outline of a Theory of Truth, “the ghost of the
Tarski hierarchy is still with us” (scil. the paracompletists:
see Kripke 1975, p. 80).
Tarski, in short, identified the cause of the semantic paradoxes to be semantic closure—the fact that natural languages such as English satisfy the T-schema. Tarski took this to mean that there can be no consistent formalization of a semantically complete language, only a approximation thereof stratified into metalanguages. Dialetheists agree, but draw the conclusion in the other direction: the appropriate formalization of a language such as ours, because it is semantically closed and is not hierarchically stratified, will be inconsistent (Priest 1987, ch.1, Beall 2009, ch.1).
These two features—a claimed immunity to revenge/strengthened liars, and dispensing with the object-language/metalanguage distinction—are argued to give dialetheism about the paradoxes of self-reference some of its major appeal. As Shapiro (in a critical note) puts it, dialetheists offer that we
The simplicity of a dialetheic theory of truth, then, is claimed as an additional further feature. The
two most prominent such theories to date are presented in Priest
1987, and Beall 2009. In the former, the truth predicate \(Tr\)
for the relevant formal language, modelling the behaviour of truth in
English, is simply characterized by the unrestricted T-schema, \(Tr\langle A\rangle \leftrightarrow A\), which,
as stressed by many philosophers, is an overwhelmingly 
intuitive—perhaps even analytic—principle
concerning truth. It is admitted that some sentences—notably,
the Liars—are truth value gluts, that is, both true and false
(the construction may also sustain sentences which are both true and
not true, although not all dialetheias need be of this kind); and no
hierarchy of metalanguages or further epicycles are needed.
Beall’s 2009 theory allows a fully transparent truth predicate: one such that
for any sentence \(A\), \(Tr\langle A\rangle\)
and \(A\) can be replaced with each other in all (non-opaque)
contexts salva veritate, that is, producing sentences
logically equivalent to the sentences one started with. Then the
unrestricted T-schema follows from transparency (and the fact
that \(A \rightarrow A\) is a logical truth) as a special
case. In Beall’s theory, all sentences \(A\) that are
dialetheias are not only true and false, i.e. (given that falsity is
truth of negation), \(Tr\langle A\rangle \wedge Tr\langle \neg A\rangle\); they are also true and
untrue, \(Tr\langle A\rangle \wedge \neg Tr\langle A\rangle\): this again follows from the
transparency of truth. Beall’s theory is based on a (relevant) paraconsistent logic,
whose modal semantics employs so-called
 non-normal worlds. 
Overall, such paradoxes as the Liar provide some evidence for the
dialetheist’s claim that some contradictions are provably
true, in the sense that they are entailed by plain facts concerning
natural language and our thought processes. Extended Liar paradoxes
like ‘This sentence is not true’ are spelt in ordinary
English. Their paradoxical characteristics, dialetheists argue,
are due exactly to the intuitive features of ordinary language:
unavoidable self-reference; the failure of metalinguistic hierarchies,
which only produce languages that are expressively weaker than English;
and the obvious presence of a truth predicate for English, ‘is
true’, which is characterized, at least extensionally, by either the Tarskian T-schema or rules amounting to the transparency of truth. For a sustained critical engagement with paraconsistent dialetheism as a solution to the semantic paradoxes, see Field 2008, part 5 (chapters 23–26).
In the larger family of paradoxes of self-reference beyond the semantic, 
dialetheism affords a treatment of the set-theoretic paradoxes. These paradoxes arise in set theories based on an unrestricted ‘comprehension
schema’ for sets: for any condition or property, including
paradoxical ones like non-self-membership, there exists a
corresponding set. In particular, inconsistent sets like Russell’s are admitted; analogously to the Liar, the Russell set
is and is not a member of itself. As with the truth schema, the set comprehension principle seems very natural and intuitive, and such
contradictions do not give rise to triviality due to the
paraconsistent logic underlying the formal theories. Though the
issue is too technical to be addressed here, and more appropriately
dealt with in the entries on
 paraconsistent logic
and 
 inconsistent mathematics, 
the reader can consult Routley 1979, Brady 1989, for inconsistent set theories, and Weber 2012 for recent results in the field. See also Mortensen 1995. For different approaches to dialetheic set theory, see Restall 1992 and Ripley 2015b.
Since dialetheism appears to resolve both the semantic and set theoretic paradoxes at once and in the same sort of way (namely, accept the contradictory outcomes as true), this has been presented as another major strong point for dialetheism. Priest argues that the paradoxes share an underlying structure (which he calls the Inclosure Schema in Priest 2002). This is used in tandem with what Priest dubs the principle of uniform solution (“same kind of paradox, same kind of solution”) to urge that, since all the set theoretic and semantic paradoxes are of a kind, then dialetheism presents a uniquely unified solution. 
A point of dispute about the dialetheic approach to the paradoxes of self-reference concerns the Curry paradox. 
This is produced by a self-referential sentence claiming ‘If I
am true, then \(\bot\)’, where \(\bot\) is a constant (what
logicians usually call the falsum) which is or entails
something that is also dialetheically unacceptable, say \(\bot =\)
‘Everything is true’, the incoherent trivialist claim. 
Prima
facie, this does not involve negation, nor a falsity
predicate. However, many logicians think that Curry’s paradox is very similar to the Liar, and therefore by the principle of uniform solution that it should be handled in the same way. A dialetheist, though, cannot simply accept that the Curry sentence is both true and false, because if it is true then \(\bot\) follows. Dialetheists need a different treatment of Curry. A standard dialetheic strategy to deal with the
Curry paradox has consisted in exploiting paraconsistent logics with a
‘noncontractive’ conditional (see again Priest 1987, Ch,
6, Beall 2009, Ch. 2), 
which do not validate the Contraction (or Absorption) Law, i.e., the rule:
from \(A \rightarrow(A \rightarrow B)\) infer \(A \rightarrow B\), or the so-called pseudo-modus ponens
principle \((A \wedge(A \rightarrow B)) \rightarrow B\). 
 Stronger forms of the paradox, though, validity curry, seem to show that dropping these principles is not enough (Beall and Murzi
2013). This leads to contraction-free logics within the broader
family of substructural logics (Restall 2000, Priest 2015), and indeed substructural dialetheic approaches that drop principles other than contraction, such as transitivity (Ripley 2012).
Curry’s paradox puts pressure on the dialetheic story about uniform solution to the paradoxes. Beall (2014a, 2014b) urges this point; Weber et al 2014 is a reply.
Dialetheias produced by the paradoxes of self-reference are confined to the abstract realm of notions such as set or to semantic concepts such as truth. However, the paradoxes of self-reference
are not the only examples of dialetheias that have been mooted. Other
cases involve contradictions affecting concrete objects and the
empirical world, and include the following.
(1) Transition states: when I exit the room, I am inside the
room at one time, and outside of it at another. Given the continuity
of motion, there must be a precise instant in time, call it \(t\), at
which I leave the room. Am I inside the room or outside at time \(t\)?
Four answers are available: (a) I am inside; (b) I am outside; (c) I
am both; and (d) I am neither. There is a strong intuition that (a)
and (b) are ruled out by symmetry considerations: choosing either
would be completely arbitrary. (This intuition is not at all unique to
dialetheists: see the article on boundaries
in general.) As for (d): if I am neither inside not outside the room,
then I am not inside and not-not inside; therefore, I am either inside
and not inside (option (c)), or not inside and not-not inside (which
follows from option (d)); in both cases, a dialetheic situation. Or so
it has been argued. For a recent description of inconsistent
boundaries using formal mereology, see Weber and Cotnoir 2015.
(2) Some of Zeno’s paradoxes concerning a 
particular—though, perhaps, the most basic—kind of transition,
that is, local motion: a moving arrow is both where it is,
and where it is not. In any given instant, argues Zeno, it cannot move to where it is, since it is already there, and it cannot move to somewhere else, because there isn’t time for it to get there. The orthodox way out of the paradoxical situation,
as formulated, e.g., by Russell 1903, has it that motion is the mere
occupation of different places at different times. But one could argue that this
is denial of the phenomenon itself, that is, of the actuality of motion:
Russell’s solution entails that motion is not an intrinsic state of the
(allegedly) moving thing, for, at each instant, the arrow is not moving
at all. Can a going-somewhere be composed by an (even
continuum-sized) infinity of going-nowheres? An alternative,
dialetheic account of motion, which takes at face value the
aforementioned Hegelian idea that “Something moves, not because at one
moment it is here and another there, but because at one and the same
moment it is here and not here, because in this ‘here’, it at once is
and is not”, is exposed in Priest 1987, Ch. 12.
(3) Borderline cases of vague predicates. Popular approaches to
vagueness and the 
 sorites paradox, such as the ones based on many-valued logics, or
supervaluations, require some under-determinacy of reference, and/or
the rejection of Bivalence: if an adolescent, \(m\), is a
borderline case of adultness, \(A\), then \(A(m)\)
may turn out to have an intermediate truth value between truth and
falsity, or no truth value at all. But it may be conjectured that a
borderline object like \(m\), instead of satisfying neither a
vague predicate nor its negation, satisfies them both: an adolescent
both is and is not an adult. Given the obvious dualities between the
LEM and the Law of Bivalence on the one side, and (respectively,
syntactic and semantic formulations of) the LNC on the other, it is
not too difficult to envisage a ‘sub-valuational’ semantic
approach, dual to the supervaluation strategy. Sub-valuational
paraconsistent semantics have been proposed by Hyde (1997), and Varzi
(1997). Other ‘glutty’ approaches to vagueness have
been proposed by Colyvan (2009), Weber (2010), Priest (2010),
Ripley (2013), and Cobreros et al (2010, 2015), motivated on both theoretical and empirical grounds. 

If inconsistencies due to vague predicates and borderline objects are taken to be 
due to merely semantic under- and over-
determination of ordinary language (de dicto), then this is further evidence for dialetheism about semantics. If the aforementioned phenomena are taken to be not just about words but things (de re), then actually inconsistent objects are admitted, together with vague objects. And this spreads
inconsistency all over the empirical world: if borderline cases can be
inconsistent, inconsistent objects are more or less everywhere, given
how pervasive the phenomenon of vagueness notoriously is: adolescents,
borderline bald men, etc. Inconsistency is observable (Beall and Colyvan 2001). Beall argues against the approach in Ch. 5 of Beall 2009, and Beall 2014a.
(4) Multi-criterial predicates. We may assume that the
semantics of a predicate is specified by means of its criteria of
application. Now ordinary language hosts predicates with different, and
occasionally conflicting, criteria of application (e.g., ‘left wing’): some criteria for
applying a predicate \(P\) (e.g., caring about social welfare, raising minimum wages) may entail that object \(m\) (e.g., a political party) is in the
extension of the predicate, some others (promoting nationalism, oppressing immigrants), that \(m\) is in its
anti-extension, or negative extension. Criteria can in some cases be
encoded by such things as meaning postulates (or other similar, albeit
more sophisticated, semantic devices); but conflicting meaning
postulates may be embedded in our standard linguistic practices, and
difficult to detect and identify. If the extensions of our ordinary
predicates are constrained by our intuitions, and such intuitions turn
out to be inconsistent, a good semantic account of the situation may
well have to reflect this fact (accepting, in our example, that a party counts as both left and right wing), instead of destroying it by means of
some regimentation (e.g. via the usual parameterisation, or distinction
of respects). As Priest 1987, pp 67–9, clarifies, it is also hard to analyse such situations as cases of vagueness (so that a party has to be understood as being left wing to some degree, and right wing to some degree).
(5) Certain legal situations, such as inconsistent bodies of
law. Suppose, for instance, that some norm states that a marriage
performed by the captain of a ship counts as a legal marriage only if
the ship was in open water throughout the ceremony. It turns out,
then, that some other law has established that such a marriage is
valid also if the ceremony has only begun with the ship in open water,
but has ended with the ship in the port. Then someone may turn out to
be both a married man and not a married man. (Since it does not appear to follow that he is not a man anymore, or both a man and not a man, we have another putative counterexample
to ex contradictione quodlibet). If one accepts the plausible
view that statements concerning legal rights, obligations, and
statuses, can be truth-value apt, we seem to have a dialetheia. Of
course, legal systems sometimes have mechanisms that can be used to
remove such inconsistencies (e.g., by ordering different kinds of laws
in a hierarchy from customary laws, to established jurisprudence, to
ordinary legislation, to constitutional norms, etc.; or via
the lex posterior principle, giving priority to the more
recent norm in case of conflict). But this is not always the case: the
inconsistent laws may be of the same rank, enacted at the same time,
etc. For a recent discussion, see Beall 2016.
Each of the above arguments undoubtedly calls for further
development. Priest 1987 includes detailed discussions of all of them. Ficara 2014 includes recent work.
We now turn to arguments against dialetheism. The most prominent sustained
defence of the LNC in the history of philosophy is, as mentioned, that given by Aristotle in Chapter 4 of Metaphysics,
\(\Gamma\). A critical analysis of Aristotle’s arguments is given point-for-point by Priest (1998b/2006 ch.1), who finds them to often conflate dialetheism with trivialism (that
is, conflating the claim that some contradictions are true, and
the one that all contradictions are). We will look at some more modern arguments against dialetheism.
A standard argument against dialetheism is to invoke the
logical principle of Explosion, in virtue of which dialetheism would
entail trivialism. Granted that trivialism is absurd (though see Priest 2000a,
Priest 2006, Ch. 3, and Kabay 2010), dialetheism must be
rejected. Since this argument assumes that explosion is logically valid, it will carry no weight against a dialetheic paraconsistentist.
Interestingly enough, while Aristotle’s defence of the LNC
may slide between attacking dialetheism and trivialism, Aristotelian syllogistic —
the first formally articulated logic in Western philosophy—is
not explosive. Aristotle held that some syllogisms with inconsistent
premises are valid, whereas others are not (An. Pr. 64a 15). Just
consider the inference:
(P1) Some logicians are intuitionists;
(P2) No intuitionist is a logician;
(C) Therefore, all logicians are logicians.
This is not a valid syllogism, despite the fact that its premises
are inconsistent. The principle of Explosion had a certain tenure at
places and times in Medieval logic, but it became well-established
mainly with the Fregean and post-Fregean development of what is now called classical
logic. For the logical aspects of denying explosion, see the article on paraconsistent logic.
There are several objections to dialetheism involving the notion
of exclusion. The very rough idea is that dialetheists have
let in more truths than non-dialetheists, but subsequently now
have trouble keeping enough falisity out.  This objection, in
one form or another, has been a recurring theme in criticisms of
dialetheism.
A version of the argument from exclusion against dialetheism found, for instance, in McTaggart 1922 (see Berto
2006, 2012) is as follows. A sentence is meaningful only if it rules
something out. But if the LNC fails, \(A\) does not rule out
\(\neg A\), or, a fortiori, anything else. Hence
meaningful language presupposes the LNC.
There are problems one may find with this argument. One is that
even though a dialetheia does not rule out its negation, it still may
rule out several other things. A bigger trouble is that the
first premise looks to be simply false. Consider again the sentence
‘Everything is true’. This entails everything, and so
rules out nothing. Yet it is meaningful. It is something that
everyone, except a trivialist, rejects.
One might attempt a more sophisticated explanation of the notion of
ruling out, for instance in terms of information theory, or
perhaps possible worlds. One may claim that a statement ‘rules
out’ something insofar as there are situations, or worlds, at
which it fails. In this sense, ‘Everything is true’ does
rule something out. But now, it is this account of propositional
meaning which can be challenged in general. If mathematical truths have a
strictly necessary status (which may safely be assumed here), Fermat’s
Last Theorem rules out nothing: being a necessary truth, it holds at
all possible worlds. But it is perfectly meaningful; people wondered whether it was true or false for centuries; and its proof by
Andrew Wiles was a substantial discovery.
 
One argument from exclusion, 
with a more ad hominem twist, claims that the dialetheist has trouble with expressing disagreement with rival positions in debates (see Parsons 1990, Shapiro 2004, Littman and
Simmons 2004). For when the
dialetheist utters ‘\(\neg A\)’, this is in itself
insufficient to rule out that \(A\) is the case, given that, in a
dialetheic world, it may well be that both \(A\) and
\(\neg A\). Similarly, ‘\(A\) is false’ and even
‘\(A\) is not true’ might not do the trick, since for
the dialetheist some \(A\)’s being false, or untrue, does not
rule out its being true. As Parsons puts it,
Elaborations and repetitions of this line of thought have come to be
known in the literature as the ‘just true’ or ‘true
only’ problem, e.g. Rossberg 2013. (Young 2015, however, argues
that the exclusion problem is distinct from the just-true problem.)
To this, the dialetheist has various replies. Priest has argued that
the logical operation of negation should be distinguished from the
speech acts of denial and the cognitive state of rejection. So, contra
Frege, assertion of a negation is not the same as denial. The idea is
that exclusion is expressed via a primitive notion
of rejection: to reject \(A\) is to positively refuse to
believe that \(A\). That the notion is taken as primitive means, in
particular, that it is not reducible to the acceptance of negation: it
is a sui generis act. The linguistic counterpart of rejection
is the speech act of denial. Then the dialetheist can rule out that
\(A\) is the case by denying \(A\); and this does not amount to the
assertion of \(\neg A\) (Priest 2006, Ch. 6).  More simply, one can
often express denials by uttering ordinary language negations:
‘not’ is, in this sense, pragmatically
ambiguous. We will come back below to how, and why, rejection-denial
may not be reducible to the acceptance-assertion of any negation.
Another way in which the dialetheist may express the
exclusion that \(A\) is the case is by uttering ‘\(A \rightarrow \bot\)’, where again \(\bot\) is 
‘Everything is true’. 
Similarly, a dialetheist may try to fix that \(A\) is consistent by saying
‘if \(A\) is both true and false, then \(\bot\)’.
Considerations by e.g. Field (2008, Ch. 27), Murzi and Carrara (2013), and Berto (2014), however, cast doubt on whether ‘arrow-falsum’ can work as a dialetheic exclusion-expressing device in all cases. One reason is due to side-effects of the
aforementioned Curry paradox. Another is that ‘arrow-falsum’ is very strong; a mundane sentence like ‘Alice had spaghetti for dinner’ may be false-only (she didn’t), but if it were true too, that wouldn’t be absurd.
Cf. Beall 2013, proposing exclusion via non-logical, theory-specific rules of the form \(A,\neg A \vdash \bot\) for each sentence \(A\) we take to be consistent; Scharp 2018 suggests possible problems for this approach.
The exclusion problem gets its strength from some background assumptions. Specifically, it seems to presuppose that the content of a proposition is given in terms of splitting all possible situations, or worlds, into those where the proposition holds and those where it does not. Even accepting this presupposition, though, would
not affect a dialetheic challenge to the LNC. For a given \(A\) to
be a dialetheia, putting things in these terms, it is sufficient that
there be overlap between the worlds where \(A\) holds, and those
where its negation holds. And this is compatible with the idea of
propositional content as splitting the totality of worlds—but now with overlap.
The tenability of such an overlap, though, requires discussing the account of negation from classical logic, to which we now turn.
Arguments against dialetheism are often focused on the concept of logical negation. The main one
goes as follows. The truth conditions for negation are:
\(\neg A\) is true iff \(A\) is not true. Hence,
if \(A\) and \(\neg A\) were true, \(A\) would be both true and not true, which is impossible.
What to make of this argument? First, the truth conditions
for negation employed here are contentious. An alternative view has it
that \(\neg A\) is true iff \(A\) is false, and
\(\neg A\) is false iff \(A\) is true—and in the
semantics of many paraconsistent logics (for instance, the logic of
First Degree Entailment), truth and falsity may overlap. Such an
account preserves our intuition that negation is the operator which
(truth-functionally) switches truth and falsity. It also preserves our
intuition on contradictoriness, in the form: \(A\) and \(B\)
are contradictories iff, if \(A\) is true, \(B\) is false,
and if \(A\) is false, \(B\) is true. What has to go, on this proposal, is
the assumption that truth and falsity are exclusive
in all cases: there exist dialetheias, that is, sentences falling
simultaneously under both categories.
Secondly, a dialetheist can point out that the argument against dialetheism based
on the truth conditions for (classical) negation begs
the question at its last step: why should we assume that it is
impossible for \(A\) to be both true and not true? Well, because
it is a contradiction. But that is precisely what is at issue; the critic was supposed to be arguing for the
impossibility of any contradiction holding to begin with. In fact, the
dialetheist may even accept a characterisation of the truth
conditions for negation as: ‘\(\neg A\) is true
iff \(A\) is not true’. For if the
‘metalanguage’ in which the characterisation is expressed
can be inconsistent in its turn, as a thoroughgoing dialetheist is
likely to allow (as in Weber et al 2016), then there is no guarantee that the ‘not’
in that clause behaves consistently. 
So the debate comes back to the basic question of whether or not consistency can be presupposed.
A variant on the anti-dialetheic argument from negation comes from a
Quinean conception of logical vocabulary. It goes as follows. Even
granting that there is an operator, say, \(*\), which behaves as
dialetheists claim (namely, such that in particular in some
cases \(A\) is true together with \(*A)\), it is still
perfectly possible to define a negation with all the
properties of classical negation; in particular, the property of being
explosive. And since classical negation is the standard operator in
logic, it is misleading to translate anything non-classical as
‘not’: such a translation risks simply calling
‘negation’ something different. A change in logical
vocabulary is a “change of subject”, as the Quinean slogan
goes. A version of this objection to dialetheism is due to Slater (1995); see also Restall 1993.
One line of reply to the Quinean objection available to the dialetheist is that the objection is confused between a logical theory and what the theory is a theory
of. There are many different and well-worked out logical theories of
negation (minimal negation, intuitionistic negation, De Morgan
negation, etc.). Insofar as each one of them characterizes its own
theoretical object, there is no rivalry between logics. Rivalry begins
when we wonder whether some account or other captures the meaning and
functioning of negation as it is used in the vernacular. An applied
account of negation is a theory of something, and the
theoretical object has to fit the real object. Now, to assume
beforehand that the classical account of negation is the
correct one, in the sense that it captures how negation works in the
vernacular, again begs the question against the dialetheist (and,
indeed, against most non-classical logicians): it is circular
just to assume that classical negation gets it right. People
who propose a treatment of negation alternative to the
classical one are not thereby proposing to
revise negation, but to revise an account of it, which they consider incorrect.
If it is agreed that a fair discussion between dialetheists and non-dialetheists cannot presuppose one account of negation over the other, then this suggests a simpler reply from dialetheists to the just-true/exclusion problems from 4.2 above. The reply now is to demur from the presuppositions of the just-true/exclusion objections. Without begging any questions one way or the other, this reply goes, all agree that for a sentence to be just-true amounts to it being true and not false, and just-false being false and not true. Then as Priest puts it (Priest 1987, p.291 of 2006 edition),
In the exclusion objection, it appears that the dialetheist is being
asked to ensure that the words she utters behave
consistently—which is exactly what is at issue. (See Restall
2010 and the reply in Beall et al 2011 for one round of this sort of
discussion.) A dialetheist goes on to question why one should think
that commitment to an explosive logic is, in itself, a guard against
contradiction, and therefore why dialetheists are supposed to be in
special difficulty with respect to the exclusion question any more
than a non-dialetheist.  Filling in the details here will vary, but
the reply, in short, is for a dialetheist as with anyone else,
‘just-true’ is just ‘true’ (Beall 2009,
p. 54).
 One final way this same sort of objection is expressed is by
asking dialetheists for some way to sort the true-only sentences from
the true-and-false sentences:
Priest’s suggestion is that dialetheists are working with truth and falsity, just like non-dialetheists. Accounts of negation differ, but this on its own does not create any special obligations on the part of dialetheists. 
Some have felt that what is wrong with dialetheism is not so much
violation of the LNC itself, as that an acceptance of the LNC is a
precondition for rationality. For example, it is often suggested that
it could not possibly be rational to accept a contradiction.
It is a matter of ongoing debate what the conditions are under which it is rational to
accept something. Nevertheless, it is commonly agreed that, as Hume
put it, the wise person “proportions his beliefs to the
evidence” (1955, p. 118). If this is right, then if a sufficient case can be
made out for a contradiction, it will be rational to believe it. And
sometimes this does seem possible. We have seen that a seemingly
compelling argument can be made in favour of the truth of the
strengthened Liar sentence, ‘This sentence is not
true’. Whether or not one takes the argument in question to be
completely persuasive, it suggests that there is nothing in principle
impossible about the existence of good arguments for true
contradictions. Of course, if there were conclusive evidence for the
LNC, then no case for a contradiction could be strong enough. But
conclusive evidence for any philosophical position is difficult to
achieve.
A more persuasive worry about dialetheism, relating to rationality,
is the claim that if a person could legitimately accept a
contradiction, then no one could be forced, rationally, to
abandon any view held. For if a person accepts \(A\) then,
when an argument for \(\neg A\) is put up, they could simply
accept both \(A\) and \(\neg A\).
A dialetheist can reply that, again, not all contradictions are equal. Each sentence, including each contradiction, is evaluated on its merits. While a case can 
be made for the claim that the Liar sentence is both true and false,
but this in no way shows that a case can also be made for Brisbane
being and not being in Australia. (Of course, if one subscribes to the
claim that entailment is explosive, a case for one contradiction is a
case for all; but if entailment is paraconsistent, this argument is of
no use.) 
As orthodox philosophy of science indicates, there are, in
fact, many different considerations that speak for or against the
rational acceptability of a theory or a view. Among the epistemic
virtues of a theory are: its adequacy to the data; its simplicity,
cleanness and elegance; its unity and freedom from ad hoc
hypotheses; its explanatory and predictive power; etc. Not only do
these (and other) criteria come in degrees, but they may also be
orthogonal to each other. In the end, the rational evaluation of a
view must balance it against all criteria of this kind (of which,
consistency is, arguably, one), each, on its own, being defeasible.
Dialetheism asks us to consider the possibility that a theory lacking the virtue of
consistency may still overcomes its rivals in all or most of the other respects.
According to dialetheists, this is actually the case with the
dialetheic account of the semantics of ordinary language, whose 
advantages with respect to consistent accounts have already been
shortly suggested above. And conversely, of course, an inconsistent theory may
well be trumped by a consistent theory, all things considered. So it
may be rational to reject an inconsistent position, even if it is
logically possible that it is true.
Rationality considerations are dealt with at length in Priest 2006.
If some contradictions are true, it is natural to expect that a dialetheist will
sometimes accept, or believe in, contradictions, and assert them.
Priest (2006, p. 109) adopts the following Rationality Principle:
(RP) If you have good evidence for the truth of \(A\), you
ought to accept \(A\).
Belief, acceptance, and assertion have a point: when we
believe and assert, what we aim at is believing and asserting what is
the case or, equivalently, the truth. Therefore, the dialetheist will
accept and, sometimes, assert both \(A\) and \(\neg A\), if
she has evidence that \(A\) is a dialetheia.
Notice that this need not entail that the dialetheist both accepts
and rejects \(A\) at the same time. We now come
back to the issue flagged in Section 4.2, on the irreducibility of
rejection to negation. That rejecting
\(A\) is tantamount to accepting its negation is a common view,
famously endorsed and defended (more precisely in terms of the
corresponding speech acts of assertion and denial) by Frege and Peter
Geach. But dialetheists have argued that this fusion is a confusion (see
Berto 2008 on this issue). The point can be made independently of the
issue of dialetheism: a paracompletist may well want to deny \(A\), but it would be unfair to
take such a denial as equivalent to the assertion of \(\neg A\), since
if \(A\) is truth-valueless, \(\neg A\) is normally
considered truth-valueless, too, not a truth, and so not to be asserted. A dual position can hold for
dialetheism: given that accepting \(\neg A\) is different from
rejecting \(A\), a dialetheist can do the former and not the
latter—exactly when she thinks that \(A\) is a
dialetheia.
Does this show that dialetheism is compatible with rationality? The story about assertion and denial, acceptance and rejection has been challenged from several directions. We will just mention a few. 
Restall (2015) argues that the the acceptance/rejection issue makes gappy and glutty approaches symmterical: gap theorists cannot assert some true claims about paradoxes, but glut theorists cannot reject some false claims about non-paradoxes; see also Restall 2013, Jenny 2017.
In a note by Laura Goodship (1996), she suggests that the proposal of separating denial from assertion of negation runs into problems related, again, to Curry’s paradox. Her proposal is, in effect, that it would be more natural for dialetheists to both accept and reject things after all.
Focusing on the phenomenon of disagreement in natural language, Ripley (2015a) argues that dialetheists (and paracompleteists) should rejoin classical logicians in taking negation to embed denial, and denial to express disagreement. Ripley proposes that dialetheists simply admit that (1) agreement and disagreement are incompatible (“it’s incoherent to do both”, p. 306), but (2) in some cases, assert and deny the same thing. The result would be what Ripley calls paracoherentism, which (in echo of paraconsistency) would try to allow local incoherence without global incoherence. How this could be done is an open question. Ripley suggests dropping the transitivity of logical consequence. Goodship herself ultimately recommends dropping modus ponens, a proposal that has been dubbed the ‘Goodship project’ (Beall 2015, Omori 2016, Priest 2017).
There certainly are various other arguments against dialetheism in the
philosophical market (see papers in Priest et al. 2004). For example, Zalta (2004, p. 432) argues that preserving “our pretheoretic understanding of what it is to exemplify or instantiate a property” requires us to preserve the LNC. This entry has presented only some of the most immediate issues that arise in objections and replies.
The modern dialetheic research program has begun to confront itself with some major topics in traditional and
mainstream philosophy. Among such topics, a prominent one is the
debate between
 realists and
 anti-realists
(for example, idealists and constructivists) in metaphysics. Very
roughly, to be a realist about entities of some kind is to
maintain that such entities objectively exist apart from, and
antecedently to, anyone’s thought of them; and, therefore, that our
thoughts, beliefs and theories concerning such entities are made
objectively true or objectively false by them, apart from what we
think of them (more refined definitions of realism and anti-realism
are certainly available; but this characterization will suffice for
our purposes).
It has been claimed (Priest 2000b, Priest 2006, Ch. 2)
that dialetheism is not by itself committed to a specific conception of
truth (deflationist, semantic, correspondentist, coherentist,
constructivist, etc.). Nevertheless, if we accept even a mild form of
realism, the truth of some contradictions entails the existence of
inconsistent objects and/or states of affairs: those that make the
contradictions true (Berto 2007b). One may claim that it makes no
sense to talk of inconsistent objects, situations, or states of
affairs. The world is all there, all together: how could some pieces of
it contradict some other pieces? Consistency and inconsistency
might be taken as properties of sentences, or theories (sets of
sentences closed under logical consequence), or propositions (what
sentences express), or maybe thoughts, or (sets of) beliefs, etc.
Contradiction (Widerspruch, the Latin contradictio)
has to do with discourse (diction, sprechen, dicere).
The world, with its non-mental and non-linguistic inhabitants —
armchairs, trees, people—is not the right kind of
thing that can be consistent or inconsistent, and ascribing such
properties to (a part of) the world is, to use Gilbert Ryle’s
terminology, a category mistake.
These considerations might drive dialetheism towards an anti-realist
interpretation of the claim that there are dialetheias, true
contradictions; and anti-realist dialetheic theories of truth have, in
fact, been proposed (see e.g. Beall’s ‘constructive
methodological deflationism’, in Beall 2004). But other options
are available to a dialetheist who wants to embrace some form of
metaphysically robust realism about truth. For instance, she can
stress that consistency and inconsistency can be ascribed to (pieces
of) the world in a derived sense: to say that the world is
(locally) inconsistent just is to say that some true purely
descriptive sentences about the world have true
negations. Consequently, and not accidentally, it is quite common in
the current literature both for and against dialetheism to
straightforwardly speak of inconsistent objects, states of affairs,
and entire inconsistent worlds. A dialetheic correspondence theory of
truth might be committed, in particular, to negative facts (requiring
the simultaneous existence of truth-makers both for \(A\) and for
its negation, when \(A\) is a dialetheia); but these may be not
too difficult to handle (see e.g. Priest 2006, pp. 51–3).
There may also be room for a further intermediate position, that is to
say, a ‘semantic dialetheism’ which accepts true
contradictions without inconsistent objects or states of affairs as
their truth-makers. This position has been explored in the literature (Kroon 2004, Mares 2004). Beall’s
view, expressed in his transparent truth theory in Beall 2009, may
also be seen as a form of semantic dialetheism. Transparency can be
naturally paired with a 
 deflationary view of truth. 
For suppose the truth predicate is a merely semantic device, coined,
as Quine famously stressed, for expressive,
‘disquotational’ purposes. Then dialetheias such as the
Liar(s) may well be semantic side-effects (‘spandrels’, in
Beall’s terminology) of the introduction of such device, not involving
any metaphysically committing contradiction in a language- and mind-
independent world. Woodbridge and Armour-Garb (2013) argue that a deflationary view of truth is best understood in terms
of semantic pretense (a hermeneutic fictionalist perspective), and on
that basis offered a pretense account of the semantic paradoxes.
Debates on realism and anti-realism quickly spill
over into questions concerning the nature of reality in general, that
is, into metaphysical issues: if reality is dialetheic, how should the
ontology of a dialetheic world be spelt out? If metaphysics
should be placed (once again) at the very core of philosophy, the
debate on the possibility of dialetheias occupies a central place in
the core. This was, after all, Aristotle’s view, too: he decided to
speak on behalf of the unconditional validity of the LNC, not in his
Organon (his writings on the subject of logic), but in the
Metaphysics, for this was for him an issue to be addressed
ontologically, not (only) via formal logical tools. The most detailed work to date in dialetheic metaphysics is probably Priest 2014, which grounds the very unity of objects in an inconsistent theory of parthood and boundary, and applies it to classical issues in metaphysics, such as the One and the Many, and the instantiation of universals.
Since Aristotle, the assumption that consistency is a requirement for truth, validity, meaning, and rationality, has gone largely unchallenged. Modern
investigations into dialetheism, in pressing the possibility of inconsistent theories that are nevertheless meaningful, valid, rational, and true, call that assumption into question. 
If consistency does turn out to be a necessary condition for any of
these notions, dialetheism prompts us to articulate why; just by pushing philosophers to find arguments for what previously were undisputed beliefs renders a valuable service (Scharp 2007, p. 544).
And if consistency turns out not to be an essential requirement for all theories, then the way is
open for the rational exploration of areas in philosophy and the sciences that have traditionally been closed
off.