What could motivate such a strange and seemingly incoherent doctrine?
One central consideration in its favor derives from the Anselmian
definition of God as maximally perfect, as that than which no greater
can be conceived. A God who was less than maximally perfect would not
be an absolute reality and an appropriate object of worship. A God who
was less than ultimate and absolute would be an idol. Now an absolute
reality must be a se, from itself, and so not dependent on
anything distinct from itself either for its nature or for its
existence. If God had properties in the way creatures have them,
however, he would be distinct from them and so dependent on them. This
is the case whether one thinks of a property of x as a
constituent of x, or as an entity external to x to
which x is tied by the asymmetrical relation (or
nonrelational tie) of instantiation. If the properties of x
are constituents or ontological (proper) parts of x, then
x will depend on them in the same way that any whole composed
of parts depends on its parts. But if x is tied to its
properties by the asymmetrical relation of instantiation, it is still
the case that x will depend on them: if x is
F in virtue of x’s instantiation of F-ness,
then F-ness is a logically prior condition of x’s
being F. In sum, the divine aseity would seem to require that
God be rather than have his attributes.
One can also arrive at the simplicity doctrine via the divine
necessity. As maximally perfect, as that than which no greater can be
conceived, God must be a metaphysically necessary being, one that
cannot not exist. A necessary being is one whose possibility entails
its existence, and whose nonexistence entails its impossibility. But
what could be the ground of this necessity of existence if not the
identity in God of essence and existence, possibility and actuality?
Saying that God exists in all metaphysically possible worlds does not
provide a ground, but merely a graphic Leibnizian representation, of
the notion of necessary being. The possible worlds representation also
does not distinguish the necessity of God from that of an abstract
object such as the set of even primes. God is not just another
necessary being among necessary beings; he is uniquely necessary as
the source and ground of everything distinct from himself, including
all non-divine necessary beings. Indeed, God is uniquely unique, i.e.,
unique in his mode of uniqueness, in that he is not one of a kind, or
necessarily one of a kind, but unique in transcending the
kind-instance difference altogether. A divine being cannot possess
contingent modal status: if God exists, then he is necessary, and if
he does not exist, then he is impossible. So if God exists, then there
is a very tight connection between the divine nature and the divine
existence. The simplicity doctrine in its traditional and strongest
form assays this ‘tightness’ as identity. The divine
simplicity thus grounds the divine necessity. God is necessary because
he is simple. It is easy to see that the divine simplicity also
grounds God’s possession of essential properties. God has his
attributes essentially because he is identical to his attributes.
Nothing is more essential to a thing than something to which it is
identical.
A third motivation for DDS lies in the fact that it provides a
solution to the ancient Euthyphro dilemma first presented by Plato in
his eponymous dialog. Does God command the good because it is good,
and forbid the bad because it is bad, or is the good good and the bad
bad because God commands/forbids it? If the former, God’s willing
would be subject to an external standard logically antecedent to God
to the detriment of the divine sovereignty. If the latter, the content
of morality would be arbitrary because subject to God’s free will. On
DDS, however, the dilemma is a false alternative. If God is goodness
itself in its prime instance, then he is not subject to a standard; he
is the standard. And if God, being simple, just is his willing, then
he cannot will anything other than the good and the appearance of
arbitrarity vanishes. See Feser (2009, 129) who draws on Stump
(2003).
Note that while the traditional approach to divine simplicity is in
terms of identity, this approach is open to what Dolezal (2011,
136–144) calls the “harmonist challenge” according
to which, on one variation, that of Immink (1987), the divine
attributes are not identical but necessarily equivalent. Dolezal also
counts Swinburne (1994) among the harmonists. Harmonism will not be
discussed further in this entry. See Dolezal (2011) for competent
critique of harmonism and for an overall excellent defense of DDS.
Besides perfection and necessity, immateriality, eternity, and
immutability also seem to point to simplicity as their ground. Because
God is simple, he cannot have parts and so cannot have material or
temporal parts. And because God is simple, he cannot harbor any
unrealized potentialities, and so must be immutable. The centrality of
DDS to medieval philosophical theology is shown by its position in the
order of topics in Aquinas’ Summa Theologica. It occurs as
Question 3 right after Question 2 on the existence of God.
The very notion of an ontologically simple being will be dismissed by
many as self-evidently incoherent. Among theists, there are those who
will argue that DDS does not cohere with some other theistic
commitment such as the doctrine of the Trinity. The main concern of
this article is not with such intramural coherence questions, but with
the question of whether or not DDS is coherent at all. This broad
coherence question is not whether the doctrine is true, or even
possibly true; the question is whether it is possible for us to think
it without obvious contradictions and category mistakes. Ultimately,
the broad coherence question concerns the sort of general metaphysical
framework that would allow DDS to be discussed as a live option as
opposed to being dismissed as incoherent from the outset.
A central threat to coherence is the question of how a thing could be
identical to its properties. Alvin Plantinga (1980, 47) maintains that
if God is identical to his properties, then he is a property, and they
are a single property, in which case God is a single property. Given
that properties are abstract entities, and abstracta are causally
inert, then God is abstract and causally inert — which is of
course inconsistent with the core tenet of classical theism according
to which God is the personal creator and sustainer of every contingent
being. No abstract object is either a person or a causal agent. No
abstract object can be omniscient, or indeed know anything at all.
More fundamentally, no abstract entity can be identical to any
concrete entity. God as person and creator is concrete. Abstracta and
concreta are mutually exclusive and jointly exhaustive. Nothing can be
both. Objections similar to Plantinga’s have been raised by Richard
Gale (1991, 23 ff.), William Hasker (2016, 703) and others.
It is easy to see that Plantinga-style objections will not appear
decisive to those who reject his metaphysical framework. Indeed,
Plantinga’s accusations of category mistake may strike students
of the main medieval proponents of DDS as so many misunderstandings based on a foisting of a foreign framework on their ideas.
Plantinga, along with many other philosophers, thinks of individuals
and properties as belonging to disjoint categories connected by an
external relation of exemplification. Individuals are causally
efficacious concreta whereas properties are causally impotent
abstracta. Such an approach to ontology renders the divine simplicity
inconceivable from the outset. For if God is a concrete individual and
his nature (conceived perhaps as the conjunction of his
omni-attributes) is an abstract property, then the general ontology
rules out any identity or sameness of God and his nature. Any such
identity or sameness would violate the separateness of the two categories.
To identify an unexemplifiable concretum with an exemplifiable
abstractum would amount to a category mistake. At most, a
Plantinga-style approach allows for God’s exemplification of
his nature where the (first-level) exemplification relation, unlike
the identity relation, is asymmetrical and irreflexive and so enforces
the non-identity of its relata. In short, if God exemplifies his
nature, then God must be distinct from his nature, just as Socrates
must be distinct from his nature. God’s nature is then something he
has, by exemplification, not, pace Augustine, something he is
by some form of identity or sameness. 
Since a Plantinga-type approach to ontology rules out DDS from the
outset, no sophisticated adherent of the doctrine will adopt such an
approach. The DDS defender will embrace an ontology that
accommodates an ontologically simple being. Indeed, as Nicholas
Wolterstorff (1991) notes, classical proponents of DDS such as Aquinas
had a radically different ontological style, one that allowed for the
coherent conceivability of DDS. They did not think of individuals as
related to their properties as to abstracta external to them, but as
having properties as ontological constituents. They, and some atheist
contemporaries as well, think in terms of a “constituent
ontology” as opposed to what Wolterstorff calls a
“relation ontology” or what might be called a
“nonconstituent ontology”. Bundle theories are
contemporary examples of constituent ontology. If properties are
assayed as tropes and a concrete particular as a bundle of tropes,
then these tropes or abstract particulars are parts of concrete
particulars when suitably bundled. Properties so assayed are brought
from Plato’s heaven to earth. The togetherness or compresence of
tropes in a trope bundle is not formal identity but a kind of
contingent sameness. Thus a redness trope and a sweetness trope in an
apple are not identical but contingently compresent as parts of the same
whole. A model such as this allows for an extrapolation to a necessary
compresence of the divine attributes in the case of God. Aquinas, the
greatest of the medieval proponents of DDS, is of course an
Aristotelian, not a trope theorist. But he too is a constituent
ontologist. Form and matter, act and potency, and essence and
existence are constituents of primary substances. Essence and
existence in sublunary substances such as Socrates are really distinct
but inseparably together. Their unity is contingent. This model
permits an extrapolation to the case of a being in which essence and
existence are necessarily together or compresent. Constituent ontology, as
murky as it must remain on a sketch such as this, at least provides a
framework in which DDS is somewhat intelligible as opposed to a
Plantinga-style framework on which DDS remains wholly unintelligible.
The arguments for DDS amount to arguments against the nonconstituent
ontological framework.
Adopting a constituent ontology will not, by itself, bring DDS into
the clear. Suppose properties (whether assayed as universals or as
tropes) are ontological parts of the ordinary (thick) particulars that
have them and that this having is understood quasi-mereologically as a
kind of part-whole relation rather than as an exemplification relation
that spans the abstract-concrete divide. This would still leave us
with the puzzle of how a whole could be identical to one of its proper
parts, and the related puzzle of how two distinct proper parts could
be identical to each other. Construing properties as parts of the
things that have them does not, by itself, show how there could be a
simple being. But if properties are parts, then at least Plantinga’s
dismissal of DDS on the ground that nothing concrete can be identical
to anything abstract can itself be dismissed.
What is needed to render DDS coherent is a particular version of
constituent ontology according to which a thing’s nature is a unitary
concrete item and a constituent of the thing. In the case of material
beings, the nature will be together with some individuating
constituent such as signate or designated matter (materia
signata). Material beings are individuated and diversified by
their signate matter. Thus Socrates and Plato, though the same in
nature, differ numerically in virtue of their different portions of
materia signata. Matter makes them individuals, and matter
makes them numerically diverse individuals. God, however, being
immaterial, is not individuated by anything distinct from his nature,
and so can be said to be a self-individuating nature. As
self-individuating, there is no real distinction between God and his
nature. In Thomist terms, in God nature and suppositum are
identical.(ST I, q. 3, art. 3) The divine nature is not an
abstract object related across an ontological chasm to a concrete
individual;the divine nature is a self-individuating concrete unitary
nature. For Plantinga, the nature of a thing is a conjunctive property
the conjuncts of which are those properties the thing exemplifies in
every possible world in which it exists. On this approach, the divine
nature is ‘cobbled together’ or constructed out of God’s essential
properties. But then the divine nature is logically and ontologically
posterior to those properties. Clearly, no defender of DDS will think
of natures in this way. He will think of the divine nature as
logically and ontologically prior to the properties, and of the
properties as manifestations of that unitary nature, a nature the
radical unity of which cannot be made sense of on Plantinga’s
approach. None of this is spectacularly clear, and plenty of questions
remain; but it is not obviously incoherent as DDS would be on the
approach of Plantinga. And our question, you will recall, is
concerned solely with coherence.
One can see from the foregoing that Plantinga-type objections are not
compelling. The reason, again, is that DDS cannot be made sense of within a nonconstituent ontology.  It can be made sense of, assuming it can be made sense of, only within a constituent ontology, the style of ontology presupposed by its main defender, Aquinas. A nonconstituent ontologist like Plantinga may be
represented as arguing by Modus Ponens: If God exemplifies his nature,
then he is distinct from it; God exemplifies his nature; ergo, God is
distinct from his nature, and DDS is false. But the constituent
ontologist is justified in switching to Modus
Tollens: If God exemplifies his nature, then he is distinct from it;
God is not distinct from his nature; ergo, God does not exemplify his
nature but has his nature by being identical with it.
We have just seen how God can be identical to his nature where
“can be” is elliptical for “can be conceived without
obvious incoherence.” But there are two other problems that also
pose a serious threat to the coherence of DDS. One concerns how God
can be identical to his existence, the other how the divine attributes
can be identical to each other.
Taking the first question first, on a Plantinga-style approach, it
makes no sense to say that God is identical either to existence or to
his existence. For Plantinga, existence is a first-level
property that everything exemplifies. Given that
“exemplifies” picks out a two-term irreflexive and
asymmetrical relation, God cannot be identical with existence. Nor can
God be identical to his existence. The latter is presumably a
state of affairs, an abstract object, and no concretum can be
identical with an abstractum on pain of violating the separateness of
the concrete and abstract realms. There are, however, plenty of
reasons (Vallicella 2002, Ch. 2) to reject the view that existence is
a first-level property and the ontological schemes that entail it. One
intuition that many share is that existence is not one of an
individual’s properties, but that in virtue of which it has any
properties in the first place: it is more like the unity or cohesion
of an individual’s properties (Vallicella 2002, Ch. 6).
Another route to the identity of God with his existence is via the
divine necessity. Although it is true to say that a contingent being is one that exists in some, but not all, metaphysically possible worlds, that is not what makes a contingent being contingent. What makes a contingent being contingent is the real distinction in it between essence and existence. What makes an absolutely necessary being necessary, then, is the lack of such a distinction. God, who has his necessity from himself
and not from another, is therefore identical to his existence. One can say, if one likes, that God exists in all metaphysically possible worlds, but that is true only because in God essence and existence are the same.  The divine simplicity is the ground of the divine necessity. Given the way our minds work, we cannot think of God without distinguishing between essence and existence; but that is our affair and not God’s.
In reality, God is his existence. 
The foregoing may explain how it is conceivable without obvious
incoherence that God and his nature and God and his existence be
identical, but how does it answer the second question? How does it
explain the conceivability without obvious incoherence of the identity
of the divine attributes with each other? If each attribute is
identical to God, then each attribute is identical to each other by
the Transitivity of Identity. For example, if God = omniscience, and
God = omnipotence, then omniscience = omnipotence. But how could each
attribute be identical to God? If we can understand how each attribute
can be identical to God, then we can understand how each can be
identical to every other one.
We have already seen how, if we embrace a constituent approach to
ontology, the divine nature can be coherently conceived as identical
to God. Being immaterial, there is nothing in God to distinguish him
from his nature. So he is identical to his nature. The divine nature
is, or can be thought of as, a property. So there is at least one
property that is self-instantiating: it has itself as its sole
instance, and indeed as its sole possible instance. If this is
coherently conceivable, then the same will be true of perfect
knowledge, perfect power, and so on: if instantiated, these attributes
are self-instantiated in every possible world and by the same thing in
every possible world (Vallicella 1992). Thus not only is the divine
nature identical to an individual, each divine perfection is identical
to an individual, namely God, whence it follows that each perfection
is identical to every other one.
A structurally similar approach is suggested by Christopher Hughes.
Think of first-level properties as David Lewis (1986, 50 ff.) does: as
sets of actual and possible individuals. Then the property of being
red will be the set of all actual and possible red individuals and the
property of being perfectly powerful will be the set consisting of all
actual and possible perfectly powerful individuals. But there is only
one such individual, God. Only God is perfectly powerful and only God
can be perfectly powerful. So perfect power = {God}. As Hughes (1989,
65) notes, Quine holds that a singleton and its member are identical.
If so, then perfect power = {God} = God. It should be added that if we
have already abandoned nonconstituent ontology with its rigid
bifurcation of the concrete and the abstract according to which the
two realms are disjoint, then we no longer have a reason to argue that
a concrete individual and its singleton must be distinct on the ground that the
former is concrete while the latter is abstract. Constituent ontology
allows for a sort of ‘coalescence’ of the concrete and the
abstract, the particular and the universal. Indeed, such a coalescence
is what we find in the simple God who is in some sense both concrete
and abstract in that he is a nature that is its own suppositum.
Thus there appears to be justification for the move from perfect power
= {God} to perfect power = God. And similarly for perfect knowledge,
etc. In this way one can render coherent the notion that the
perfections constitutive of the divine nature are identical with one
another. For if each is identical to God, then each is identical to
every other one.
William Mann cites a couple of difficulties that arise if the divine
attributes are said to be identical to each other. The first is that
if God = wisdom, and God = life, then wisdom = life. But wisdom and
life are not even extensionally equivalent, let alone identical. If
Tom is alive, it doesn’t follow that Tom is wise (Mann 2015,
23). The second difficulty is that if God is wisdom, and Socrates is
wise by participating in wisdom, then Socrates is wise by
participating in God. But this smacks of heresy. No creature
participates in God (Mann 2015, 23). The problem arises if the divine
attributes are thought to be universals.
Enter property instances. It is one thing to say that God is wisdom,
quite another to say that God is God’s
wisdom. God’s wisdom is an example of a property
instance. And similarly for the other divine attributes. God is not
identical to life; God is identical to
his life. Suppose we say that God = God’s wisdom, and God =
God’s life. It would then follow that God’s wisdom = God’s life, but
not that God = wisdom or that wisdom = life. So if we construe
identity with properties as identity with property instances, then we
can evade both of the above difficulties. Mann’s idea, then, is that
the identity claims made within DDS should be taken as Deity-instance
identities (e.g., God is his omniscience) and as instance-instance
identities (e.g., God’s omniscience is God’s omnipotence), but not as
Deity-property identities (e.g., God is omniscience) or as
property-property identities (e.g., omniscience is omnipotence).
Support for Mann’s approach is readily available in the texts of the
doctor angelicus (Mann 2015, 24). Aquinas says things like,
Deus est sua bonitas, “God is his goodness.”
But what exactly is a property instance? If the concrete individual
Socrates instantiates the abstract universal property wisdom, then two
further putative items come into consideration. One is the
(Chisholmian-Plantingian as opposed to Bergmannian-Armstrongian) state
of affairs, Socrates’ being wise. Such items are abstract, i.e., not
in space or time. The other is the property instance, the wisdom of
Socrates. Mann rightly holds that they are distinct. All abstract
states of affairs exist, but only some of them obtain or are actual.
By contrast, all property instances are actual: they cannot exist
without being actual. The wisdom of Socrates is a particular, an
unrepeatable item, just as Socrates is, and the wisdom of Socrates is
concrete (in space and/or time) just as Socrates is. If we admit
property instances into our ontology, then the above two difficulties
can be circumvented. Or so Mann maintains.
But then other problems loom. One is this. If the F-ness of God = God,
if, for example, the wisdom of God = God, then God is a property
instance. But God is a person. How could a person be a property
instance? From the frying pan into the fire? How could the stupendous
and super-eminent reality of God be reduced to something as
ontologically flimsy as a property instance? The problem displayed as
an inconsistent triad: (a) God is a property instance; (b) God is a
person; (c) No person is a property instance.
Mann solves the triad by denying (c) (2015, 37). Some persons are
property instances. Indeed, Mann argues that every person is a
property instance because everything is a property instance. (2015,
38) God is a person and therefore a property instance. If you object
that persons are concrete while property instances are abstract,
Mann’s response is that both are concrete (2015, 37). To be
concrete is to be in space and/or time (2015, 37). Socrates is
concrete in this sense, but so is his being sunburned.
If you object that persons are substances and thus independent items
while property instances are not substances but dependent on
substances, Mann’s response will be that the point holds for
accidental property instances but not for essential property
instances. Socrates may lose his wisdom but he cannot lose his
humanity. Now all of God’s properties are essential: God is
essentially omniscient, omnipotent, etc. So it seems to Mann that “the
omniscience of God is not any more dependent on God than God is on the
omniscience of God: should either cease to be, the other would also.”
(2015, 37) This is scarcely compelling: x can depend on y even if both
are necessary beings. Both the set whose sole member is the number 7
and the number 7 itself are necessary beings, but the set depends on
its member both for its existence and its necessity, and not vice
versa. Closer to home, Aquinas held that some necessary beings have
their necessity from another while one has its necessity in itself. I
should think that the omniscience of God is dependent on God, and not
vice versa. Mann’s view, however, is not unreasonable. Intuitions
vary.
Mann’s argument for the thesis that everything is a property
instance involves the notion of a rich property. The rich property of
an individual x is a conjunctive property the conjuncts of
which are all and only the essential and accidental properties, some
of them temporally indexed, instantiated by x
throughout x’s career (2015, 38). Mann tells us that for
anything whatsoever there is a corresponding rich property. From this
he concludes that “everything is a property instance of some
rich property or other” (38). It follows that every person is a
property instance. The argument seems to be this: (a) For every
concrete individual x, there is a corresponding rich property
R. Therefore, (b) for every concrete
individual x, x is a property instance of some rich
property or other.  Therefore, (c) For every concrete
individual x, if
x is a person, then x is a property instance.
Vallicella (2016, 379) argues that the move from (a) to (b) smacks of
a non sequitur absent some auxiliary premise. Let it be granted
arguendo that for each concrete individual x there is
a corresponding rich property R. And let it be granted that
there are property instances. So, in addition to Socrates and wisdom,
there is the wisdom of Socrates. Recall that this property instance is
not to be confused with the abstract state of affairs, Socrates’
being wise.  From what has been granted it follows that for each x
there is the rich property instance, the R-ness
of x. But how is it supposed to follow that everything is a
property instance? Everything instantiates properties, and in this
sense everything is an instance of properties; but this is not to say
that everything is a property instance.  Socrates instantiates a rich
property, and so is an instance of a property, but it doesn’t
follow that Socrates is a property instance.  Something seems to be
missing in Mann’s argument. 
There is of course no chance that Professor Mann is confusing being an
instance of a property with being a property instance. If a
instantiates F-ness, then a is an instance of the property
F-ness; but a is not a property instance as
philosophers use this phrase: the F-ness of a is a
property instance. So what do we have to add to Mann’s argument
for it to generate the conclusion that every concrete individual is a
property instance? How do we validate the inferential move from (a) to
(b)? Let ‘Rs’ stand for Socrates’ rich
property. We have to add the claim that there is nothing one could
point to that could distinguish Socrates from the property instance
generated when Socrates instantiates Rs. Rich property
instances are a special case of property instances. Socrates cannot be
identical to his wisdom because he can exist even if his wisdom does
not exist. And he cannot be identical to his humanity because there is
more to Socrates that his humanity, even though he cannot exist
without it. But since Socrates’ rich property instance includes
all his property instances, why can’t Socrates be identical to
this rich property instance? And so Mann’s thought seems to be
that there is nothing that could distinguish Socrates from his rich
property instance. So they are identical. And likewise for every other
individual. But it is arguable that it is a mistake to hold that every
person is a property instance. Here (Vallicella 2016 379–380) is one
argument.
Rich Properties and Haecceity Properties. Socrates can exist
without his rich property; ergo, he can exist without his rich
property instance; ergo, Socrates cannot be a rich property instance
or any property instance. The truth of the initial premise is fallout
from the definition of ‘rich property.’ The R
of x is a conjunctive property each conjunct of which is a
property of x. Thus Socrates’ rich property includes (has
as a conjunct) the property of being married to Xanthippe. But
Socrates might not have had that property, whence it follows that he
might not have had R. (If R has C as a conjunct,
then necessarily R has C as a conjunct, which implies
that R cannot be what it is without having exactly the
conjuncts it in fact has. An analog of mereological essentialism holds
for conjunctive properties.)  And because Socrates might not have had
R, he might not have had the property instance of R. So
Socrates cannot be identical to this property instance. What Mann
needs is not a rich property, but an haecceity property: one that
individuates Socrates across every possible world in which he
exists. His rich property, by contrast, individuates him in only the
actual world. In different worlds, Socrates has different rich
properties. And in different worlds, Socrates has different rich
property instances. It follows that Socrates cannot be identical to,
or even necessarily equivalent to, any rich property instance. An
haecceity property, however, is a property Socrates has in every world
in which he exists, and which he alone has in every world in which he
exists. Now if there are such haecceity properties as
identity-with-Socrates, then perhaps we can say that Socrates is
identical to a property instance, namely, the identity-with-Socrates
of Socrates. Unfortunately, there are powerful arguments for rejecting
haecceity properties (Vallicella 2002, 99–104). So we ought to
conclude that concrete individuals cannot be identified with property
instances, whence follows the perhaps obvious proposition that no
person is a property instance, not God, not me, not Socrates.
To conceptualize a simple God it seems we must assign him to some
familiar category or other. But how is this possible if, as DDS
implies, God is utterly sui generis and unique in his very mode
of uniqueness? It might not be possible at all, in which case silence
might be the most appropriate response. But let’s not give up just
yet. Vallicella (1992) suggests that God is assimilable to a
self-exemplifying property, a Platonic Form. Hughes goes nominalist
with his idea that God is something like a singleton set. Mann
assimilates God to a property instance or trope. Hugh McCann,
rejecting Mann’s view, proposes that we think of God as a concrete
state of affairs. Such are to be distinguished from abstract states of
affairs. Contrast Booth’s assassinating Lincoln with
Booth assassinating Lincoln. Both are states of affairs, but
only the former is concrete in the sense of causally active/passive.
Whereas the former is an act (act-token), the latter is an act-type.
The former was causally efficacious; the latter is disbarred from
causal efficacy by its ontological category. McCann’s proposal,
then, is that God be thought of as a concrete state of affairs along
the lines of Michaelangelo’s creating of the Sistine
Chapel’s ceiling.
Thus is concretion secured, but whither simplicity? A concrete state
of affairs such as Socrates’ being pale is a complex both the
subject and the property constituent of which are necessary for its
identity.  Property instance or tropes, by contrast, are simples: the
paleness trope in Socrates, though it cannot ‘migrate’ to
Plato, does not have Socrates as a constituent and so is not tied to
the philosopher for its identity. Now McCann is well aware that the
ontological complexity of concrete states of affairs does not comport
well with divine simplicity. But he thinks it is the best we can
do.
Although McCann doesn’t say it, it seems to follow from his
whole approach that God cannot be a member of any extant ontological
category: he cannot be a universal or a set or a trope … or a
concrete state of affairs. Indeed, if he is absolutely sovereign, then
God must somehow be the creative source of the ontological categories
themselves, how many they are and what they are, and not merely the
source of the natures (essences) of the members of categories. God
must transcend all categories. Taken to the limit, absolute
sovereignty would seem to imply absolute transcendence— and
absolute ineffability. Clearly, this is what the simplicity doctrine
culminates in and is meant to preserve. So there is a tension here if
not a contradiction: it cannot be true both that God is beyond all
ontological categories and is a member of the category of concrete
states of affairs. But if we are to have any conception of God at all,
we must force him into some extant category or other, and for McCann
the category of concrete state of affairs is the best we can do. One
walks a tightrope when one attempts to avoid negative theology with
its “nothing can be said positively about God.” Citing
various texts of Aquinas, Eleonore Stump (2016, 195–198) shows that
radical agnosticism about the divine nature is unwarranted. To know
what God is not, one must have some knowledge of what God is. The
claim that God is not a body, for example, rests on such affirmations
as that God is the prime mover and is purely actual.
So far we have explored how God can be (i) identical to his nature,
(ii) identical to his existence, and (iii) such that his
omni-attributes are identical to one another. But a very serious
problem remains, a problem that arises when we consider properties
shared by God and creatures. It is obvious that the divine perfections
cannot be shared with creatures: only God is perfectly powerful, wise,
good, and so on. But there must be some properties that God and
creatures share if God is not to be a wholly other than creatures and
out of all relation to them. These shared properties, however, pose a
threat to DDS. The problem in a nutshell is to reconcile the divine
transcendence, of which DDS is an expression, with the need for some
commensurability between God and creatures. The problem, in other
words, is to find a way of preserving transcendence while avoiding a
self-vitiating negative theology according to which nothing can be
positively affirmed of God, not even that he exists.
God is powerful, but so is Socrates. The use of ‘powerful’
in ‘God is powerful’ and ‘Socrates is
powerful’ is not equivocal. That God is perfectly powerful while
Socrates is imperfectly powerful does not alter the fact that both are
powerful. Whether a thing is perfectly powerful or imperfectly
powerful, it is powerful. There is a difference in degree of power,
but the difference in degree seems to presuppose (and thus entail) a
sameness in respect of being powerful. Now if God and Socrates are
both powerful, then God has a property with which he is not identical,
namely, the property of being powerful, and this contradicts DDS. For
if God is identical with the property of being powerful, then he
cannot share this property with Socrates. The argument, then, is
this:
From (1) together with the premise that God is perfectly powerful, it
follows that
But among creatures we also find agents of varying degrees of power,
so it is also true that
It follows from (2) and (3) that
If x and y share a property P, then
P is distinct from both x and y.
Therefore,
Graham Oppy (2003) suggests a way to defeat the foregoing argument.
Oppy (in effect) rejects the inference from (2) and (3) to (4). Given
the truth of ‘God is powerful’ and ‘Socrates is
powerful,’ it does not follow that there is a property expressed
by the predicate ‘powerful’ that is shared by God and
Socrates. On Oppy’s approach, both sentences are true, and the
predicate ‘powerful’ has the same sense in both sentences.
There is no equivocation and no analogy either. It is just that there
is no one property that is expressed by the predicate in its two
occurrences. If this right, then there is no warrant for (4) and the
above argument against DDS collapses.
Oppy is not denying that many predicates express properties; he is
denying that all do. Taking a page from David Armstrong (1978), he is
saying that predicates and their senses provide no sure guidance as to
what properties (Armstrongian immanent universals) the world contains.
It follows that the ontological structure of the truth-maker of a true
sentence cannot be read off from the syntactic structure of the
sentence of which it is the truth-maker. Therefore, the fact that our
two sentences (3) and (4) have the form a is F does not
warrant the conclusion that the respective truth-makers have the
structure: particular-exemplifying-same universal. Oppy writes:
The idea is essentially this. Suppose that something is an H
if and only if it is either an F or a G. One can
easily see that if a is H and b is
H, it does not follow that there is some one property that
they share. For it might be that a is H in virtue of
a’s exemplifying F-ness and b is H
in virtue of b’s exemplifying G-ness. Applied to
Socrates and the simple God: Socrates is powerful in virtue of
exemplifying P1 while God is powerful in virtue of
exemplifying P2. Thus there is no one property,
the property of being powerful, that both exemplify. So (4) above is
false, and the argument against DDS collapses. Since a full defense of
Oppy’s defense of DDS is beyond the scope of the present entry, we
shall focus on a second way of defusing the objection. 
The above argument against DDS requires the assumption that if
x is perfectly F, then x is F.
This is highly plausible but not quite obvious, since as Barry Miller
(1996, Ch. 5) argues, ‘perfect’ might be an
alienans adjective. An alienans adjective is one
that shifts, alters, alienates, the sense of the noun that it
modifies. Thus ‘decoy’ in ‘decoy duck’ is an
alienans adjective: from the fact that a thing is a decoy
duck one cannot infer that it is a duck in the way in which one can
infer from the fact that a thing is a male duck that it is a duck. So
if ‘perfectly’ in ‘perfectly powerful’ is an
alienans adjective, then God can be perfectly powerful
without being powerful, and the above objection to DDS collapses.
At first glance, this may appear to be a senseless suggestion. Power
is an attribute that admits of degrees. Perfect power is therefore
quite naturally viewed as the maximal degree of power. So viewed,
perfect power is generically identical with any submaximal degree of
power. According to Miller, however, there is an important distinction
between a limit simpliciter and a limit case. A limit simpliciter
differs merely in degree from that of which it is the limit
simpliciter, whereas a limit case differs absolutely from that of
which it is the limit case. Thus the limit simpliciter of an
F is an F, while the limit case of an F is
not an F. What Miller argues is that the divine perfections
are limit cases, not limits simpliciter, of such properties as power
and knowledge. As such, they have nothing generically in common with
the corresponding attributes in creatures.
To appreciate the limit simpliciter/limit case distinction, consider
the speed of moving bodies. It has an upper limit, the speed of light.
This is a limit simpliciter. But the lower limit, namely the speed 0
km/sec, is a limit case and not a limit simpliciter. Whereas the upper
limit simpliciter is a speed, the lower limit case is not a speed. A
particle moving at 0 km/sec is not moving. For a second example,
consider the series: 3-place predicable, 2-place predicable, 1-place
predicable. Since a predicable (e.g., “___ is wise”) must
have at least one place to be a predicable, a 1-place predicable is a
limit simpliciter of the ordered series of predicables.
Although talk of zero-place predicables comes naturally, as when we
speak of a proposition as a zero-place predicable, a zero-place
predicable is no more a predicable than negative growth is growth.
“Zero-place” is an alienans adjective like
“negative” in “negative growth.” So a
zero-place predicable is not a limit simpliciter of the series in
question, but a limit case of this series: it is not a member
of the series of which it is the limit case. It nevertheless stands in
some relation to the members of the series inasmuch as they and the
way they are ordered point to the limit case (Miller 1996, p.
8).
The idea, then, is that God’s power is not the maximum, or limit
simpliciter, of an ordered series of instances of power, but the limit
case of power. This implies that God’s power is not an
instance of power any more than a zero-place predicable is a
predicable. No doubt this will surprise the perfect-being theologians,
but, in mitigation, it can be said that God’s power, though not an
instance of power, is that to which the ordered series of
power-instances points, and is therefore something to which
the members of that series stand in a definite relation.
Miller’s approach allows us to reject the premise of the above
argument. The premise stated in effect that anything that is perfectly
powerful is powerful. But if Miller is right, and God’s power is not
the limit simpliciter of an ordered series of instances of power, and
thus itself an instance of power, but is instead a limit case
of power, then what is perfectly powerful need not be an instance of
power.
God is the absolute. An absolute cannot lack anything nor does it have
any need to develop itself: it is, eternally, all that it can be. This
implies that there is no act-potency distinction in God, no unrealized
powers or potentialities. In the classical phrase, God is actus
purus, pure act, wholly actual. James Dolezal puts it very well
when he writes, “The consideration of God as ipsum esse
subsistens and actus purus is crucial for any confession
of God’s absolute existence” (Dolezal, 214). 
But to uphold the divine absoluteness, it is also necessary that God
be libertarianly free in his production of creatures. He must be free
either to create or not to create. For suppose that the divine nature
is such that God must create.  Then God would depend on the created
world to be himself and to be fully actual. He would need what is
other than himself to be himself. This entanglement with the relative
would compromise the divine absoluteness. God would need the world as
much as the world needs God. Each would require the other to be what
it is. But then God would not be absolute (Dolezal, 210) Therefore, God
must be free to either create or not create
So God must be both simple and free to be absolute. But it is very
difficult to understand how a simple being could be free in the
unconditional ‘could have done otherwise’ sense. If God is
simple, then he is pure act, as was explained at the beginning of this
entry. It follows that God is devoid of unrealized powers,
potentialities, or possibilities. To act freely, however is to act in
such a way that one (unconditionally) could have done otherwise, which
implies unrealized possibilities of divine action. Now Dolezal’s
view is that it is not only difficult to reconcile simplicity and
(libertarian) freedom, but impossible for us, at least in our present
state. “Though we discover strong reasons for confessing both
simplicity and freedom in God, we cannot form an isomorphically
adequate notion of how this is the case” (210). In footnote 55
on the same page, Dolezal brings up wave-particle duality: light
behaves both like a particle and like a wave. We have good reason to
believe that it is both despite the difficulty or impossibility of
understanding how it could be both. On the basis of the quotation and
the footnote it seems fair to Dolezal to pin the label
‘mysterian’ on him, at least with respect to the
simplicity-freedom problem which is only one sub-problem within the
divine simplicity constellation of problems.  God is both simple and
free, and he must be both to be God; it is a mystery, however, how he
could be both.
If we have good reason to believe that p is true, and good
reason to believe that q is true, then we have good reason to
believe that p and q are logically consistent (with
each other) despite an absence of understanding as to how
they could be mutually consistent. What is actual is possible whether
or not one can render intelligible how it is possible. For example,
motion is actual, hence possible, despite one’s inability in the teeth
of Zenonian considerations to understand how it is possible. Many
similar examples could be given.
And so a mysterian move suggests itself: We are justified in
maintaining both that God is simple and that God is free despite the
fact that after protracted effort we cannot make logical sense of this
conjunction. If we have good arguments for both limbs of what appears
to be a logically contradictory dyad, it could be that the
contradiction is merely apparent. The fact that the conjunction
— God is simple and God is free — appears to us, and
perhaps even necessarily appears to us, to be or rather entail an
explicit logical contradiction is not a compelling reason to reject
the conjunction. It is a reason, perhaps even a good reason, but not a
rationally compelling one. For it may be that our cognitive
architecture saddles us with irremediable cognitive limitations that
make it impossible for us to understand how God could be both simple
and libertarianly free. The mysterian is not a dialetheist: the
mysterian does not claim that there are true contradictions. Like the
rest of us, the mysterian eschews them like the plague. The mysterian
point is rather that a proposition’s non-episodic and chronic
seeming to be a contradiction does not suffice for its rejection. For
it may well be that certain truths are inaccessible to us due to our
mental limitations and defects, and that among these truths are some
that appear to us only in the guise of contradictions, and must so
appear in this life. The religious mysterian can bolster the point by
referencing the Fall.  Sin, after all, may be expected to have noetic
consequences. Of course, Dolezal’s mysterian move cannot be
reasonably made unless the extant attempts to reconcile simplicity and
freedom are failures. That they are failures is not difficult to
believe. So mysterianism is up and running despite its own
problems. What might these be? 
First, if a (conjunctive) proposition’s seeming, after careful and
repeated scrutiny, to be or entail an explicit logical contradiction
is not sufficient, or at least good enough, evidence of its being a
contradiction, what would be? To put it another way, one’s inability to
explain how it could be true both that p and that q
does seem to be pretty good (non-demonstrative) evidence that
p and q are not both true. Now it was noted above
that the actual is possible whether or not one can explain how it is
possible.  Granted, but if one cannot explain the ‘how,’
doubt is cast on the actuality. The tables can be turned. How
adjudicate between these opposing lines of argument: A:
Because X is actual, X is possible, whether or not
anyone can explain how it is possible! B: Because no one can explain
how it is possible, it is not possible, and therefore not actual!
Second, if all extant attempts to reconcile simplicity and freedom
fail, it does not follow that there isn’t a solution right over the
horizon. How can a mysterian rule out the possibility of a future
solution? The mysterian seems committed to saying that it is
impossible (at least in this life) that there be a solution. How can
he be sure of this?
Third, if a proposition appears under careful scrutiny to be or entail
a contradiction, then is there even a proposition before the mind? If
you require for x’s salvation that x believe that
God is one and God is three, what exactly are you demanding
that x believe? Before x can affirm a proposition as
true x must understand it, but how can x affirm as true
a proposition that appears necessarily false? Such a
‘proposition’ is arguably not a proposition at
all. God is simple but free appears to be in like case. As a
matter of pure logic, there are of course necessarily false
propositions: take the members of a contradictory pair of propositions
and conjoin them, e.g.,
snow is white & snow is not white. This necessarily false
proposition is arguably not a possible object of belief because of our
charitable tendency to re-interpret blatant contradictions in some
innocuous way. When our hermeneutical charity is thwarted, however, we
suspend belief, not in a proposition, but in a putative
proposition’s being a proposition, or in a verbal
formula’s expressing a proposition.
Like Dolezal, Eleonore Stump thinks of God as self-subsistent Being
(esse). If God is absolutely simple, and not just simple in
the uncontroversial sense of lacking material parts, then God must be
self-subsistent Being. God is at once both Being and something that
is. He has to be both. If he were Being (esse) but not a
being (id quod est), he could not enter into causal
relations. He could not do anything such as create the world,
intervene in its operations, or interact with human persons. Such a
God would be “religiously pernicious” (Stump 2016, 199).
Indeed, if God were Being but not a being, then one could not sensibly
maintain that God exists. For if Being is other than every being, then
Being is not. (It is instructive to note that Martin Heidegger, the
famous critic of onto-theology, who holds to the “ontological
difference” of Being (Sein) from every being
(Seiendes) ends up assimilating Being to Nothing
(Nichts).) On the other hand, if God were a being among
beings who merely has Being but is not (identically) Being, then he
would not be absolutely transcendent, worthy of worship, or
ineffable. Such a God would be “comfortingly familiar” but
“discomfitingly anthropomorphic” (Miller 1996, 3). It is
not clear that DDS is susceptible of a satisfactory articulation
acceptable to most theists. There is no reason to be sanguine. But if
such could be achieved then we would have a via media between
the Scylla of negative theology according to which nothing can be
truly said or known about God and the Charybdis of an anthropomorphic
theology according to which “… God’s properties are
merely human ones, albeit extended to the maximum degree
possible” (Miller, 1996, 3).
The problem, of course, is to explain how God can be both
Being esseand something that is ens. This is
unintelligible to the discursive intellect.  Either Being is other
than beings or it is not. If Being is other than beings, then Being
cannot itself be. That would imply that God, who must be Being itself
to be absolute, cannot be. If, on the other hand, Being just is beings
taken collectively, then God could only be a being among beings and
not the absolute reality. To the discursive intellect the notion of
self-subsistent Being is contradictory. For the idea here is that
Being itself is a being, a very special being no doubt, but
nonetheless a being, something that is. One response to the
contradiction is simply to deny divine simplicity. That is a
reasonable response, no doubt. But might it not also be reasonable to
admit that there are things that human reason cannot understand, and
that one of these things is the divine nature? “Human reason can
see that human reason cannot comprehend the quid est of
God.” (Stump 2016, 205)
On one reading of Stump, she, like Dolezal, makes a mysterian move, and she,
like Dolezal (2011, 210, fn 55), invokes wave-particle duality. We
cannot understand how light can be both a wave phenomenon and also
particulate in nature, and yet it is both: 
If the defender of DDS is driven to mysterianism, many will consider
this a desperate jump from the frying pan into the fire. Dolezal, for
example, holds that God must be both simple and libertarianly free to
be absolute despite the apparent contradiction. How God can be both
simple and free must remain a mystery. William Hasker balks:
“This won’t do, of course” (2016, 19). His “of
course” is of course a bit of bluster, but one feels his
pain. “The argument Dolezal has given quite straightforwardly
entails that the doctrine of divine simplicity is false
…” (2016, 19). This is not an unreasonable thing to say,
but is it compelling? Does it force a rational person to abandon DDS?
Is it so compelling that DDS can be dismissed as a mistake, a
correctable error in reasoning that one falls into due, perhaps, to
inattention to certain obvious truths? Not quite.
Hasker takes the apparent contradiction to be real. But can he exclude
the possibility that the contradiction is merely apparent? His view
comports well with the notion that God is a being among beings. But
for those who hold that the divine transcendence requires that God
transcend beings in his mode of existence, his mode of
property-possession, his mode of necessity, and his mode of
uniqueness, it may seem more likely that the apparent contradictions
that arise when we think about God reflect our structural inability to
think of him as anything other than a very special being among
beings.
For Stump, God is esse and God is also id quod est.
These claims, though apparently contradictory, must both be affirmed.
The apparent contradiction arises because of a “deficiency in
our mode of speaking” (Stump 2016, 207). She presumably means
that this deficiency is in this life irremediable and ineluctable. In
reality, however, there is no contradiction; the laws of logic apply
to God, “and not just anything can be correctly affirmed of
God” (2016, 207).
Hasker is unimpressed:
Stump could agree with Hasker that she does not present us with
“a coherent view of God’s nature,” but then that is
precisely what her position implies cannot be had. Our mode of
speaking about God is necessarily defective and inaccurate. If we
could speak accurately, then …
The issue that divides Hasker and Stump and the parties they represent
is perhaps impossible to resolve. Hasker demands a “coherent
view of God’s nature,” one that satisfies and can be
seen to satisfy the exigencies of the discursive
intellect. Hasker demands that God fit within the discursive
framework, which implies that he have properties the way creatures do,
exist the way creatures do, and so on. Stump could reasonably claim
that Hasker is making an inappropriate demand, one that does not
respect the divine transcendence.
Proponents of DDS affirm such sentences as ‘God is his
omniscience’ and‘God is his omnipotence.’ If the
singular terms ‘his omniscience’ and ‘his
omnipotence’ in such sentences are taken to refer to properties,
then such sentences assert the identity of God and a property, an
exemplifiable entity. This is unacceptable for the reasons rehearsed
in section 2 above. Briefly, God is an individual and not a property.
If, however, the singular terms in question could be taken to refer to
individuals, then this particular objection to the coherence of DDS
would collapse. Clearly, if ‘God’ and ‘his
omniscience’ both refer to an individual, God, then the
coherence of ‘God is his omniscience’ will be beyond
question.
Enter the truthmaker defense. The truthmaker defense hinges on a
theory of predication that Bergmann and Brower (2006) put as
follows:
P* is to be understood by contrast to a theory of predication
according to which every true predication of the form
‘a is F’ is to be explained in terms of
an individual’s exemplifying of a property. Now consider the essential
predication, ‘God is omniscient.’ Given that a truthmaker
of a truth t is an entity whose existence broadly logically
necessitates the truth of t, God himself is plausibly viewed as
the truthmaker of ‘God is omniscient’ and like essential
predications. For in every possible world in which God exists, these
essential predications (or the propositions they express) are true. In
the case of essential as opposed to accidental predications,
truthmakers need not be taken to be concrete states of affairs, and so
need not be taken as involving exemplifiable entities. Socrates
himself is not plausibly taken to be the truthmaker of the accidental
‘Socrates is wise’ (or the proposition it expresses)
because there are possible worlds in which Socrates exists but the
predication is not true; Socrates is, however, plausibly taken to be
the truthmaker of the essential ‘Socrates is human.’
Now ‘God’s omniscience’ and ‘Socrates’
humanity’ are abstract nominalizations of ‘God is
omniscient’ and ‘Socrates is human,’ respectively.
So given that God and Socrates are the truthmakers of the respective
essential predications, the nominalizations can be taken to refer, not
to properties, but to these very same truthmakers. Accordingly, to say
that God is identical to his omniscience is just to say that God is
identical to the truthmaker of ‘God is omniscient.’ And
that amounts to saying that God is identical to God. In this way one
avoids the absurdity of saying that God is identical to a property.
What God is identical to is not the property of omniscience but the
referent of ‘God’s omniscience,’ which turns out to be God
himself. And similarly for the rest of God’s intrinsic and essential
attributes.
Suppose a creaturely agent freely performs an action A. He
files his tax return, say, by the April 15th deadline. Suppose that
the freedom involved is not the compatibilist “freedom of the
turnspit” (to borrow Kant’s phrase) but the robust
freedom that implies both that the agent is the unsourced source of
the action and that the agent could have done otherwise. The
performance of A makes true a number of contingent
propositions, all of them known by God in his omniscience. Now if
subject S knows that proposition p, and p is
contingent, then it would seem that S’s knowing that p
is or involves an accidental (as opposed to essential)
intrinsic state of S. If God is omniscient, then he
knows every (non-indexical) truth, including every contingent truth.
It seems to follow that God has at least as many accidental intrinsic
states as there are contingent truths. But this contradicts DDS
according to which there is nothing intrinsic to God that is distinct
from God. 
Consider the mental state God is in when he knows that Tom freely
files his tax return on April 14th, 2014. This divine mental state is
an intrinsic state God is in contingently. If God were identical to
this state, then he could not be a se. For if God were
identical to the state, then God would be dependent on something
– Tom’s libertarianly free action – that is external to
God and beyond his control. Now anything that compromises the divine
aseity will compromise the divine simplicity, the latter being an
entailment of the former. So it seems that an omniscient God cannot be
simple if there are free creaturely agents and God knows what they do
and leave undone. There is also the problem that if the divine mental
state in question were identical to God, then the truth God knows when
he knows that Tom files on April 14th would be necessarily
true.
The problem is expressible as an aporetic pentad:
Each limb of the above pentad has a strong, though not irresistible,
claim on a classical theist’s acceptance. As for (1), if God is
L-free, as he must be on classical theism, then it is
reasonable to maintain that every free agent is L-free. For if
‘could have done otherwise’ is an essential ingredient in
the analysis of ‘Agent A freely performs action X,’
then it is highly plausible to maintain that this is so whether the
agent is God or Socrates. Otherwise, ‘free’ will means
something different in the two cases. Furthermore, if man is made in
the image and likeness of God, then it is surely arguable if not
obvious that part of what this means is that man is a spiritual being
who is libertarianly free just as God is. If a man is a deterministic
system, then one wonders in what sense man is in the image of God.
As for (2), some reasons were given earlier for thinking that a theism
that understands itself must uphold God’s ontological simplicity
inasmuch as it is implied by the divine aseity. An example of (3) is
Oswald’s shooting of Kennedy. The act was freely performed by Oswald,
and the proposition that records it is a contingent truth known by God
in his omniscience.
The plausibility of (4) may be appreciated as follows. Whatever else
knowledge is, it is plausibly regarded as a species of true belief. A
belief is an intrinsic state of a subject. Moreover, to unpack the
second clause of (3), beliefs are individuated by their contents:
beliefs or believings with different contents are different beliefs.
It cannot be that one and the same act of believing has different
contents at different times or in different possible worlds.
(5), if not obvious on its own, could be taken as an entailment of
(2). If in God essence and existence are one, then God cannot not
exist.
But although each limb of the pentad is plausibly maintained and is
typically maintained by theists who uphold DDS, they cannot all be
true. Any four limbs, taken together, entail the negation of the
remaining one.
To illustrate, let us consider how the limbs of the pentad, excepting
(2), entail the negation of (2). Being omniscient, God knows that
Oswald freely chose to kill Kennedy. But Oswald’s L-freedom
precludes us from saying that God’s knowledge of this contingent fact
depends solely on the divine will. For it also depends on Oswald’s
L-free authorship of his evil deed, an authorship that God
cannot prevent or override once he has created L-free agents. But this
is inconsistent with the divine aseity. For to say that God is a
se is to say that God is not dependent on anything distinct from
himself for his existence or intrinsic properties or states. But, by
(4), God is in the state of knowing that Oswald freely chose to kill
Kennedy, and his being in this state depends on something outside of
God’s control, namely, Oswald’s L-free choice. In this way the
divine aseity is compromised, and with it the divine simplicity.
It seems, then, that our aporetic pentad is an inconsistent pentad.
The defender of DDS cannot deny either the divine simplicity or the
divine necessity, which is an entailment of simplicity. But an
upholder of the divine simplicity has the option of denying (1) and
maintaining that, while God is L-free, creaturely agents are
free only in a compatibilist sense (‘C-free’). If
creaturely agents are C-free, but not L-free, then
Oswald could not have done otherwise, and it is possible for the
upholder of divine simplicity to say that that Oswald’s C-free
choice is no more a threat to the divine aseity than the fact that God
knows the contingent truth that creaturely agents exist. The latter is
not a threat to the divine aseity because the existence of creaturely
agents derives from God in a way that Oswald’s L-free choice
does not derive from God.
A second and perhaps better response would be to reject (4) in one of
the ways canvassed by W. M. Grant (2012). Here are two ways that
appear promising. On what Grant calls the Belief Model, God’s
knowledge is a species of true belief, but God’s beliefs are not
intrinsic states of God. They are not mental acts or episodes. Beliefs
are relational. To have a belief is to be related to a proposition,
where propositions are not contents of belief states, but abstract
entities that exist independently of the subjects who believe them.
For God to believe that Oswald killed Kennedy is for God to stand in a
relation to a proposition without it being the case that there is
anything intrinsic to God that grounds his standing in the belief
relation to the Oswald proposition as opposed to any other
proposition. Believing, at least in the case of God, is an external
relation, not an internal relation grounded in an intrinsic feature of
the believer. Various objections can be brought against this Belief
Model of divine cognition, but if they can be turned aside, then (4)
falls and the pentad is solved.
A second way to reject (4) is by adopting what Grant calls an
Immediate Cognition Model of divine knowing. Accordingly, God’s
knowledge is not mediated by propositions or anything else, but is
directly of contingent realities. God’s knowledge of Socrates has as
an essential constituent Socrates himself, warts and all. On this
externalist model, as on the Belief Model, there nothing internal to
God and intrinsic to him in virtue of which he possesses contingent
knowledge, and thus nothing contingent in him to compromise his
simplicity.
One ought to ask, however, whether either model preserves the divine
aseity which is a main motive for the divine simplicity (Brower 2009).
If the simple God’s knowing of Socrates includes the man himself in
his bodily reality, this would seem to make God dependent on something
other than himself. Brower thinks the problem can be defused by
observing that God is the cause of the contingent entities on which
his contingent knowledge depends. Grant (2012, 267), however, thinks
that neither externalist model poses a problem for aseity whether or
not God causes the contingent objects he knows. If God exists from
himself, then he is a se. But the existence of a thing is
intrinsic to it, not relational. So it suffices for the divine aseity
that God not depend on anything else for what he is intrinsically.
That God’s knowing of Socrates depends on Socrates is not to the
point: this knowing is purely relational and not intrinsic to God.