Thomas Aquinas is credited with introducing the principle of double
effect in his discussion of the permissibility of self-defense in the
Summa Theologica (II-II, Qu. 64, Art.7). Killing one’s
assailant is justified, he argues, provided one does not intend to
kill him. In contrast, Augustine had earlier maintained that killing
in self-defense was not permissible, arguing that “private
self-defense can only proceed from some degree of inordinate
self-love.” Aquinas observes that “Nothing hinders one act
from having two effects, only one of which is intended, while the
other is beside the intention. … Accordingly, the act of
self-defense may have two effects: one, the saving of one’s
life; the other, the slaying of the aggressor.” As
Aquinas’s discussion continues, a justification is provided that
rests on characterizing the defensive action as a means to a goal that
is justified: “Therefore, this act, since one’s intention
is to save one’s own life, is not unlawful, seeing that it is
natural to everything to keep itself in being as far as
possible.” However, Aquinas observes, the permissibility of
self-defense is not unconditional: “And yet, though proceeding
from a good intention, an act may be rendered unlawful if it be out of
proportion to the end. Wherefore, if a man in self-defense uses more
than necessary violence, it will be unlawful, whereas, if he repel
force with moderation, his defense will be lawful.”
The passage can be interpreted as formulating a prohibition on
apportioning one’s efforts with killing as the goal guiding
one’s actions, which would lead one to act with greater
viciousness than pursuing the goal of self-defense would require. 
Later versions of the double effect principle all emphasize the
distinction between causing a morally grave harm as a side effect of
pursuing a good end and causing a morally grave harm as a means of
pursuing a good end. We can summarize this by noting that for certain
categories of morally grave actions, for example, causing the death of
a human being, the principle of double effect combines a special
permission for incidentally causing death for the sake of a good end
(when it occurs as a side effect of one’s pursuit of that end)
with a general prohibition on instrumentally causing death for the
sake of a good end (when it occurs as part of one’s means to
pursue that end). The prohibition is absolute in traditional Catholic
applications of the principle. Two traditional formulations appear
below.
The New Catholic Encyclopedia provides four conditions for
the application of the principle of double effect:
The conditions provided by Joseph Mangan include the explicit
requirement that the bad effect not be intended:
A person may licitly perform an action that he foresees will produce a
good effect and a bad effect provided that four conditions are
verified at one and the same time:
In both of these accounts, the fourth condition, the proportionality
condition is usually understood to involve determining if the extent
of the harm is adequately offset by the magnitude of the proposed
benefit. 
It is reasonable to assume that agents who regret causing harm will be
disposed to avoid causing the harm or to minimize how much of it they
cause. This assumption could be made explicit as an additional
condition on permissibly causing unintended harm:
Michael Walzer (1977) has convincingly argued that agents who cause
harm as a foreseen side effect of promoting a good end must be willing
to accept additional risk or to forego some benefit in order to
minimize how much harm they cause. Whether this kind of condition is
satisfied may depend on the agent’s current circumstances and
the options that exist. 
Double effect might also be part of a secular and non-absolutist view
according to which a justification adequate for causing a certain harm
as a side effect might not be adequate for causing that harm as a
means to the same good end under the same circumstances. Warren Quinn
provides such an account while also recasting double effect as a
distinction between direct and indirect agency. On his view, double
effect “distinguishes between agency in which harm comes to some
victims, at least in part, from the agent’s deliberately
involving them in something in order to further his purpose precisely
by way of their being so involved (agency in which they figure as
intentional objects), and harmful agency in which either nothing is in
that way intended for the victims or what is so intended does not
contribute to their harm” (1989, p. 343). Quinn explains that
“direct agency requires neither that harm itself be useful nor
that what is useful be causally connected in some especially close way
with the harm it helps bring about” (1989, p. 344). He remarks
that “some cases of harming that the doctrine intuitively speaks
against are arguably not cases of intentional harming, precisely
because neither the harm itself (nor anything itself causally very
close to it) is intended” (1991, p. 511). On this view, the
distinction between direct and indirect harmful agency is what
underlies the moral significance of the distinction between intended
and merely foreseen harms, but it need not align perfectly with
it.
Many morally reflective people have been persuaded that something
along the lines of double effect must be correct. No doubt this is
because at least some of the examples cited as illustrations of DE
have considerable intuitive appeal:
Does the principle of double effect play the important explanatory
role that has been claimed for it? To consider this question, one must
be careful to clarify just what the principle is supposed to explain.
Three misinterpretations of the principle’s force or range of
application are common.
First, it is a misinterpretation to claim that the principle of double
effect shows that agents may permissibly bring about harmful effects
provided that they are merely foreseen side effects of promoting a
good end. Applications of double effect always presuppose that some
kind of proportionality condition has been satisfied. Traditional
formulations of the proportionality condition require that the value
of promoting the good end outweigh the disvalue of the harmful side
effect.
For example, a physician’s justification for administering drugs
to relieve a patient’s pain while foreseeing the hastening of
death as a side effect does not depend only on the fact that the
physician does not intend to hasten death. After all, physicians are
not permitted to relieve the pain of kidney stones or childbirth with
potentially lethal doses of opiates simply because they foresee but do
not intend the causing of death as a side effect! A variety of
substantive medical and ethical judgments provide the justificatory
context: the patient is terminally ill, there is an urgent need to
relieve pain and suffering, death is imminent, and the patient or the
patient’s proxy consents. Note that this last constraint, the
consent of the patient or the patient’s proxy, is not naturally
classified as a concern with proportionality, understood as the
weighing of harms and benefits. 
We have added a fifth condition on causing unintended harm: that the
agent seek to minimize the harm involved. This ensures that Double
Effect is not misunderstood as principle issuing a blanket permission
on causing any unintended harm that yields a benefit. Whether this
fifth condition is satisfied will depend on the agent’s
circumstances and the options that exist. For example, as techniques
for managing pain, for titrating the doses of pain-relieving
medication, and for delivering analgesic medication have been refined,
what might in the past have been an adequate justification for
hastening death in the course of pain relief would now fail because
current techniques provide the better alternative of managing pain
without the risk of hastening death. (See section 6 for a full
discussion of this application of double effect.)
A second misinterpretation is fostered by applications of double
effect that contrast the permissibility of causing a harm as a merely
foreseen side effect of pursuing a good end with the impermissibility
of aiming at the same kind of harm as one’s end. Since it is
widely accepted that it is wrong to aim to produce harm to someone as
an end, to rule this out is not part of double effect’s
distinctive content. The principle presupposes that agents do not aim
to cause morally grave harms as an end and seeks to guide decisions
about causing harm while pursuing a morally good end. For example,
double effect contrasts those who would (allegedly permissibly)
provide medication to terminally ill patients in order to alleviate
suffering with the side effect of hastening death with those who would
(allegedly impermissibly) provide medication to terminally ill
patients in order to hasten death in order to alleviate suffering. In
the allegedly impermissible case, the physician’s ultimate end
is a good one — to alleviate suffering — not to cause
death. 
The principle of double effect is directed at well-intentioned agents
who ask whether they may cause a serious harm in order to bring about
a good end of overriding moral importance when it is impossible to
bring about the good end without the harm. A third common
misinterpretation of double effect is to assume that the principle
assures agents that they may do this provided that their ultimate aim
is a good one that is ordinarily worth pursuing, the proportionality
condition is satisfied and the harm is not only regretted but
minimized. That is not sufficient: it must also be true that causing
the harm is not so implicated as part of an agent’s means to
this good end that it must count as something that is instrumentally
intended to bring about the good end. Some discussions of double
effect wrongly assume that it permits acts that cause certain kinds of
harm because those harms were not the agent’s ultimate aim or
were regretted rather than welcomed. The principle of double effect is
much more specific than that. Harms that were produced regretfully and
only for the sake of producing a good end may be prohibited by double
effect because they were brought about as part of the agent’s
means to realizing the good end. 
Those who defend the principle of double effect often assume that
their opponents deny that an agent’s intentions, motives, and
attitudes are important factors in determining the permissibility of a
course of action. If the permissibility of an action depended only on
the consequences of the action, or only on the foreseen or foreseeable
consequences of the action, then the distinction that grounds the
principle of double effect would not have the moral significance
claimed for it (see the related entry on
 consequentialism).
 Some opponents of the principle of double effect do indeed deny that
the distinction between intended and merely foreseen consequences has
any moral significance.
Nevertheless, many criticisms of the principle of double effect do not
proceed from consequentialist assumptions or skepticism about the
distinction between intended and merely foreseen consequences. Instead
they ask whether the principle adequately codifies the moral
intuitions at play in the cases that have been taken to be
illustrations of it. One important line of criticism has focused on
the difficulty of distinguishing between grave harms that are
regretfully intended as part of the agent’s means and grave
harms that are regretfully foreseen as side effects of the
agent’s means. Since double effect implies that the latter may
be permissible even when the former are not, those who wish to apply
double effect must provide principled grounds for drawing this
distinction. The application of Double Effect to explain the
permissibility of performing a hysterectomy on a pregnant woman and
the impermissibility of performing an abortion to save a woman’s
life is often singled out for criticism on this score. Lawrence Masek
(2010) offers a thoughtful defense of the principle of double effect
that proposes to construe what is intended by an agent as narrowly or
strictly as possible while also distinguishing between motivating side
effects and non-motivating side effects. 
In contrast, Warren Quinn’s proposal to substitute the concept
of direct agency for the concept of intending to cause harm to someone
as a means (see Section 1) would effectively broaden the category of
results that count as cases of causing intended harm. If the soldier
who throws himself on the grenade in order to shield his fellow
soldiers from the force of an explosion acts permissibly, and if the
permissibility of his action is explained by Double Effect, then he
must not intend to sacrifice his own life in order to save the others,
he must merely foresee that his life will end as a side effect of his
action. But many have argued that this is an implausible description
of the soldier’s action and that his action is permissible even
if he does intend to let himself be blown up by the grenade as a means
of protecting the others from the explosion. Shelly Kagan (1999)
points out that if someone else were to shove the soldier on the
grenade we would certainly say that that the harm to the soldier was
intended by the person who did the shoving. Equally, Kagan argues, we
should say that it is intended in this case (p. 145). The same kind of
argument can be made for cases of killing in self-defense when
overwhelming and lethal force is used. If these arguments are correct,
then they cast doubt on the claim that Double Effect explains the
permissibility of these actions. Double Effect is silent about cases
in which it is permissible to cause a death as a means to a good
end.
Warren Quinn has argued that double effect does not rest on the
distinction between intended and merely foreseen harm, but instead is
best formulated using a distinction between direct and indirect agency
(see the
 Formulations
 section). Quinn’s view would imply that typical cases of
self-defense and self-sacrifice would count as cases of direct agency.
One clearly intends to involve the aggressor or oneself in something
that furthers one’s purpose precisely by way of his being so
involved. Therefore, Quinn’s account of the moral significance
of the distinction between direct and indirect agency could not be
invoked to explain why it might be permissible to kill in self-defense
or to sacrifice one’s own life to save the lives of others. But
perhaps this is as it should be: double effect might be easier to
explain and justify if the range of cases to which it applies is
limited in this way. If Quinn’s view is correct, and if the
distinction between direct and indirect agency can be drawn clearly,
then perhaps the objections outlined above can be answered.
If we are more inclined to call a harmful result a merely foreseen
side effect when we believe that it is permissibly brought about, and
if we are more inclined to describe a harmful result something that
was intended as part of the agent’s means when we believe that
it is impermissibly brought about, then there will be an association
between permissible harms that are classified as side effects and
impermissibly caused harms that are classified as results brought
about intentionally, as part of the agent’s means, but this
association cannot be explained by the principle of double effect.
Instead, independently grounded moral considerations have influenced
how we draw the distinction between means and side effects in the
first place. Empirical research by Joshua Knobe (2003, 2006) has
demonstrated that the ways in which we distinguish between results
that are intended or brought about intentionally and those that are
mere side effects may be influenced by normative judgments in such a
way as to bias our descriptions. This was first pointed out by Gilbert
Harman (1976), but is now often referred to as “The Knobe
Effect” or “The Side Effect Effect”. Richard Holton
(2010) has observed that norm violation merely involves knowingly
violating a norm, while complying with a norm involves an intention to
comply with it, and that this might explain the asymmetry Knobe has
documented in judgments about whether bad and good results are brought
about intentionally. This discussion raises questions about the
suitability of the distinction highlighted by the principle of double
effect for serving as an evaluatively neutral basis for moral
judgments.
Does the principle of double effect explain the permissibility of
switching a runaway trolley away from a track with five people on it
and onto a track containing only one person? This is an alleged
application of Double Effect in which it seems clear to many people
that if one were to switch the trolley, the harm to the one person
would not be intended as part of one’s means of diverting the
trolley from the five. Of course, if the harm to the one is rightly
described as a merely foreseen side effect of switching the trolley,
then this alone does not show that it is permissible to cause it.
However, if the proportionality condition is satisfied, and if the
agent attempts to minimize the harm or to identify alternative means
of saving the five and fails, then these factors together might seem
to imply that the principle of double effect can be invoked to explain
the permissibility of switching the trolley. Moreover, Double Effect
seems to explain the impermissibility of pushing someone onto the
track in front of the speeding trolley in order to stop it and protect
the five on the track ahead. In both scenarios, a person would be
killed as part of saving the five; the difference in permissibility
seems to depend on whether the death of that person is a means or a
side effect of saving them.
Discussions of the Trolley Problem and the relevance of the principle
of double effect to explaining our intuitions about it can be divided
into three groups. First, there are consequentialists who view the
widespread reluctance people feel to push someone in the path of the
trolley in order to stop it and save the five as irrational (Joshua
Greene, 2013). Second, there are those who take the paired intuitions
in the Trolley Problem as proof of the fundamental role of Double
Effect as an implicit principle guiding moral judgment (Philippa Foot,
1985), John Mikhail, 2011). Third, some argue that it would be wrong
for a bystander to switch the trolley (Judith Jarvis Thomson, 2008)
and suggest that people’s willingness to view it as permissible
is a result of inadequate reflection or insufficient emotional
engagement. This group would include those who uphold the principle of
double effect but deny that it provides a permission to swerve the
trolley (Elizabeth Anscombe, 1982) and those who reject the principle
of double effect while conceding that the standard intuitive judgments
about the Trolley Problem comport with the principle as it ordinarily
interpreted.
The contrast between the Terror Bomber and the Strategic Bomber is
often viewed as the least controversial pair of examples illustrating
the distinction between intention and foresight that underlies the
principle of double effect. The judgment that the Terror Bomber acts
impermissibly and the Strategic Bomber acts permissibly is widely
affirmed. Terror bombing was engaged in by both sides in World War II
(see Douglas Lackey (1989) for a thoughtful historical account of the
decision process engaged in by Allied decision-makers and the
controversy it generated at the time). The view that terror bombing is
always impermissible would condemn the kind of incendiary bombing
carried out by Allied forces in Germany and Japan. 
The common judgment that strategic bombing is permissible provided
that it is proportionate also deserves more scrutiny than it usually
receives when it is taken to be justified by the principle of double
effect. How much of an obligation do military strategists have to
avoid harm to civilian populations? This is a substantive issue about
the conventions that constrain military decision-making and the
principles that underlie these conventions. Many relevant
considerations depend on judgments that are far outside the ambit of
Double Effect. For example, the Rules of Customary International
Humanitarian Law displayed on the website of the International
Committee of the Red Cross prohibit attacks targeting civilians. They
also include protections denied to minimize harm to civilians: 
Rule 15. Precautions in Attack In the conduct of military operations,
constant care must be taken to spare the civilian population,
civilians and civilian objects. All feasible precautions must be taken
to avoid, and in any event to minimize, incidental loss of civilian
life, injury to civilians and damage to civilian objects.
Rule 20. Advance Warning Each party to the conflict must give
effective advance warning of attacks which may affect the civilian
population, unless circumstances do not permit.
Rule 24. Removal of Civilians and Civilian Objects from the Vicinity
of Military Objectives Each party to the conflict must, to the extent
feasible, remove civilian persons and objects under its control from
the vicinity of military objectives.
These considerations suggest that the principle of double effect does
not contain, even when the principle of proportionality is included as
part of its content, a sufficient condition of permissibility for
bombardment that affects civilian populations. The example concerning
strategic bombing so frequently invoked by philosophers never mentions
a duty to warn or remove civilians.
It is not at all clear that all of the examples that double effect has
been invoked to justify can be explained by a single principle. There
may in fact be a variety of considerations that bear on the
permissibility of causing unintended harm.
Proponents of the principle of double effect have always acknowledged
that a proportionality condition must be satisfied when double effect
is applied, but this condition typically requires only that the good
effect outweigh the foreseen bad effect or that there be sufficient
reason for causing the bad effect. Some critics of the principle of
double effect have maintained that when double effect has been
invoked, substantive independent justifications for causing the kind
of harm in question are implicitly relied upon, and are in fact, doing
all of the justificatory work. These independent considerations are
not derived from the distinction between intended and merely foreseen
consequences and do not depend on it (Davis (1984), McIntyre (2001)).
If this criticism is correct, then perhaps the cases that have
traditionally been cited as applications of the principle of double
effect are united only by the fact that each is an exception to the
general prohibition on causing the death of a human being.
The historical origins of the principle of double effect as a tenet of
Catholic casuistry might provide a similar explanation for the unity
of its applications. If one were to assume that it is absolutely
prohibited to cause the death of a human being, then it would not be
permissible to kill an aggressor in self-defense, to sacrifice
one’s life to protect others, to hasten death as a side effect
of administering sedation for intractable pain, or to endanger
non-combatants in warfare. If one were to assume instead that what is
absolutely prohibited is to cause the death of a human being
intentionally, then these cases can be viewed as cases of
non-intentional killing. Controversy about the principle of double
effect concerns whether a unified justification for these cases of
non-intentional killing can be provided and if so, whether that
justification depends on the distinction between intended and merely
foreseen consequences.
In an essay that develops Warren Quinn’s view that Double Effect
is best understood as resting on a distinction between direct and
indirect agency, Dana Nelkin and Samuel Rickless (2014) formulate the
principle in this way: “In cases in which harm must come to some
in order to achieve a good (and is the least costly of possible harms
necessary), the agent foresees the harm, and all other things are
equal, a stronger case is needed to justify harmful direct agency than
to justify equally harmful indirect agency” (2014). In harmful
indirect agency, harm comes to some victims in order to achieve a
good, but “nothing in that way is intended for the victims, or
what is so intended does not contribute to their harm.” In
harmful direct agency “harm comes to some victims, at least in
part, from the agent’s deliberately involving them in something
in order to further his purpose precisely by way of their being so
involved” (Nelkin and Rickless (2014), quoting Quinn
(1989)).
This way of characterizing harmful direct agency and harmful indirect
agency could be thought of as two possible dimensions of agency in
which harm is not intended, rather than as a contrast within a single
dimension of agency. This view would be supported if it turns out that
some complex plans of action count as both harmful direct agency and
harmful indirect agency. For example, consider the deliberations of
public health officials who propose to put in place a vaccination
program in their region in order to protect citizens from a rapidly
spreading, highly contagious, and invariably lethal disease. They
foresee that if the program is carried out, about one in ten thousand
vaccine recipients will experience adverse effects from the vaccine
that will prove fatal, and the officials have no way to identify in
advance which vaccine recipients will be susceptible to these adverse
effects in order to screen them and exclude them from receiving the
vaccine. It might seem that Double Effect is designed to explain why
they may proceed with the vaccination program despite these
foreseeable, regretted, and unpreventable unintended side effects of
promoting a good end: this might seem to be a case of indirect agency.
And yet, if the officials’ desire to bring about herd immunity
leads them to advocate a widespread program with incentives for
participation or even mandatory participation, then it will be true
that harm comes to some victims that they have deliberately involved.
This would make their actions in promoting the program a case of
direct agency. Issues about consent may be relevant here as well: if
the vaccine recipients willingly assume the risk of experiencing
adverse effects, then a full description of the program must consider
their own agency in assessing the information they receive. Examples
like these suggest that the cases Double Effect has been taken to
apply to may involve many different dimensions of agency rather than a
sharp contrast that concerns a single dimension of agency.
Critics of the principle of double effect claim that the pattern of
justification used in these cases has some shared conditions: the
agent acts in order to promote a good end, shows adequate respect for
the value of human life in so acting, and has attempted to avoid or
minimize the harm in question. However, they maintain that the
justification for causing the harm in question depends on further
substantive considerations that are not derived from the contrast
between intention and foresight or the contrast between direct and
indirect agency. 
Some have developed this kind of criticism by arguing that the appeal
of the principle of double effect is, fundamentally, illusory: an
agent’s intentions are not relevant to the permissibility of an
action in the way that the proponents of the principle of double
effect would claim, though an agent’s intentions are relevant to
moral assessments of the way in which the agent deliberated (see David
McCarthy (2002) and T.M. Scanlon (2008). That an agent intended to
bring about a certain harm does not explain why the action was
impermissible, but it can explain what is morally faulty about the
agent’s reasoning in pursuing that line of action.
The principle of double effect is often mentioned in discussions of
what is known as palliative care, medical care for patients with
terminal illness in need of pain relief. Three assumptions often
operate in the background of these discussions:
When these assumptions are made, double effect seems to provide at
least part of a justification for administering drugs to relieve pain.
Yet the first assumption is false. Physicians and researchers have
insisted repeatedly that it is a myth that opioids administered for
pain relief can be expected to hasten death (Sykes and Thorns, 2003
provide a review of a large number of studies supporting this claim).
There is no research that substantiates the claim that opioid drugs
administered appropriately and carefully titrated are likely to
depress respiration. In a survey of research bearing on this issue,
Susan Anderson Fohr (1998) concludes: “It is important to
emphasize that there is no debate among specialists in palliative care
and pain control on this issue. There is a broad consensus that when
used appropriately, respiratory depression from opioid analgesics is a
rarely occurring side effect. The belief that palliative care hastens
death is counter to the experience of physicians with the most
experience in this area.” The mistaken belief that pain relief
will have the side effect of hastening death may have the unfortunate
effect of leading physicians, patients, and the patients’
families to under-treat pain because they are apprehensive about
causing this alleged side effect.
The appropriate conclusion, then, is that double effect plays no role
whatsoever in justifying the use of opioid drugs for pain relief in
the context of palliative care. Why is double effect so frequently
mentioned in discussions of pain relief in the context of palliative
care if its application rests on (and thereby perpetuates) a medical
myth? The popularity and intuitive appeal of this alleged illustration
of double effect may have two sources. First, the point of mentioning
the permissible hastening of death as a merely foreseen side effect
may be to contrast it with what is deemed morally impermissible:
administering drugs that are not pain relievers to a patient with a
terminal illness in order to hasten death and thereby cut short the
patient’s suffering. Second, the myth that pain relief hastens
death might have persisted and perpetuated itself because it expresses
the compassionate thought behind the second assumption: that the
hastening of death may be a welcome side effect of administering pain
relief to patients at the end of life. This point of view may not be
consistent with invoking Double Effect as a justification: if, in the
course of treating a dying patient, death is not viewed as a harm,
then Double Effect does not apply (see Allmark, Cobb, Liddle, and Todd
(2010)). 
Furthermore, the apparently compassionate assumption that the
hastening of death is a welcome result may be unduly paternalistic in
the context of end of life care in which the patient is not dying.
Patients receiving palliative care whose pain can be adequately
treated with opioid drugs may well value additional days, hours or
minutes of life. It is unjustified to assume that the hastening of
death is itself a form of merciful relief for patients with terminal
illnesses and not a regrettable side effect to be minimized. Recall
that the most plausible formulations of double effect would require
agents to seek to minimize or avoid the merely foreseen harms that
they cause as side effects. On this point, popular understandings of
double effect, with the second assumption in place, may diverge from
the most defensible version of the principle. 
Some members of the U.S. Supreme Court invoked double effect as a
justification for the administration of pain-relieving drugs to
patients receiving palliative care and also as a justification for the
practice known as terminal sedation in which sedative drugs are
administered to patients with intractable and untreatable pain in
order to induce unconsciousness (Vacco et al. v. Quill et al., 117
S.Ct. 2293 (1997)). If artificial hydration and nutrition are not
provided, sedation undertaken to deal with intractable pain may well
hasten death. (If death is immediately imminent, then the absence of
hydration and nutrition may not affect the time of death.) The most
plausible and defensible version of the principle of double effect
requires that the harmful side effect be minimized, so the principle
of double effect provides no justification for withholding hydration
and nutrition in cases in which death is not immediately imminent. The
decision to withhold hydration and nutrition seems to depend on a
judgment that death would not be a harm to the patient who has been
sedated. In circumstances in which it would not be a harm to cause a
person’s death, the principle of double effect does not
apply.
Terminal or full sedation is a response to intractable pain in
patients suffering from terminal illness. It involves bringing about a
set of conditions (sedation, unconsciousness, the absence of hydration
and nutrition) that together might have the effect of hastening death
if death is not already imminent. In any case, these conditions make
death inevitable. Two important moral issues arise concerning this
practice. First, is terminal sedation appropriate if it is necessary
to relieve intractable pain in patients diagnosed with a terminal
illness, even if death is not imminent? This is what Cellarius (2008)
calls early terminal sedation because it does not satisfy the
requirement that death is imminent that is typically cited as a
condition of the permissibility of terminal sedation. Early terminal
sedation could be expected to hasten death as a side effect of
providing palliative care for unusually recalcitrant pain. A second
issue concerns the moral significance of the fact that once sedation
has occurred, death is inevitable either because it was imminent
already or because the withholding of nutrition and hydration has made
it inevitable. Would it be permissible to increase the level of
sedation foreseeing that this would hasten the death that is now
inevitable? Traditional applications of the principle of double effect
rest on the assumption that the death of an innocent human being may
never be brought about intentionally and would rule against such an
action. Yet the assumptions that inform the popular understanding of
double effect — that the physician’s guiding intention is
to relieve pain, that the hastening of death would not be unwelcome in
these very specific circumstances, and that this course of action
should be distinguished from a case of active euthanasia that is not
prompted by the duty to relieve pain — might seem to count in
favor of it. It may obscure rather than clarify discussion of these
situations to view the principle of double effect as a clear
guideline. In this discussion, as in many others, the principle of
double effect may serve more as a framework for announcing moral
constraints on decisions that involve causing death regretfully than
as a way of determining the precise content of those decisions and the
judgments that justify them. 