In an 1897 magazine article and again in his 1903 Souls of Black
Folk, Du Bois innovated by using a term already in
currency—and with multiple associations in a variety of
literary, philosophical, and scientific discourses—in a
distinctive and original way to name a theretofore largely unremarked
phenomenon. The innovation was part of an account of a form of
life-experience that he ascribed to “black folk” in
America generally in then-current social circumstances—Jim Crow
in the south, de facto segregation in the North, and the
threat and actuality of racist violence throughout the country. 
The term he
used—“double-consciousness”—dropped entirely,
after just these two uses, from his published writing. Those uses
nonetheless struck a chord, and use of the term, interpreted in a
number of distinct ways, has become more frequent as the century since
its appearance has passed. While the disappearance of the term from Du
Bois’s writing after 1903 has fueled questions about the
significance of the concept in the overall assessment of his work,
some commentators continue to insist on the centrality of the concept
for an appreciation of Du Bois’s legacy. 
Du Bois was engaged throughout his long career in the attempt to
understand both the socio-historic conditions facing “Black
folk” in the American twentieth century, and the impacts of
those conditions on the consciousness and “inner world” of
the human beings subject to them. In Souls of Black Folk that
second concern was with capturing in words “the strange meaning
of being black”, with describing the “spiritual
world” and the “spiritual strivings” of “the
American Negro”. Du Bois continued to articulate responses to
these concerns in his later works: one finds formulations addressing
them even in his posthumously published Autobiography
(1968). As the contexts of Du Bois’s writing, research, and
activism changed, these responses shifted in focus, emphasis, and
perspective. Broadly speaking, as his reflections on what he initially
termed the “spiritual world” of Black folk came to be more
richly filled out in the variety and extent of its details, Du
Bois’s account of the phenomena he originally identified with
the term “double-consciousness” both overflowed the
initial associations of that term and became stratified under pressure
from his shifts in perspective. In what follows, we trace the fate of
Du Bois’s 1903 account in his later work and then try to assess
the reconstructed account on its own terms. 
This article will, first, briefly survey some of the attempts to
explicate and contextualize the use of the concept by Du Bois in
The Souls of Black Folk of 1903 (hereafter Souls),
present a brief overview of controversies concerning the viability of
the concept and its significance for contemporary Africana thought,
and then present some suggestions concerning the development of Du
Bois’s understanding of the phenomenon after Souls.
(The term Du Bois used was “double-consciousness”, with
the hyphen intact; more recent writers have generally abandoned the
hyphen. In this article the hyphen is retained in discussing Du
Bois’s 1903 term and concept, and interpretive attempts to get
at it. But “double consciousness”
simpliciter is used when discussing the term more generally,
and in relation to current debates about its import for Africana
thought.)
The locus classicus for the Du Boisian conception occurs in the
third paragraph of “Of our Spiritual Strivings”, the first
chapter of Du Bois’s 1903 Souls (this chapter is a very
slightly modified version of the earlier “The Strivings of the
Negro People”, an article Du Bois published in The
Atlantic magazine in August, 1897, where he first uses the
term):
After the Egyptian and Indian, the Greek and Roman, the Teuton and
Mongolian, the Negro is a sort of seventh son, born with a veil, and
gifted with second-sight in this American world,—a world which
yields him no true self-consciousness, but only lets him see himself
through the revelation of the other world. It is a peculiar sensation,
this double-consciousness, this sense of always looking at one’s
self through the eyes of others, of measuring one’s soul by the
tape of a world that looks on in amused contempt and pity. One ever
feels his two-ness,—an American, a Negro; two souls, two
thoughts, two unreconciled strivings; two warring ideals in one dark
body, whose dogged strength alone keeps it from being torn asunder.
(1997 [1903]: 38) [This passage henceforth referred to as the “Strivings”
text.] 
An inspection of the passage reveals the complexity of its object.
Double-consciousness is identified here as a “sensation”,
one which falls short of “true” self-consciousness, but is
a consciousness of one’s self, nonetheless. It is also part of a
more complex feeling of “two-ness”, of disparate and
competing “thoughts”, “strivings”, and
“ideals”. This is not an episodic or occasional sensation,
but a fixed and persistent form of consciousness. It is ascribed to
“the Negro … in this American world”, that is, it
seems to be a socio-cultural construct rather than a baldly bio-racial
given, and it is particularly attributed to people of African descent
in America. The “two-ness” of which it is a consciousness
thus is not inherent, accidental, nor benign: the condition is both
imposed and fraught with psychic danger. It is presented as arising in
conjunction with two other phenomena, related to two other
figures—the “veil”, and the “gift” of
“second-sight”. Of these, “the veil” is the
more insistent motif, recurring regularly throughout Souls as
well as other of Du Bois’s writings. By contrast, the terms
“double-consciousness” and “second-sight” seem
not to have been used in print by Du Bois after 1903. Still, this
passage has come to have a singular significance in the philosophical
interpretation of Du Bois’s thought as well as for the influence
of his views.
The paragraph immediately following makes clear that, for Du Bois,
this is not only a “sensation” but constitutes a crucial
object of “striving” and political struggle for black folk
in the United States: 
The history of the American Negro is the history of this
strife,—this longing to attain self-conscious manhood, to merge
his double self into a better and truer self. In this merging he
wishes neither of the older selves to be lost. 
The phenomenon is identified again—but without being so named
again—in the tenth chapter of Souls, “Of the
Faith of the Fathers”, an essay on “Negro religious
life”. In a passage devoted to “the current critical phase
of Negro religion”, Du Bois sets down these words:
From the double life every American Negro must live, as a Negro and as
an American, as swept on by the current of the nineteenth while yet
struggling in the eddies of the fifteenth century,—from this
must arise a painful self-consciousness, an almost morbid sense of
personality, and a moral hesitancy which is fatal to self-confidence.
The worlds within and without the Veil of Color are changing, and
changing rapidly, but not at the same rate, not in the same way; and
this must produce a peculiar wrenching of the soul, a peculiar sense
of doubt and bewilderment. Such a double life, with double thoughts,
double duties, and double social classes, must give rise to double
words and double ideals, and tempt the mind to pretence or revolt, to
hypocrisy or radicalism. (1997 [1903]: 155–6) [This passage henceforth
referred to as the “Faith”
text.] 
Here double-consciousness, unnamed, is set in a more dynamic context
than in the earlier, “Strivings”
text. The two passages,
parallel in form, are subtly different in tone. Here Du Bois clearly
distinguishes two social “worlds” and the “double
lives” that result. This text sweeps us along, showing a
causality, a coming-into-being of consciousness. And this second,
“Faith” text, concludes by
noting, in a matter of words, the social and political consequences of
this “painful” double-consciousness. Yet, oddly, the
“Faith” text is largely
neglected in discussions of the concept. 
The current relevance of double consciousness to an understanding of
Black lives, and of contemporary American reality, is evidenced by
recent commentary and scholarship. In a recent interview, Toni
Morrison recalls the Du Boisian motif in characterizing the
literary work of Black men: 
… African American male writers justifiably write books about
their oppression, 
she says. 
Confronting the oppressor who is white male or white woman. It’s
race. And the person who defines you under those circumstances is a
white mind—tells you whether you’re worthy or what have
you. And as long as that’s your preoccupation, you’re
defending yourself against that. Reacting to it. Reacting to the
definition—saying it’s not true. 
Morrison contrasts this to her own approach, which is to 
take away the gaze of the white male. Once you take that out, the
whole world opens up. (Morrison 2012)  
Lawrie Balfour, in discussing what she calls James Baldwin’s
“race conscious” approach to American race relations
(1998), measures its similarities to and differences from Du Boisian
double consciousness. Balfour argues that Baldwin’s approach
“goes to the core of the post-civil rights predicament”
(1998: 246) since the basic reality
of the color line has not been decisively effaced. Most recently, the
New York Times columnist Charles M. Blow has more than once
cited the “Strivings” text in
commenting on the contemporary paradoxes of black life brought into
the open by some of President Obama’s public statements in the
wake of recent criminal justice controversies (Blow 2013). 
A number of academic writers have been concerned in the last twenty
years to contextualize and interpret Du Bois’s notion of
double-consciousness—most often focusing on the
 “Strivings”
text, and ignoring the
“Faith” text—to
identify sources and antecedents that influenced his conception, and
to clarify the concerns he was addressing and his intentions in
putting it forward. A brief resume of that interpretive record
follows. 
In his 1992 article “W.E.B. Du Bois and the Idea of Double
Consciousness”, Dickson D. Bruce Jr. suggests a variety of
sources of the complex of meanings marshaled at the time by Du
Bois’s use of the term. The “double consciousness”
figure precedes Du Bois, coming out of the European romantic
opposition between an innate human affinity for the transcendent and a
pragmatic “materialism” grounded in a utilitarian attitude
to life, to mundane needs and commercial enterprise. Tracing this
understanding of double consciousness back to the American philosopher
Ralph Waldo Emerson (and beyond him to Goethe), who used the term in
his essay, “The Transcendentalist” (1842), Bruce maintains
that this anti-bourgeois romanticism is a “figurative
background” of Du Bois’s use of the term, to which Du Bois
brought his idea that 
the essence of a distinctive African consciousness was its
spirituality… revealed among African Americans in their
folklore, their history of patient suffering, and their faith. (Bruce
1999 [1992]: 238)
Bruce also briefly traces the trajectory of
“double-consciousness” in the medical and psychological
literature of the nineteenth century. An early appearance of the term
in the Medical Repository in 1817 (Mitchill 1817: 185) named
the condition of a Mary Reynolds, who, for a period of about fifteen
years beginning in her nineteenth, alternately lived two distinct
lives, with wholly different personalities, uncognizant of and
inaccessible to each other. This use of the term had some currency
throughout the nineteenth century; William James, one of Du
Bois’s Harvard philosophy professors, described such cases as
alternating between “primary and secondary
consciousnesses” in his considerable discussion of them in the
Principles of Psychology (1890: see esp. Vol. I, 379-393),
published while Du Bois was at Harvard (although James does not seem
to have used the term “double-consciousness”) (Bruce 1999
[1992]: 240–1). Bruce comments that 
…based on Du Bois’s use of
“double-consciousness” in his Atlantic essay he
certainly seems to have known the term’s psychological
background, because he used it in ways quite consistent with that
background. (1999: 242) 
[Bruce does not note the appearance of the term, in
French—“double conscience”—in Josef
Breuer and Sigmund Freud’s “On the Psychical Mechanism of
Hysterical Phenomena” published in 1893 in Neurologisches
Centralblatt, Nos. 1 and 2. This paper was later reprinted as the
first chapter of Studies on Hysteria, published in 1895.
Breuer and Freud appear to use the French term in responding to and
developing its earlier use by Pierre Janet, relating it to
“splitting of consciousness” and psychic
“dissociation”. (For a discussion of the
Breuer-Freud-Janet connection, see James Strachey’s introduction to
Studies on Hysteria.)] 
The diverse associations of the different senses of the term were
crucial, Bruce argues, to the resonance and suggestiveness of Du
Bois’s distinctive use of the term: the romantic-transcendental
connotations of spiritual longing and unbridgeable opposition between
two viewpoints combined with the psychological sense of not only the
real distinctiveness and moral parity of the two personae but
also the possibility that they could merge in a new synthetic unity
signifying a cure, a fact reported in a number of cases of the
psychological malady.
The first book-length study thematizing Du Boisian
double-consciousness was Sandra Adell’s
Double-Consciousness/ Double Bind: Theoretical Issues in
Twentieth-Century Black Literature (1994). The book engaged
critical debates over theoretical approaches to Black literature;
Adell argues for an intertextualism inspired by Derridean
deconstruction, and aimed at transcending the “Afrocentric/
Eurocentric” divide. The book begins with a chapter on Du
Bois’s “Strivings” text
and Souls. Adell, following the lead of Joel
Williamson’s earlier article, “W.E.B. Du Bois as a
Hegelian” (1978), presents Du Bois’s text as a
“reading” and use of crucial passages in Hegel: Du Boisian
double-consciousness, she claims, “emerges from the philosophy
of Hegel as it is articulated in the Phenomenology of
Spirit” (1994: 8). She adduces as evidence for the Hegelian
reading of Souls Du Bois’s studies with William James
and Josiah Royce, references to Hegel in Du Bois’s Philosophy IV
notebook from his time at Harvard, as well as his studies with von
Trietschke in Berlin “(in the midst of a ‘Hegelian
revival’ when he arrived)” (1994: 12).
Adell identifies three “instances” of the “doubling
of consciousness” in Hegel’s text (in the section on
“Self-Consciousness”; in “Lordship and
Bondage”; and in “The Unhappy Consciousness”); it is
the third of these that, Adell argues, forms the basic pattern for the
“Strivings” text:
Du Bois’s “double-consciousness” decontextualizes
Hegel’s “Unhappy Consciousness” … and opens
it up to other contexts. In this case, the new context is one upon
which is inscribed the problem of the twentieth century: the problem
of the color line. (1994: 19) 
Adell sketches a reading of the entire text of Souls as a
detailed “sociological, psychological, and philosophical”
account of “the Negro’s being-in-the-world” (1994:
19). Her reading identifies other borrowings from German Idealism,
noting along the way that 
the title of Du Bois’s text itself, The Souls of Black
Folk, remarks and reiterates the two concepts—soul and
folk—(Volk) that are central, not only to [Johann
Gottfried von] Herder’s aesthetics, but to that of Hegel as
well. (1994: 23)
What might be called a “deflationist” approach to the
interpretation of Du Bois’s conception of double-consciousness
is pursued by Adolph Reed, Jr., in his 1997 book on Du Bois’s
political philosophy, W.E.B. Du Bois and American Political
Thought: Fabianism and the Color Line. Reed’s book offers a
critique of what he dubs “vindicationist” approaches to
Afro-American political thought—approaches attempting to show
the significance of the work of African-American theorists by tracing
analogies and lines of influence between them and the
“greats” of the European tradition (1997: 12). The double
polemical thrust of Reed’s text, with respect to
double-consciousness, is to question the alleged sources of influence
on Du Bois’s thinking, and to refute the claim that Du
Bois’s formulation refers to a transhistorical feature of black
life in America. He points to the 
fact that, for all its prominence in The Souls of Black Folk,
the double-consciousness notion by and large disappears from Du
Bois’s writing after 1903, 
to undercut the claims that it “was a definitive element, a key
organizing principle of his thought” or “a moment in a
distinctively black social-theoretical discourse or tradition”
(1997: 124). He concludes that 
[a]s a proposition alleging a generic racial condition—that
millions of individuals experience a peculiar form of bifurcated
identity, simply by virtue of common racial status—the notion
seems preposterous on its face. (1997: 125)
Reed, setting out an extensive contextualizing account, shows the
considerable cachet of ideas of duality current when Du Bois wrote,
and argues that the claims of a lineage connecting Du Bois’s use
of double-consciousness to Emerson’s and James’s writings
fail. He rejects any Hegelian source of influence on Du Bois, aligning
Du Bois’s concept with evolutionary and Lamarckian
social-scientific views instead. Reed argues that an emphasis on
double-consciousness comes to the fore in Du Bois interpretation only
after the 1960s, when it supplants critical attention to the critique
of Booker T. Washington’s strategy of
“accommodation” in the third essay of the book. Reed
attributes this shift in focus to “an ideological current within
the post-segregation-era black petite bourgeoisie” (1997: 130)
“centered on assertion of black presence within hermetically
constituted communities of academic discourse” (1997:
94–5). 
Ernest Allen Jr. presents a similarly deflationist case in his
article, “Du Boisian Double Consciousness: The Unsustainable
Argument” (2002), arguing that the Du Boisian conception of
double-consciousness was a “tactical, political” attempt
to gain support among sympathetic white philanthropists for the
efforts of cultural uplift and organization on the part of a
“Talented Tenth”, an “educated black elite”.
The rhetorical construction of a model of double-consciousness in
Souls involves for Allen a “double sleight of
hand” (2002: 25), requiring a slippage between a putative
conflict of ideals within the minds of the black elite and a more
general problem for African Americans “who could not help but
have internalized some of the negative sentiments that white society
held towards them” (2002: 29).
The attribution of distinctive “American” and
“Negro” ideals is empty, Allen argues: there are no clear
examples of “Negro” ideals in the offing in Du
Bois’s text. Though there is no conflict between
“warring” ideals as claimed by Du Bois—ideals
equally attractive, between which Negroes had to choose but
couldn’t—there is a conflict between white racial
prejudice and intransigent hostility and exclusion of blacks, on the
one hand, and the ideal of civic equality for all emblazoned on the
ideological banners of the American republic, on the other.
This—what Allen calls “the institutionalized as well as
everyday double consciousness and double dealings of white
Americans”—is, he claims, “the social
foundation” of the “African American ideological
ambivalence” (2002: 38) that Du Boisian double-consciousness
expresses.
Robert Gooding-Williams develops an elaborate analysis of
double-consciousness in his In the Shadow of Du Bois: Afro-Modern
Political Thought in America (2009). Gooding-Williams presents a
tripartite account of the concept as a keystone in Du Bois’s
political-philosophical project. Double-consciousness functions as
part of an account of the subjective experience of African-Americans
in conditions dominated by Jim Crow and the “color line”;
it serves as an essential component of Du Bois’s critique of
certain forms of black political leadership under those conditions;
and it underwrites Du Bois’s own positive theory of
“political expressivism”. Gooding-Williams, like Allen,
distinguishes double-consciousness from the more general idea of
“two-ness” that Du Bois connects it to, arguing also that
“second sight” is a distinctive feature of Du Boisian
double-consciousness.
Gooding-Williams’ account of double-consciousness emphasizes
that Du Bois presents the concept in Souls in a passage that
begins with the question, “How does it feel to be a
problem?”—a question which references the so-called
“Negro problem”. This positioning indicates an inward
approach to the “subjective” felt experience of “the
Negro”. Double-consciousness is related in this passage to
“second sight”, which Du Bois characterizes as a
“gift” in this American world. Gooding-Williams finds two
sources for the idea of second sight—one in African-American
folklore, and one in the nineteenth-century literature on animal
magnetism. Both these present it as a capacity for a sort of
extra-sensory perception (e.g., of ghosts) or a kind of vision into
the future—a capacity to see what is not generally visible.
Gooding-Williams argues that Du Bois uses “second sight”
to identify “the Negro’s” capacity to see himself
through the eyes of white Americans. Because white Americans
constitute what Du Bois refers to as “the other world”, a
social group distinct from that of black folk, whites’
perceptions of and views about blacks would not “normally”
be available to blacks, for Gooding-Williams; it is second sight that
gives such access. In “this American world”, however,
whites’ perspectives on blacks are deeply distorted by racial
prejudice. It is the “gift” of second sight, then, that
makes blacks’ self-consciousness into a “false
self-consciousness”, Gooding-Williams claims, by fostering in
them a self-concept molded by contempt and a presumption of
inferiority. 
Gooding-Williams agrees with Reed in rejecting readings of
double-consciousness as a timeless condition, and in seeing the
centrality of an emancipatory political project for Du Bois’s
understanding of the Negro’s social condition. On
Gooding-Williams’ reconstruction, double-consciousness, as a
form of false self-consciousness, is a causally necessary condition of
the sense of two-ness Du Bois describes. That sense is of a
conflict between two sets of ideals and strivings, so
Gooding-Williams dubs it “conflictual two-ness”. For Du
Bois, the “merging” of the two selves can only take place
if white prejudice and, in a word, racism, has been eliminated from
the environing culture and the “other world’s”
perspective on the Negro, and, consequently, from “the
Negro’s” second sight. Gooding-Williams identifies this
with the achievement of reciprocal recognition that has been denied
the Negro by the white “other world” throughout American
history.
Thus, Gooding-Williams presents double-consciousness as a “false
self-consciousness” arising through second sight exercised in
conditions of a racially prejudiced dominant culture. This false
consciousness can make way for a “true self-consciousness”
only when those conditions have been transformed and whites no longer
perceive blacks as “contemptible” or
“inferior” (for only then will the Negro’s
“second sight” reflect a perception of himself undistorted
by prejudice). This eventuality, neither inevitable nor unattainable,
is consequently a prime object of the Du Boisian political project.
That project’s broader object—indeed, the goal of the
history of African-American striving—is for African-Americans to
be recognized as “co-workers in the kingdom of culture”.
Gooding-Williams concludes that the overcoming of double-consciousness
is a necessary and sufficient condition for the achievement of
reciprocal recognition and full equality, since the struggle for full
equality grounded in reciprocal recognition cannot be won without
eradicating the basis for double-consciousness.
Gooding-Williams argues finally that Du Bois was concerned with
double-consciousness not only as a correlate of the disenfranchised
condition that constitutes the so-called Negro problem, but also as a
crucial test of the effectiveness of the struggle for the overcoming
of that condition itself. In his discussions of Booker T. Washington
and Alexander Crummell (in chapters III and XII of Souls), Du
Bois makes a case that both these leaders fell victim to a
double-consciousness, vitiating their effectiveness as leaders of the
emancipation struggle. The “Atlanta Compromise” Washington
proposed in 1895, for example, was a strategy that, by giving up the
demand for black citizenship rights, compromised the struggle for
recognition and effectively reinforced double-consciousness by failing
to challenge the white perception of Negro
“inferiority”.
Frank Kirkland proposes, following Gooding-Williams, to take Du Bois
at his word in describing double-consciousness as a
“feeling”; Kirkland articulates that feeling through the
Rousseauian notion of amour-propre, the form of
“civilized” self-love that is reflective, contrastive,
and, in Rousseau’s account, radically corrosive of social
solidarity. (Rousseau’s account distinguishes
amour-propre from amour de soi, a
“natural” instinctual urge to self-preservation.
Amour-propre is a purely social sort of anti-solidarity,
pitting one against another on grounds of comparative measures of
worth.) 
Du Bois’ “double consciousness” refers to a black
person’s felt awareness of the harmfully comparative measures of
others on her character and self-esteem, by which s⁄he takes
herself to be a problem in and of a social arrangement permitting such
measures or obliging them. (2013: 144)
For Kirkland, Du Bois’ conception of double-consciousness is
inherently comparative, the consequence of the operation of
amour-propre in conditions of the color line. Du Bois,
according to Kirkland, began from the “inflamed
amour-propre of others”: 
those (of the darker races) have their own respect and esteem …
denied or underestimated by others (of the lighter races), thereby
agitating and worsening the color line. (2013: 140) 
For Kirkland amour-propre is not the cause of the color-line,
but 
once the color line is on the scene, amour-propre provides it
with the stimulus to spread widely and intensely forms of inequality.
(2013: 146 n19)
Kirkland also stresses the element of “sentience” within
double-consciousness, of the black person’s awareness, even if
unreflective and rudimentary, of the comparative form of his/her
disvaluation. 
[F]or Du Bois, this comparison gone awry is a matter about which black
people are, at least, sentient, awake to, even if they have not
grasped it conceptually, 
writes Kirkland, adding that this is “their sentience to the
comparison by which they are made a problem” (2013: 140).
Kirkland identifies two forms of the “hazard” consequent
on double-consciousness for African-Americans: it can induce a
“dual/duelist” hazard of internally conflicted aspirations
and expectations, and a related “duplicitous” stance of
hypocrisy. Both these arise from the felt need to 
compromis[e] one’s ideals to maintain one’s
esteem…. Being of two conflicting minds or being two-faced are
the outcomes of the compromise to the hazards accompanying their
aspirations for esteem. (2013: 145) 
Kirkland also identifies a third, “dyadic” form of
double-consciousness which 
would reflect, via education, the result of an individual coming to a
true, non-estranged comprehension of the position s⁄he deserves
in comparison to others as both a citizen and a person of color with
certain talents and competences. (2013: 142) 
This “non-estranged” mode of double-consciousness is a
“solution to the hazards” of the other two forms,
according to Kirkland.
Cornel West extends the analytic grasp of the concept as part of a
critical discussion of double-consciousness in his first book,
Prophecy Deliverance! (1982). In the first chapter, West
suggests an ingredient missing from Du Bois’s analysis of the
self-consciousness of Africans in America, claiming that 
Du Bois overlooked the broader dialectic of being American yet feeling
European, of being provincial but yearning for British
cosmopolitanism, of being at once incompletely civilized and
materially prosperous, a genteel Brahmin amid uncouth conditions.
Black Americans labored rather under the burden of a triple crisis of
self-consciousness. Their cultural predicament was comprised of
African appearance and unconscious cultural mores, involuntary
displacement to America without American status, and American
alienation from the European ethos complicated through domination by
incompletely European Americans. (1982: 30–1)
West further complicates his enumeration of the tangled elements of
the African-American cultural dialectic, referring to the
“anxiety-ridden provinciality” of Protestant-American
self-identity, and the “distinctly antimodern values and
sensibilities” dominant in the southern states, the
“geographic cradle of black America” (1982: 31). 
West’s formulations do not unmake the basic claim of Du
Bois’s text, but embed its core insight in a richer vision. The
“triple crisis of self-consciousness” West attributes to
black Americans seems to add “American alienation from the
European ethos” to the two “sides” of Du Boisian
double-consciousness. It’s worth noting that, near the end of
West’s discussion, he acknowledges that, in the first attempts
to shape their own self-identity, “Black people were relatively
uninformed about British culture…”. This seems to
minimize the significance of “British cosmopolitanism” and
“alienation from the European ethos” as issues for black
folk in America generally. It would follow that, as Africans in
America became educated in the European-American cultural milieu,
their awareness and sensitivity to the anxieties of generic American
self-awareness might be more fully reflected in their own
self-understandings.
In The Black Atlantic: Modernity and Double Consciousness
(1993) Paul Gilroy attempts to “muddle” the
boundaries—both disciplinary and geographical—of the
political and cultural analysis in/of black studies. Gilroy argues,
against essentialist and nationalist trends in black political
discourse, for an “intercultural and anti-ethnocentric account
of black history and political culture” (1993: 115). Du Bois
figures prominently in that argument, and Gilroy extends Du Boisian
double-consciousness both beyond the American context and at odds with
an essentialist understanding of race.
Gilroy claims double consciousness as an overriding thematic element
in Du Bois’s thought and writing, both in and beyond
Souls, part of Du Bois’s attempt to subvert rigidly
fixed racial identities as imposed categories keyed to the oppressive
social structures of white supremacy. The
 “Strivings”
text is taken as one early
explicit expression of Du Bois’s own ambivalence toward
modernity, prefiguring as well the increasingly transnational and
pan-racial scope of Du Bois’s evolving concerns as the twentieth
century unrolls. Gilroy also identifies that ambivalence as a stable
and pronounced tendency in diasporic black cultures and political
debates generally. 
In a reading of Souls that is central to his book, Gilroy
highlights the 
nagging anxiety over the inner contradictions of modernity and a
radical scepticism towards the ideology of progress with which it is
associated (1993: 117) 
that he finds there in germ form. Gilroy further finds elements of an
implicit global-diasporic—hence “Black
Atlantic”—perspective on “the meaning of being
black” that is in tension with, and submerged somewhat under the
“smooth flow of African-American exceptionalisms” (1993:
120). This element within the discourse of Souls points to
the wider significance of double consciousness, according to Gilroy,
who argues that the theme would, subsequent to Souls, come
“to illuminate the experience of post-slave populations in
general” and to “animate a dream of global co-operation
among people of color which came to full fruition only in [Du
Bois’] later work” (1993: 126). 
Paget Henry’s phenomenological treatment of Du Bois’s
double-consciousness conception in his “Africana Phenomenology:
Its Philosophical Implications” (2005) identifies a
“theory” of double consciousness as part of a
“comprehensive phenomenology of Africana
self-consciousness” (2005: 85). Henry distinguishes Du Boisian
double-consciousness from the double consciousness found in
Hegel’s discussion of lordship and bondage in the
Phenomenology of Spirit: Du Boisian double-consciousness 
is the theorizing of a period of racial/imperial domination in the
self-consciousness of the Africana subject that is absent from the
life of Hegel’s European subject. (2005: 94)
Henry offers further an explication of Du Boisian “second
sight”: on his view, it is 
the ability of the racialized Africana subject to see him/herself as
“a negro”, that is, through the eyes of the white other.
(2005: 89) 
Henry characterizes this as a “categoric form of self-blindness
… a classic case of false consciousness” (2005: 90). But
Henry claims a further, ethically propitious form of second sight is
possible—what he calls “potentiated second sight”.
This is a “very special access and insight into the dehumanizing
‘will to power’ of the European imperial subject”.
This “potentiating” of second sight can occur, according
to Henry, when an Africana subject is able to uproot the
“blackface” stereotype from his/her consciousness and
reconceive him/herself as “an African” by operating
“within the creative codes of African discourses and
symbols” (2005: 91). Henry cites the Rastafarians as an example
of this route to potentiated second sight. An alternate route to
potentiated second sight is through an individually acquired
independent standpoint on the world of the agents of white supremacy,
and here Henry cites Du Bois himself as an exemplar.
Henry’s account of double consciousness identifies Du Boisian
double-consciousness with the object of Frantz Fanon’s
existential-psychoanalytic account of black self-consciousness,
relying primarily on Fanon’s Black Skin, White Masks
(1967). While clearly specifying the Freudian and Sartrian idiom in
which Fanon carries through his analyses in that text, Henry writes
that “there is no finer or more detailed account of the state of
racial double consciousness” (2005: 95). In the very first pages
of that text, Fanon makes clear his psychoanalytic orientation,
writing of the black’s “inferiority complex”—a
term whose first appearance in the book is in an epigraph, a quotation
from Aime Cesaire’s Discourse on Colonialism. Several
pages later, Fanon observes that
The effective disalienation of the black man entails an immediate
recognition of social and economic realities. If there is an
inferiority complex, it is the outcome of a double process: primarily,
economic; subsequently, the internalization—or better, the
epidermalization—of this inferiority. (1967: 10–11) 
Henry details a process he dubs “negrification”, to which,
on his reading of Fanon, the black is subject in the confines of the
West. In that process, “colonized Africana people lost their
earlier cultural identities and became identified by the color of
their skin” (2005: 96). In this process, the white colonizer
projects the most reprehensible and forbidden aspects of himself onto
the black man, thereby bringing about the stereotype of “the
Negro”. Fanon also borrows Jungian formulations for his account,
writing of the “collective unconscious of homo
occidentalis”, in which the black man “symbolizes
evil, sin, wretchedness, death, war, famine”. Referring to his
native land, Fanon writes 
[i]n Martinique, whose collective unconscious makes it a European
country, when a “blue” Negro—a coal-black
one—comes to visit, one reacts at once: “What bad luck is
he bringing?” (1967: 191)
In an earlier text, Caliban’s Reason (2000), Henry uses
the Shakespearean motif, from The Tempest, of the clash of
the European colonizer Prospero with the native Caliban. There he
writes of the “Calibanization” of the Africans imported by
European slavers to the Caribbean: 
[C]olor eclipsed culture. The latter became more invisible as Africans
were transformed into negroes and niggers in the minds of Europeans.
This racial violence shattered the cultural foundations of the African
self…. Race became the primary signifier of Europeans and
Africans and of the differences between them. Consequently, the
identities of these two groups were rigidly inscribed in a set of
binary oppositions that linked the binary black/white to other
binaries such as primitive/civilized, irrational/rational, body/mind,
prelogical/logical, flesh/spirit. (2000: 11–2) 
Henry takes this process of “Calibanization”—the
substitution of a racialized identity based on a set of insidiously
contrastive binaries for an original and native cultural identity
grounded in African ways of life—as the production of a form of
double consciousness.
Lewis Gordon touches on double consciousness in his account of Du
Bois’s significance to the tradition of Africana philosophy in
his Introduction to Africana Philosophy (2008). Gordon notes
that in the very first paragraphs of the “Strivings”
chapter, Du Bois refers to the
“unasked question” at the root of his personal
interactions with white interlocutors: “How does it feel to be a
problem?” For Gordon, this question presupposes the
subjectivity, and, hence, the humanity, of the black person being
addressed. And yet, the ascription of the status of a
“problem” to that person involves at the same time a
denial of the humanity of that black addressee. Gordon notes
that “[t]he appeal to blacks as problem-people is an assertion
of their ultimate location outside the system of order and
rationality” (2008: 76). This outsider status, Gordon suggests,
is crucial to the formation of double consciousness, leading as it
does to “the splitting of worlds and consciousness itself
according to the norms of U.S. society and its contradictions”.
Gordon claims the ascription of problematic status to blacks itself is
necessitated by the fact that “‘American’ was
persistently defined as ‘white’ in North America and the
rest of the Americas” (2008: 77).
Gordon specifies the “negative version” of double
consciousness as when the self-image of the black person is wholly
determined by how the racial others view her—her view of herself
becomes a “white point of view” (2008: 78). Closely
related to this is an exclusionary account of citizenship, relegating
the black person to the status of noncitizen or a lesser, second class
citizen. For Gordon, the epistemological significance of double
consciousness is that one of the two perspectives implicit in
it—that of the white world—is necessarily partial, yet
positions itself as universal, and so, is “a form of
consciousness that hides itself” (2008: 79). This only comes to
light because this dominant self-conception brings into being a
“subaltern” consciousness, which is a consciousness of the
contradictions in that dominant self-conception. This, Gordon writes,
is the second, doubling consciousness in its affirmative, fully
realized manifestation.
The preceding resume of the interpretive literature on Du Bois’s
conception yields several points of contention, among them issues
concerning the source(s) of Du Bois’s conception and
terminology, and especially the possible Rousseauian, Hegelian and/or
American philosophical connections; the scope of the conception, that
is, how widely and to whom Du Bois thought it applied; the relation
between double-consciousness and the psychic duality he associated it
with; the nature of “second sight”, and its relation to
double-consciousness; double-consciousness’s connection to what
might be called pathology, on the one hand, and to critical social
awareness or critique, on the other; the validity and usefulness of
the conception to an understanding of the situation of black folk
specifically, both at the turn of the twentieth century when Du Bois
put it forward, and today, in the century plus since. Here we briefly
recapitulate several of those questions.
The first question, one Gooding-Williams identifies as a paradox,
concerns Du Bois’s apparent invulnerability to
double-consciousness. If double-consciousness is indeed endemic to
“Negroes”—if it was, in a sense, a structural
problem for any Negro consciousness under conditions of Jim
Crow—then how exactly could Du Bois himself write as though he
has transcended or surmounted it, and achieved himself the “true
self-conscious manhood”? And if not, how can the account he
presents be taken as veridical? Although Du Bois never explicitly
makes the claim that he himself is free from double-consciousness, he
does seem to have written as though his theoretical vision was
relatively unclouded by an internal soul-struggle. And yet Du Bois
also clearly introduces his conception of double-consciousness in the
context of an account of his own personal experience and as, in part,
based on that experience.
Gooding-Williams argues that this paradox can be overcome by
distinguishing the narrative authority of Souls from the
historical author of the text. It is the narrator of Souls,
and not Du Bois himself, who has escaped double-consciousness. This
may work for Souls as a literary text, but it doesn’t
help make a consistent theory of black political leadership plausible,
suggesting as it does that no actual black political leader is immune
from double-consciousness. Another possible resolution to the paradox,
one not readily available to Gooding-Williams given his
interpretation, involves the liberatory potential of a second sight
that penetrates to the contradictions of the dominant white cultural
milieu, and so opens up the possibility for undermining and
subsequently rejecting its biased assumption about black folk (what
Henry calls “potentiated second sight”). 
Du Bois often insisted that his accounting of “the Negro
problem”—or, alternatively, of “the race
concept”—involves leading his readers “within the
Veil”—making it possible for his (presumably mostly white)
readers to gain some sense of the experience of “being
black”. This involves, as he puts it in Dusk of Dawn
(1940), “elucidating the inner meaning and significance of that
race problem by explaining it in terms of the one human life that I
know best” (1968 [1940]: viii). But that life, by any measure,
was one lived at the top of “the upper layers of educated and
ambitious Negroes” (1968 [1940]: 185). This returns us to the
question of the scope of double-consciousness, a question raised most
insistently by Allen.
While Du Bois presents double-consciousness in the 1903 texts as a
problem for black folks generally given conditions of segregation and
historically persisting inequality, a closer inspection shows that he
also suggests that the phenomenon is specific to black leadership or
those who are most fully caught between the white world and
the world of color—those who have deliberately taken on the
project of “the moral uplift” of the
“backward” black masses, and who stand as
“representatives” of these two “worlds” one to
another. Much of what he says in illustration of his original claim
about double-consciousness in the “Strivings”
passage features educated,
“better” Negroes: illustrative examples cited in the
subsequent paragraphs include that of the black artisan, the Negro
minister or doctor, the “would be black savant”
and the black artist. Du Bois also devotes several chapters in
Souls to detailed characterizations of the inner soul
struggles of those, both actual and fictional, who would be or were in
fact leaders of their people—Washington, Crummell, and the
fictional John Jones. Yet much of the force of the initial claim for
double-consciousness in the “Strivings”
text is the universality of
its attribution there to “the Negro in this American
world”.
Some recent commentators have rejected the claim that
double-consciousness, in the sense of internalized disparagement or a
self-perception of inferiority, has been a universal feature of black
life in America. Molefi Kete Asante, discussing his own experience
growing up in and around the small town of Valdosta, Georgia, in the
1950s, writes that
[t]he tightly knit community of Africans who lived on the dirt roads
of Valdosta never saw themselves as intellectually or physically
inferior to whites. There existed no reference points outside of
ourselves despite the economic and psychological poverty of our
situation. (1993: 133) 
Several pages later Asante states flat-out, “I was never
affected by the Du Boisian double-consciousness” (1993: 136). He
does go on to acknowledge the special circumstances of his experience:
It might have been another matter if I had gone to school and to
church with whites when I was younger. I might have suffered
confusion, double-consciousness, but I did not. (1993: 137)
A third issue for Du Bois’s conception of double-consciousness
concerns its putative relation to the “two-ness” of the
Negro psyche. Du Bois never explicitly clarifies the relation between
double-consciousness and two-ness in his texts. Du Bois was concerned
early on to establish a distinct contribution of “the
Negro” to world culture and civilization, since lynch law and
the backlash against Reconstruction in the last decades of the
nineteenth and early twentieth century raised the specter of a
genocidal extermination of black folk in America. The claim of a
distinctly “Negro” contribution to world culture seems to
require, indeed, some distinctive Negro “ideals”. But the
reconstruction presented by Gooding-Williams, who makes the best
detailed case so far for the coherence and viability of Du
Bois’s conception, depends on the claim that the two-ness is
conflictual, and hence a “problem”, only because
double-consciousness incorporates white prejudices into the
Negro’s own self-consciousness. As Allen and others have pointed
out (and Gooding-Williams acknowledges) Du Bois presents vague,
seemingly empty, or competing accounts of just what the conflicting
American and Negro “ideals” are. The question, then, is
whether Du Bois’s reference to distinctly “Negro” or
black “ideals” can be sustained as a source of the
“two-ness” to which Du Bois connects double-consciousness.
If there are indeed such (non-empty) ideals, and they are an
independent source of conflictual two-ness, then double-consciousness
might turn out to be a more complex phenomenon than
Gooding-Williams’ account suggests.
The Du Boisian conception has been criticized as well for
oversimplifying the complexity and multidimensionality of contemporary
selves, for expressing a nostalgia for a unitary and integral self
that may never have existed, is an illusion, an unachievable ideal.
Thus Darlene Clark Hine suggests that 
had Du Bois specifically included the experiences and lives of black
women in his lament, … instead of writing, “One ever
feels his twoness”, he would have mused about how one ever feels
her “fiveness”: Negro, American, woman, poor, black woman.
(Hines 1993: 338) 
Critiques of Du Bois’s conception along these lines have become
widespread since the last decades of the twentieth century, but, it
might be argued, they are in one sense beside the point. That the 1903
text is masculinist seems undeniable. But it’s also true that Du
Bois’s “double-consciousness” was not proposed as a
comprehensive account of the reality of human being, was not addressed
to the variety of sources of human social identity per se.
His conception was an attempt to capture something about the lived
experience of black folk as black folk in the United States
under conditions of Jim Crow and white supremacy. It would be wholly
consistent with the point of his conception if, added to the doubling
of consciousness consequent upon racially oppressive social
conditions, other forms of psychic doubling or fragmentation,
responses to other forms of inequality, might arise. 
Henry Louis Gates Jr. addresses not the descriptive adequacy but the
normative thrust of Du Bois’s conception when he observes that
cultural multiplicity is no longer seen as the problem, but as a
solution—a solution to the confines of identity itself. Double
consciousness, once a disorder, is now the cure. (2006: xv)
This remark is best read as a contextualizing point about Du
Bois’s conception, yet it trades upon the common confusion of
the duality or “two-ness” Du Bois wraps around his
double-consciousness conception with that conception itself. Surely
even if “cultural multiplicity” has come to be valuable in
itself, as Gates has it, the “amused contempt and pity”
crucial to Du Bois’s double-consciousness, directed against
oneself, is an unlikely part of any “cure”. 
Finally, a question might be raised about the relation of Du
Bois’s double-consciousness conception and the sorts of
self-doubts, troubled feelings, and “identity issues” that
have been linked to biracial or mixed-race appearance or identity in
our persisting, harshly racialized American social world. The racist
ideologies accompanying and justifying white supremacy, and the mores
and systems of “etiquette” governing “race
relations” in racially hierarchical social conditions, have
presented particular difficulties for persons of ambiguous racial
descent, visibly marked as brought into being by “race
mixing”. Often mixed-race persons have encountered hostility and
suspicion from “both sides”, from each of the distinct
races of which they are mixed. Sometimes they are deemed weak or
inferior just because they are mixed, as Naomi Zack documents
in her Race and Mixed-Race (1993: chapters 11, 12). Indeed,
Du Bois was himself personally deeply familiar with this issue, as he
relates, for instance, from his university days in Berlin. His
“most interesting” professor there was Heinrich von
Trietschke;
[o]ne day he startled me by suddenly declaring during a lecture on
America: “Die Mulattin sind niedrig! Sie fuhlen sich
niedrig!” [Mulattoes are inferior; they feel themselves
inferior.] I felt as if he were pointing me out; but I presume he was
quite unaware of my presence. However my presence or absence would
have made no difference to him. He was given to making extraordinary
assertions out of a clear sky and evidently believing just what he
said. My fellow students gave no evidence of connecting what he said
with me. (Du Bois 1968: 165) 
In the further course of his life, skin color—Du Bois’s
own skin color—would be made an issue of by some who wanted to
challenge his positions and leadership or with whom he had ideological
disagreements—Marcus Garvey being a notable case in point (on
the Du Bois – Garvey contretemps, see Lewis 2000).
Yet when Du Bois formulated “double-consciousness” at the
turn of the century, mixed-race and issues of what might be called
“skin color anxiety” among black folk were not topics he
addressed in print. There is virtually no consideration of such issues
in Souls. The duality posited in the texts of 1903 is one
between “Negro”—an identity keyed to a
metaphysically conceived racial designation—and
“American”—one based on a putative citizenship
status. Racial designation at that time was determined primarily
through hypodescent, and the citizenship status of black folk was
impugned by Plessy v. Ferguson (1896) and Jim Crow. But Du
Bois’s conception did not reference skin color discriminations
within black racial designation.
Commentators are agreed that while Du Bois names
“double-consciousness” and uses the concept in his own way
in that 1903 text, the term does not reappear in any of his
subsequent texts. That does not mean he abandons the concept, of
course, but most of the commentary on his employment of the concept
focuses on the treatment of the issues it names in Souls.
There have been some attempts to interpret various of his other works
in terms of the conception, but these tend to focus on his fictional
writings, and the use made of these is not primarily to develop the
conception but rather to show its uses by Du Bois in other contexts.
Throughout, the focus is always on the conception as it is presented
in the “Strivings” text. This
fact is due undoubtedly both to the canonical status of that 1903 text
in African-American literature and social criticism—and in
Africana philosophy—and to the fact noted above that the term
“double-consciousness” is used there alone. More than one
writer has asserted that the passage in which Du Bois presents the
term is the most-referenced text in all African-American letters.
It seems problematic, however, to pin a full-blown account of and
theoretical reconstruction on one passage in one work, however seminal
or influential it may have been. So it may be useful to
examine several later texts of Du Bois’s to see if the claim
some commentators have made that Du Bois abandons the conception after
1903 can be substantiated or if it can be challenged and the
conception given further legs. There are discussions in later texts
that seem to involve aspects, at least, of the 1903 conception.
While Du Bois does not present the “double-consciousness”
concept in so many words in Darkwater, published in 1920, the
second chapter of that text, “The Souls of White Folks”,
seems to involve something like the “second sight” of the
“Strivings” text. In that
chapter, Du Bois characterizes the development of what he calls
“the religion of whiteness” and discusses its impact on
social relations in the nineteenth and the early twentieth centuries.
Du Bois seems to make a claim for a special kind of knowledge of the
psychology of white people. He writes of himself that, about them,
“I am singularly clairvoyant”. After specifying that his
knowledge is not that of the foreigner, nor of the servant or the
worker, he writes: 
I see these souls undressed and from the back and sides. I see the
working of their entrails. I know their thoughts and they know that I
know. (Du Bois 1920: 17) 
Du Bois here claims a “singular” insight into the psyches
of white folk, one that depends in part on an awareness of the beliefs
and attitudes of white folks of the kind that double-consciousness
involves. But what Du Bois claims here also seems to go beyond the
1903 conception, since that conception did not specifically and
explicitly refer to knowledge of the souls of white folks.
Several pages into the “Souls of White Folks” chapter,
after identifying the “discovery of personal whiteness” as
an historically recent phenomenon associated with “this new
religion of whiteness”, Du Bois indicates that it is black folk
generally—“we”—who have such powers of
“clairvoyance”:
We whose shame, humiliation and deep insult [the white man’s]
aggrandizement so often involved were never deceived. We looked at him
clearly, with world-old eyes, and saw simply a human being, weak and
pitiable and cruel, even as we are and were. (1920: 20) 
Here is a condition of consciousness that allows “the
humiliated” to see more clearly the reality of the lives of
those who humiliate them than the humiliators themselves can. This
condition of consciousness is a kind of
“clairvoyance”—a capacity for knowledge that escapes
those who initiate the humiliation, who do not—and, perhaps,
cannot—see themselves as clearly. While such knowledge does not
involve “knowing the thoughts” of the humiliators in
detail, it does require that one know some patterns of
what and how they think and feel. Du Bois is here considering the
ideology of white supremacy, tracing out the historical conditions of
its development and some of the psychological consequences it has for
whites who accept it and live in and on the basis of it. To the extent
that whites accept the premises of white supremacy, and live and act
upon them, they are deceived about themselves and act out a deception
that the blacks who are subject to them are in a position to see
through. This is not the core of double-consciousness, though it seems
to be the sort of thing Du Bois had in mind when he referred in 1903
to “second sight”, a key adjunct to double-consciousness,
in the “Strivings” passage.
This interpretation is brought out in Henry, Gordon, and Kirkland as
well.
But there is a bit more here, and other than, “second
sight”. For what Du Bois presents in this chapter is a critical
analysis of the American ideology of white supremacy that is informed
by historical understanding and backed up by social-scientific data.
Du Bois both begins and ends the chapter by noting his own position
“high in the tower”. This refers both to his distanced,
observer status relative to those who he is discussing, and to his own
achieved position as an academically trained social
scientist—indeed, one of the most highly trained minds in
America at the time—bringing his powers of analysis to bear on
the “souls of white folk”. Du Bois presents, if we take
him at his word, a case of scientifically-informed, nuanced historical
analysis built on a “clairvoyant” insight into the psyche
of the white person “under the influence” of white
supremacist ideology, one predicated on both the second sight and
ideology-critique.
There is another passage later in Darkwater that bears, if
somewhat indirectly, on the notion of double-consciousness:
Pessimism is cowardice. The man who cannot frankly acknowledge the
“Jim-Crow” car as a fact and yet live and hope is simply
afraid either of himself or of the world. There is not in the world a
more disgraceful denial of brotherhood than the “Jim-Crow”
car of the Southern United States; but, too, just as true, there is
nothing more beautiful in the universe than sunset and moonlight on
Montego Bay in far Jamaica. And both things are true and both belong
to this our world, and neither can be denied. (1920: 135) 
This passage is surely aimed against the debilitating effects of the
facts of life for Black folk in the Jim-Crow south. In it Du Bois
urges the reader’s resistance against the submersion of her
cherished ideal—equality qua
“brotherhood”—by those brute facts of life. And that
is resistance to the pernicious double consciousness that would bury
our intimate self-understanding under a dominant white supremacist
rationalization of racial inequality. Such resistance involves an
expanded, and expansive, conception of “this our world”,
one that owns the world in all its manifold, stunning, and appalling
complexity. 
Du Bois begins the essay, published in Crisis in September,
1933, with a story about his grandfather, who indignantly rejected an
invitation to a “Negro” picnic: 
[i]t meant close association with poverty, ignorance and suppressed
and disadvantaged people, dirty and with bad manners. (Du Bois 1933: 199) 
He then succinctly captures the whole dilemma of this Negro upper
crust:
because the upper colored group is desperately afraid of being
represented before American whites by this lower group, or being
mistaken for them, or being treated as though they were part of it,
they are pushed to the extreme of effort to avoid contact with the
poorest classes of Negroes. This exaggerates, at once, the secret
shame of being identified with such people and the anomaly of
insisting that the physical characteristics of these folk which the
upper class shares, are not the stigmata of degradation. (1933: 199) 
Here Du Bois explicitly draws out the intra-racial implications and
grounds of this aspect of double consciousness—what he
identifies as “being ashamed” of members of one’s
group, and, thus, “indirectly”, of oneself. He also
reiterates a theme that was apparent from the very beginning of his
thinking about double-consciousness—its close connection to
divergent personal as well as political strategies for managing, and
working to transform, the conditions giving rise to it. He identified
these especially in the 1903 “Faith”
text, where he speaks both of
“double classes” and of “pretense or revolt”,
“hypocrisy or radicalism”. In the 1920 text, Du Bois notes
that such feelings of shame can motivate the strategy of “race
suicide”—“the attempt to escape from
ourselves”, as he describes assimilation. This attempt
involves—and also is grounded in—“a drawing of class
lines inside the Negro race” and “the emergence of a
certain social aristocracy” defined by
“looks”—by which Du Bois presumably means
complexion—as well as education, income, cultivation, and
aspiration.
But this class-based sense of shame is both impediment and adjunct of
any strategy based on race pride and solidarity, as well, since such
shame and embarrassment can present an obstacle to any concerted
political action, which demands racial unity in common cause, and
under the leadership of the “talented tenth” of race
aristocrats, to be successful. While calling for efforts to “to
build up a racial ethos”, Du Bois thus warns against too extreme
a version of such “propaganda for race pride”, counseling
Blacks to avoid reproducing what he describes as a “superiority
complex among the white and the yellow race”.
There is a discussion of what appears to be more or less the same
phenomena in Du Bois’s book Dusk of Dawn, published in
1940, two years after Du Bois turned seventy. Indeed, since Dusk
of Dawn is more nearly autobiographical in design than
Souls—its subtitle is An Essay Toward an
Autobiography of a Race Concept—it’s not surprising
that Du Bois writes more expansively there of the experience of living
in conditions of segregation and white supremacy, even though he
doesn’t use the term employed in Souls. But also, by
this time, his conception of race itself has opened up even further
beyond that of any linear historical development. As he writes at the
end of the central chapter of that book, “The Concept of
Race”, 
It had as I have tried to show all kinds of illogical trends and
irreconcilable tendencies. Perhaps it is wrong to speak of it at all
as “a concept” rather than as a group of contradictory
forces, facts, and tendencies. (1940: 133)
A number of things change in the account given by Du Bois in Dusk
of Dawn of the phenomena that, in Souls, are brought
under the sign of double-consciousness.
The first is that the Dusk of Dawn treatment of the issues is
subsumed much more fully under a thematics of
“environment”, articulated as social, geographical, and
cultural in its dimensions and both dynamic and relatively stable in
historical terms. Writing about “the facts of the Negro’s
double environment”, Du Bois, characterizes the situation
thus:
The Negro American has for his environment not only the white
surrounding world, but also, and touching him usually much more nearly
and compellingly, is the environment furnished by his own colored
group. There are exceptions, of course, but this is the rule. The
American Negro, therefore, is surrounded and conditioned by the
concept which he has of white people and he is treated in accordance
with the concept they have of him. On the other hand, so far as his
own people are concerned, he is in direct contact with individuals and
facts. He fits into this environment more or less willingly. It gives
him a social world and mental peace. (1940: 173)
Here the white world is “surrounding” the world of the
colored group with which the Negro individual is, as a rule, “in
direct contact”. This double environment is the basic reality,
overwhelmingly, of the Negro in the 1940 text. This way of putting it
is prefigured in the “Faith”
text of Souls, in which Du Bois writes of the “double
life” of Black folk and of the “worlds within and without
the Veil of Color”. What is only once formulated explicitly in
Souls is given extensive treatment in Dusk of
Dawn.
This characterization of the situation also suggests that, while the
inhabitants of the “white world” and the “colored
world” look at one other each through “the concept”
they have of one another, individuals within the “colored
world” know each other directly, being aware of
“individuals and facts”. This is the impact of the veil,
the color line. Writing of his own personal experience, Du Bois
details the effect of this environing white world on him:
I was by long education and continual compulsion and daily reminder, a
colored man in a white world; and that white world often existed
primarily, so far as I was concerned, to see with sleepless vigilance
that I was kept within bounds. All this made me limited in physical
movement and provincial in thought and dream. I could not stir, I
could not act, I could not live, without taking into careful daily
account the reaction of my white environing world. (1940:
135–6)
Note here that in addition to the definite limitation of possibilities
by this white world, there is also an active appropriation, and
employment in strategic thinking by Du Bois, of the understanding he
has of the white world. This suggests another mode in which
double consciousness—that seems to be what we are dealing with
here—can operate. If double consciousness can also take the form
of practical consciousness, one of “taking into careful
daily account” whites’ reactions—tinged as they are
by prejudice, by expectations grounded in that prejudice—in
one’s plans, one’s own expectations, that would not
necessarily involve internalizing the prejudiced viewpoint itself,
though it might surely engender considerable disturbance of the soul.
Double consciousness would then be a practical, and affective, rather
than a strictly cognitive, impact of the environing conditions on the
Negro soul.
There is also, indeed, according to the Dusk of Dawn account,
a further, more telling and insidious effect of the white world on the
Negro soul, here exemplified by Du Bois: 
… this fact of racial distinction based on color was the
greatest thing in my life and absolutely determined it, because this
surrounding group, in alliance and agreement with the white European
world, was settled and determined upon the fact that I was and must be
a thing apart. It was impossible to gainsay this. It was impossible
for any time and to any distance to withdraw myself and look down upon
these absurd assumptions with philosophical calm and humorous
self-control. (1940: 136) 
The “absurd assumptions” can and often do infiltrate the
Negro’s psyche, and affect how she thinks and feels about
herself in ways that stubbornly resist her own efforts to override or
undermine them. (Or else, perhaps, more rarely, they elicit fierce and
abiding anger, even rage.) Writing in a less autobiographical vein, Du
Bois notes that despair of racial progress “too often”
results from the Negro’s “lack of faith in essential Negro
possibilities parallel to similar attitudes on the part of the
whites”. This attitude itself is, he continues, “a natural
phenomenon”, since Negroes share “average American culture
and current American prejudices”. Because of this, it is 
almost impossible for a Negro boy trained in a white Northern high
school and a white college to come out with any high idea of his own
people or any abiding faith in what they can do. (1940: 191) 
This is Du Boisian double-consciousness as Gooding-Williams interprets
it in Souls.
But the 1940 text never asserts a basic inner duality within the
Negro: missing entirely from the Dusk of Dawn account is any
mention of inward two-ness, of the psychic splitting that was so
crucial to the account given in Souls. In the later work the
issue is characterized in the terminology of “Negro
self-criticism” (1940: 179), a “lack of faith in essential
Negro possibilities” (1940: 191), and the “inner
contradiction and frustration which [segregation and white racist
intransigence] involves” (1940: 187)—a terminology that,
while conveying the ambivalence and complexity of the treatment in the
earlier text, falls far short of an assertion of an overriding psychic
duality. And this is not because the text does not address the
“felt experience” of being a Negro in America: a central,
and the longest, chapter in Dusk of Dawn is devoted to
“The Colored World Within”.
There are, “naturally”, problems with the unitary
consciousness of a soul within the double environment Du Bois depicts,
but these fall short of causing a split in the psyche itself. There is
resentment, frustration, and anger verging on madness; there is a
faithlessness, and, often, consequent despair; there are the
temptations to turning one’s back on the folk, and also
temptations to reject absolutely anything the “environing”
white world offers or proposes. And there is what Du Bois calls 
that bitter inner criticism of Negroes directed in upon themselves,
which is widespread. It tends often to fierce, angry, contemptuous
judgment of nearly all that Negroes do, say, and believe….
(1940: 179) 
But what two-ness there is in the Dusk of Dawn account has
been removed from the inwardness of souls, and is located instead in
the “environing” world.
There are two more important ways in which the Dusk of Dawn
account diverges from that of Souls. The first is that the
brute facticity of what Du Bois calls the “inferiority” of
the colored world is asserted in this text quite explicitly, and its
effect upon the attitudes of Negroes described tellingly. Du Bois
presents this stark reality as undeniable, while at the same time as
contrasted to the claims made by racist prejudice concerning black
folk, claims he takes the trouble to explicitly reject:
It is true, as I have argued, that Negroes are not inherently ugly nor
congenitally stupid. They are not naturally criminal and their poverty
and ignorance today have clear and well-known and remediable causes.
All this is true: and yet what every colored man living today knows is
that by practical present measurements Negroes today are inferior to
whites. The white folk of the world are richer and more intelligent;
they live better; have better government; have better legal systems;
have built more impressive cities; larger systems of communication and
they control a larger part of the earth than all the colored peoples
together. (1940: 173–4)
By invoking this set of what he regards as indubitable facts, Du Bois
is naming historically contingent yet palpably certain realities that,
he claims, “every colored man living today knows”.
Consequently, “Negro self-criticism” is, in part, grounded
in “a perfectly obvious fact” (1940: 179), namely,
“that most Negroes in the United States today occupy a low
cultural status” and a “low social condition” (1940:
180), which he specifies by immediately discussing “Negro
ignorance”, the death rate, “criminal tendencies”,
poverty, and “social degradation”. These facts, it is
worth emphasizing, are listed by Du Bois not as representations of
white prejudice but as an essential acknowledgment of patent
observable realities. Though their causes, both present and past,
count against the prejudiced conclusions often drawn, the causes are
less visible, so less obvious. But the facts on the ground cannot be
denied. 
Another important departure of the 1940 text from Souls is an
explicit recognition in the latter text that the psychic phenomena
attributed to Negro Americans are not distinctive; as Du Bois writes,
[s]imilar phenomena may be noticed always among undeveloped or
suppressed peoples or groups undergoing extraordinary experience. None
have more pitilessly castigated the Jews than the Jewish prophets,
ancient and modern. (1940: 179) 
He goes on to cite as further cases the Irish and the Germans of the
Sturm und Drang period. This is part of a broader recognition
by Du Bois, one that he gives expression to explicitly only subsequent
to Souls, that “the imprisoning of a human group with
chains in the hands of an environing group” was not “a
singularly unusual characteristic of the Negro in the United States in
the nineteenth century”, but that “the majority of mankind
has struggled through this inner spiritual slavery…”
(1940: 137).
Any account of double consciousness rooted in the sweep of Du
Bois’s writings must acknowledge his taking it as both a state
of consciousness of individual African-Americans as members of an
oppressed group and also as a form of social recognition of an entire
social situation in which that group finds itself. Such an account
must, of course, confront the glaringly peculiar fact of the singular
use of the term by Du Bois despite his revisiting in his writing, on
various occasions in different contexts of publication, what seems to
be an increasingly expansive repertoire of closely related
phenomena.
Du Bois gives up the moniker “double-consciousness” for a
variety of reasons, but at least in part because he wants to resist
the impression that this is simply and only a problem of
consciousness, unconnected with any palpable social facts. Also, as we
have seen, the close association of at least some of the original
senses of “double-consciousness”—as the term was
used just before the turn of the twentieth century—with
pathological psychic states, may well have given Du Bois pause after
his initial use of the term. Part of what he wants to distance himself
from is the idea—explicitly rejected in Dusk of
Dawn—that collectivities can be treated as entities with
their own consciousnesses, reified in what he seems to have regarded
as mistaken idealist theoretical overreach. Finally, Du Bois seems to
have opened up and expanded the range of phenomena related to double
consciousness beyond the exemplar in the 1903 texts.
But Du Bois did not characterize the matter succinctly in one place so
as to embrace both all its effects on consciousness and affect
and its reality as an “environing” condition.
Rather, he employs, alternately, two strategies of writing in trying
to capture its fullness. He presents first- and third-personal
accounts of “what it is like”, “spiritually”,
to live in conditions of double consciousness, either through
autobiographical writing or by personifying the feelings, attitudes,
and thoughts associated with double consciousness in fictional or
composite characters. And he also describes social environments along
with the “customs” and “irrational”,
“subconscious” attitudes and modes of being characteristic
of social groups living in those environments. 
Near the end of his life, in the posthumously published
Autobiography, Du Bois revisited his original formulation of
“two-ness”:
I began to feel that dichotomy which all my life has characterized my
thought: how far can love for my oppressed race accord with love for
the oppressing country? And when these loyalties diverge, where shall
my soul find refuge? (1968: 169) 
This passage relates the young Du Bois’s feelings on observing
“the pageantry and patriotism of Germany in 1892”. It is
plainly autobiographical rather than programmatic, as are the
Souls texts. This formulation in no way suggests anything
like a basic psychic split, but rather reflects an ambivalence, a
conflict of affections and loyalties—but within an integral
self.
All previous critical attention has been fixed steadily on the
spiritual aspect of the phenomena of double consciousness, virtually
none on the environing conditions Du Bois saw as giving rise to it. The environing
conditions might be summed up as
a social and political regime grounded in the maintenance of rigid
segregation in vastly unequal living conditions of social groups
ideologically identified as racially distinct and unequal, creating a
“double environment” particularly for members of the
subordinate racial group.  
The spiritual correlate of these environing conditions would
include some combination of at least some of these sorts of emergent
aspects:
This list, while including the sense of
“double-consciousness” as Du Bois develops the idea in
Souls (particularly the first three items), also expands the
sense of “double consciousness” to include more active,
practical, and critical appropriations of the situation established by
the color line.