The 6th century witnesses at once the culmination and the demise of a
long tradition of philosophical commentaries on the works of Plato and
especially Aristotle. This tradition already began in the 1st century
BCE, but it becomes first tangible for us with the commentaries on
Aristotle of Aspasius in the 2nd century CE and especially with
Alexander of Aphrodisias in the early 3rd century. This exegetical
tradition reached its pinnacle in the first half of the 6th century
with the great works of Ammonius Hermeiou and his pupils Simplicius
and John Philoponus. The latter was a Christian who, after much
criticism and polemic, broke with (pagan) Neoplatonic school
philosophy and turned his energy to the exegesis of biblical texts as
well as the theological controversies of his day. However, because of
the survival of even later commentaries attributed to philosophers
with Christian names such as Elias and David, it is commonly supposed
that in the later 6th century pagan philosophy was indeed still being
taught in Alexandria, only by Christians. This would then be in marked
contrast to Athens, where pagan philosophy died out rapidly after the
Athenian academy was closed by Emperor Justinian in 529.
Three works attributed to Elias have been published: a commentary on
Porphyry’s Isagoge, a commentary on Aristotle’s
Categories (both in Commentaria in Aristotelem
Graeca Vol 18) and a third, highly truncated work on
Aristotle’s Prior Analytics (see Westerink 1961). The
author of these works may have been a pupil of Olympiodorus, and in
that case it is quite possible that the commentary on the
Isagoge was composed in the form of a transcript of
Olympiodorus’ lectures.
In the tradition of Neoplatonic philosophical training,
Porphyry’s Isagoge and Aristotle’s
Categories were part of the standard curriculum for
beginners, a practice that was well established by the 5th and 6th
centuries. Like Ammonius Hermeiou before him, Elias prefaces the
lectures on the Isagoge with a very general
‘Introduction’ to philosophy, a text that belongs to the
genre of protreptic or exhortational philosophical literature.
Elias’exhortation to philosophy consists of 12 lectures designed
to serve a triple purpose: 1. to outline and define the scope of
philosophy, 2. to justify the various topics of the lectures the
students are about to hear, and 3. to motivate them in a general way
to pursue a course in philosophy.
To some extent, Elias’ introduction to philosophy brings out the
individual character and temperament of the author. He comes across as
a very lively lecturer who dazzled his students with quotations and
allusions of many kinds. For example, in his 12 introductory lectures,
Plato is mentioned 22 times; there are 15 quotations from Homer as
well as numerous scattered references to Aristotle, Plotinus, Proclus,
Marinus, Hierocles, Pythagoras, Archilochus, Theognis, Herodotus,
Callimachus, Demosthenes, Sophocles, Euripides, Menander, Galen and an
unnamed Stoic. Moreover, Elias repeatedly emphasizes the
Platonic-Neoplatonic conviction that the purpose of philosophy is the
transformation or assimilation of a human being to the godhead, a
genuinely Platonic ideal explicitly stated in the Theaetetus,
176A-B. Given that by the late 6th century a professor in Alexandria,
or anywhere else in the Eastern empire, would address a predominantly,
if not exclusively, Christian audience, these remarks give one pause,
especially if one believes that they stem from an author who, if the
attribution to “Elias” can be trusted, himself subscribed to
Christianity. For a Christian, of course, drawing near the godhead
would not be the result of reading and embracing Platonic philosophy
but of divine grace that depended on faith.
In his preface to Aristotle’s Categories, Elias gives a
concise and admirable summary of the qualities an ideal commentator
ought to have (CAG 18.1, pp. 122f. as quoted by Wilson 1983,
47):
The title of a recently published manuscript, dated to the 13th or
14th century and containing a Prior Analytics commentary,
suggests that Elias, who is named as the author of the commentary,
once held the office of prefect in the Byzantine empire. In the
Novellae of Justinian, a prefect by the name of Elias is
indeed mentioned (Novel. CLIII, dated 12 December 541; cf.
Westerink 1961). Since the name Elias was rare in secular circles at
the time, Westerink proposes that unless evidence to the contrary
emerges our commentator and the prefect should be considered
identical. A (praetorian or urban) prefect in the late Roman Empire
was, as direct representative of the emperor, the highest civilian
administrator of a region or city (most importantly Rome or
Constantinople). If our commentator really held such an illustrious
office, presumably after he had established himself as professor of
philosophy (cf. the life of Themistius), he most likely also came from
a high-ranking family of nobles. Unfortunately, apart from the scant
evidence found in the late manuscripts of the extant commentaries
nothing further is known about a philosopher or prefect by the name of
Elias. A fairly comprehensive Byzantine list of commentators on
Porphyry and Aristotle does not know of any philosopher by that name,
nor do Photius (9th c. Byzantine scholar) and the author of the Suda,
a 10th c. encyclopedia. A closer look at the manuscript tradition
reveals that the texts now attributed to Elias circulated as anonymous
manuscripts for a considerable time, meaning that the attribution to
one “Elias” is a much later addition. Given that there is nothing
explicitly Christian about these works (there are no references to the
Bible, but the text abounds with references to pagan philosophers and
literary figures), and given that we find an explicit avowal of
doctrines that are quite obviously at variance with Christianity (e.g.
that a philosopher must strive to imitate the sun; that the world is
eternal), it is possible to adopt a more skeptical position (cf.
Wildberg 1990). That is to say, the suspicion arises that the original
author may not have been Christian at all, but a latter-day pagan who,
like Olympiodorus, taught Greek philosophy to a Christian audience. In
that case, the attribution of these commentaries to some
“Elias” may well have been motivated by monastic scribes
who sought to justify copying these pagan philosophical texts by
inventing a good Christian name for their author. Alternatively, if
the author was indeed the Christian prefect Elias, as Westerink
suggests, we are invited to modify our preconceptions about the
possibility of pagan philosophical discourse within the Christian
culture of the Byzantine empire. In either case, the commentaries
testify to the vitality and importance of pagan philosophy and
learning in the mid- or late 6th century CE.