The major source for Epicurean doctrine is Diogenes Laertius’
third-century C.E. Lives of Eminent Philosophers, a compilation of
information on the lives and doctrines of the philosophers of
classical Greece (see “Doxography of Ancient
Philosophy”). In the tenth and final book, devoted to
Epicureanism, Diogenes preserves three of Epicurus’ letters to his
disciples, in which he presents his basic views in a concise and handy
form. The Letter to Herodotus summarizes Epicurus’ physical theory,
the Letter to Menoeceus offers a précis of Epicurean ethics,
and the Letter to Pythocles treats astronomical and meteorological
matters. (There is some doubt about whether the last is by Epicurus
himself or a follower, but there seems to be sufficient reason to
attribute it to the founder himself.) Diogenes also quotes a
collection of brief sayings, called the “Principal
Beliefs” or “Principal Doctrines” (Kuriai Doxai),
excerpted from the writings of Epicurus or, in some cases, of his
close associates; another such collection, partially overlapping with
the first, survives in an independent manuscript and is conventionally
called the Vatican Sayings. The purpose of both sets, like that of the
Letters, was to make the core doctrines easy to remember. Diogenes
also fills in topics not covered in the Letters, and provides a list
of Epicurus’ writings and other biographical information.
Short citations of Epicurus’ works appear in other writers (e.g.,
Plutarch, Sextus Empiricus, and the Greek commentators on Aristotle),
often taken out of context or presented in a polemical and distorted
fashion. (The standard edition of Epicurus’ works in Greek is
Arrighetti 1973; the fullest collection of fragments and testimonies
is still Usener 1887, repr. with Italian translation, Ramelli 2002;
for translations, see Bibliography: Editions, Translations,
Commentaries). In addition, several works of Epicurus, including parts
of his major treatise, On Nature (Peri
phuseôs) — a series of lectures running to 37 papyrus
rolls — have been recovered in damaged condition from the
library of a villa in the town of Herculaneum, which was buried in the
eruption of Mt. Vesuvius in 79 C.E. The library almost certainly
contained the working collection of Philodemus, an Epicurean
philosopher from Syria who studied in Athens and moved to Italy in the
first century B.C.E. Many of the rolls consist of Philodemus’ own
writings, and provide valuable information about later issues in the
history of Epicureanism. One must be cautious about ascribing these
views to the founder himself, although the school tended to be
conservative and later thinkers embellished rather than altered
Epicurus’ own teachings. New editions and translations are now making
these difficult texts available to a wider readership.
More or less contemporary with Philodemus is Lucretius (first century
B.C.E.), who composed in Latin De rerum natura (“On the
Nature of Things”; the title, if it is Lucretius’ own, is an
adaptation of “On Nature”) in six books of hexameter
verse, the meter characteristic of epic and didactic poetry. As a
dedicated Epicurean, passionate to promulgate the message of the
founder, Lucretius reproduced Epicurean doctrine faithfully (Sedley
1998; Clay 1983 allows Lucretius more originality). His poem
concentrates principally on the physical and psychological or
epistemological aspects of Epicureanism, and to a great extent omits
the ethical. From a hostile point of view, Cicero rehearsed and
criticized Epicurus’ ideas, especially concerning ethics, in several
of his philosophical works, including On Moral Ends (De
finibus) and the Tusculan Disputations. Still later, in
the second century C.E., another Diogenes erected a large inscription,
to this day only partially excavated, in the city of Oenoanda (in
southwestern Turkey), which contained the basic tenets of Epicureanism
(authoritative edition by Smith 1993, but new fragments have been
published subsequently; see also Gordon 1996, Hammerstaedt et alii, 2017).
“Epicurus, the son of Neocles and Chaerestrata, was an Athenian
from the deme of Gargettus and the lineage of the Philaïdes, as
Metrodorus says in his On Noble Families. Heraclides, among
others, in his epitome of Sotion, says that he was raised in Samos,
since the Athenians were given parcels of land there, but came to
Athens when he was eighteen, when Xenocrates was head of the Academy
and Aristotle was still in Chalcis” (where he died in 322). So
begins the account by Diogenes Laertius (10.1). The dates for
Epicurus’ birth and first move to Athens are thus 341 B.C.E. and 323
respectively. Diogenes adds that after the death of Alexander (323),
when the Athenians were expelled from Samos, Epicurus left Athens and
joined his father in Colophon (in 321), on the coast of what is now
Turkey. Here he studied philosophy under the tutelage of Nausiphanes,
a Democritean philosopher with skeptical leanings, and author of a
work called the
Tripod, on which Epicurus reportedly drew for
his Canon, his principal work on epistemology; in ethics,
Nausiphanes substituted the term
akataplêxia (“undauntability”) for Democritus’
athambiê, “fearlessness,” as crucial to the good
life, which invites comparison with Epicurus’ ataraxia or
“imperturbability,” though Epicurus is said to have denied
having been influenced by him (On Nausiphanes’ role in transmitting
elements of Democritean doctrine to Epicurus, see Warren 2002:
160–92.)
Ten years later, Epicurus moved to Mytilene on the island of Lesbos,
and soon proceeded to Lampsacus on the nearby mainland; in both cities
he taught and gathered followers before returning again to Athens in
307/06, where he remained until his death in 270, at the age of
seventy or seventy-one. In Athens, he purchased the property that
became known as the “Garden” (later used as a name for his
school itself) and began to develop his own school in
earnest. Diogenes reports a number of slanderous stories that were
circulated by Epicurus’ opponents, despite which he affirms that
Epicurus was of an extraordinarily humane disposition; this was the
prevailing view, shared even by hostile witnesses to
Epicureanism. Diogenes also records Epicurus’ will (10.16–21),
in which, among other things, he made provisions for the children of
his friends and appointed a successor.
Epicurus held that the elementary constituents of nature are
undifferentiated matter, in the form of discrete, solid and
indivisible particles (“atoms”) below the threshold of
perception, plus empty space, that is, the complement of matter or
where matter is not (Inwood 1981, Konstan 2014; contra Sedley 1982,
who argues that space, for Epicurus, is a continuous matrix extending
uniformly throughout the universe, and is either occupied by matter or
empty). In its broad outline, Epicurus inherited this scheme from the
earlier atomists, above all Democritus. But Democritus’ version had
been the object of critiques by later thinkers, especially Aristotle,
in part for incoherencies in the notion of an infinite void, in part
for problems attaching to his idea of minima, or entities of the
smallest conceivable size (see especially Physics Book
6). First, freestanding entities of minimal size could have no edges,
and so no shapes, or rather would be all edge: thus, if two minima
touched, they would wholly overlap. (The same argument applies to
points in a line, which is why a line contains points but is not
composed of them, according to Aristotle.)  Further, if atoms really
are conceptually indivisible, and not just physically unsplittable,
then when two atoms pass by each other it is impossible that they
should at any time be only partway past, for this would imply a point
partway along the length of the atom, which contradicts the premise
that it is a minimum.  Although Aristotle does not state the argument
precisely in this form, it is apparent that a strict conception of
minimal-sized atoms entails that motion too must consist of
discontinuous quanta; and if motion, then time. Atoms must, then,
Aristotle inferred, move in discrete hops (kinêmata),
each one occupying a single temporal minimum — and hence, all
atoms must move at a uniform speed. An infinite void, with atoms
distributed throughout it, led to problems of its own, for it permits
no intrinsic spatial orientation and hence no account of why things
fall, as they are observed to do.
The problem for Epicurus was to find a way of explaining the natural
phenomena of bodily movement while responding to the challenges posed
by Aristotle’s criticisms of Democritus’ theory. Epicurus rose to the
challenge, although one cannot be certain that he was responding
directly to Aristotle’s critique. (It is unclear whether or how much
philosophers of Epicurus’ generation who were not members of
Aristotle’s own school had access to Aristotle’s treatises.)
First, he distinguished between the atom, which by its nature cannot
be broken apart, and the minimum conceivable expanse of matter: atoms
have such minima as parts, but are not minima themselves — there
can be no free-standing entity one minimum expanse in size. This
resolves the problem of atomic edges, and also that of how atoms can
come in different shapes and sizes (though never large enough to be
seen): to have the hooks and crevices needed to form compounds, they
can scarcely be theoretically partless. Second, Epicurus agreed that
time too is discontinuous, as is motion: Simplicius
(p. 934.23–30 Diels; translation in Konstan 1989) quotes him as
affirming that it is untrue to say that an atom is moving over a
minimum interval, but only that it has moved (some scholars maintain
that this is a later innovation in the school; see especially Verde
2013). What is more, as Aristotle had argued must be the case, atoms
all move at the same velocity (the principle
of isotakheia). This last claim entailed difficulties of its
own, such as how atoms ever overtake each other, if they are moving in
the same direction.  (Lucretius invoked the idea of a random swerve to
solve this one; see below.) But it also provided a solution to another
problem, that of entropy: for since atoms can never slow down, the
universe can never come to a halt (in modern terms, there is no loss
of energy). As for gravity, Epicurus may have had a solution to this
too, and in a novel form. If an atom just on its own cannot slow down
or alter its direction of motion, then an atom that is rising or
moving in an oblique direction cannot at some point begin to tilt or
fall, unless something blocks its progress and forces it to do so. If,
however, after a collision atoms tended to emerge in a statistically
favored direction — that is, if the motions of all atoms after
collisions did not cancel each other out but on average produced a
vector, however small, in a given direction, then that direction would
by definition be down. The absence of a global orientation in the
universe was thus immaterial. Due to this vector, any given world
will, like our own, be similarly oriented in respect to
the direction “down.” (Given the infinite expanse of the universe on Epicurean
theory — see below — we must expect there to be a
plurality of worlds, some like ours, some — within limits
— different.)
Macroscopic objects, of course, do not move at a uniform and very
great speed; the atoms within them do, but their motions are restricted
and deflected by neighboring atoms, and so they vibrate. In the case of
compound objects that are completely at rest, the resultant of internal
atomic motions is zero, relative, at least, to the earth, which may
have an average motion of its own. If so, and if for some reason the
earth’s motion is slower in a downward direction than that of objects
on or near its surface — because, say, the earth is disk-shaped, as
Epicurus held, and hence sinks more slowly in the surrounding atomic
medium, like a falling leaf — then Epicurus could explain as well why
things like stones tend to fall to the earth’s surface when let go.
Epicurus operated with a highly limited number of elementary
principles in nature — he did not know the concept of force, for
example, or the associated ideas of attraction and repulsion among
atoms, not to mention more arcane properties — and for all his
efforts to account for all the physical features of the world on the
basis of this theory, paradoxes remained. An excellent one is posed by
Sextus Empiricus (Against the Physicists = M
10.144–48), which at the same time gives an idea of how
Epicurean atoms were understood to behave (at least in Sextus’ time,
late 2nd century AD).  Sextus imagined two atoms separated
by a distance of nine minima, traveling at the same speed (as atoms
must) toward each other; after four temporal minima, the atoms would
be one spatial minimum apart.  Then what? They cannot meet in the
middle of the remaining distance, by the very concept of a
minimum. Nor can one cross the interval before the other, without
violating the rule of equal velocity. But how, then, can they meet at
all? We do not know an Epicurean reply to this conundrum. Perhaps
atoms are always an even number of minimal spaces apart from one
another. Or else, minima are always bundled in such large quantities
that it is meaningless to speak of an odd or even number of minima
between atoms; the Stoics, at all events, held that whether the number
of stars, for example, is odd or even is absolutely or naturally
non-evident (kathapax adela, Sextus Empiricus Outline of
Pyrrhonism = PH 2.97, M 8.147; physei
adela, M 8.317–18). But Epicurus believed that
motion at the atomic level obeyed different laws from those that
appear to operate at the level of macroscopic objects (that atomic
motion is discontinuous is an example). Perhaps, then, motions over
small numbers of minima were in some sense indiscernible. Finally, it
is possible that he discounted such a puzzle as a purely mathematical
paradox, since it is recorded that he had little interest in
mathematics as a separate science from physics and believed it to be
irrelevant to the proper study of physics.
Fascinating as these questions are in their own right, Epicurus
himself does not proceed by creating an abstract model, exploring its
internal coherence, and determining its applicability to phenomena, in
the ideal manner of modern science. Rather, he begins with the
testimony of the senses, which he thinks are always reliable. These
provide a basis on which to draw conclusions either with respect to
things that still await confirmation or those that are by nature
imperceptible (Letter to Herodotus = LH 38). Thus,
in beginning his account of the physical world in this Letter, he
argues that things cannot arise out of nothing, since otherwise there
would be no need of specific seeds for specific plants and animals,
and anything whatsoever could be generated out of just any types of
material elements. Since this is not seen to happen, but reproduction
in things we can observe with our senses is in fact orderly and
determinate, spontaneous generation at any level is ruled out. The
logic is what Epicurus calls counterwitnessing: a hypothetical premise
(here, that things sometimes arise out of nothing) is eliminated
because experience tells against its conclusion (here, that the coming
into being of visible objects does not require determinate seeds or
materials). More simply, if A then B; but not
B, hence not A. One might, of course, challenge the
implication: something might arise from nothing, even if there are no
cases of chickens giving birth to horses. The important point,
however, is that Epicurus invokes the data of perception to testify
for or against the nature of elementary phenomena; he assumes a
certain uniformity of nature at all levels. So too with his next
postulate: things are not destroyed into what is not, since in that
case everything would cease to exist (and would have ceased to exist
before now, given infinite past time — recall that nothing is
created out of nothing); but things do exist, hence the premise is
false.
As for bodies (note the plural: Epicurus does not typically speak of
matter per se) and void as the basic physical principles, the senses,
Epicurus affirms, testify to the existence of bodies, and by
calculation on the basis of the senses we infer the nature of what is
invisible, for example the atoms (LH 39). Here the reasoning
is based on analogy: what is evident to our senses must be true on the
microscopic level as well, at least in some respects. Void must exist,
in turn, if bodies are to be able to move, as they are seen to
do. Thus motion is the counterwitness to the non-existence of void
— an indirect argument is required since one cannot perceive
empty space.  What is more, since bodies, being “full,”
offer resistance and void, being empty, offers no resistance, they
complement each other and exhaust the possibilities; hence it is
impossible to conceive of anything besides these two principles, apart
from things that are accidents of them — accidents that arise
from unions of elementary bodies in the void. (Inconceivability is
another tool in Epicurus’ method of demonstration.) These elementary
bodies, then, are the atoms, which are indivisible and inalterable, if
things are not to dissolve into nothingness. The Letter to
Herodotus is an epitome of Epicurean doctrine, and the arguments
are crisp and abbreviated, but the reasoning is clear, and is
confirmed by the more detailed treatment in Lucretius, which almost
certainly follows Epicurus’ On Nature (see Leone
2012). Epicurus appeals to some elementary intuitions concerning
bodies and their movement through space in order to establish the
structure of imperceptibly small things; he concludes that these must
be inalterable if nature is not to dissolve into nothing (creation
back out of nothing having already been eliminated by the argument
cited above from regularity in generation); and the basic features of
the atomic system are then in place. A similar appeal to the senses
establishes the infinity of the universe, since what is finite must
have an edge, and an edge is conceived in reference to something
beyond it. But the universe — in Greek, the “all”
— contains everything, and so there is nothing outside it by
which to conceive an edge. Hence, it is infinite.  And if the all is
infinite, so is the void and the number of atoms as well, for
otherwise atoms would be too widely dispersed ever to meet
(LH 41–42).
Epicurus now has in place the fundamental constituents of his
natural world, and he might have stopped here, with atoms and void and
the denial, on the grounds of inconceivability, of any other kind of
basic physical principle. All secondary properties, such as color and
taste, will be explained as epiphenomena of atomic combinations, and
perception of things at a distance by the continual emission of
infinitesimally thin laminas from objects, which maintain the relevant
features of the source (in the case of vision, for example, the laminas
will preserve the atomic patterns specific to the color and shape of
the object) and directly stimulate the relevant sense organ. This is a
tricky thesis, and again posed puzzles: how do the lamina or simulacra,
as Lucretius called them, of a mountain enter the eye, for example? In
fragments? By somehow shrinking? We do not know the answer to this one.
A few more concepts fill in the picture of the natural world: thus,
Epicurus denies that there can be infinitely many kinds of atoms, for
then all shapes (which define the kinds) at any given magnitude would
be exhausted and atoms would have to reach visible proportions, which
we know that they do not (this argument depends on the idea of minima,
discussed further below); instead, the number of kinds (i.e., shapes of
various microscopic sizes) is inconceivably large but “not strictly
infinite,” whereas the number of each kind of atom is simply infinite
(LH 55–56). This condition is also invoked to explain why there is a
limit on possible types of combinations of atoms, and hence on the
number of viable species of things in the perceptible world: if there
were infinitely many kinds of atoms, Epicurus believed, they could
combine to generate absolutely anything — an infinity of different
sorts of thing.
But an infinite number of solid and therefore indivisible atoms of
finitely many kinds, such as Epicurus’ theory provides, are enough to
avoid the possibility of the universe crumbling into nothing. Why did
Epicurus complicate matters still further with the doctrine that atoms
themselves consist of still smaller parts in the form of
mathematically minimal expanses, as we saw above that he does? Finite
bodies, according to Epicurus, had to be composed of smaller expanses,
and if there were no lower limit in size to such expanses, one would
have to imagine traversing such a body in an infinite number of moves
— but then, however small these infinitesimals might be, the
object that contained them, Epicurus reasoned, would have to be
infinitely large (LH 56–57). What are such minima like?
Epicurus asks us to think of the smallest perceptible thing. It
differs from larger visible entities in that it has no sub-parts to be
traversed with the eye: if you do attempt to visualize such sub-parts,
they simply coincide with the original perceptible minimum. Since such
minimal visible entities have no parts, they do not touch edge to edge
(edges are parts), and yet they measure out the body that contains
them, larger bodies having more such minima. By analogy with the
visible, then, we conceive of the smallest part of an atom
(LH 58–59). This conception resembles the way points
exist in a line, according to Aristotle, since they too do not touch,
nor can they exist independently. But Epicurean minima differ from
points in that they are physical expanses and so have extension.  This
looks like a contradictory state of affairs: can we imagine, for
example, an atom consisting of just two minima? Or ten? It would be
like counting up the least visible bits of a perceptible object.
Geometrical problems arise as well, since it was known that the side
and diagonal of a cube, for example, were incommensurable, yet both
must, it would appear, be composed of finite and hence commensurable
numbers of minima. On the assumption that Epicurus was aware of and
cared about such puzzles, it has been suggested that he thought any
atom consists of a not strictly infinite, but inconceivably large
— and so “not strictly finite” — number of
minima (see Konstan 1989a): thus, the minimum may be imagined as the
inverse of the number of kinds of atoms postulated by Epicurus, a
quantity that takes on a quasi-technical status as a special order of
magnitude. But sufficient evidence for this hypothesis is lacking.
Having established the physical basis of the world, Epicurus proceeds
to explain the nature of the soul (this, at least, is the order in
which Lucretius sets things out). This too, of course, consists of
atoms: first, there is nothing that is not made up of atoms and void
(secondary qualities are simply accidents of the arrangement of
atoms), and second, an incorporeal entity could neither act on nor be
moved by bodies, as the soul is seen to do (e.g., it is conscious of
what happens to the body, and it initiates physical
movement). Epicurus maintains that soul atoms are particularly fine
and are distributed throughout the body (LH 64), and it is by
means of them that we have sensations (aisthêseis) and
the experience of pain and pleasure, which Epicurus
calls pathê (a term used by Aristotle and others to
signify emotions instead). Body without soul atoms is unconscious and
inert, and when the atoms of the body are disarranged so that it can
no longer support conscious life, the soul atoms are scattered and no
longer retain the capacity for sensation (LH 65). There is
also a part of the human soul that is concentrated in the chest, and
is the seat of the higher intellectual functions. The distinction is
important, because it is in the rational part that error of judgment
enters in. Sensation, like pain and pleasure, is incorrigible just
because it is a function of the non-rational part, which does not
modify a perception — that is, the reception of lamina emitted
from macroscopic bodies — by the addition of opinion or
belief.
The corporeal nature of the soul has two crucial consequences for
Epicureanism. First, it is the basis of Epicurus’ demonstration that
the soul does not survive the death of the body (other arguments to
this effect are presented in Lucretius 3.417–614). The soul’s
texture is too delicate to exist independently of the body that
contains it, and in any case the connection with the body is necessary
for sensation to occur. From this it follows that there can be no
punishment after death, nor any regrets for the life that has been
lost. Second, the soul is responsive to physical impressions, whether
those that arrive from without in the form of laminas or simulacra, or
those that arise from internal motions of the body. No phenomena are
purely mental, in the sense of being disembodied states or objects of
pure consciousness conceived as separate from embodiment. The
elementary sensations of pleasure and pain, accordingly, rather than
abstract moral principles or abstract concepts of goodness or badness,
are the fundamental guides to what is good and bad, since all sentient
creatures are naturally attracted to the one and repelled by the
other. The function of the human mind — that part of the soul that is
located in our chest — is not to seek higher things, but to
maximize pleasure and minimize pain. That is its entire objective; the
risk (a substantial one) is that it may miscalculate, since it is
subject to false beliefs and errors in cognitive processes.
Unlike other Hellenistic schools, such as those of Aristotle and the
Stoics, the Epicureans were not greatly interested in formal logic,
but they certainly needed a theory of the formation of beliefs. As far
as the ideational content of thinking — that is, the thought of
something — is concerned, Epicurus proposed a radically
reductive hypothesis: just as sensations occur as a result of thin
films emitted by objects that enter the appropriate sense organ, so
too some of these simulacra are fine enough to penetrate directly to
the mind (located in the chest), and that is how we imagine such
objects (e.g., gods). This process is invoked to explain not only
dream images, but many kinds of mental impression, including
impressions constituting voluntary thought: the latter occurs when we
attend to one or another of the exiguous physical films that are
continuously floating through the air. (How we manage to attend
voluntarily to whichever of these films we choose is not explained in
the surviving sources.) Imagining a thing is thus nothing more than
picking out the simulacra that have been emitted by it, and which may
endure beyond the life of the thing itself (hence we can imagine the
dead). These mental images have no privileged status, such as Plato
gave to his noetic Ideas or Forms; they are always true, but in this
do not differ from the information provided by the senses.  Mistakes
occur here too when the wrong beliefs are associated with such
impressions, for example, that because we have a mental image of a
dead person it follows that he or she still exists in a ghostly form.
Epicurean physics proves that this is impossible.
A great barrier to correct thinking is language itself, which, because
it has a name for death, may suggest that death (being dead) is
something a person can experience and hence deserves to be feared.
Words must be understood in their basic sense, Epicurus says, as
opposed to what he calls “empty sounds” (LH 37). The
culprit in misunderstanding is always an illegitimate inference from
sensation (the latter including thoughts produced by film-like
images). An example is the belief that centaurs exist. Epicurus does
not deny that the thought of a centaur corresponds to some real
stimulus in the form of simulacra: his theory of knowledge commits him
to the view that it must. But the flimsy laminas as they float through
the air can become distorted or interfere with one another, and thus
the upper part of a human figure may get loosely attached to the lower
part of a horse’s.  We know that this is unreal because such a
combination is physically impossible: horses and human beings mature
at different rates, for example, and eat different foods (see
Lucretius 5.878–91; cf.  Palaephatus On Incredible Tales
20). Beliefs about whether sensations correspond to an actually
existing thing must be tested against knowledge of the world, as
informed by Epicurean theory.
The ability to reason or calculate (logismos) cannot be a
function of images. It is the faculty that lets us infer by analogy
from the visible world to the invisible, and also that with which we
may recognize that not all pleasures are to be chosen at all times,
since some immediate pleasures may lead to long-term pain or harm
(Letter to Menoeceus = LM 129). What is more, one
must know something about the nature of pleasure in order to pursue it
rationally, and likewise for pain. Epicurus, it appears, uses the
terms pleasure and pain
(hêdonê, algêdôn) strictly
in reference to physical pathê or sensations, that is,
those that are experienced via the non-rational soul that is
distributed throughout the body. As for the rational part or mind, we
have positive and negative experiences through it too. Most prominent
among the negative mental states is fear, above all the fear of unreal
dangers, such as death.  Death, Epicurus insists, is nothing to us,
since while we exist, our death is not, and when our death occurs, we
do not exist (LM 124–25); but if one is frightened by
the empty name of death, the fear will persist since we must all
eventually die. This fear is one source of perturbation
(tarakhê), and is a worse curse than physical pain
itself; the absence of such fear is ataraxy, lack of perturbation, and
ataraxy, together with freedom from physical pain, is one way of
specifying the goal of life, for Epicurus.
There are also positive states of mind, which Epicurus identifies by
the special term khara (joy), as opposed
to hêdonê (pleasure, i.e., physical
pleasure). These states too depend on belief, whether true or
false. But Epicurus does not treat khara as an end, or part
of the end for living: rather, he tends to describe the goal by
negation, as freedom from bodily pain and mental disturbance
(LM 128).  However, happiness (eudaimonia),
according to Epicurus, is not simply a neutral or privative condition
but rather a form of pleasure in its own right — what Epicurus
called catastematic or (following Cicero’s Latin translation)
“static” as opposed to “kinetic”
pleasure. Although the precise nature of this distinction is debated,
kinetic pleasures seem to be of the non-necessary kind (see below),
such as those resulting from agreeable odors or sounds, rather than
deriving from replenishment, as in the case of hunger or thirst. The
philosophical school known as the Cyrenaics advocated increasing
desires and seeking ever new ways of gratifying them.
Epicurus objected that such pleasures are necessarily accompanied by
distress, for they depend upon a lack that is painful (Plato had
demonstrated the problematic nature of this kind of pleasure; see
Gorgias 496C–497A, Philebus 31E–32D,
46A–50C). In addition, augmenting desires tends to intensify
rather than reduce the mental agitation (a distressful state of mind)
that Epicurean philosophy sought to eliminate. Catastematic pleasure,
on the contrary, is (or is taken in) a state rather than a process: it
is the pleasure that accompanies well-being as such. The Cyrenaics and
others, such as Cicero, maintained, in turn, that this condition is
not pleasurable but rather neutral — neither pleasurable nor
painful.
For Epicurus, there are some fears that are perfectly legitimate; so
too are some desires. Epicurus offers a classification of desires into
three types: some are natural, others are empty; and natural desires
are of two sorts, those that are necessary and those that are merely
natural (see Cooper 1999). Natural and necessary are those that look
to happiness, physical well-being, or life itself (LM
127). Unnecessary but natural desires are for pleasant things like
sweet odors and good-tasting food and drink (and for various
pleasurable activities of sorts other than simple smelling, touching
and tasting). Empty desires are those that have as their objects
things designated by empty sounds, such as immortality, which cannot
exist for human beings and do not correspond to any genuine need. The
same holds for the desire for great wealth or for marks of fame, such
as statues: they cannot provide the security that is the genuine
object of the desire. Such desires, accordingly, can never be
satisfied, any more than the corresponding fears — e.g., the
fear of death — can ever be alleviated, since neither has a
genuine referent, i.e., death as something harmful (when it is
present, we do not exist) or wealth and power as salves for
anxiety. Such empty fears and desires, based on what Epicurus calls
kenodoxia or empty belief, are themselves the main source of
perturbation and pain in civilized life, where more elementary dangers
have been brought under control, since they are the reason why people
are driven to strive for limitless wealth and power,
subjecting themselves to the very dangers they imagine they are
avoiding.
Although human beings, like everything else, are composed of atoms
that move according to their fixed laws, our actions are not wholly
predetermined — rather than entertain such a paralyzing
doctrine, Epicurus says, it would be better to believe in the old
myths, for all their perversities (LM 134). What enables us to wrest
liberty from a mechanistic universe is the existence of a certain
randomness in the motion of atoms, that takes the form of a minute
swerve in their forward course (evidence for this doctrine derives
chiefly from later sources, including Lucretius and Cicero). It is not
entirely clear how the swerve operates: it may involve a small angle
of deviation from the original path, or else a slight shift sideways,
perhaps by a single minimum, with no change in direction. The idea of
such a minute veering, said to occur at no determinate time or place,
is less strange in the modern age of quantum physics than it was in
Epicurus’ time, and it gave rise to mocking critiques. More
problematic today is how the swerve might explain freedom of will
— if indeed Epicurus’ idea of the will was like our own. It did,
at all events, introduce an indeterminacy into the universe, and if
soul atoms, thanks to their fineness, were more susceptible to the
effects of such deviations than coarser matter, the swerve could at
least represent a breach in any strict predestination of human
behavior. And this might have been enough for Epicurus’ purposes: he
may not have invoked the swerve in order to explain voluntary action
(claiming that it is action deriving, immediately or ultimately, from
a swerve or some swerves of the soul’s atoms). He may have wished
merely to establish the possibility of action not deriving from the
positions of the soul’s constituent atoms at any time plus the effects
of collisions among them resulting from their given movements at that
time. According to Lucretius (2.225–50), the swerve was also put
to use to solve a cosmological problem: if at some (as it were)
initial moment all atoms were moving uniformly in a single direction
(downward) at the same speed, it is impossible to conceive how the
process of atomic collisions could have begun, save by some such
device. This seems a curious idea: given that time, like space, was
infinite according to Epicurus, he need not have imagined a time prior
to collisions. Just possibly the tendency of atoms to emerge from
collisions in a preferred direction (by definition “down”)
might lead over time to local regions of parallel motion, and the
swerve could serve to reintroduce contact among them. In any event,
Epicurus may have thought of atoms moving in some uniform direction
rather than in diverse ones as a default position for physical theory
(because of the simplicity of that hypothesis); thus he may have felt
the need to explain how the diversity of the atoms’ motions could have
arisen.
Although our main witness for Epicurus’ views on the evolution of
human society is Lucretius’ poem (5.925–1457), there is no doubt
that Lucretius was following, in the main, the ideas of the founder
himself, as recorded in Epicurus’ On Nature and other treatises. In
the beginning, human beings were solitary; they reproduced
haphazardly, could not communicate verbally, had no social
institutions, and survived because they were physically hardier than
their modern descendants. With time, the race softened, thanks in part
to the discovery of fire, in part too to the emergence of the family
and the gentler sentiments toward spouses and offspring to which the
family gave rise. At this stage, human beings were in a position to
unite in order to fend off natural dangers, such as wild beasts, and
they developed various kinds of technical skills, such as agriculture
and the building of houses, as well as language. Epicurus explains (LH
75–76) that names at first arose naturally, in the sense that as
human beings experienced different affects (pathê) or received
various images (phantasmata) they emitted air corresponding to these
stimuli; since human physical characteristics vary somewhat from place
to place, however, the sounds people produced in response to any given
stimulus similarly differed, which explains why there are many
tongues. Upon this basis, people later, nation by nation, established
certain terms by convention for the purpose of improving clarity and
brevity in communication. Finally, certain individual experts further
augmented the vocabulary by the introduction of new and specialized
words, to explain the results of their theoretical
investigations. Once language reached a developed state, people began
to establish alliances and friendships, which contributed further to
collective security.
This early form of social life had various advantages: among others,
the relative scarcity of goods prevented excessive competition
(sharing was obligatory for survival) and thereby set limits on those
unnatural desires that at a later, richer phase of society would lead
to wars and other disturbances. It would appear too that, before
language had developed fully, words more or less conformed to their
original or primitive objects, and were not yet a source of mental
confusion. But thanks to a gradual accumulation of wealth, the
struggle over goods came to infect social relations, and there emerged
kings or tyrants who ruled over others not by virtue of their physical
strength but by dint of gold. These autocrats in turn were overthrown,
and after a subsequent period of violent anarchy people finally saw
the wisdom of living under the rule of law. This might seem to
represent the highest attainment in political organization, but that
is not so for the Epicureans. For with law came the generalized fear
of punishment that has contaminated the blessings of life (Lucretius
5.1151; cf.  [Philodemus] On Choices and Avoidances
col. XII). Lucretius at this point gives an acount of the origin of
religious superstition and dread of the gods, and although he does not
relate this anxiety directly to the fear of punishment under human
law, he does state that thunder and lightning are interpreted as signs
that the gods are angry at human sins (5.1218–25). While
primitive people in the presocial or early communal stages might have
been awed by such manifestations of natural power and ascribed them to
the action of the gods, they would not necessarily have explained them
as chastisement for human crimes before the concept of punishment
became familiar under the regime of law.  People at an early time knew
that gods exist thanks to the simulacra that they give off, although
the precise nature of the gods according to Epicurus remains obscure
(for contrasting intepretations, see Konstan 2011 and Sedley 2011);
but the gods, for him, do not interest themselves in human affairs,
since this would compromise their beatitude (see Obbink 1996:
321–23).
If one does not fear the gods, what motive is there for living justly?
Where law obtains, Epicurus indicates, it is preferable not to commit
crimes, even secret ones, since there will always be anxiety over the
possibility of detection, and this will disrupt the tranquillity or
ataraxy that is the chief basis of happiness in life
(see Principal Beliefs = KD 34–35). Justice,
for Epicurus, depends on the capacity to make compacts neither to harm
others nor be harmed by them, and consists precisely in these
compacts; justice is nothing in itself, independent of such
arrangements (KD 31–33). According to Epicurus
(LM 132, KD 5), someone who is incapable of living
prudently, honorably, and justly cannot live pleasurably, and vice
versa. Moreover, prudence or wisdom (phronêsis) is the
chief of the virtues: on it depend all the rest. This again sounds
calculating, as though justice were purely a pragmatic and selfish
matter of remaining unperturbed.  Epicurus does not entertain the
thought experiment proposed by Plato in the Republic
(359C–360D), in which Plato asks whether a person who is
absolutely secure from punishment would have reason to be just. Did
Epicurus have an answer to such a challenge? He may simply have denied
that anyone can be perfectly confident in this way. Perhaps, however,
he did have a reply, but it was derived from the domain of psychology
rather than of ethics. A person who understands what is desirable and
what is to be feared would not be motivated to acquire inordinate
wealth or power, but would lead a peaceful life to the extent
possible, avoiding politics and the general fray. An Epicurean sage,
accordingly, would have no motive to violate the rights of
others. Whether the sage would be virtuous is perhaps moot; what
Epicurus says is that he would live virtuously, that is prudently,
honorably, and justly (the adverbial construction may be
significant). He would do so not because of an acquired disposition
or hexis, as Aristotle had it, but because he knows how to
reason correctly about his needs. Hence his desires would be limited
to those that are natural (not empty), and so easily satisfied, or at
least not a source of disturbance if sometimes unsatisfied.
Epicurus placed an extremely high value on friendship (or love:
philia). A saying with rather a more poetic flair than is Epicurus’
custom runs: “Friendship goes dancing round the world,
announcing to all of us to wake up to happiness” (Vatican Saying
= VS 52). Epicurus held that a wise man would feel the torture of a
friend no less than his own, and would die for a friend rather than
betray him, for otherwise his own life would be confounded (VS
56–57). These are powerfully altruistic sentiments for a
philosopher who posits as the unique goal in life happiness based on
freedom from physical pain and mental anxiety. Epicurus could justify
such an attitude by the same prudential calculus that he uses to argue
in favor of living justly: only by living in such a way that loyalty
to friends is perceived to be a consummate value will one be able to
feel secure in one’s friends, and thus maximize one’s felicity. Yet
this does not seem quite what Epicurus means when he says that
“friendship [or love] had its beginning as a result of utility,
but is to be chosen [or is a virtue, if we follow the manuscript
reading] for its own sake” (VS 23). The question is further
complicated by the report in Cicero’s On Moral Ends (1.66–70)
that there was a difference of opinion concerning friendship among
later Epicureans. Since human beings were originally asocial and only
later learned to form alliances and compacts, it is possible that
Epicurus means to say that this capacity for friendship arose out of
need, but that once the capacity for such feelings was acquired,
feeling them came to be valued in itself. The argument would be
similar to the modern idea that altruism could have developed as a
result of natural selection. But the evidence does not permit a firm
conclusion on this matter.
When Epicurus spoke of friendship, he may have had at least partly in
mind specifically the relationship among his followers, who seem to
have thought of themselves as friends. Epicureans were encouraged to
form communities and to observe certain rituals, although most of
these practices, such as the celebration each month of the day (the
20th) on which Epicurus was born or wearing rings bearing
an image of Epicurus, may have originated after the founder’s
death. The Epicureans paid attention to problems of pedagogy as well,
laying out the best way to correct the ideas of people new to the
school and its community without cajoling or discouraging them. It
must be remembered that Epicurus understood the task of philosophy
first and foremost as a form of therapy for life, since philosophy
that does not heal the soul is no better than medicine that cannot
cure the body (Usener 1887, frag. 221). A life free of mental anxiety
and open to the enjoyment of other pleasures was deemed equal to that
of the gods. Indeed, it is from the gods themselves, via the simulacra
that reach us from their abode, that we derive our image of blessed
happiness, and prayer for the Epicureans consisted not in petitioning
favors but rather in a receptivity to this vision. (Epicurus
encouraged the practice of the conventional cults.) Although they held
the gods to be immortal and indestructible (how this might work in a
materialist universe remains unclear), human pleasure might
nevertheless equal divine, since pleasure, Epicurus maintained (KD
19), is not augmented by duration (compare the idea of perfect health,
which is not more perfect for lasting longer); the catastematic
pleasure experienced by a human being completely free of mental
distress and with no bodily pain to disturb him or her is at the absolute top
of the scale. Nor is such pleasure difficult to achieve: it is a mark
precisely of those desires that are neither natural nor necessary that
they are hard to satisfy. Epicurus was famously content with little,
since on such a diet a small delicacy is as good as a feast, in
addition to which it is easier to achieve self-sufficiency, and
“the greatest benefit of self-sufficiency is freedom” (VS
77).