The core question underlying the existence of these two competing
philosophical traditions is the extent to which something is considered
as being formed or organized from the “beginning” or
whether organization and form arise only over time. 19th
century uses of the term “evolution” included a sense of
unfolding of preexisting form, or a sort of preformationism in contrast
to the epigenesis of the day. Discussions of “evolution”
and “epigenesis” can therefore be misleading in retrospect
since evolution has assumed a meaning more nearly like the old
epigenesis [Bowler 1975]. Making things even more complicated, by the
late 19th century “preformationism” really was
less about the preexistence of form as such than about various versions
of predetermination or predelineation. In the background lie debates
about the relative significance of predestination and free will, for
persons, for organic beings, or even for the inorganic. Furthermore
some authors saw epigenesis or preformation as entirely internally
directed, while others in each case allowed responses to the
environment. In each case, it is important to keep in mind what the
particular writer was saying and the arguments presented. Thus,
discussions of epigenesis and preformation often bring in other
ancillary questions and are difficult to separate from their contexts.
This essay is an effort to extract what is centrally at issue and to
focus on key contributions to the discussion.
Solar systems can “evolve” and could develop
epigenetically, at least in theory. Yet they are not thought of as
doing so, typically, and so the terms apply primarily to the organic
world. Species can evolve or develop more or less gradually, with more
or less form already physically existing or programmed in from the
beginning. Yet typically discussions of epigenesis and preformation
have focused on individual organisms and their development rather than
on species. The emphasis is on different interpretations of the actual
developmental process as it plays out in time, rather than on the
underlying cause of development per se.
Therefore, this essay focuses on individual organisms and
understandings of their development processes. Even more specifically,
this means looking at the development of their form and to a lesser
extent also function. Epigenesis and preformation offer two competing
interpretations of what is involved, with a range of alternatives in
between. The two approaches draw on different metaphysical and
different epistemological sets of assumptions. We can get at the
central issues by looking most closely at a series of focused
episodes.
Aristotle was a keen observer of many things, including embryos.
Looking at chicks, for example, and drawing on his interpretations
developed earlier for the physical science, he saw material, final,
formal, and efficient causes at work in developing individual
organisms. The early egg was not formed. It was not already a little
chick (or whatever the species). Instead, it gradually acquired form,
only gradually acquired a heart that began beating, only gradually
acquired the other parts that make it a chick. The material may be
there from the beginning in the case of chicks, for example, but the
formal cause only gradually plays out along with the efficient cause of
embryonic development.
Thus, Aristotle could fit his observations of embryos perfectly well
within his larger theoretical interpretations of the world. With
sexually reproducing species, individual organisms begin when the
fluids (or “semen”) from the mother and the father come
together. This combines the essential causes and initiates the
developmental process. Gradually, over time, form begins to emerge from
the unformed. The maternal contribution is the material cause, which
resides in the menstrual blood. After “the discharge is over and
most of it has passed off, then what remains begins to take shape as a
fetus” [Aristotle 1979]. Yet the female semen or menstrual blood
is only “that out of which it generates” and must be acted
upon by the male semen which is “that which generates.”
Together, consistent with the essential nature of the species and telos
(or final cause) in question, the formal cause and efficient causal
process act to bring a formed individual organism from potential into
actual being. The male and female parents serve as the
“principles of generation,” and each individual organism
begins anew.
For Aristotle, the causes lie internal to the combined fluids rather
than outside. An individual life begins when the male and female semen
are brought together. This is an external action and it starts the
individual developmental process in motion. From that point on, the
process is internal and driven by internal causes. The process then
leads to development of form of the individual's type, since
“once a thing has been formed, it must of necessity grow”
[Aristotle 1979, pp. 151-153, 157]. (See Lennox 2001 for discussion of
Aristotle's predecessors on these points; see Vinci and Robert
2005, on Aristotle's development.)
An individual organic life requires a “soul” which must
be there from the outset and that resides within the material body.
This soul guides the gradual epigenetic process of development. This is
the Aristotelian and not the Christian soul. Soul consists of the
vegetative (for all organisms), locomotory (for those organisms that
move, namely animals), and rational (for those organisms that think,
namely man). This soul resides in the combination of male and female
semen. The living differs from the dead because of the action of the
soul. Therefore, it is the teleological drive of the potential that
actualizes the individual and its form and function, epigenetically,
gradually, and internally.
Aristotelians followed Aristotle and without much further study of
embryos interpreted development, including human development, as
gradual and epigenetic. Traditional Catholicism agreed. St. Augustine
and St. Thomas Aquinas both held that hominization, or the coming into
being of the human, occurs only gradually. Quickening was thought to
occur around 40 days, and to be the point at which the merely animal
mix of material fluids was ensouled. Until 1859, when Pope Pius IX
decreed that life begins at “conception,” the Church was
epigenetic along with the Aristotelians [see Maienschein 2003].
Shirley Roe's discussion of the 18th century
debates provides the best understanding of the context. Enthusiasm for
scientific study of natural phenomena of all sorts was combined with
particular interest in natural history and changes over time and with
newly available microscopic methods to stimulate interest in
development [Roe 1971].  Aristotelian epigenesis still provided the
background assumptions about individual development as the
18th century began, and researchers sought to observe the
gradual emergence of form from non-form. Yet Aristotelian accounts
called for the efficacy of the causes, acting through the process of
ensoulment. In effect, this interpretation of epigenesis depended on a
life force within the organism driving its emergence of form. Those who
accepted epigenesis also accepted a form of vitalism.
Matter in motion, by itself, would not seem to have the capacity to
produce these results. How could matter become formed when it was not?
How could the emerging form acquire the capacity to function without
some vital force or factor that was not strictly material? This was the
problem for materialists. And as Roe explains quite nicely, the
18th century brought those who would be materialists. Those
who began with a materialist metaphysic, assuming that all that can
exist is matter in motion, could not see how gradual epigenetic
emergence of form could occur. The 18th century brought
debates between those who started from metaphysical assumptions of
materialism and those who started from epistemological assumptions that
empirical observation should provide the basis for scientific
knowledge.
One popular representation of the alternative, preformationist view
was with the homunculus. Whether initially intended seriously or as a
way to capture alternative ideas, the idea of a tiny preformed little
person did capture attention. Nicolaas von Hartsoeker gave us the image
in 1694 of a tiny man in the sperm, which became the starting point for
spermists. Others, ovists, accepted the idea of a preformed form but
placed it in the egg. This was preformationism taken quite literally.
The form that the individual adult organism would assume was,
physically and materially, preformed from the earliest stages of
development. From that point it just grew up.
Not all preformationists took their preformationism quite so
literally or graphically, but it did present a competing alternative to
Aristotelian epigenesis by the 18th century [see
Pinto-Correia 1997; Bowler 1971]. As Iris Fry has argued in her study of
origins of life debates, only with preformation could a materialistic
mechanist be a good Christian in the 18th century [Fry
2000, p. 26, citing Farley 1977 p. 29]. This debate played out, for
example, in the work of Caspar Friedrich Wolff and Charles Bonnet, both
looking at chick development. They looked at the same thing and even
fundamentally agreed about what they saw, but their conclusions were
quite different. This story can be seen as a debate about scientific
theory. Wolff was an epigenesist, maintaining that form emerges only
gradually; Bonnet was a preformationist, insisting that form exists
from the beginning of each individual organism and only experiences
growth over time. In addition to these theoretical and epistemological
issues, there is also a story about metaphysics. This story has been
told in detail elsewhere, and I need not repeat that exposition here.
The central point for our purposes is that the 18th century
brought debates between metaphysical materialists who were forced into
preformationism, and epistemological epigenesists who observed from
emerging only gradually and who were willing to accept vitalism as the
only apparent causal explanation for the emergence of form from the
not-formed [Roe 1981, Maienschein 2000].
In 1859, Darwin focused on embryos and their usefulness for
understanding evolutionary relationships. Ernst Haeckel brought the
study of embryos to popular attention. And histologists and
embryologists, especially in Germany and the United States, used
rapidly improving microscopic techniques to observe far more than had
been possible before. These observations, in the context of
evolutionary interpretations, raised new questions and provoked new
answers. The understanding of both epigenesis and preformation
underwent transformation so that the debates brought new questions
along with the traditional differences.
Darwin pointed to embryology as fundamental for interpreting
historical relationships. In Chapter 13 of the Origin he asked
“How, then, can we explain these several facts in embryology,
namely the very general, but not universal difference in structure
between the embryo and the adult; of parts in the same individual
embryo, which ultimately become very unlike and serve for diverse
purposes, being at this early period of growth alike; of embryos of
different species within the same class, generally, but not
universally, resembling each other; of the structure of the embryo not
being closely related to its conditions of existence, except when the
embryo becomes at any period of life active and has to provide for
itself; of the embryo apparently having sometimes a higher organization
than the mature animal, into which it is developed.” But we know
that this was rhetorical question, and sure enough he concluded that
“I believe that all these facts can be explained, as follows, on
the view of descent with modification.” And that furthermore,
“the leading facts in embryology, which are second in importance
to none in natural history, are explained on the principle of slight
modifications not appearing, in the many descendants from some one
ancient progenitor, at a very period of the life of each, though
perhaps caused at the earliest, and being inherited at a corresponding
not early period. Embryology rises greatly in interest, when we thus
look at the embryo as a picture, more or less obscured, of the common
parent-form of each great class of animals” [Darwin 1858, chapter
13].
Haeckel saw “Ontogeny as the brief and rapid recapitulation of
phylogeny” and saw each individual's development as
following the sequence of, and indeed caused by, the evolutionary
history of that individual organism's species. In his highly
popular books that were widely translated and widely read, Haeckel
offered pictures of comparative embryology. “See,” he
seemed to suggest, “the human form emerges following the
evolutionary development and adaptations of its ancestors.” Form
comes from form of the ancestors, and unfolds following pre-scripted
stages [Haeckel 1867].
Darwin was not an embryologist, and he did not contribute to our
understanding of embryogenesis as such. Nor, really, did Haeckel. But
while Darwin's use of the embryo in supporting evolutionary
theory and in helping to interpret evolutionary relationships was
consistent with various versions of either epigenetic or
preformationist development, Haeckel's view was decidedly
preformationist. Here, then, was a preformationist interpretation based
not on additional embryological observations but on adherence to
Haeckel's own metaphysical adherence to both his monistic
materialism and to his desire to provide evidence for evolution. The
Haeckelian approach reflected the context in which those studying cells
and embryos worked at the end of the 19th century.
In 1899, American biologist William Morton Wheeler suggested that
there are just two different kinds of thinkers. Some see change and
process, while others see stability. Heraclitus, Aristotle, physiology,
and epigenesis characterize one way of looking at the world, while
Parmenides, Plato, morphology, and preformationism characterizes
another. These are, Wheeler felt, stable and persistent classes, with
just the nature and details of their differences have changed over
time. Yet by the end of the 19th century, he argued, neither
a strict preformationist nor a strict epigeneticist who ignored new
evidence and new reasoning should prevail. Rather he called for a
middle ground, for: “The pronounced ‘epigenecist’ of
to-day who postulates little or no pre-determination in the germ must
gird himself to perform Herculean labors in explaining how the complex
heterogeneity of the adult organism can arise from chemical enzymes,
while the pronounced ‘preformationist’ of to-day is bound
to elucidate the elaborate morphological structure which he insists
must be present in the germ.” Furthermore, it is not to
philosophy but science that we must look to resolve the relative
contributions of each, for “Both tendencies will find their
correctives in investigation” [Wheeler 1899, p. 284].
Wheeler was stimulated by recent late 19th century debates,
themselves provoked by a flood of new discoveries. August Weismann and
Oscar Hertwig provided particularly strong and contrasting positions.
Weismann had begun from an epigenetic viewpoint and initially rejected
the idea that individual form emerges through the unfolding, or
evolution, of pre-existent form in the inherited germ. But by the time
his Das Keimplasm appeared in 1892 (translated into English in
1893), Weismann had changed his mind. As Weismann wrote:
His “proof” provided an account of how, within the
context of cell theory and given that the entire body begins in one
fertilized cell, all the diverse body parts can become so diversely
differentiated. The key is in the special material of the germ cells,
Weismann decided. Within these cells lies all the determinants
necessary to direct development. Inheritance, that is, causes
development and differentiation.
Weismann's theory postulated the existence of several levels of
hypothetical units. By the 1890s, it was agreed that individuals begin
as cells, those cells contain nuclei, and that nuclei contain
chromosomes. The chromosomes are the material of heredity, Weismann
postulated, and they consist of a string of determinants, correlated
with characters in the organism. Each determinant consisted of a
number of material particles called biophores, inherited from both
parents.  These biophores compete with each other and some prevail,
which then determines the character of the determinant, which in turn
determines the character of the organism. During each cell division,
the original whole chromosomal material is divided up, so that the
effect is like a mosaic. Each cell becomes the right type just because
of the action of the determinants distributed to it. As Weismann put
it, “Ontogeny, or the development of the individual, depends
therefore on a series of gradual qualitative changes in the nuclear
substance of the egg-cell.” Cells are self-differentiating
“that is to say, the fate of the cells is determined by forces
situated within them, and not by external influences” [Weismann
1893, pp. 32, 134]. Conditions external to the cell itself cannot
guide development, but rather the causes lie within. And cell
differentiations that make up complex organisms are predetermined.
Oscar Hertwig disagreed. He felt that Weismann made too many
assumptions and that he actually provided no real explanation of
development and differentiation at all. In his work of 1894,
Präformation oder Epigenese, Hertwig complained that
Weismann's theory:
In contrast to Weismann's preformationism, Hertwig pointed to
the interactions of cells and to the differences among cells for the
source of differentiation. The complexity is not built in from the
beginning, but emerges over time, dynamically, and interactively. A
cytologist himself, Hertwig saw the intricate structures already part
of the unfertilized egg, and the changes that occur with fertilization.
The egg is not a completely unstructured blob, but rather a complex of
different materials that can respond to influences both within the egg
and from the external environment. Cells behave like small organisms,
and it is the interactions of these separate organisms that makes the
whole. As Hertwig put it: “I shall explain the gradual,
progressive organization of the whole organism as due to the influences
upon each other of these numerous elementary organisms in each stage of
the development. I cannot regard the development of any creature as a
mosaic work. I hold that all the parts develop in connection with each
other, the development of each part always being dependent upon the
development of the whole.” Furthermore, “during the course
of development, there are forces external to the cells that bid them
assume the individual characters appropriate to their individual
relations to the whole; the determining forces are not within the
cells, as the doctrine of determinants supposed” [Hertwig 1900,
pp. 105-106, 138].
Hertwig and Weismann continued to argue both about the metaphysical
nature of the organism as well as about the epistemological demands
for gaining knowledge about it, as did others, with no generally
accepted way to resolve the issues. Given the information at hand, it
seemed that Wheeler was right. There were just two different types of
people, drawing on two different sets of values and emphases. Both
relied on assumptions, and only more evidence could help move the
discussion forward.
Wilhelm Roux adopted much the same approach as Weismann's and
so, at first, did Hans Driesch. Yet their experiments ultimately led to
new approaches and revised interpretations of what was at issue with
epigenesist and preformationist accounts of development. In 1888, Roux
published results of his experiments on frog eggs. Working on the
assumption of a mosaic type preformationism, Roux was persuaded that
starting from the very first cell division, each cell would be
different because it was already predetermined to be different.
Roux proposed an experiment, a simple and elegant experiment on the
face of it. He proposed to take a developing frog egg, after the first
cell division, and to separate the two cells. Finding it impossible to
separate the two cells, however, he simply killed one by inserting a
hot needle. That cell just hung there like a blob of material and no
longer differentiated. The other half organism, or single cell
proceeded to develop, in Roux's interpretation, as it normally would
have developed [Roux 1888]. The half became a half, just as it should
if it were already preformed or predetermined as to its fate in the
organism. Roux had, it seemed, confirmed the mosaic hypothesis.
A few years later, Driesch was working at Naples and had access to sea
urchin eggs. Fortunately, because of Oscar and his brother Richard
Hertwig's study of these eggs, Driesch knew that if he shook the two
cells they would separate completely. Driesch reported agreeing with
Roux and intending to confirm Roux's results. But since the sea urchin
eggs could actually be separated, he felt that his results would be
even more convincing. Imagine his surprise when he looked the next
morning after separating the eggs and found not two half embryos but
two smaller sized urchin larvae. As he noted, “I must confess
that the idea of a free-swimming hemisphere or a half gastrula open
lengthwise seemed rather extraordinary. I thought the formations would
probably die.” Not so. “Instead, the next morning I found
in their respective dishes typical, actively swimming blastulae of
half size” [Driesch 1892].  In later experiments they developed
even further, into apparently perfectly normal pluteus larvae, and
even the four cell stage could do the same.
Driesch concluded with an epigenetic account, but an epigenesis
relying strictly on materialistic factors (at least that was his
initial response; Driesch did turn later to a version of vitalism). The
early embryo retains its totipotency, he concluded. The fertilized egg
clearly has the capacity to become a whole organism and so, apparently,
do the cells after the early cell divisions. Not a mosaic of cells
already predetermined by their inherited determinants in the nucleus,
the early embryonic stages are instead a population of separate
totipotent organisms, each capable of becoming a whole. It is only the
interactions among them under normal conditions that lead to a complex,
organized, integrated differentiated organism.
It might seem that Roux would have to acknowledge the superiority of
Driesch's approach, since he had actually separated the cells.
But no. Instead Roux countered with an additional hypothesis. The
nucleus retains the capacity to adapt, especially in simpler organisms.
They need the capacity to regenerate when injured, and therefore the
mosaic determination simply has not occurred yet. Each cell retains a
“reserve idioplasm,” he argued, and this provides the
necessary backup determination needed to form a whole organism [see
Churchill 1966, 1973]. 
It seems that Wheeler was right. Roux, Weismann, and others had
decided that development must be guided by predetermined mosaic
differences. Preformation, stability, and predictability stood on one
side, with epigenesis, dynamic process, and change on the other. And,
as Wheeler noted, by 1899 the way forward lay between the extremes of
strict preformation or epigenesis. Wheeler's dissertation
director Charles Otis Whitman agreed. Whitman felt that what biology
needed was a clear statement of the alternative views, and then
movement to a new standpoint examining how much depends on the
organism's developmental response to external conditions drawing
on preformation, rather than on programmed internal unfolding
alone.
Whitman, Edmund Beecher Wilson, and others at the Marine Biological
Laboratory in Woods Hole, Massachusetts, dedicated considerable energy
to discovering the nature of each cell and its internal organization
and relationships, in an attempt to discover the relative contributions
of preformation and epigenetic development to a materialistic
explanation of development. By the early 20th century, they
had moved toward an understanding that included a fertilized egg that
was to some extent preorganized and differentiated, including in the
nuclear chromosomes, and also a capacity of the individual organism to
respond to changes in its environment or to self-regulate. This was an
epigenetic view that allowed some minimal predeterminism.
The epigenetic embryologists emphasized the individual's
development, but an alternative new form of preformationism soon arose
in the form of genetics. This pointed to the nuclear chromosomes as the
locus for the causes of differentiation. Yet unlike Weismann and Roux,
the new geneticists saw the genetic material not as divided up into a
mosaic as an explanation of difference. Rather, the inherited nuclear
material was the same in every cell, but it acted differently according
to an internal program. The interpretation appealed to some for
metaphysical reasons, since it focused on the material units of
heredity and apparently of causation. Epistemologically, it was more
difficult to point to the evidence that inherited genes explain
development.
This is not the place for a history of genetics, which has been
offered many times elsewhere. The important point here is that genetics
brought a new form of preformationism. Instead of a dynamically acting
organism taking its cues from the environmental conditions and from the
way that cells interact with each cell division, the 20th
century brought a dominant and popular view that has often emphasized
genes as programmed to carry the information of heredity, which was
also the information necessary to construct an individual. Of course,
there have been calls for alternatives or interactionist models where
heredity and development, epigenesist and preformation, work together,
but these have often been offered as alternatives than as central
interpretations. [See, for example, Oyama 2000; Robert 2004.]
In the beginning of the 20th century, at first Thomas
Hunt Morgan resisted the Mendelian-chromosome theory of inheritance
that saw inherited units of heredity carried on chromosomes as
determinants of developed characters. If all the cells contain the same
chromosomes, then how can their inheritance explain anything, he asked.
Instead, he insisted that “We have two factors determining
characters: heredity and the modification during development”
[Morgan 1910a, p. 477].  Morgan wrote to a friend that “my field is
experimental embryology”and not the genetics with which he became
associated [Morgan 1908]. Like his Woods Hole colleagues, Morgan did
not see how inherited chromosomes could explain development of form
from non-form. He had rejected Weismann's interpretations, and
continued to reject the idea of inherited determinants.
Also in 1910, however, he was studying many different kinds of
organisms in pursuit of explanations of heredity as well as
differentiation. A white eyed male Drosophila fly famously
caught his attention, and led him to the conclusion that some inherited
factors must, indeed, cause expression in the emerging organism
[Morgan 1910b]. It is not that Morgan changed his mind about how to do
science, but rather that the evidence carried him in new directions
[Maienschein 1991].
The fertilized egg cell contains a nucleus made up of chromosomes
inherited from both parents. Along these chromosomes are lined up units
of heredity that serve like Weismann's determinants and that were
called genes. These genes correlate with some characters in the
resulting organism, and therefore in some sense the resulting form was
predetermined in the egg. Yet it was not already formed. And, indeed,
the mere correlation of genes and characters tells us virtually nothing
about how the differentiation occurs nor about how form becomes formed
(or the problem of morphogenesis). Therefore, yes, genetics brings a
sort of new preformation or more accurately predeterminism. But that in
itself brings a description and a correlation but no explanation. Or so
Morgan initially felt, as did his embryologist colleagues.
By mid 20th century, and especially after the discovery of
DNA's structure (which apparently also explained its function),
researchers began to forget or at least to ignore questions about
morphogenesis and epigenesis. [See, for example, Olby 1974, Judson
1979.] How, actually, did genes give rise to differentiated form?
Somehow that works, seemed to be the answer. Genetics predominated
over what C.H. Waddington referred to as the epigenetics of
development  [Waddington 1942]. Of course not everyone ignored
development, but it became a seriously neglected field and even
professional societies and journals that had focused on
“embryology” shifted to “developmental
genetics” [Oppenheimer 1967]. When Robert Briggs and Thomas King
cloned frogs in the 1950s and John Gurdon extended the research in the
1960s, it seemed that nuclear transfer could come from only early
stages of development. Furthermore the resulting clones were like
their donors from whom the nuclei came rather than like the mothers
from whom the eggs came [Briggs and King 1952, Gurdon and Colman
1999, McLaren 2000]. Apparently development brings differentiation that
is unidirectional. Preformationist/ predeterminist thinking
prevailed. Epigenetic development and regulatory response to
environmental conditions seemed to have strict limits for those
adopting the mid 20th century predeterminist emphasis.
The end of the 20th century brought discoveries that have
challenged the most the prevailing geneticism, and have also begun to
replace the extreme forms of either preformationism or epigenesist with
the sorts of interactionist models that were only offered as outlying
alternatives in earlier decades. A modified form of epigenesis, in
which the organism is seen as beginning from an inherited egg and sperm
that do include genes, seems to be on the rise again. Ian
Wilmut's team's success in cloning Dolly, reported in 1997,
and Gearhart and Thomson's successes with developing human stem
cell lines, both reported in 1998, challenged prevailing assumptions
[Wilmut 2000, Thomson 1998, Shamblott et al. 1998, Gearhart 1998]. Both
suggested that development is a good deal more flexible, plastic, and
interactive than preformationist interpretations allow.
Stem cell research is exciting precisely because the fate of cells
turns out to be not determined by the genes. At the early stages of
development when embryonic stem cells are most plentiful, in the
blastocyst stage just before implantation, the stem cells can be
harvested and cultured to become a large number of different kinds of
cells. In theory, they have the capacity to become any kind of
differentiated cell, but it is impossible to prove that conclusively.
Normally, each cell does become one kind of cell rather than all kinds.
Position in the organism and with respect to other cells seems to be
decisive in directing differentiation. Yes, genetics provides
information about the range of possibilities. But clearly, regulation
of the genetic expression involves interpretation. And this is
epigenetic. It seems that those were right who called for a middle
ground, with some predetermination that interacts with some form of
epigenetic development. Perhaps it is as Thomas Hunt Morgan suggested,
“a process of pure epigenetic development, as generally
understood nowadays, may also be predetermined in the egg”
[Morgan 1901, p. 968]. The nowadays of the 21st century may
take us back to some of the understanding and insights of the early
20th, a time when a balance of epigenesis and preformation
seemed likely, a time for a bit of predeterminism and a bit of cellular
free will.