The question of how our perceptual beliefs are justified or
known can be approached by first considering the question of
whether they are justified or known. A prominent skeptical
argument is designed to show that our perceptual beliefs are not
justified. Versions of this argument (or cluster of arguments) appear
in René Descartes’s Meditations,
Augustine’s Against the Academicians, and several of the
ancient and modern skeptics (e.g., Sextus Empiricus, Michel de
Montaigne). The argument introduces some type of skeptical scenario,
in which things perceptually appear to us just as things normally do,
but in which the beliefs that we would naturally form are radically
false. To take some standard examples: differences in the sense organs
and/or situation of the perceiver might make her experience as cold
things that we would experience as hot, or experience as bitter things
that we would experience as sweet; a person might mistake a vivid
dream for waking life; or a brain in a vat might have its sensory
cortices stimulated in such a way that it has the very same perceptual
experiences that I am currently having, etc.
It is usually not specified how one gets from here to the conclusion
that our perceptual beliefs are unjustified. I offer one possible
reconstruction of the skeptical argument, one which helps to
illustrate the central problems in the epistemology of perception.
The skeptical scenarios (dreaming, brains in vats, differently
situated sense organs, etc.) call our attention to a crucial
distinction between appearance and reality: how things perceptually
appear is not necessarily how things really are; things could appear
the same though really be different, and they could appear to be some
other, incompatible way and really be the same. Further reflection on
the scenarios suggests that although I might know very
little—perhaps nothing—about how things are in the
external world, I can nevertheless know quite a lot about how it
appears to me that things are. This engenders a shift from thinking
about perceptual appearances as features of objects (e.g., “the
appearance of the house was quite shabby”), to thinking of them
as mental states—experiences—of the perceiving subject
(e.g., “she had a visual appearance/experience as of a
house”). Finally, it seems that if we are to know anything about
the external world at all, that knowledge must be indirect, for what
is directly before me is not the world itself, but only these
perceptual appearances. I know and have justified beliefs about the
external world only insofar as I know and have justified beliefs about
appearances.
All this suggests a “veil of perception” between us and
external objects: we do not have direct unvarnished access to the
world, but instead have an access that is mediated by sensory
appearances, the character of which might well depend on all kinds of
factors (e.g., condition of sense organs, direct brain stimulation,
etc.) besides those features of the external world that our perceptual
judgments aim to capture. Paraphrasing David Hume (1739: I.2.vi,
I.4.ii; 1748: sec 12.1; see also Locke 1690, Berkeley 1710, Russell
1912): nothing is ever directly present to the mind in perception
except perceptual appearances.
But if our only access to the external world is mediated by
potentially misleading perceptual appearances, we ought to have some
assurance that the appearances we are relying on are not of
the misleading variety. And here is where all the trouble arises, for
it seems that there is no way we could have any evidence for the
reliability of perception (i.e., perceptual appearances) without
relying on other perceptions. We have empirical reason, for example,
to think that science is not yet capable of stimulating brains in a
very precise way, but appealing to this to rebut the possibility of
brain-in-a-vat scenarios seems blatantly question begging. At the
heart of the problem of the external world is a skeptical argument I
will refer to as “PEW” and which I reconstruct in what
follows. I have named the premises, as we will want to discuss them
individually.
A few comments on the logic of the argument are in order.
 (2)
 and
 (3)
 make up the meat of the argument; together they entail
 (4).
 This means that
 (1),
 which is motivated by the skeptical scenarios mentioned above and the
associated veil of perception view, would be unnecessary for deriving
the skeptical conclusion, as are those skeptical scenarios, were it
not for the fact that
 (1)
 is commonly taken to render perception inferential in such a
way as to lend support to
 (2).
 If
 (1)
 is true, then, plausibly,
 (2)
 is: if our access is mediated by potentially nonveridical
appearances, then we should only trust the appearances we have reason
to think veridical. And no other reason to endorse
 (2)
 is immediately apparent (although an additional motivation for
 (2)
 will be discussed below, in
 section 3.1).
 (1) is therefore an important component of the traditional
problem. The plausibility of
 (3)
 derives from the idea that our only means of verifying the
veridicality of appearances would itself depend on perception, in the
question-begging manner sketched above.
Notice that PEW addresses justification rather than knowledge. On the
reasonable assumption that knowledge requires justification,
 (4)
 implies that our perceptual beliefs do not count as knowledge. One
who denies this assumption could easily rewrite PEW in terms of
knowledge rather than justification with little or no reduction in
plausibility. I have reconstructed PEW in a way that is supposed to be
intuitively compelling. Were we to get specific about the implicit
quantification involved (we have no good reason for thinking that
any perceptual appearances are veridical? that perceptual
appearances are in general veridical? that this
perceptual appearance is veridical?), the argument would get a lot
more complicated. The simpler version presented above is sufficient
for our current purposes.
The problem of the external world should be distinguished from what is
typically called the problem of perception (see the entry on the
 problem of perception),
 even though they are motivated by similar considerations, in
particular, by the Indirectness Principle. The problem of perception
is the problem of how perception is possible—how it is
possible, for example, to see mind-independent objects,
rather than inferring them from awareness of sense-experiences, in
light of the claim that only appearances are ever directly present to
the mind. The problem of the external world is a distinctively
epistemological problem, and it focuses on the normative status of
perceptual judgments about external objects; it matters little for
these purposes whether and how such judgments might amount to
seeing. What matters is whether such judgments are or could
be justified.
PEW illustrates the central problem of the epistemology of perception:
if many or any of our perceptual beliefs are justified, PEW must have
gone wrong somewhere. But where? Several subsidiary problems in the
epistemology of perception arise in the efforts to solve this central
problem.
The Indirectness Principle is a metaphysical principle: it
says something about the nature of perception. The Metaevidential
Principle and the Reasons Claim are epistemic principles: one
lays down specifically normative requirements for justified belief and
the other denies that these requirements are satisfied. Because PEW
can be challenged by denying any of the premises, there are two main
classes of solution to the central problem: metaphysical solutions,
which challenge the Indirectness Principle; and epistemological
solutions, which challenge the Metaevidential Principle and/or the
Reasons Claim. This section addresses the first class of solutions to
the central problem.
 Section 3
 addresses the second class.
PEW starts with the Indirectness Principle, and it has often been
thought that the central skeptical worry is due to a metaphysics of
perception that holds that, although worldly objects do exist outside
of the mind, they are never directly present to the mind, but only
indirectly so, through mental intermediaries. Thomas Reid, for
example, held that “Des Cartes’ system … hath some
original defect; that this skepticism is inlaid in it, and reared
along with it” (1785: 1.vii). Consequently, a great deal of
philosophy since Descartes has involved various attempts to block PEW
by doing away with the intermediaries between the mind and the objects
of perception, by offering a metaphysics of perception that puts these
objects directly before the mind. If perception is direct in the
relevant sense, then the skeptical problem never even gets off the
ground.
There are two main branches to this tradition. The more obvious and
commonsensical one originates with Reid (1764, 1785) who denies that
only mental items can be directly present to the mind, arguing that
physical objects and their properties can be directly present as well.
This is the direct realist option. A somewhat older tradition,
however, tracing back to George Berkeley (1710, 1713), agrees with
Descartes that only mental items are directly present to the mind but
insists that the objects of perception—tables, rocks, cats,
etc.—are really mental items after all. This is the
idealist/phenomenalist option. Despite the manifest differences
between realist and idealist metaphysics, both branches of the
“direct presence” tradition are united in rejecting the
Indirectness Principle, insisting that tables and such are indeed
directly present to the mind in perception. If perception is thus
direct, the Indirectness Principle is false, and support for the
Metaevidential Principle is undercut, and PEW ceases to pose a threat
to knowledge.
Whether in the realist or idealist tradition, the direct presence
theorist rejects the Indirectness Principle, insisting that when one
perceives a cat, for example, the cat is directly in view, directly
present to, simply there before the mind. But what is meant
by these spatial metaphors? The metaphors can be unpacked in several
importantly different ways, having different implications for the rest
of PEW. In the next five subsections, I will briefly distinguish some
different ways in which perception might be (or fail to be) direct.
The spatial/metaphorical terminology has been so vastly prevalent in
the literature that it is very often hard to tell which author intends
which conception(s) of directness. Consequently, I won’t be
naming names much in the next few paragraphs or pinning particular
conceptions of directness on particular authors. Instead, these
paragraphs aim to map out the more salient possibilities. Later, in
sections
 2.2
 and
 2.3,
 I will use these distinctions to examine how the traditional
metaphysical theories of perception bear on the epistemology of
perception.
Before we try to understand “direct presence”, notice that
what is metaphorical here is the notion of presence, not of
directness. To be directly present is to be present, but not
in virtue of the presence of another thing (that would be
indirect presence). Directness is merely unmediatedness, but
what kind of mediation is at issue will depend on what kind of
presence is intended.
One dimension of directness, emphasized by Reid (1785), notes that
perceptual judgments are phenomenally noninferential, in the sense
that they do not result from any discursive or ratiocinative process;
they are not introspectibly based on premises. This noninferentiality
is usually understood loosely enough to allow for perceptual
beliefs’ being based on things other than beliefs (in
particular, on experiential states, as we will see below) and also to
allow for the possibility of unconscious or subpersonal inferential
involvement in the formation of perceptual beliefs, so long as the
agent is not deliberately basing these perceptual beliefs on
other beliefs. Without these two allowances, claims of
noninferentiality would quickly run afoul of standard views in
epistemology and psychology, respectively. To claim that perception is
phenomenally direct is to claim that it is noninferential in this
sense.
Another way that perception might be direct is if perception
represents external objects, as such, without that representation
being mediated by representation of other things. Contrast this with
the classical empiricists’ opposing view, that the only way to
represent external objects is as the cause of our sensations (Locke
1690, Berkeley 1710). One might worry, however, that unless perception
puts objects directly before us, we are in danger of not genuinely
being able to think about the objective, external world at all, but
only about ourselves. To say that perception is referentially direct
is to say that the ability of perceptual states to represent does not
depend on the ability of other states to represent.
One version of indirectness claims that we perceive outer
things by perceiving (or standing in a quasi-perceptual
relation to) inner things—usually sense-data (see below and
 the entry on sense-data).
 This makes it sound as if what we thought was ordinary direct
perceiving of tables and rocks and such is really more like
“perceiving” that someone has broken into your
house—indirectly, on the basis of actually perceiving the broken
window, empty area where the TV used to be, etc. It is easy to see how
such perceptual indirectness may invite the semantic and
epistemological worries we have been seeing. To claim that perception
of external objects is perceptually direct is to claim that it is not
mediated by the perception (or quasi-perceptual apprehension
or awareness) of something else.
One could endorse phenomenal directness and perceptual directness
while still holding that perceptual contact is mediated by experience,
where experience is conceived as something in virtue of which we have
perceptual contact, though it is not the perceptual contact itself. An
alternative is a relational metaphysics of perception according to
which elements of the perceived world are literally parts of the
perceptual experience. On idealist versions of this view, the mental
states whose immediate apprehension constitutes perceptual experience
just are the objects of perception (or parts of these
objects). On (direct) realist versions of the view, perceptual
experiences are not internal mental states of the agent but are
relations between the agent and some external objects or states of
affairs. Thus the agent is in a different type of mental state in the
case of veridical perception (the “good case”) than in the
case of hallucination (the “bad case”). Veridical
perception is a certain kind of relation to a distal array, while
hallucination or dreaming is an introspectively indistinguishable but
metaphysically distinct relation to something else entirely.
Finally, one might hold that perception is direct in the sense that
one’s perceptual beliefs about external objects, like rocks and
cats and such, enjoy a kind of justification or knowledge that does
not depend on—is not mediated by—any other justification
or knowledge. Such beliefs are said to be or “epistemically
noninferential”, or “epistemologically basic” and
the normative status is sometimes referred to as “immediate
justification/knowledge” or “basic
justification/knowledge”. This possibility will be explored in
more detail below, in
 section 3.4.
 Epistemological directness will be treated separately from the
previous senses of direct presence, which can all be viewed as
metaphysical senses of direct presence. The relation between
metaphysical and epistemological directness will be addressed below,
in
 section 2.4.
With these distinctions in hand, we can better situate the traditional
theories of perception that are often thought to bear on the skeptical
problem.
Idealism and phenomenalism are views that hold that ordinary objects
(tables, clouds, rocks, etc.) are really collections of or constructs
out of actual and/or possible mental states, especially perceptual
experiences. (I won’t try to distinguish phenomenalism from
idealism but will use “idealism” to include both.) There
are several varieties of idealism and several motivations for holding
the view. But one motivation is that it promises to solve the
skeptical problem of the external world. Berkeley (1710) held that
idealism was a cure for skepticism. Transcendental idealism (Kant
1781) aims to split the difference with the skeptic by distinguishing
the phenomenal objects of perception—which are collections of
appearances and about which we can know something—from the
noumenal objects—which are things in themselves and not mere
appearances, and about which skepticism is true.
One way in which idealism might help to solve the skeptical problem is
by attacking the Indirectness Principle. If the problem of the
external world starts with the gap between the proximal and the distal
objects of perceptual experience, then idealism would avoid skepticism
by simply closing that gap. The idealist can embrace direct
world-involvement while retaining the claim that nothing is ever
directly present to the mind but its own mental states, by holding
that the world is fundamentally mental, that, e.g., tables are just
collections of ideas. Although metaphysical solutions are usually
aimed at the Indirectness Principle, idealism also offers a response
to PEW by way of undermining the Reasons Claim. Hume (1739) argued
that we couldn’t have any good reason to think that external
objects are plausible causes of our experiences without first
observing a constant conjunction between external objects and
experiences; but we can’t “observe” external objects
unless we justifiedly believe in their existence, and we can only do
that if we can reasonably posit them as plausible causes of our
experiences. On the other hand, if the objects of perception are not
external after all, we are in a better position to infer causal
relations between them and individual experiences.
The main difference between idealism and an indirect realism concerns
not so much the metaphysics of perception as a larger metaphysical
view about what else exists outside of the mind. Berkeley and
Descartes agree about the direct objects of perception, but Descartes
posits an additional stratum of mind-independent external objects in
addition. The idealist denies that there is a veil of perception not
because Descartes was wrong about the nature of perception, but
because he was wrong about the natures of cats and rocks.
Idealism has a few contemporary defenders (e.g., Foster 2008, Hoffman
2009), though it is nowhere near the dominant view that it had been
for almost two centuries after Berkeley. Most responses to PEW in the
last century have endorsed some kind of realism instead, insisting
that ordinary objects are indeed mind-independent.
The problem of the external world, especially the Indirectness
Principle, sees its modern renaissance in Descartes’s
representative realism, which was offered as an alternative to both
the commonsense view of naive (aka direct) realism, and the
hylomorphic theory standard among Scholastics. This latter doctrine
holds that objects are combinations of primordial matter and forms
impressed upon them, which determine the objects’ properties;
these objects then cast off forms that can enter the mind through the
sense organs. A red thing is simply something that has the form of
RED, which it can transmit, making the receptive, perceiving mind
also—though presumably in a different sense—red.
Both theories suffer from an apparent inability to handle error.
Science frequently teaches us that things are not in reality the way
they appear to the senses. The sun, for example, perceptually appears
as a small disk rather than the large sphere that it is (Descartes
1641). This perceptual experience cannot involve either the
transmission of forms (since the sun doesn’t have those forms),
or the “direct pick-up” of objective properties (again,
those properties aren’t there to pick up). Nor could we simply
be picking up relational properties, like looking small from
here, Descartes argues, because I could have the very same
perceptual experience in a vivid dream (where even the relational
properties are not instantiated) as I do in waking life. Therefore,
perceptual appearances must be entirely mental and internal, rather
than relational. Insofar as external objects are at all present to the
mind, it is only because of these appearances, which thus serve as
inner stand-ins, or proxies, for them. As John Locke puts it, 
the understanding is not much unlike a closet wholly shut from light,
with only some little openings left, to let in external visible
resemblances, or ideas of things without. (1690: 163) 
It is this notion of standing in that the term “representative
realism” is supposed to capture. The representative realist may,
but need not, hold that these proxies are also
representations in the sense of having semantic contents,
i.e., truth- or accuracy-conditions. In fact, the most recognizable
form of representative realism denies that experiences are in this
sense representational.
This best known, though now widely rejected, form of representative
realism incorporates a sense-datum theory
 (see the entry on  sense-data),
 which holds that every perceptual experience as of something’s
being F involves the subject’s awareness of something
that really is F. My having a perceptual (veridical or
hallucinatory) experience as of something’s being blue requires
there to be a nonphysical, inner, mental object—a
sense-datum—that is blue. Sense-data are not normally taken to
be true or false, any more than rocks or tables are; nonetheless,
sense-data constitute the inner rocks and tables in virtue of which we
perceive external rocks and tables and are in that sense the
latter’s representatives. Two important features of this theory
are worth highlighting: (i) that sense-data really do have the
properties that external objects appear to have, and (ii) that the
relation one stands in to one’s sense-data is a perceptual, or
quasi-perceptual, relation: one is perceptually aware of objects due
to a more fundamental awareness of one’s sense-data.
Any version of representative realism denies direct world-involvement.
The sense-datum theory is further incompatible with perceptual
directness, as it has us perceive objects by way of perceiving our
sense-data; and it is typically fleshed out in such a way as to be
incompatible with referential directness as well, holding that we can
think about mind-independent objects only as the external causes of
these sense-data. It is compatible, however, with phenomenal and
epistemological directness. For example, one could deny that the
“inference” from sense-data to external objects is
conscious and deliberate and insist that only such deliberate
inferences would render a belief epistemically inferential (i.e.,
nonbasic) in the sense of
 2.1.5
 above.
Intentionalism holds that to have a perceptual experience as
of something blue is to be in a state with a distinctively
semantic property of meaning blue, of referring to
the property of blueness
 (see the entry on
  consciousness and intentionality).
 On this view, the inner states are not just representatives but
representations; they have semantic values. Such
representations typically lack the properties they depict external
objects as having. Furthermore, the relation one stands in to
one’s perceptual representations is not necessarily a
quasi-perceptual one: it is normally held that one simply
has, or tokens, the representations; they are not in
any sense objects of perception or awareness in the ordinary
course of events, but the vehicles of perception (Huemer
2001). (They might, of course, become objects of something like
perception if we reflectively attend to them, but this is something
more than merely having the experience.) 
Sense-datum and intentionalist views both see perceptual experience as
a two-place relation between perceiver and inner representative.
Adverbialism, on the other hand, holds that perceptual
experience itself is monadic; it doesn't involve the
perceiver standing in a relation to something
 (see the entry on the 
  problem of perception).[1]
 Different kinds of perceptual experiences are simply different ways
of sensing: one “senses greenly” or “is appeared to
horsely”, and such locutions do not commit us to the existence
of either sense-data or representations. Adverbialism is sometimes
offered as an ontologically neutral way of talking about experiences
(Chisholm 1957), sometimes as the more contentious claim that
perceptual experience is primitive and unanalyzable.
Intentionalism and adverbialism deny direct world-involvement but are
compatible with the other varieties of directness. They are also
compatible with any of the corresponding varieties of
indirectness.
Proponents of intentionalist and adverbialist theories have often
thought of themselves as defending a kind of direct realism; Reid
(1785), for example, clearly thinks his proto-adverbialist view is a
direct realist view. And perceptual experience is surely less indirect
on an intentionalist or adverbialist theory than on the typical
sense-datum theory, at least in the sense of perceptual directness.
Nevertheless, intentionalist and adverbialist theories render the
perception of worldly objects indirect in at least two important ways:
(a) it is mediated by an inner state, in that one is in
perceptual contact with an outer object of perception only (though not
entirely) in virtue of being in that inner state; and (b) that inner
state is one that we could be in even in cases of radical perceptual
error (e.g., dreams, demonic deception, etc.). These theories might
thus be viewed as only “quasi-direct” realist theories;
experiences still screen off the external world in the sense that
whether the agent is in the good case or the bad case, the experience
might still be the same. Quasi-direct theories thus reject the
Indirectness Principle only under some readings of
“directness”. A fully direct realism would offer an
unequivocal rejection of the Indirectness Principle by denying that we
are in the same mental states in the good and the bad cases. In recent
years, direct realists have wanted the perceptual relation to be
entirely unmediated: we don’t achieve perceptual contact with
objects in virtue of having perceptual experiences; the
experience just is the perceptual contact with the
object.
In recent years, therefore, “direct realism” has been
usually reserved for the view that perceptual experience is
constituted by the subject’s standing in certain relations to
external objects, where this relation is not mediated by or analyzable
in terms of further, inner states of the agent. Thus, the brain in the
vat could not have the same experiences as a normal veridical
perceiver, because experience is itself already world-involving.
A type of direct realism that has received much recent attention is
disjunctivism (e.g., Snowdon 1980, McDowell 1982, Martin 2002, Haddock
& Macpherson 2008; see the entry on the 
 disjunctive theory of perception).
 There are many different versions of disjunctivism, but a common
thread is the claim that the experiences involved in the veridical
case are ipso facto of a different type than those involved in the
hallucinatory cases. The theory of appearing (Alston 1999) is a type
of disjunctivism but one that emphasizes the direct world-involvement
in the veridical case rather than the radical difference between the
cases.
Some forms of behaviorism, functionalism, and embodied mind are also
direct realist views. If, for example, having a certain perceptual
experience constitutively involves being disposed to act on worldly
objects and properties in certain ways—that is, if behavioral
dispositions are themselves individuated as world-involving—then
this would render the experience relational in the way required by
direct realism; disembodied brains in vats could not have the same
experiences as we have in normal, veridical cases. Similar
consequences follow if perceptual experience is understood in terms of
“skilled coping” (Dreyfus 2002) or “sensorimotor
know-how” (Noë 2004), again, if these terms are read as
requiring certain interactions with real, external objects. Any such
theory implies that brains in vats couldn’t have the same
experiences we do, because they’re causally disconnected from
the physical world. Such a view need not be a form of disjunctivism,
however; depending on the details of the theory, a hallucinating
subject who is nevertheless embedded in and disposed to act on the
world in the right ways might have the same experience as a
veridically perceiving subject.
Direct realism is compatible with all the metaphysical species of
direct presence listed above. As such, it allows for an unequivocal
denial of premise
 (1)
 of PEW, while quasi-realist views only reject that premise under
certain understandings of direct presence.
If representative realism is the cause of the central epistemological
problem for perception, then perhaps direct realism or idealism will
be the solution. Some philosophers have thought that these
metaphysical views resolved the epistemological problem by closing the
gap between appearance and reality, by making ordinary objects (e.g.,
tables and rocks) directly present to the mind.
On further reflection, however, it is clear that the metaphysical
account will be, at best, a part of the solution.
Consider again PEW:
Most metaphysical solutions attack the Indirectness Principle as a way
of undercutting the Metaevidential Principle. But they only attack
metaphysical readings of the Indirectness Principle, and while the
various metaphysical theories of perception from sections
 2.2
 and
 2.3
 may have certain intuitive affinities with the Metaevidential
Principle or its denial, it follows from Hume’s “no
ought from is” dictum that none of them
immediately implies either premise
 (2)
 or its negation. Epistemological directness does straightforwardly
entail the rejection of
 (2),
 but epistemological directness is compatible with any of the
metaphysical theories of perception glossed above and is entailed by
none of them. At best, a metaphysical theory of perception will block
one avenue of intuitive support for
 (2),
 but it will not imply that
 (2)
 is false.
An idealist, for example, will allow that we sometimes dream and that
there is a real difference between hallucination and veridical
perception, even though in both cases the direct object of awareness
is a collection of ideas. The standard view (Berkeley 1710) is that a
hallucinatory table is a different sort of collection of
ideas than a real table; certain counterfactuals are true of the
latter that are not true of the former (e.g., that if I were to will
certain movements, my visual perceptions would change in certain ways,
etc.). But this reopens the gap between perceptual experiences and
ordinary objects. Tables are not just experiences; they are larger
entities of which experiences are parts, and those parts are shared by
hallucinations. So what is directly present to the mind is something
common to hallucination and veridical perception. So my perceptual
experience would seem to be neutral with respect to whether I am
seeing or hallucinating a table. So to be justified in believing there
is a table in front of me, I will need some reason to think this
particular experience is veridical, and PEW is back in business
(Alston 1993, Greco 2000).
Direct realism precludes this particular relapse into skepticism by
denying that the experience is the same in the good and the bad cases.
If our perceptual evidence includes the experience, then our evidence
in the good case is different from our evidence in the bad
case—they are different mental states. It does not follow,
however, that these two bits of evidence have differing evidential
import; both may—for all we’ve been told so far—be
evidentially neutral with respect to, e.g., whether there is actually
a chair in front of me or whether it merely appears so. Two very
different mental states might nevertheless license all the same
inferences; most pertinently, both might only license beliefs of the
form “I”m either seeing or hallucinating a table’.
Additionally, the direct realist is free to impose a metaevidential
demand on justified perceptual belief, a demand that we know which
kind of experience we are having before that experience can serve as
evidence. Unsurprisingly, direct realists tend to endorse some kind or
other of epistemological directness
 (section 3.4
 below, especially
 3.4.2),
 but the metaphysical view is by itself silent on this epistemological
issue.
Even with the metaphysical premise
 (1)
 removed, a purely epistemological version of PEW, consisting of
 (2)
 through
 (4),
 still challenges the justification of our perceptual beliefs. A
satisfying solution to the problem of the external world requires the
articulation of some plausible epistemic principles, one that explains
which of the two crucial premises
 (2)
 and
 (3)
 of PEW are being rejected, and provides an epistemological context
which renders that rejection plausible. An entirely metaphysical
solution to the problem of the external world will not suffice. An
epistemological solution to this epistemological problem will be
needed in addition or instead.
Epistemological solutions to PEW deny one or more of its explicitly
epistemological premises. They try to make that denial plausible and
to situate it within a larger epistemology of perception and a larger
epistemology more generally.
Foundationalism is the view that some beliefs are epistemologically
basic—i.e., their justification does not depend on evidential
support from other beliefs—and all other beliefs ultimately
derive their justification from basic beliefs. (Basically justified
beliefs are sometimes referred to as “immediately
justified” or “directly justified” as well.)
Classical foundationalism is the view that (i) it is
appearance beliefs—i.e., beliefs about perceptual
appearances—that are basic, and perceptual beliefs about
ordinary objects are based at least partly on these, and (ii)
perceptual justification requires us to have good reason to think that
the relevant current appearances are veridical. Basing is a relation
of epistemic dependence and does not imply explicit
inference, although particular theories might hold that the relation
is satisfied only when inference occurs.
(i) is defended in one of several ways. Here are brief versions of
some of the more common, often implicit, arguments:
(ii) includes an endorsement of the Metaevidential Principle. We have
looked at representative realism as one motivation for that principle,
but there are others. Classical foundationalists have traditionally
endorsed it because it follows from two other claims they find
plausible. The first is (i) above, that our perceptual beliefs are
based on appearance beliefs. The second is the claim that in order to
be justified in believing hypothesis h on the basis of evidence
e, one must be justified in believing that e makes
h probable (or that e entails h, or e is
good evidence for h, etc.) This second claim is a version of
Richard Fumerton’s “Principle of Inferential
Justification” and is often defended by citing examples
(Fumerton 1995; see the entry on 
 foundationalist theories of justification).
 My belief that you’re going to die soon cannot be justified on
the basis of your tarot card reading unless I’m justified in
believing that tarot cards really do tell the future. Whether such
examples generalize to all inferences is an open question.
Some fairly strong though controversial forms of internalism (see the entry on
 internalist vs. externalist conceptions of epistemic justification)
 would imply the Principle of Inferential Justification as well.
The classical foundationalist avoids skepticism by rejecting the
Reasons Claim, insisting that we do often have good,
non-viciously-circular, reasons for thinking that our experiences are
veridical. Two questions thus arise for classical foundationalism, one
about the nature and justification of appearance beliefs and one about
the allegedly non-circular inference from appearance beliefs to
perceptual beliefs.
Appearance beliefs are said not to be based on other beliefs. This
raises the question of how they are themselves justified.
Appearance beliefs are a species of introspective belief, and
introspection is sometimes thought to involve a “direct
contact”, or “confrontation”, or “acquaintance
with”, or “access to”, or
“self-presentation” of certain truths. As we saw in
 section 2.1,
 regarding “direct presence”, such metaphors could be
unpacked in a variety of ways. If claims about
“acquaintance” and the like (for simplicity, I will refer
to them all indiscriminately as “acquaintance”) are given
an epistemological reading, then they seem to restate or reiterate the
classical foundationalist’s claim that we can have foundational
justification for appearance beliefs, rather than to explain or argue
for that claim. If they are making some metaphysical claim, then the
consequences for epistemology are indirect and unclear.
Epistemologists are sometimes less than fully explicit about how they
are understanding acquaintance. And however acquaintance is
understood, the classical foundationalist must make acquaintance broad
enough that we are plausibly acquainted with appearances but narrow
enough that we are not acquainted with physical objects as well.
Roderick Chisholm’s (1977) conception of acquaintance (he calls
it “self-presentation”) is explicitly and fundamentally
epistemic—a self-presenting state is simply one such that a
person is justified in believing she is in it whenever she is actually
in it. This doesn’t explain or argue for the special epistemic
status of appearance beliefs, but Chisholm denies that this needs to
be argued: it is self-presenting that appearance beliefs are
self-presenting. In a somewhat similar vein, Fumerton (1995, 2001)
claims that the acquaintance relation is not an epistemic relation but
insists that it is sui generis and unanalyzable; he holds that we
nevertheless understand the acquaintance relation, as we are
acquainted with it.
Attempts to explicate acquaintance in non-epistemic terms fall into
one of two categories. The traditional way to understand acquaintance
is in terms of a containment relation between appearance beliefs and
appearances, with the result that appearance beliefs entail their own
truth. This is the indirect realist’s analogue of the
world-involvement invoked by direct realists (above, sections
 2.1.4,
 2.3.3). Descartes (1641) held that appearance beliefs, like any
belief about one’s own mental states, are infallible for this
reason and thereby self-evident (and thus justified). Though some
still endorse this view (McGrew 2003), most epistemologists deny that
we are infallible in our self-attributions. A more modest claim is
that only some appearance beliefs are infallible. David
Chalmers (2003) argues that phenomenal qualities are literally
elements or constituents of a special type of phenomenal concept
(“direct phenomenal concepts”), and so introspective
judgments that involve the application of such concepts cannot be
mistaken.
This does not yet account for the distinctive epistemic status of
appearance beliefs, as the epistemic implications of infallibility
remain unclear, especially in the context of an internalist
epistemology. One might believe some necessary truth as the result of
a lucky guess; the belief is infallible, but not justified. This seems
at least in part to result from the fact that the infallibility
occurs, in some sense, outside of the agent’s perspective. (The
infallibility involved in self-attribution, however, seems intuitively
to fall within the agent’s perspective.)
The second type of approach views appearance beliefs as justified by
something extrinsic to them, so that an appearance belief is justified
when it is accompanied by acquaintance with the experiential fact that
the appearance belief describes. Laurence BonJour (2003), for example,
understands acquaintance in terms of constitutivity, though in a very
different way from Chalmers. BonJour claims that awareness of the
sensory content of an experience is partly constitutive of what it is
to have a conscious experience. That awareness is thus infallible, but
appearance beliefs—which purport to describe the
experience and constituent awareness—are fallible.
All the authors just mentioned, except for Chisholm, see acquaintance
as a metaphysical (i.e., non-epistemic) relation that does not
immediately entail any epistemological theses. They lay down as a
separate, further thesis one that is not entailed by but is rendered
highly plausible, they think, by the nature of the acquaintance
relation: that when one is thus acquainted with an experience, one has
a strong prima facie justification to believe that one has
that experience, and furthermore, that justification does not depend
on any other beliefs. On either non-epistemic understanding of
acquaintance, it puts us in a very good position to make correct
judgments about our current experiences. Most classical
foundationalists allow that all appearance beliefs are defeasible
(i.e., having a kind of justification that is capable of being
overridden or undermined by further reasons); hence the claim made is
merely for prima facie, rather than ultima facie,
justification. (To say that a belief is prima facie [aka
pro tanto] justified is to say that it is has some positive
epistemic status, in the sense that it is justified if it is
not defeated by overriding or undermining considerations.) Chisholm
(1977) and Timothy McGrew (2003) endorse the stronger claim that
acquaintance provides indefeasible, ultima facie
justification.
It is possible that the experience (or acquaintance with it) is
intended to serve not only as a truth-maker and justifier for the
appearance belief, but as evidence for that belief as well.
By “evidence” is meant here not just any factor that
serves to confer justification on a belief, but something that serves
as a ground, or reason, or rational basis,
for that
 belief.[2]
 Not all justification-conferring or justification-relevant factors
count as evidence in this sense (if they did, Earl Conee and Richard
Feldman [2004] would not have to defend evidentialism). For
example, Descartes held that all clear and distinct judgments were
justified, though certain judgments—e.g., “I
think”—are justified without evidential appeal to clarity
and distinctness. It is the fact that it is clear and
distinct that makes it justified, not the agent’s awareness of
that fact or appreciation of that fact’s epistemic significance,
so clarity and distinctness are not functioning here as evidence.
Similarly, reliabilism holds, roughly, that being reliably formed
renders a belief justified; although reliability need not—and
typically does not—figure in as the agent’s evidence or
grounds for believing something. Thus, one can claim that perceptual
experiences are nondoxastic (i.e., non-belief) states that serve as
evidence for appearance beliefs, in much the way that beliefs serve as
evidence for other beliefs, though with one crucial difference: for
one belief to serve as evidence for another, the former must be
justified; experiences are not susceptible to justification, thus can
be neither justified nor unjustified, but—on this view—can
nevertheless serve as evidence and confer justification on beliefs.
The justification of appearance beliefs would then depend on
evidential connections to other mental states but not to other
beliefs, and because experiences need not be justified in order to
serve as evidence, the threatened regress is halted in a way that is
consistent with foundationalism. The idea of such nondoxastic evidence
raises several problems, as we will see shortly.
Classical foundationalism is sometimes objected to on the grounds that
we typically do not have beliefs about our experiences (e.g., Pollock
1986, Greco 2000). This raises interesting and difficult issues about
the natures of evidence and the basing relation. For the belief that
p to serve as justifying evidence for the belief that q,
must I consciously form the belief that p, or is it enough
that, e.g., I have good reason to believe that p? Surely the
classical foundationalist never denied phenomenal directness or
thought our perceptual beliefs were reasoned out explicitly. If one
could show that only consciously formed beliefs could ground other
beliefs, this would be bad news indeed for classical foundationalism,
but this is a controversial claim. Alternatively, the objection might
be that we are typically not even yet in a position to form
justified appearance beliefs, in some situations where we are already
quite justified in our perceptual beliefs. Being in a position to form
justified appearance beliefs would require further investigation, in
an “inward” direction. This investigation is not always
easy (Pollock 1986), and it is possible that such investigation would
alter the nature of the experience. In addition, some perceivers may
lack the conceptual resources to distinguish appearances from external
objects, although they seem to be justified in their perceptual
beliefs nonetheless.
Cartesian foundationalism was the strictest form of classical
foundationalism, requiring a deductive metaevidential argument for the
reliability of perception. Descartes believed that he could give a
non-circular argument for thinking that some perceptual experiences
were veridical, by constructing an a priori argument for the
reliability of perception. He also aimed for certainty, so his
argument was a deductive one, starting with the existence and
perfection of God and concluding that any clear and distinct awareness
(including elements of perceptual awarenesses) must be true; so some
perceptual experiences—namely, the clear and distinct
ones—are veridical. This would have licensed a rejection of the
Reasons Claim, by showing how we could have a good reason for thinking
our experiences to be veridical. However, Descartes’s a
priori arguments for the existence of God were at best
controversial, and the theology needed to deduce the reliability of
perception from the perfection of the deity was unconvincing, so
deductive metaevidential arguments along these lines were not pursued
further.
NonCartesian forms of classical foundationalism have tried to combine
the a priority required by non-circularity with a probabilistic form
of inference, the most promising candidate being abduction, or
inference to the best explanation (Russell 1912, BonJour 2003).
According to this view, the best explanation of our experiences is the
commonsense hypothesis that there is a mind-independent external world
that conforms in some measure to these experiences and is the cause of
them. The superiority of this explanation to the alternatives
(idealism, a Cartesian demon, etc.) is held to be an a priori
matter, thus not dependent on assuming the veridicality of the very
experiences the argument is supposed to legitimate. There is a good
deal of intuitive plausibility to the claim that an external world
serves as the best explanation for our sense experience, but making
that case in any detail, especially enough to satisfy the idealist,
would require taking on some large and complex issues, like what makes
one explanation better than another
 (see they entry on abduction),
 and—since the commonsense view is sometimes (e.g., Russell
1912, BonJour 2010) held to be simpler than
competitors—what counts as simplicity, a vexed question in the
philosophy of science
 (see the entry on  simplicity).
 William Alston (1993) offers an influential critique of abductive
arguments for the reliability of sense-experience.
Furthermore, if we are trying to explain how the ordinary
person’s perceptual beliefs are justified, then it is not enough
that there be some good deductive or abductive argument for
the reliability of perception; this argument must be in some important
sense available to or possessed by the agent. Premise
 (2)
 of PEW, after all, is the claim that the agent must have
some good reason for thinking her experiences are veridical. Some
(e.g., Pollock & Cruz 1999) think this imposes a significantly
more onerous burden on the proponent of classical foundationalism,
although others (e.g., BonJour 2010) claim that the superiority of the
commonsense view is quite accessible to ordinary epistemic agents.
Other foundationalists have responded to PEW by denying the
Metaevidential Principle. Most such views have rejected both parts of
the standard argument for the Metaevidential Principle
 (3.1
 above), but one important exception is worth noting. Chisholm (1966,
1977) agrees with the classical foundationalist that perceptual
beliefs are based on appearance beliefs but denies that any argument
for the legitimacy of the appearance-reality inference is needed.
Chisholm posits as a fundamental epistemic principle that if one is
justified in believing herself to be perceptually appeared to as if
p, then one is prima facie justified in believing that
p. The significance of insisting that this principle is
fundamental is to insist on the legitimacy of the move from
p-appearance to p-reality while denying that that
legitimacy is derived from deduction or abduction.
To the classical foundationalist, this move seems illicitly ad
hoc. Admittedly, it gives the answer we desire—that
perceptual beliefs are justified—but it doesn’t explain
how this can be so or give us any reason to think it is true (Fumerton
1995). The objection holds that the postulation of fundamental
epistemic principles licensing the inferences we like, despite our
inability to provide an argument for the legitimacy of such
inferences, has, to use Bertrand Russell’s apt phrase, all the
advantages of theft over honest toil.
The coherentist, like the classical foundationalist, endorses the
Metaevidential Principle but holds that we can indeed have good
arguments for the reliability of perception. Coherentism is the view
that at least some justification comes from mutual support among
otherwise unsupported beliefs instead of tracing back to basic
beliefs. As such, coherentists are sometimes said to endorse certain
kinds of circular (they prefer to call them holistic) argument, but a
coherentist will reject the Reasons Claim by insisting that there is
nothing viciously circular about our arguments for the reliability of
perception (BonJour 1985, Lehrer 1990). Because it allows mutual
support, coherentism can tolerate empirical arguments for the
reliability of perception, in principle, allowing appeals to track
records, evolution, and other scientific evidence.
Coherentism has traditionally been propounded as a doxastic theory:
one that holds that only beliefs can serve as evidence. This is in
part because one of the major motivations for coherentism derives from
an argument due to Wilfrid Sellars (1956), Donald Davidson (1986) and
Laurence BonJour (1980) that purports to show that nondoxastic states
(e.g., experiences) cannot play an evidential role (about which, more
below, in
 section 3.4.1).
 This doxasticism is the source of one of the most notorious problems
for coherentism, however, for the internal coherence of a belief
system could result from the ingenuity of the believer, rather than
from its fit with reality. A detailed enough and cleverly constructed
fairy tale could be highly internally coherent, but surely I am not
justified in believing the fairy tale, in my current situation and
environment. This is the famous isolation objection to
coherentism: a belief system could be isolated from the world and yet
be fully coherent. Since those beliefs would not be justified,
coherence is not sufficient for justification.
The brunt of the isolation objection is that (doxastic) coherentism is
unable to do justice to perception, for it does not require any
genuinely perceptual contact with the world. But without perception,
the whole of one’s beliefs is just another plausible story, not
the one true description of things. (Even with perception, there is
unlikely to be a single best belief set, but the number of
equally good contenders will be vastly reduced.) For some time,
BonJour (1985) thought that the problem could be solved with more
beliefs; he required a candidate belief system to include a number of
beliefs attributing reliability to beliefs that seem to be
involuntary, noninferential, and directly caused by the outside world.
But this solution seemed ad hoc, and it still didn’t
require the belief set to be very highly constrained by perception; at
best it constrained the belief set by what the agent believes
to be perception, and even then, only those putatively perceptual
beliefs about which she has favorable metabeliefs would need to
constrain the rest of the system in any way. This seems to render
perception epistemically “optional”, in an objectionable
way.
Although BonJour (1997) has consequently abandoned this approach in
favor of a form of foundationalism, others have sought to incorporate
experiences into a nondoxastic coherentism (Conee 1988, Haack 1993,
Kvanvig 2012, Kvanvig & Riggs 1992). If experiences are among the
relata over which the coherence relation is defined, then a fully
isolated agent won’t be able to satisfy the coherence
requirement, and the isolation objection may be averted.
It is unclear whether such a move genuinely rescues coherentism or
simply replaces it with a version of foundationalism. If consonance
with experience can increase the credibility of a belief, then it
begins to look as if that belief satisfies at least some
(“weak”) foundationalist definitions of an
epistemologically basic belief. Instead, the nondoxastic coherentist
might insist that experiences justify perceptual beliefs, but only in
the presence of the right background beliefs about which experiences
reliably indicate which distal states of affairs, where these
background beliefs are themselves justified in a coherentist manner
(Gupta 2006). This view seems to be securely coherentist, though it
threatens to render coherence with experience optional in just the way
BonJour’s older view did. The crucial question here is whether
experiences—alone, and in and of themselves—affect the
coherence of a belief system, or whether they do so only in the
presence of the relevant metabeliefs. If the former, then
“nondoxastic coherentism” may not be significantly
different from some form of foundationalism. If the latter, then an
agent lacking the requisite metabeliefs might satisfy the coherence
requirements quite well but have a belief system that clashes with her
experience, and the nondoxastic coherentist would have to hold that
she is none the worse, epistemically, for that fact.
The very spirit of coherentism seems to dictate that perception yields
justification only because and insofar as the perceiver has
metabeliefs that favor perception, while it is central to the
foundationalist theory of perception that perceptual experience
imposes epistemic constraints on us, whether we believe it or not.
The epistemological views considered so far can all be considered
egoistic theories, for they hold that justification for
beliefs about external objects depends in part on justification for
beliefs about oneself—about one’s current mental states,
about the connections between one’s experiences or putatively
perceptual beliefs and certain distal states of affairs, rendering
perceptual beliefs nonbasic. Modest foundationalism is a
nonegoistic version of foundationalism, one that allows some beliefs
about external objects and their properties—particularly,
perceptual beliefs—to be epistemologically basic. (Both types of
foundationalism also countenance other basic beliefs, e.g., beliefs
about simple arithmetical truths.) Modest foundationalism thus denies
the Metaevidential Principle; perceptual beliefs are not based on
other beliefs and thus not based on appearance beliefs, and if they
are based on something other than beliefs (namely, experiences) the
agent need not have a justified belief about the reliability of this
connection.
Some proponents of modest foundationalism go a step further and offer
a derivative denial of the Reasons Claim: since we already have
justified beliefs about our surroundings, and introspective knowledge
of the deliverances of perception, we can construct non-circular
arguments for the reliability of perception. Indeed, if I can have
first-order knowledge about the world around me without first having
metaevidence about the reliability of perception, I should be able to
accumulate empirical evidence for thinking that I am not a brain in a
vat, that I am not dreaming, etc., without begging the question.
Whether this should count as a virtue or a vice of the theory is a
matter of debate. Proponents of a “Moorean” response to
skepticism (see the entries on
 skepticism
 and
 epistemic closure)
 will see this as a selling point for modest foundationalism (Pryor
2000). Others (Vogel 2000, 2008; Cohen 2002) have interpreted this
result as revealing a fundamental flaw of the theory: it makes
justification and knowledge “too easy”. It is as if I used
an untested speedometer to form beliefs both about my speed and what
the meter indicated my speed to be, then used a number of such belief
pairs to inductively argue for the reliability of the speedometer.
Modest foundationalism endorses epistemological directness
 (section 2.1.5
 above) and could be considered a kind of epistemological direct
realism, for it makes the world and its elements “directly
present” to the mind in a fairly clear, epistemological sense:
perceptual justification is not dependent on any other justification;
no other beliefs are interposed between us and the world (in fact,
John Pollock’s term for his [1986] modest foundationalism is
“direct realism”; cf. Pollock & Cruz 1999). Modest
foundationalism is compatible with any metaphysical view about the
nature of perception. Even a sense-datum theorist could embrace this
epistemological direct realism, provided she held that the inference
from sense-data to external objects was a kind of (perhaps unconscious
or subpersonal) inference that does not impose evidential requirements
on the conclusion belief.
Modest foundationalism is usually associated with the internalist
versions of the theory. Roughly, epistemological internalism is the
claim that the factors that determine justification supervene on the
mental states of the cognizer (mentalism) or can be determined to
obtain by mere reflection (access internalism; see the entry on
 internalist vs. externalist conceptions of epistemic justification).
 Internalist modest foundationalist theories hold that perceptual
beliefs are directly justified by the corresponding perceptual
experiences; it is the experiences themselves, rather than beliefs
about the experiences, that do the justificatory work.
The most straightforward version is one that holds that having a
certain experience is by itself sufficient for prima facie
justification for the corresponding perceptual belief. Michael
Huemer’s (2007) “phenomenal conservatism”, James
Pryor’s (2000) “dogmatism”, and Pollock’s
(1974, 1986) “direct realism” all endorse something like
the following principle:
If S has a perceptual experience as of p, then S
is prima facie justified in believing that p.
That is, S is prima facie justified whether or
not perception is reliable for S and whether or not
S has any evidence in favor of the claim that perception is
reliable. Perceptual beliefs are justified by the experience alone, in
virtue of some intrinsic feature of that experience (its content, or
phenomenal character, or assertive force, etc.). Of course, because
the justification here is only prima facie justification,
this justification could be defeated if, say, S has good enough
reason to think that perception is unreliable, or has independent
evidence that p is false.
To have a neutral term, I call this view “seemings
internalism”, for it holds that perceptual beliefs are
based on “seemings”, i.e., appearance states, i.e.,
experiences. (There is no fixed, established terminology here, so I
will use these terms interchangeably.)
Perhaps the most important problem for this view concerns the relevant
understanding of seemings, or perceptual experience. It is clear that
seemings must be non-belief states of some sort, as their
epistemological role is to confer justification on basic beliefs, and
the latter wouldn’t be basic if seemings were themselves
beliefs. The “Sellarsian dilemma” is a famous argument,
due perhaps as much to BonJour (1978, 1985) as to Sellars (1956),
which claims that “experience” and “seemings”
and the like are ambiguous in a way that undermines the
epistemological role foundationalism requires of experiences. That
role, of course, is to provide justification for beliefs without being
themselves in need of it. (Sellars’s original argument is aimed
at classical foundationalism, but I discuss it here, because it
threatens any theory that has experiences justifying beliefs—by
themselves and in the absence of background beliefs—and because
most recent discussion of the Sellarsian dilemma occurs within the
context of seemings internalism.) According to Sellars (1956), there
is a kind of awareness of sensations that does not involve learning or
the application of concepts, but this kind of awareness does not
account for the justification of our appearance beliefs; one might
well have this kind of awareness without having any idea what kind of
experiences one is having (or any idea that there are such things as
experiences!). There is another kind of awareness of our sensations
that does involve the application of concepts and does entail
knowledge and justification. But this awareness just is
one’s knowledge of one’s experiences (i.e., one’s
justified, true, unGettiered appearance belief). But that kind of
awareness cannot then serve as a nondoxastic foundation that confers
justification on beliefs without being itself in need of
justification.
Sellars himself (1956) thought that there are two elements to
perception: a bare sensation, which is an inner event with qualitative
character but no representational content; and a perceptual belief (or
belief-like state, in cases where the agent does not accept
appearances at face value; see Reid 1764, 1785 for a similar view).
Recent formulations of the Sellarsian dilemma have focused on this
mismatch in content between experience and perceptual belief. There
are several variants of the argument; what follows is an amalgamated
version.
In defense of
 (2),
 experiences have frequently been construed as lacking
representational contents altogether (Sellars 1956, Martin 2002,
Brewer 2011), or as having nonconceptual contents (Heck 2000, Peacocke
2001).[4]
 An influential argument (e.g., McDowell 1994, Brewer 1999) holds that
without conceptual content, an experience would have to stand outside
the “logical space of reasons” and thus cannot justify a
belief. This line is perhaps most plausible if the relevant mode of
justification is assumed to be a specifically evidential one
(see
 section 3.1.1
 above). To serve as evidence, the experience would need to stand in
logical or probabilistic relations to beliefs, and without
(conceptual) contents, it is unclear how it could stand in evidential
relations to beliefs, or which beliefs it would serve as evidence for
(McDowell 1994). A common response is that as long as experiences have
contents of any sort, they can have truth conditions and thus stand in
entailment and probabilistic relations to beliefs (Heck 2000, Byrne
2005). One way to follow through on the original argument for
 (2)
 is to emphasize the kind of content necessary for evidence
appreciable as such by the perceiver. If experiences are
nonconceptual, then it seems that I could have a nonconceptual
experience of a cat without being in any position to appreciate the
fact that the experience is in fact of a cat. In such a case, I could
fail to have any justification for believing that there is cat in
front of me. So nonconceptual experiences cannot, by themselves,
justify perceptual beliefs (Lyons 2016). Such an argument requires the
controversial assumption that an agent must “appreciate”
e’s evidential significance vis-à-vis h, in
order for e to supply that agent with evidence for h.
Some (e.g., Alston 1988) have explicitly rejected this assumption.
As for the other horn of the dilemma, premise
 (3),
 one can argue that so-called “experiences” that have
assertive force and the same contents as beliefs are, if not
themselves beliefs, at least sufficiently belief-like that
they are susceptible to epistemic evaluation in much the way that
beliefs are; if so and if only the “justified” ones can
confer justification on beliefs, then these experiences will not have
filled the role foundationalism had carved out for them (Sellars 1956,
BonJour 1978, Sosa 2007).
In recent years, several authors (Lyons 2005, 2009; Bengson, Grube,
& Korman 2011; Brogaard 2013) have argued that what we think of as
perceptual experiences is actually a composite of two (or more)
distinct elements, what Chris Tucker (2010) calls the
“sensation” (an imagistic state, rich in perceptual
phenomenology) and a “seeming” (here construed as a purely
representational state, applying conceptual categories to things in
the world). Seemings understood in this way are still non-belief
states: in cases of known perceptual illusion, it might seem to me
that p, even though I don’t believe that p.
Something like the above Sellarsian dilemma can be run with this
distinction in hand: sensations without seemings are insufficient to
justify beliefs; and seemings without sensations would be subjectively
too similar to mere hunches to justify beliefs (Lyons 2009). The
seemings internalist can reply by arguing that seemings alone, even
construed as just one component of perceptual experience, can indeed
justify beliefs (Tucker 2010), or by rejecting this composite view,
insisting that a seeming is a single, unified state, whose perceptual
phenomenology and conceptual content are inextricably linked (Chudnoff
& Didomenico 2015).
Seemings internalism as formulated above claims that the content of
the experience is the same as the content of the belief, thus
rejecting premise
 (3)
 of the Sellarsian argument. There may be variations close enough to
still count as seemings internalism that deny
 (2)
 instead, allowing experiences with nonconceptual contents to justify
beliefs. The standard schema would have to be modified:
If S has a perceptual experience as of p*, then
S is prima facie justified in believing that
p.
One would, of course, want to say more about the relation between
p and p*. Although his concern is not with nonconceptual
content, Nico Silins (2011) defends a view much like seemings
internalism, where the experiences are not required to have the same
contents as the beliefs.
A second problem is that of alien sense modalities (Bergmann 2006).
There are possible creatures with sense modalities and experiences
that are foreign to us: echolocation, electeroception, etc. If
metaevidential beliefs are not necessary for perceptual justification,
then these same experiences ought to justify us in those same
beliefs. Intuitively, however, a sudden electeroceptive experience
would not justify me in believing there was a medium sized animal
about three feet behind me. In fact, a famous objection that is
normally pressed against reliabilist theories seems to apply equally
well to seemings internalism. Norman (BonJour 1980) has no reason for
thinking that he has clairvoyant powers, but one day he has a
clairvoyant experience as of the president being in New York;
intuitively, he is not prima facie justified in believing
that the president is in New York, yet seemings internalism seems to
imply that he is. One might argue that Norman’s experience is
not exactly perceptual; perhaps this might offer a way out. Some
versions of seemings internalism restrict their claims to perception
(Pryor 2000), although some (Huemer 2007) apply to seemings much more
generally.
Another potential problem is that seemings internalism is insensitive
to the etiology of the experience, where it intuitively seems that
this should matter. If the only reason Jack looks angry to Jill is
that she has an irrational fear that he would be angry, then her
perceptual experience as of angry-Jack should not carry its usual
evidential weight (Siegel 2011). In general, experiences that result
from wishful thinking, fear, and various irrational processes should
not have the same evidential import as do experiences with a more
respectable etiology (Siegel 2013). But seemings internalism makes the
experience itself sufficient for (prima facie) justification
and thus leaves no role for etiology to play. One response to these
sorts of cases is that if it genuinely looks to Jill as if Jack is
angry, then the only appropriate thing for Jill to do is believe that
he is angry (Huemer 2013). This is compatible with there still being
something else epistemically wrong with Jill; e.g., she presumably
doesn’t know that Jack is angry (even if he is).
A question that arises for any epistemology of perception but that is
more salient for seemings internalism concerns which perceptual
beliefs are epistemologically basic. Is my belief that there’s a
dog in front of me basic, or does its justification depend on the
justification of more elemental beliefs: that there’s a medium
sized, 3-dimensional object of such-and-such a shape and a furry
texture, etc.? Is my belief that that’s Django on the floor in
front of me basic, or does it depend on the beliefs that there’s
a black and tan dog of a certain description, and that Django is a
black and tan dog who fits that description, etc.? One reason this
matters, especially for the present views, is that it is closely
linked to separate issues concerning the contents of perception
 (see the entry on the 
  contents of perception).
 If I can have the basic perceptual belief that Django the dog is here
in front of me, then does this mean that I must be capable of having a
perceptual experience with the content that Django is in front of
me?
A final worry for seemings internalism is one that we encountered
above in
 section 3.2:
 the proposal seems to be an ad hoc attempt to get the
desired nonskeptical answer without further justification for the
 principle.[5]
There is a nonstandard form of internalist modest foundationalism that
might be able to solve some of these problems by finding a distinctive
role for background knowledge to play. Peter Markie (2006) suggests
that background knowledge of how to form perceptual beliefs can
determine which experiences count as evidence for which beliefs. If
this background served as evidence, the view in question would no
longer be a modest foundationalism. Markie, however, understands this
know-how entirely in nondoxastic terms—in terms of behavioral
dispositions. This presumably keeps it from serving as evidence,
although the know-how is mental and available to introspection, which
renders the theory internalist. On this view, the content of
perceptual experiences would not matter, for their status as evidence
is not supposed to be determined entirely by the nature of themselves
and their justificanda. This view does, however, flout the intuitively
plausible, though controversial, principle of evidence
essentialism, which holds that if e is evidence of
h for S, then necessarily, e is evidence of
h for any S (Lyons 2009; Pollock 1986 calls the
principle “cognitive essentialism” and Conee & Feldman
2004 call it “strong supervenience”). It also violates the
plausible and less controversial claim that evidential relations are
objective (Bergmann 2004), i.e., that the agent’s subjective
sense of evidential fit is insufficient for genuine fit.
Seemings internalism employs a conception of seemings that is neutral
between hallucination and veridical perception. The view thus holds
that our epistemic status is the same in both cases, as do coherentism
and classical foundationalism. The epistemological disjunctivist, on
the other hand, holds that we are more justified in the good case
(perhaps significantly more justified).
The debate between epistemological disjunctivists is actually
orthogonal to the debates between foundationalism and coherentism. The
disjunctivist need not endorse modest foundationalism and hold that
perceptual beliefs are basic. I discuss the theory here under the
heading of modest foundationalism, because proponents of
epistemological disjunctivists have typically embraced a version of
modest foundationalism, at least with respect to perception.
Epistemological disjunctivism fits naturally with metaphysical
disjunctivism, although neither implies the other. The proponent of
both can claim that the reason we are justified in the good case but
not in the bad is that a veridical perceptual experience is a distinct
type of mental state from a hallucination and that different types of
mental states frequently have different evidential significance. An
epistemological disjunctivist who denied metaphysical disjunctivism
would claim that we are in the same mental state in both cases but
that the justificatory potency of an experiential state is partly
determined by further factors, including the veridicality or not of
the experience. On the standard mentalist understanding of
internalism, the latter view is clearly externalist; the former view
might count as internalist, at least on a rather unusually liberal
understanding of internalism, which allows the supervenience base for
justification to include factive mental states.
One motivation for epistemological disjunctivism is that it would
allow for a kind of infallibilism in perception: in the good case, the
basis for my perceptual belief is something that absolutely guarantees
the truth of that belief (McDowell 1982, Pritchard 2012). At the same
time, it does so in a way that is compatible with a (somewhat unusual)
kind of access internalism (Pritchard 2012): in the good case, my
experience justifies me not only in believing, say, that there’s
a cat in front of me, but also in believing that I’m perceiving
veridically. This allows me, at least in the good case, to know on the
basis of mere reflection that I’m in a state that infallibly
guarantees that there is a cat in front of me. I cannot, however, know
whether or not I am in a state that guarantees that
there’s a cat. Because veridical and hallucinatory experiences
are indistinguishable, epistemological disjunctivism implies that even
if one can know that she does have good (infallible) evidence for
p in the good case, one might yet fail to know that she lacks
good evidence for p in the bad case, where she would continue
to think she had good evidence. This brand of access internalism is
unlikely to satisfy most internalists (Smithies 2013).
Other versions of epistemological disjunctivism (not all of which
embrace the title) are motivated differently. Some are motivated by
the idea that what justifies a perceptual belief that p is the
fact that one sees that p (Millar 2011, Byrne 2016),
some by the idea that all evidence consists of facts (Williamson
2000), and some by the idea that veridical involves a successful
exercise of a capacity while the hallucinatory case does not
(Schellenberg 2016).
Coherentism and classical foundationalism attempt to satisfy the
Metaevidential Principle in a way that allows these theories to (a)
defend, rather than simply postulate, the epistemic legitimacy of
perception, and (b) satisfy the internalist demand that the factors
relevant to the justification of a belief be internal to the agent.
Internalist modest foundationalism does (b) but not (a); externalist
versions do (a) but not (b). (Both reject the Metaevidential
Principle.) Although it is possible to defend an externalist
epistemology that is otherwise structurally similar to classical
foundationalism or coherentism (Goldman 1986), extant externalist
theories have followed modest foundationalism in allowing beliefs
about external objects and properties to be epistemologically
basic.
Externalist theories impose more (and also sometimes less) than the
seemings internalist requirement that the agent have the relevant
perceptual experience. One obvious candidate factor is reliability.
Alvin Goldman (1979, 1986) argues that, so long as perception really
is reliable,[6]
 the agent need not have reasons for believing perception to be
reliable in order to be justified in her perceptual beliefs. What
makes perceptual beliefs justified, on such a view, is that they are
reliably formed. The simplest reliabilist theory of perceptual belief
is one that holds
(SR): a belief is prima facie justified iff it is the result
of a reliable cognitive process.
This offers a nonevidentialist theory of perceptual justification;
rather than being justified by evidential connections to experiences
or other beliefs, it is the mere fact that the producing or sustaining
process has a tendency to yield true beliefs that makes the perceptual
belief justified. This is not to say that it precludes evidence from
playing any epistemic role but only that it does not require evidence
for perceptual justification; an agent can have justified perceptual
beliefs without having any evidence.
A second externalist approach can be offered either as an alternative
or an addendum to reliabilism. It holds that what makes certain
beliefs about the world justified is that they have a distinctive
psychological etiology, e.g., that they are the outputs of a
perceptual module (where what counts as a perceptual module is spelled
out in architectural terms, rather than in terms of phenomenology or
the agent’s background beliefs; Lyons 2009). Psychological
etiology is not available to mere reflection, and the theory leaves
open the possibility that the agent has a justified perceptual belief
with the requisite perceptual etiology, without having any conscious
experiences or evidence of any other kind. Obviously, the lack of an
evidential requirement will be controversial, but the proponent of
this view sees this as little more than the externalist had already
signed on for.
A third possibility is to claim that what makes perceptual beliefs
justified is that they are properly formed, where the operative
conception of “proper” is cashed in terms of a
biological—usually evolutionary—understanding of proper
function. Again, this can be offered either in conjunction with
(Plantinga 1993) or in opposition to (Bergmann 2006, Graham 2012)
reliabilism.
Many of the objections to these views are just specific applications
of objections to reliabilism, externalism, and teleological theories
more generally. For instance, clairvoyance objections (BonJour 1980)
aim to show that reliability is not sufficient for prima
facie justification, and new evil demon arguments (Lehrer &
Cohen 1983) insist that reliability is not necessary
 (see the entry on reliabilist epistemology).
 Teleological theories face the additional problem of the Swampman
(Davidson 1987), who is a randomly occurring (therefore, lacking in
any biological functions) molecular duplicate of a normal person;
intuitively he seems to have justified perceptual beliefs, although
this cannot be accounted for in terms of proper function.
In addition to these standard worries, there is a pervasive sense
among epistemologists that perceptual experiences must play some
important role in the justification of perceptual belief, probably an
evidential one. There are two ways to make room for experiences in an
externalist epistemology. One is to add an auxiliary thesis to the
effect that the requisite external property is essentially mediated in
certain cases by experiences. For example, some perceptual processes
might only be highly reliable when experiences are among the inputs;
or they might be designed (Plantinga 1993) to take experiences as
inputs. The other way is to defend a genuinely hybrid account, which
posits an internalist (usually evidentialist) constraint that is not
taken to reduce to the more general external criteria already in
place.
An example of this second approach is Alston’s (1988)
internalist externalism. He requires that every justified belief have
some ground, or evidence, and that this ground be accessible; that is
the internalist element. He claims, however, that what makes a ground
(good) evidence for some belief is that the ground reliably indicates
the truth of that belief, and this fact is one that need not be
accessible to the agent; this is the externalist element. Juan
Comesaña (2010) endorses a similar view, though in ostensibly
process reliabilist terms (the processes he has in mind, however, are
very narrow, of the form “believing h on the basis of
e”, which makes it more similar to an indicator
reliabilism than a typical process reliabilism). Goldman (2011) wants
experiential evidence to play a central role in perception, though he
does not explicitly endorse an experiential/evidential requirement. He
offers a two-factor reliabilist proposal for understanding evidence,
which combines process and indicator reliabilism; for e to be
evidence for h (i) e must be among the inputs to a
reliable process that outputs h, and (ii) there must be an
objective fittingness relation between e and h, that is,
e must reliably indicate the truth of h.
These theories understand evidential justification in terms of
reliability. One could alternatively understand it in teleological
terms (Plantinga 1993) and couple this with a requirement that every
justified perceptual belief be based on some appropriate experiential
evidence (although teleological theories tend not to take this extra
step). Either way, we get a theory that solves some of the Sellarsian
problems for seemings internalism. The reliability or teleology can
determine which experiences serve as proper evidence for which
beliefs, and it shouldn’t matter whether experiences have the
right kind of content, or any content at all. The external factor thus
plays roughly the same role as internalized know-how does for
Markie’s view. Like Markie’s view, externalist theories of
perceptual evidence violate evidence essentialism, but unlike that
view, they retain the objectivity of evidence, even if the
teleological views see it as species-relative.
Of course, such hybrid theories will still be unsatisfying to
internalists. Even if they require certain internal factors for
justification, they still leave the total determinants of
justification outside the agent’s ken. Some experience of mine
will count as evidence for some belief of mine, but it is an utter
mystery to me which belief the experience is evidence for. This will
not satisfy the internalist, at least not the sort who thinks that if
we are justified in believing something, then this is a fact we can
ascertain on the basis of mere reflection. At the same time,
nonevidentialist externalists are not likely to see what is compelling
about the experiential requirement, especially if it doesn’t go
far enough to appease internalist scruples anyway.
The epistemological problems of perception have traditionally centered
on the threat of skepticism, in particular, on the “veil of
perception” implicated by a well-known metaphysics of
perception, which threatens to lead inexorably to skepticism. Although
certain metaphysical theories of perception have natural affinities
for certain epistemological views, the epistemology and metaphysics
tend to be logically independent. Even once our metaphysics is in
place, we will need to make difficult decisions about the
epistemology. There is a wide variety of direct realist
epistemological theories of perception and a number of
non-direct-realist epistemologies as well, each boasting certain
strengths and facing problems yet to be solved.