Memory makes possible knowledge of the past.  But how it does this
is far from clear.  The theory that has the best claim to the
“traditional view” label is the “Representational
Theory of Memory” (or RTM).
When I recall my twenty-first birthday, I bring to mind something
that is now in the past; I think of an event that is no longer
occurring. Therefore, the friend of RTM reasons, I can't now
be directly related to my twenty-first birthday since there is not
now an event that is my twenty-birthday.  The direct or
immediate object of a recollection must surely be something that
exists at the time of the memorial event; one can't be directly aware
of an entity that doesn't exist. 
So what is it that one is immediately aware of in memory if not the
past?  As its name implies, the RTM answer is that one is aware of a
representation of that past event.  Recall some important event in
your life — your twenty-first birthday, your bar mitzvah or
confirmation, your wedding, etc. You recall such events by bringing to
mind images. So you picture, say, a large cake with twenty-one candles
sitting on a table around which sit your parents and siblings.  You
remember your twenty first birthday by recalling this image.  So as
with the representational theory of perception, the RTM claims that
the object of your immediate awareness in memory is a representation
or image, and that it is in virtue of your now having that image that
you are now able to recall the event you are remembering.
 A difficulty arises almost immediately.  As the last sentence of
the above paragraph suggests, other cognitive processes or faculties
also make use of images or representations.  Most obviously,
perception and imagination depend crucially on the subject's having
the appropriate imagery.  What, then, makes a representation a
memory image rather than a perceptual or imaginary
representation?
In his Treatise on Human Nature, David Hume discusses this
very question. No perceptual realist, Hume nevertheless went along
with the representational component of representational
realism.  Like the other empiricists of his time, Hume believed that
the immediate objects of cognition are representations.  It was his
view of the relation of these perceptions to sensible objects that
distinguished the view of Hume from that of Locke (and from Berkeley's
idealism).
Hume divided the representations that inhabit the mind into two
types: impressions and ideas. Impressions are the basic building
blocks of cognition. In contrast with ideas of memory and imagination,
impressions come upon us with “force and liveliness.” Once
we've had an impression, we often find that “it again makes its
appearance there as an idea.” When this happens, the impression
retains some of its vivacity and forcefulness, and “is somewhat
intermediate betwixt an impression and an idea” [Hume, 1739, Bk
1, Part 1, Section 2], in which case it is a memory image.  Should it
lose its vivacity entirely, it is then a “perfect idea” and
is of the imagination.
Hume, then, answers our question about the distinguishing
characteristic of memory images by appealing to the relative vivacity
and force of the image.  Memory images are, by definition, fainter
than impressions but more vivacious and forceful than images of
imagination.
While there may be a certain surface plausibility to Hume's account
of memory, its inadequacies quickly come to light.  First, as Hume
himself recognizes, there is nothing in principle to prevent an idea
of memory from being decidedly faint and without force (just as ideas
of imagination can be vivid and forceful).  Hume can and does say that
when memory ideas are faint, they are often not recognized as memory
images, but are instead taken to be of the imagination.  But this
response confuses the issue.  Our concern here, and the one that Hume
is addressing in the relevant sections of the Treatise, is
with the metaphysics of memory and not with its epistemology.  So it
doesn't matter that sometimes memory images may be mistaken for images
of the imagination.  For even in describing such a circumstance, one
assumes that the fact of the matter is that the image in question is a
memory image and that the subject has made a mistake in judging the
image to be of imagination.  We are trying to figure out the criteria
according to which an image is of memory and not the conditions under
which one can introspectively know that this.
Things don't get a lot better if we seek help from Hume's comrade
in empiricism John Locke.  In the first edition of An Essay
Concerning Human Understanding, Locke describes memory as the
“storehouse” of ideas, but he never offers an account of
what distinguishes a memory idea from an idea of imagination.  And
while the storehouse metaphor remains in the second edition of the
Essay, Locke nevertheless backs away from it dramatically.
He argues that because ideas don't exist unperceived there is no
significant sense in which the ideas of memory continue to exist when
we are not thinking about them.  Rather the mind has the power to
“revive” ideas that we are said to remember.  Be this as it
may, although Locke is clearly a proponent of RTM, he does nothing to
help us answer the question of what it is that distinguishes memory
images from those of other kinds. We'll look at Locke's account a
little more closely when we discuss Reid's criticisms of the RTM.
While one finds little help in our query from Hume (because his
account is clearly flawed) or from Locke (he doesn't even appear to
recognize the issue), there is another empiricist who is more helpful,
viz., Bertrand Russell.  In his The Analysis of Mind, Russell
offers a distinctly RTM that clearly addresses the issue of what it is
in virtue of which an image is a memory image.  Here is a clear
statement of his position as it involves a particular example:
 Memory-images and imagination-images do not differ in their
intrinsic qualities, so far as we can discover.  They differ by the
fact that the images that constitute memories, unlike those that
constitute imagination, are accompanied by a feeling of belief which
may be expressed in the words “this happened.” The mere
occurrence of images, without this feeling of belief constitutes
imagination; it is the element of belief that is distinctive in
memory. [Russell 1921, pages 175-176]
Russell's concludes his account as follows:
Hume's and Russell's accounts of memory are both versions of the
RTM.  They differ, however, in two important respects.  First, Hume's
account of memory sees the objects of memory as ideas.  But Humean
ideas are not essentially propositional.  In fact, a propositional
representation will have to be constructed from two or more ideas.  So
inasmuch as we are interested in an account of memory belief,
which is essentially propositional, we'll have to look elsewhere.  On
the other hand, the “images” that are the primary component
of Russell's view surely have propositional content.  Russell's second
important point of departure from Hume concerns that which is
distinctive of memory representations.  On Hume's account, memory
images are distinguished by an intrinsic property; memory images are
more vivid and forceful than images of imagination and less vivid and forceful
than impressions.  Pace Hume, Russell takes the
distinguishing feature of memory images to be relational: an image is
a memory image if it is associated with a certain feeling or belief to
the effect that the content of that image refers to an event in the
past.
One major advantage of Russell's view over Hume's is that Russell's
is decidedly more economical.  For any event that one perceives,
remembers, and imagines, one will need three distinct images each with
the appropriate level of vivacity and forcefulness.  Russell's view,
in contrast, sees the difference between the different mental types as
coming in the relation to the same representation.  Russell's view, or
something like it, has become standard in contemporary philosophy of
mind: the difference between the thought that p, the desire
that p, and the belief that p is taken to be found
not in the representation itself but in the relationship one bears to
the representation.  In this way, the same thing can be the object of
belief, thought, desire, and any other propositional attitude.
The most severe critic of the RTM was Scottish philosopher Thomas
Reid, a contemporary of Hume.  I'll close this section of this
essay by looking at Reid's critique of Locke and Hume.  This will
provide us with a natural transition to the next section on the Direct
Theory of Memory, the chief proponent of which is none other than Reid
himself.
Reid begins his attack on the RTM by quoting Locke's concession
that the metaphor of the mind as a repository of ideas is not to be
taken strictly.  For on the standard Early Modern view, an idea is
necessarily consciously perceived. Stored ideas of which one is not
currently aware are not possible; a non-conscious idea is an
unperceived idea and hence an impossibility.  So Locke notes that to
say that the mind is a storehouse of ideas is only to say that the
mind has:
Reid notes that Locke's view here seems to be that no-longer
existent ideas are “revived” or brought back from the purely
metaphorical storehouse.  But as Locke himself acknowledges elsewhere
in the Essay, no object can have two beginnings of existence
— that is, it cannot come into existence at two distinct times.
So there is no serious sense in which an old idea is revived.  What
Locke must be committed to, then, is not the mind's ability to
resurrect nonexistent ideas but its power to produce new ideas that
are similar in certain respects to ideas it has had before.  So Locke
must be read as saying that when we remember, our minds produce ideas
that we recognize as similar to ideas we have had before.  Of course,
we might take these ideas of memory to be the very same token ideas we
previously had, but this is just a pre-reflective opinion that we can
see on reflection is not quite right. 
But even this somewhat sympathetic reading of Locke creates
problems.  For Locke's view entails not just that the mind has the
power to produce these ideas but also that we have the ability (at
least much of the time) to recognize these ideas as ones (or like
ones) we've seen before.  Yet this ability would seem to itself
presuppose memory.  As Reid says, this recognition (that this idea has
been seen before) “supposes a remembrance of those we had
before, otherwise the similitude or identity could not be
perceived” [Reid 1785, Essay III, Chapter VII]. Far from
illuminating the nature of memory, then, Locke's version of the RTM
merely presupposes what it sets out to explain.
Yet even if this serious difficulty is resolved or ignored, there
are other problems lurking nearby.  For, Reid argues, Locke's RTM does
not provide a sufficient condition for having a memory.  I'll let Reid
speak for himself:
Lest I give the impression that Reid picks only on Locke, I should
note with due haste that he also has little patience with Hume's
account of memory.  Recall that Hume's theory is that a memory is an
idea that is less vivid and forceful than an impression but more vivid
and forceful than an idea of imagination.  Always the attentive
reader, Reid quotes the passage from Hume's Treatise of Human
Nature in which Hume offers his initial characterization of
memory.  At the beginning of Book I, Part I, Section III of the
Treatise, Hume writes “We find by experience when any
impression has been present with the mind, it again makes its
appearance as an idea; and this it may do after two different
ways,” one of which is by memory.  Reid asks what Hume could mean
by experience in the quoted sentence.  Reid can think of only
one plausible answer: memory.  So while Hume offers us a deflationary
account of memory according to which to remember something is merely
to have an idea that is midway between an impression and an idea of
imagination, he helps himself in forming the account to experience
which, Reid argues, turns out to require the robust memory of common
sense.  Reid says,
According to vulgar apprehension, memory is an immediate knowledge
of something past.  Our author [i.e., Hume] does not admit that there
is any such knowledge in the human mind.  He maintains that memory is
nothing but a present idea or impression. But, in defining what he
takes memory to be, he takes for granted that kind of memory which he
rejects.  For can we find by experience, that an impression, after its
first appearance to the mind, makes a second, and a third, with
different degrees of strength and vivacity, if we have not so distinct
a remembrance of its first appearance, as enables us to know it, upon
its second and third, notwithstanding that, in the interval, it has
undergone a very considerable change. 
 All experience supposes memory; and there can be no such thing as
experience, without trusting to our own memory or that of others; so
that it appears from Mr. Hume's account of this matter, that he found
himself to have that kind of memory, which he acknowledges and
defines, by exercising that kind which he rejects. [Reid 1785, Essay
III, Chapter VII] 
So Reid thinks that Hume is illegitimately smuggling in a more
standard understanding both of what memory is and of the knowledge it
provides in giving his deflationary account.  But it gets worse.
Hume's theory does no better than Locke's in offering a sufficient
condition for memory. First, as Locke and Reid have previously noted,
it isn't literally true that the ideas of memory are the same ideas
that were experienced before; when we cease to be conscious of the
original ideas, they cease to exist.  So memory must be nothing but
“the faculty of making a weak impression…after a
corresponding strong one.” But to this, Reid offers the
following counterexample:
Reid's point is that Hume's account of memory entails that the
person who is able to both bring about an impression and then,
sometime later, a somewhat less forceful impression or idea (say, by
literally hitting his head against a wall, once hard enough to really
hurt, once not so hard), thereby remembers the first. But surely such
head banging is not remembering.
 Reid offers one further criticism of the RTM.  He notes the
structural similarity between the RTM and the representational theory
of perception.  He claims that Hume followed the logic of the view
that the only objects that are truly given in perception are ideas,
that all we ever experience are representations, to its natural
conclusion: all we can have knowledge of are our ideas.  If there is
any single lesson taught by the history of epistemology, it is that
there are no successful arguments that have only premises about the
contents of our ideas and which conclude with propositions about
physical objects.  The so-called Theory of Ideas in the realm of sense
perception brings with it skepticism about the physical world.
Reid argues that for exactly similar reasons, the RTM leads to
skepticism about the past.  If we begin with the thesis that in memory
all that one is aware of are ideas, then in order to justify beliefs
about the past one will have to provide an argument with premises
about our present ideas and a conclusion that the past is how we
remember it.  But there is no more reason to think that such an
argument will be forthcoming than there is for thinking that on the
basis of our ideas of sense we can show that the world is as we
suppose it to be.
In sum, then, Reid argues that the both Lockean and Humean versions
of RTM fail because (a) they presuppose a more robust variety of
memory than they can allow for, (b) they fail to shed light on the
nature of memory because of (a), (c) the accounts they do offer are
satisfied by many things that aren't memory, and (d) finally, they
lead to skepticism about the past.  Each of these points is well-taken
and taken together seem more than adequate reason for rejecting
Locke's and Hume's accounts of memory.
But what about Russell's view? Do Reid's objections hit the mark
there too? It would seem that they do.  As we have seen, Russell's
view is that remembering involves the having of an image together with
a “belief-feeling” that what the image depicts is in the
past.  On the assumption that we are at least generally reliable
regarding which images we have previously experienced (that is, on the
assumption that we don't have these memory feelings willy nilly),
Russell's theory includes an unanalyzed component that includes the
substance of memory.  Furthermore, Russell's theory is consistent with
one's being mistaken about the pastness of the image. That is, images
that are the products of imagination but which have a misleading air
of familiarity to them, will count as memories on Russell's view as
long as they are associated with a belief feeling.  Finally, inasmuch
as the RTM theories of Locke and Hume can be fairly charged with
aiding and abetting the skeptic, Russell's theory is guilty of the
same.  To remember is to have an image and a belief feeling;
demonstrating a reliable connection between these two and the past
event one is said to be remembering looks to be just another instance
of arguing from the current contents of one's mind to the truth of
claims about the external world (in this case, about the way the
external world was).
Thomas Reid's view of memory is worth discussing if only because it
provides a clear contrast to the view of the Locke, Hume, Russsell,
and the whole RTM.  
Reid was not only a critic of the RTM but of the whole
“Theory of Ideas” on which it was based.  Thus, he was
just as opposed to the representative theory of perception as he was
to the RTM.  In contrast to the RTM and to representative theories in
general, Reid held to a theory of memory that I'll call the Direct
Theory of Memory (the DTM).  On Reid's view, memory is immediate in
the same way that perception is immediate.  My, say, seeing the table
is immediate if and only if there is no other object O such
that it is in virtue of my seeing O that I see the table.
The Representative Theory of Perception holds that our perception of
the world is always mediated by the perception of our ideas of sense
or, in Hume's vocabulary, our impressions. These ideas and
impressions, these representations, mediate our knowledge of the
world, if knowledge of the world there be.  
Reid believed that there was no reason to posit ideas that we
perceive immediately.  This is not to say, of course, that our
perception of the world lacks an experiential component but only to
deny that it is in virtue of perceiving that element that we perceive
the world.  Reid thought that just as representationalism for
perception was flawed, so was the RTM.  When I remember having corn
flakes for breakfast, Reid argues, it isn't in virtue of my now
remembering an image of a bowl of cereal that I now remember
my breakfast.  Rather, my remembering breakfast is a direct
apprehension of the past.  Of course, there is an experiential element
to my memory, but that doesn't begin to show that I only remember
breakfast in virtue of “remembering” the mental image.  To
get from the experience to the representative theory requires two
steps: a reification of the experience into an idea or image and the
epistemic claim that my knowing that I had cornflakes for breakfast is
mediated by my knowledge of that idea or image.
What, then, is memory on Reid's view? According to Reid, memory is
a faculty by which we:
 The object of memory…must be something that is
past…What now is, cannot be an object of memory; neither can
that which is past and gone be an object of perception or of
consciousness.
 Memory is always accompanied with the belief of that
which we remember, as perception is accompanied with the belief that
that which we perceive… [Reid 1785, Essay III, Chapter
I]
So Reid's account of memory is “direct” in that he
insists that we have “immediate knowledge of things past.”
A remembrance is an act of the mind and it is in virtue of this act
that we have knowledge of the past.  So Reid flatly rejects what some
have claimed to be a datum: when one is remembering what one is
remembering must be present at the time of the remembering.  Indeed,
not only does Reid reject this principle, but he accepts its contrary:
when one is remembering what one is remembering must not be present
when one is remembering, but must be in the past instead.  
Does Reid's view carry with it any absurdity?  It has seemed to
some that it does. How, it might be asked, can something be remembered
and hence be present before the mind while at the same time not in the
present but in the past?  Isn't that like saying that is it possible
to perceive objects that don't exist?  Reid would allow that nothing
could be both present before the mind and at the same time past but
insist that his theory entails no such consequence.  Reid claims that
while, necessarily, the object of memory is in the past at the time it
is remembered, nevertheless “the remembrance of it is a
particular act of the mind which now exists, and of which we are
conscious.” [Reid 1785, Essay III, Section I] That is, when one
remembers p, the act of remembering is what is
present (or better “occurring”) although
p is not. We are currently aware of our act of remembering
but the object of the act is in the past. 
So far, so good.  But what exactly is the cognitive act of
remembering? And what distinguishes it from other mental events? If we
are looking for full-blown analysis of memory from Reid, we're going
to be disappointed.  Although Reid points to certain characteristics
of memory (i.e., that the object must be in the past, that it
provides immediate knowledge, that the thing remembered is distinct
from the remembrance of it, etc), he seems to hold that it is in the
end unanalyzable.  He writes:
His claim that memory is “unaccountable” could be
understood in at least two different ways.  He might mean only that he
doesn't have an account of the actual workings of the faculty, that he
lacks a psychological theory of the operation of the mechanism by
which we remember. Yet this would not be a reason for thinking that
memory is “unaccountable,” but only “presently
unaccounted for”. So the most plausible interpretation is that
memory is unanalyzable.  Reid's insistence that memory cannot be
accounted for via a relationship to an image, but that it is instead
an immediate knowledge of the past would seem to support the
unanalyzablity reading.  To call memory “unanalyzable” in
the sense Reid has in mind is to say that it cannot be analyzed or
reduced to component parts, at least not over and above its
characterization as direct knowledge of the past.
When looking for problems with the DTM a good place to start is by
recalling the problems that face a Direct Theory of Perception.  The
most obvious and possibly most serious problem for the DTP is the
problem of error.  If perceiving X as F is nothing
more than having a direct awareness of X's being F,
then how is it that we are often wrong in our perceptual beliefs?  To
allow for the possibility of error, it seems that an account must
provide space for things to go wrong.  Similarly, the DTM tells us
simply that memory provides us with immediate knowledge of the past.
But it doesn't seem that it always does that; after all, memory is
fallible.  This “problem,” though, might not bother Reid
who claims that when memory is “distinct and determinate”
and when the mind is sound, then what is believed is “no less
certain than if it was grounded on demonstration” [Reid 1785,
Essay III, Section I].  Reid also claims, when considering a case of
his remembering something from earlier in the day, “It is
impossible that this act [of remembrance] should be, if the event
[i.e., the event remembered] did not happen” [Reid 1785, Essay
III, Section II].  So Reid might welcome the result that the DTM
apparently entails the infallibility of memory (at least where what it
remembered is distinct and the mind is in good working order).  But
whether Reid acknowledges it or not, it surely it a problem.  Even
clear and distinct “memories” in those who suffer from no
psychological disorder can turn out to be false.
The twentieth century saw rather little work on the epistemology of
memory. We've already seen that Russell continued and improved upon
the RTM tradition of the empiricists. Inasmuch as memory was discussed
in the epistemological literature in the middle of the last century,
the issue of concern was the nature of remembering, or more precisely,
the nature of “remembering.” What is the proper analysis
of “S remembers P at t”?
As we have seen, there was a tradition going back to Locke and Hume
according to which having a memory of an event required having a
belief that the event occurred.  In their classic essay
“Remembering,” C.B. Martin and Max Deustscher read Locke
(and others) as claiming that the belief condition is necessary for
S's remembering.  In defense of Locke, it can be argued that
he was interested in giving an account of what it is that makes a
belief a memory belief; if that is correct, then the belief condition
surely is unobjectionable.
Martin and Deutscher offer a compelling reason for thinking that
belief is not necessary for S to remember something.  They
give an example of a painter who believes that the scene he is
painting derives from his imagination rather than from his memory.
Yet it turns out that the mental image guiding his work is the product
of his experience at a farm when he was very young.  So he remembers,
say, the horse galloping across the meadow, although, believing that
this is the product of his imagination, he does not believe that what
he is depicting is an actual event.  Yet so long as the image is
causally connected with his past experience in the right way, the
painter will be remembering the horse even though he doesn't believe
that there was such a horse in such a meadow.
The Martin and Deutscher account of remembering is essentially
this: S remembers (that) X iff X,
S has observed (that) X in the past, S's
current representation of X is appropriately causally related
to S's earlier experience of (that) X via a memory
trace.  It is not enough that S's current state be simply
“causally dependent” on S's earlier state since
there are deviant causal chain examples in which this condition is
satisfied without their being instances of memory.  For instance,
suppose Jones has an altercation with Smith that he then describes to
Johnson.  Five years later, Jones has irretrievably forgotten about
his disagreement with Smith but Johnson, who possesses a much better
memory, remembers what Jones told him five years ago, and tells Jones
everything he remembers about the incident.  Now Jones has a
representation that is causally dependent upon his earlier
representation of his altercation with Smith, but Jones still doesn't
remember the relevant interaction with Smith. It should be noted that
Martin and Deutscher have a fair amount to say about what the
appropriate causal relation is (indeed, that phrase doesn't appear in
their article), but their discussion is too long and complicated to
reproduce here.
The analysis of remembering that Martin and Deutscher offered was
not particularly in the spirit of the times.  More common was the view
of Norman Malcolm, who explicitly eschewed a causal condition because
he thought that if one were included, it would follow that anytime
someone remembered something, she would have to have beliefs about the
neurophysiology of memory.  (Martin and Deutscher correctly point out
that the claim that the concept of “remembering” includes
a causal component has no such implication.)  The non-causal accounts
of Malcolm, Gilbert Ryle, and R.F. Holland tend to require only
previous experience and a lack of a current, independent source of
information about the event, perhaps (as in the case of Malcolm) with
the additional claim of the following counterfactual dependence:
without the previous experience the subject would not be having the
current representation.  Again, Martin and Deutscher put their
collective finger on a problem with such accounts. One might have the
relevant experience, lack a current source and still not be
remembering. For example, it might turn out that the current apparent
memory is causally unrelated to the original source.  Even if we add
Malcom's counterfactual component to the account, there can still be
cases in which a person has the current present experience only
because of the earlier experience, but the chain that leads from the
earlier experience to the present is not of the right sort for
memory.
No matter what exactly the facts about the metaphysics of memory
and the analysis of remembering are, we will need a more precise
characterization of the notion of a memory belief before we can
proceed. To begin with, it will be useful to see what memory is not.
First, it is tempting to think that memory is knowledge of the past.
But this definition is doubly problematic.  Although everyone but the
skeptic thinks that there is memory knowledge, it is universally
agreed upon that not every belief in memory is an instance of
knowledge.  There is remembered false belief.  The second reason that
memory can't be defined as knowledge of the past is that one can
remember an event that has yet to take place or at least an event that
is temporally present.  I might recall now that I have a doctor's
appointment in two hours. One might take this to be memory of a future
event. However, it can be reasonably argued that this is only a
recollection of the fact that I currently have an appointment to see
the doctor at a future time. 
The fact that one can have a memory belief about the future (or at
least about the present) might be easier to see once another
distinction has been made. I have a memory belief that the Japanese
attacked Pearl Harbor on December 7th 1941, but there is a
perfectly straightforward sense of ‘remember’ in which I
can't be said to remember the attack.  Some philosophers want to make
this distinction by saying that although I can remember that
Pearl Harbor was attacked on that date, I can't remember the event
itself.  To have the relevant sort of memory of the event (as opposed
to only remembering a proposition about the event), I have to have
experienced it myself.  Exactly what the “experience”
requirement comes to is not entirely clear.  Although no one born
after the event can truly be said to remember it in this sense, it
isn't obvious that one had to be at Pearl Harbor on that date
to have this kind of memory.  Hearing about it on the radio that
evening is arguably sufficient for having remembering the event.
Let's mark the distinction of this paragraph by calling the former
‘propositional memory’ and the latter ‘event
memory.’ The objects of propositional memory are propositions;
the objects of event memory are events.  My memory that the
cake at the party was chocolate is propositional; my memory
of the party is an event memory. While one can't have event
memory of a future event, one might have propositional memory of a
proposition that refers to an event that has yet to happen; one can
remember that an event will take place.
Although it is clear that this distinction is real and significant,
I don't propose to have too much more to say about it here.  Since
epistemology is primarily the study of knowledge and rational belief,
and since knowledge and belief are propositional in nature, we'll here
limit our focus to propositional memory.
The question now is whether there is any important, structural
difference between propositional memory that begins as event memory of
the event that the proposition is about and propositional memory that
doesn't significantly involve event memory.  For example, my memory
that my driveway was icy last Christmas is propositional, yet it is
based on my experience of the event in question.  My memory belief
that Abraham Lincoln was shot in Ford's Theatre is not based on any
such event (although, of course, for virtually any non-innate belief,
there will be some event that leads to its formation). 
There can be cases of propositional memory that are not based on
event memory even when the memory is due to one's experience of the
event in question.  Last Christmas, I came to believe that my driveway
was then icy; that's why I parked on the street.  My belief that my
driveway was icy was formed on the basis of my perceiving the ice.
But now that I recall the condition of my driveway, I don't base my
belief on my event memory of the icy driveway.  I just remember that
my driveway was icy.  On the other hand, there are cases where one
does recall an event and form a new belief on the basis of a memory
image. For example, if I were asked whether the ice on my driveway
last Christmas was uniform, I might well call to mind a memory image
of the driveway and see if it contains that information.  In this
case, it seems, I am using event memory (i.e., memory of my
seeing the driveway) to form a belief about the uniformity of the
thickness of the ice.  There is a real sense, then, in which the
belief that the ice's thickness was (say) uniform is not a memory
belief in at least one legitimate sense of that term. There is surely
a suitable way of thinking of memory beliefs that stipulates that only
beliefs that have been formed at a prior time count as memory
beliefs.
So there are myriad philosophical and even epistemological issues
that memory raises.  To keep this discussion manageable, we will have
to narrow our focus a bit.  First, we will be concerned in what
follows only with the epistemology of memory beliefs.  But as we've
seen, there are a number of things that ‘memory belief’
might designate.  So to make the domain of our discussion precise,
we'll have to give it a stipulative (and hence somewhat artificial)
definition.  Let the following be our working definition of memory
belief:
This definition requires some explanation.  Clause (a)
distinguishes memory belief from beliefs newly formed on the basis of
a memory image. If one has never before believed p, then
S can't now have a memory belief that p, although one might
now form a belief for the first time on the basis of an event memory.
Clause (b) is necessary to distinguish cases in which one believes
that P at one time, completely and utterly forgets
P, and then relearns P from an independent source.
Clause (c) requires that the belief not be occurrent all the time from
the time it was formed until the time at which we are calling it a
memory belief.  I'm not certain this restriction is required, but I
think having it rules out certain complicating factors.  For example,
if I believe that P and hold it in occurrent, working memory
for one minute, say, shall we now count it as a memory belief?  What
if I hold it in memory for ten seconds?  Two seconds?  If we require
that a belief must have been nonoccurrent (while still continuing to
exist) for a time before it's now counting as a memory belief, we
don't have to deal with these issues, which are anyway not central to
our concerns.  One other important note here: I have required that it
be the “same belief” that is at one time occurrent, then
dispositional, and then occurent again.  This is not the requirement
that it be the same token belief all along, but only a belief with the
same content that, after its first appearance, is appropriately
causally related to earlier tokens of that person's having that belief
with that content.  When I believe that my car is locked because I
just checked the doors, and later recall that my car is locked, it
might be that my later belief is not token identical with the earlier
belief.  On the other hand, I don't want to insist that it is not the
same token.  I shall be leaving this issue open.
Another issue that needs discussing here is whether
‘S has the memory belief that P at
t’ includes only beliefs that are occurrent at
t.  Or do we mean to be including in the domain of our
discussion beliefs that are at the time dispositional?  This is an
important question because if we mean to be including nonoccurrent
beliefs then our domain is a great deal larger than it would otherwise
be.
There is good reason to be inclusive here.  At any given time,
nearly all a person's beliefs are dispositional.  A good
epistemological theory will then have to say something about the
epistemic status of these beliefs.  So our definition of memory belief
should not be limited to the exceedingly small class of occurrent
memory beliefs.  Perhaps the epistemologist will need to have
something special to say about occurrent memory beliefs, but our main
topic will be more general than that.
Having carefully circumscribed the domain of our inquiry, we are
now in a position to consider how memory belief gets its
justification. This is not the place to argue for any particular
theory, so we'll canvas the theoretical means that different types of
theories have for avoiding skepticism about memorial belief.  In this
section, we will discuss foundationalism, coherentism, deontological
theories, and reliabilism as well as the relevance of internalist and
externalist considerations for the justification of memory belief.
Perhaps the most common theory of the justification of memory
belief is a variety of foundationalism.  We can distinguish between
two types of foundational theories of the justification of memory
belief: simple foundationalism holds that every memory belief, just in
virtue of being a memory belief, is prima facie justified.
Memory is not merely a repository for belief but a generation
mechanism for justification (see Audi 1998 pp. 68-69). 
In contrast to this is what we might call “experiential
foundationalism.” The experiential foundationalist requires that
a memory belief be accompanied by an image or at least an experiential
“memory seeming” in order to be justified.  In demanding
that memory requires an image, such a view ipso facto implies
that the justification of memory belief requires the having of an
experience of a certain type if the memory is to be justified. (For a
critical discussion of both varieties of foundationalism see Senor
1993. For a somewhat sympathteic treatment see Huemer 1999 and for a
defense of memory foundationalism see Schroer 2008.) 
 How plausible this variety of foundationalism is will depend on
the variety of epistemic justification it is concerned with.  For
example, if one is committed to a strong truth-connection and thinks
that a belief that is justified must be in some significant sense
likely to be true, then adopting either of the above versions of
foundationalism is out of the question. For there is no necessary
connection between a belief's being stored and recalled (with or
without a memorial seeming) and its being likely to be true.  This
isn't to say that memory is not generally reliable.  But its
reliability is at best conditional: miracles aside, an agent's
recalled beliefs will be likely to be true only if her belief-forming
(as opposed to preserving) processes are generally reliable.  So the
simple foundationalist will see herself as giving conditions for an
internalistic variety of justification that minimizes the connection
between a belief's being justified and its being true.  
One difficulty that experiential foundationalism faces is that it
accounts only for the justificatory status of occurrent memory
beliefs.  But as was argued above, this leaves almost all of our
beliefs either unjustified (since the foundationalist might be read as
claiming that a memory belief is justified only if it is occurrent) or
epistemically unaccounted for (since, as is more likely, the
foundationalist will see herself only providing conditions for the
justification of occurrent memory beliefs).  This problem might be
thought resolved by appealing to counterfactuals or dispositions. That
is, a stored belief might be thought to be prima facie
justified iff were this belief to become occurrent, it would be would
be accompanied by the appropriate memory image or seeming.  Yet this
condition is pretty clearly false.  The phenomenology of recollection
depends crucially on the context in which the belief is recalled.
Typically, the experience one has when one recalls a belief depends at
least on how the recollection was cued, how much attention one is
currently paying to the recalled belief, and what other beliefs are
then occurrent.
For reasons that will presently become apparent, we will consider
the problems of simple foundationalism when we discuss negative
coherentism.
We can divide coherentist theories into two types: positive and
negative.  The positive coherentist will claim that a memory belief is
justified if it possesses a sufficiently strong coherence relation
with one's system of belief.  This is “positive” coherence
because such coherence demands more than an absence of doxastic
conflict. For a belief to positively cohere it must in some way be
supported or made probable by the doxastic system with which it
coheres.  (BonJour 1985 never discusses the epistemology of memory in
particular, but the view he presents there entails a positive
coherentist account; and in BonJour 2002, pp. 183-184, he gives a
positive coherentist account of memory justification and explicitly
rejects the foundationalism he accepts in other epistemic domains.)
The negative coherentist, on the other hand, will insist only that
there be an absence of conflict with the belief system in order for
the memory belief to be justified. In effect, the negative coherence
theory and the simple version of foundationalism are just the same:
each claims that in the absence of defeat, memory beliefs are
justified. (For a defense of negative coherentism see Harman 1986 and
McGrath 2007; for a critical discussion see Senor 1995.)
Both varieties of the coherence theory can be understood in a way
that allows them to avoid the problem we noted for experiential
foundationalism: each can be taken as a theory of justification for
memory beliefs, both dispositional and occurrent (and since negative
coherentism and simple foundationalism are essentially the same
theory, we will consider simple foundationalism here as well).  Taken
as global theories of the justification of memory belief, they claim
that any stored belief is prima facie justified.  Yet there other
problems that infect both theories.  The primary problem for positive
coherence theories is what has been dubbed the “problem of
forgotten evidence.” A belief might positively cohere with the
subject's belief system at the time the belief was formed but later
fail to positively cohere even though it intuitively remains
justified.  One might have once had a web beliefs about American
history with which the belief that Lincoln was assassinated in Ford
Theatre neatly cohered.  Yet years after having had one's last history
class, this belief might remain while much of the imbedding web was
disappeared.  Yet, intuitively, it is still justified.  The
coherentist might hope to reply to this problem by claiming that there
is still a justificatory web: the belief is a memory belief and one
might believe that most of one's memory beliefs are true; therefore,
this belief is likely to be true and is hence justified.  The problem
with this response is that it works for just any memory belief; if
this gambit is allowed, then every memory belief will be prima facie
justified.  That is, accepting this solution to the problem of
forgotten evidence amounts to trading in positive coherence theory for
its negative sister.
A problem for negative coherentism (and hence for simple
foundationalism) is that a belief that is unjustified when formed will
become justified simply in virtue of being stored in memory.  Suppose
that I come to believe, unreliably and for no reason at all, that
President Kennedy loved green tea.  My belief is unjustified when I
form it.  But when I come to have it and it becomes a memory belief,
the conditions of its justification are now wholly different.  As long
as I have no defeaters for my memory belief, the negative coherentist
tells us, it is justified.  So the next day, when I believe that
Kennedy loved green tea, my belief will be justified (since I possess
no defeater for it).  And while it isn't quite as acute, the problem
exists also for the other versions of foundationalism and coherentism.
Take experiential foundationalism first; suppose it seems to me that I
remember reading that Kennedy loved green tea but that in fact I've
never read any such thing and that any historical belief I possess
comes with a strong conviction (a “memory seeming”) that I
acquired the belief by reading it in a very reputable publication.
Then again, my forming the belief unjustifiably together with my
epistemic vice of always believing that my history beliefs come from
“very reputable” sources together turn an unjustified
belief into a justified one. But this seems to be the epistemic
equivalent of two wrongs making a right.  Notice that the same kind of
case will show a similar difficulty for positive coherentism.  For a
person who thinks his every history belief comes from a very reputable
source and who believes that he has a given history belief, will have
a system with which his belief that Kennedy loved green tea
coheres. 
The Kennedy case might be thought to indicate that foundationalist
and coherentist accounts of the justification of memory belief share a
common flaw: they are both (at least as typically construed)
synchronic rather than diachronic theories.  They make the
justificatory status of a memory a belief purely a function of the
current, internal state of the person at the time in question.  Put
somewhat differently, the only properties relevant to the
justification of my belief are my current, non-historical properties.
But, arguably, what the Kennedy case shows is that, in at least some
circumstances, whether a memory belief is justified now is
partially dependent on whether it was justified earlier.
One might think that even if some forms of internalism are thereby
shown to require a diachronic component, a deontological internalism
— a theory of justification that emphasizes epistemic duty and
responsibility — will surely be synchronic.  What matters for
duty fulfillment is that you are now doing the best you can
and not that you did the best you could when you initially formed the
belief.  So, the synchronic holdout continues, if you now sincerely
believe that Kennedy was partial to green tea, and you also believe
that this belief was generated from a very reputable source, then you
are doing your best and surely must be deemed deontologically
justified in your memory belief.  
This consideration shows one can describe a concept of
deontological justification according to which only synchronic
considerations matter. Its theoretical use will be akin to the use of
the parallel synchronic notion of ethical duty fulfillment and
responsibility.  Suppose I owe you a hundred dollars and am in a
position to repay you.  But instead of doing paying my debt, I spend
my money frivolously and become once again broke.  Looked at
synchronically, my present inability to pay apparently makes my
failing to pay excusable. I can't give you what I don't have, and if
‘ought’ implies ‘can,’ then it's not the case that I
ought to pay you.  I daresay that you won't be impressed by this line
of defense, should I be foolish enough to use it. This shows that
synchronic deontological concepts are dubious philosophical
significance.  So there is no significant refuge for the synchronic
theory of the justification of memory belief in deontologism. 
If internalism in its various guises fails to generate an adequate
account of the justification of memory belief, then we should consider
externalism. Since reliabilism is the most plausible and popular
externalism theory, we'll do well to put our focus there.  Loosely,
reliabilism claims that a belief is justified if it is the product of
a reliable belief-forming process. Perhaps, then, we should say that a
memory belief is justified if it is a product of a reliable memory
process.  As long as we are thinking of reliability as propensity to
generate truth rather than as a measure of the track-record of a
process, then a process's being reliable is a synchronic property of
that process.  So will the reliabilist believe that the justificatory
status of a belief earlier is irrelevant to its status as a memory
belief?  No, she won't.  The reliabilist will think of memory as what
Alvin Goldman has called a “belief-dependent process”
(Goldman 1979).  The input of the belief-dependent process is a
belief.  Memory belief is (normally, at any rate) belief that has been
kept in memory.  So a reliabilist will hold that a memory belief is
justified only if the memorial process that maintains it is reliable
and if it was justified when originally formed.  To hold otherwise
would be very much out of keeping with the spirit of reliabilism. 
The lesson, the reliabilist will tell us, is that the justificatory
status of a memory belief is, in standard cases, partially a function
of the belief's justificatory status at an earlier time.  I say
“in standard cases” because it is possible, of course, for
one to acquire new information that will turn a formerly unjustified
belief into a now justified memory belief.  But in the majority of
cases, when the memory belief is not accompanied by new information,
one will be justified now only if one was justified at an earlier
time.  This consequence of the theory is plausible because memory is
generally a belief-preserving rather than a belief-generating process.
Unlike perception, which takes nondoxastic inputs and produces
beliefs, memory aims at preservation.  Thus it is natural that the
epistemology of the former depends only on the conditions at the time
of the operation of the process, while the justification of the latter
sort of belief makes demands on its history.  What both have in common
is that the pedigree of the belief is relevant to its epistemic
status; the pedigree of memory belief is just a more complicated and
historically robust affair. 
Although reliabilism might seem to be particularly suited to
accounting for the diachronic aspects of the justification of memory
belief, other theories we've looked at are able to accommodate the
historical point too.  Exactly how these diachronic
components figure into a full-blown theory of the justification of
memory belief is a complex and controversial matter.  This is not the
place to arbitrate between competing epistemic perspectives.  Suffice
it to say that the kinds of general problems we've seen in standard
theories of justified memory belief can apparently be handled within
the theoretical means available to foundationalist and coherentist
epistemologies.  Each theory can be amended, for instance, to simply
require that when the memory belief has not come to be based on new
information it will be now justified only if it was justified when the
belief was initially formed, where the conditions of initial
justifications are those that theory spells out. 
The claim that there is a key diachronic element to the
justification of memory belief has come to be known
as preservationism.  Memory, it is thought, serves to
preserve both the belief and its justification; a belief that had no
justification when it was formed, has no justification to be
preserved. According to the preservationist, then, such a belief will
be unjustified when recalled (and, for that matter, while in
memory). (Preservationist accounts can be found in Audi 1995, Audi
1998, Dummett 1994, Goldman 1999, and Plantinga 1993.)
Although the preservationist can allow that memory generates
justification when it also generates a new belief (recall the example
of my using my event memory of the ice on my driveway to form the new
belief that the ice on my driveway was of uniform thickness), she'll
insist that when memory acts only to preserve belief, it is not an
epistemically generative process. However, the claim that memory is
not generative has recently come under attack. Jennifer Lackey has
presented cases in which, at t1, S has
a prima facie justified but defeated belief that P
but over time comes to lose the defeater and hence
at t2 has an ultima facie justified
belief that P. That is to say, at t1 the
belief is unjustified but at t2 the belief is
justified even though S has acquired no new evidence
regarding P. So, it is argued, memory can generate epistemic
justification. (For discussion of these cases see Lackey 2005, Senor
2007, and Lackey 2007.)
We'll conclude our discussion of the epistemology of memory with a
brief consideration of an issue absolutely fundamental to the whole
enterprise.  Epistemologists of all stripes will agree that the
reliability of memory is crucial if there is to be memory knowledge.
And while space prohibits a long exploration into this matter, we will
be able to make some important points about the likelihood of
successfully showing the reliability of memory.
There is little doubt that within certain parameters, there can be
evidence of the reliability of memory, and of its reliability in
particular situations and among particular groups. Cognitive
psychologists can test people's memory for associated word pairs, and
determine under what conditions forgetting is more likely to occur.
Such studies are not only intrinsically interesting (in part because
we depend on memory for so much) but potentially very useful in
helping us to know what to do to increase our ability to recall
information when it is needed.  But as interesting and useful as such
empirical studies are, there is reason to doubt their ability ever to
show the general reliability of memory.
To see this, suppose Sid is a cognitive psychologist running
experiments in which subjects hear word pairs and an hour later are
given the first word of each pair as a cue and are asked to remember
the second word.  Sid collects his data with the utmost care, and
holds to the highest standards of data collection and interpretation.
Suppose Sid does many such studies and concludes that his studies show
that in conditions C, memory for words that have been paired with
words that are used as cues is generally reliable.  Finally, suppose
that given his general assumptions, Sid is right in claiming
that his research indicates general reliability.  Still, in conducting
his research as he does, Sid depends on the general reliability of his
own memory at many turns.  For example, in setting up the experiment,
Sid draws on his memory of the principles for conducting his research;
in cuing the subjects and collecting the data of their responses, he
depends on his memory for believing that this group of people is the
same group of people to whom the lists were originally read;
collecting the data from the each person, Sid remembers not just that
this person is in the group, but also which person in the group this
is, so that the data can be accurately recorded; finally, in drawing
out the conclusions from his research, Sid must, at the very least,
keep in mind the procedures of the study, the summaries of the
empirical data, and the principles guiding inductive inferences.  
The problem here is perfectly general.  In order to construct an
argument for anything that is not a simple syllogism (and perhaps even
then), one must depend on the reliability of one's memory for the
earlier steps and for their justifications.  Therefore, if one wants
to construct anything other than the simplest of arguments for the
reliability of memory, one will have to depend on the reliability of
memory.  This means that any such argument is infected with a kind of
circularity: one will be able to construct such an argument only by
depending on the reliability of memory.  Of course, the inability to
construct a noncircular argument for memory does not tend to show that
memory is unreliable.  William Alston (Alston 1986) has argued
convincingly that all of the basic epistemic processes share this
common trait: their reliability cannot be shown without circularity.
Still, we have no choice but to trust them and we shouldn't take our
inability to offer a non-circular argument for them to impugn them in
any way.