Formal equality of opportunity requires that positions and posts
that confer superior advantages should be open to all applicants.
Applications are assessed on their merits, and the applicant deemed
most qualified according to appropriate criteria is offered the
position. Alternatively, applicants are winnowed by fair competition,
and the winner or winners get the superior advantages.
Formal equality of opportunity might obtain in a variety of social
settings. As defined here, this ideal does not presuppose that the
production and distribution of goods and services are organized
through a market economy with private ownership. For example, an
autocratic society, in which economic life is organized by the
commands of the autocrat, could satisfy equality of opportunity to
this extent: the post of autocrat is open to all applicants, and
selection is determined by the fitness of applicants for autocratic
performance as indicated by the comparative merits of their
applications. Moreover, the autocrat might organize economic life and
distribute economic rewards by fair competitions. A communist society,
in which political, social, and economic privileges accrue to
communist party members, might conceivably be run in such a way that
communist party membership is determined by competitive
examination. If the examination were set so that the person who earns
a top score is the best qualified for the post of party membership,
and that person is offered party membership, formal equality of
opportunity would be satisfied.
The ideal of formal equality of opportunity is associated with the
liberation of economic practices and institutions from guild
privileges and restrictions and with the development of competitive
market economies. The slogan “careers open to talents”
expresses the aspiration to establish a world where government posts
go to the most qualified and economic opportunities may be seized by
anyone independently of whether or not one's parents are of noble
blood or cronies of the king. The ideal is opposed to nepotism, the
distribution of what should be public offices to one's relatives and
friends just because they are near and dear to the distributor and
quite independently of their fitness for the post. In this entry for
the most part the terms “formal equality of opportunity”
and “careers open to talents” are used interchangeably to
denote the same ideal.
A market economy conforms to formal equality of opportunity only if
jobs offered by business firms are publicized in advance, so that
anyone who might want to apply has a reasonable opportunity to do so.
In this setting formal equality of opportunity also requires that
applications from anyone are accepted, applications are judged on
their merits, and the most qualified according to criteria that are
relevant to job performance are offered positions. (A variant practice
in which only current employees of a firm are eligible to apply to
higher-level jobs might be deemed to satisfy equal opportunity
provided entry-level jobs in the firm are open to all applicants.) In
addition, equal opportunity in a market setting requires that the
lending of money for investment purposes by banks should proceed by
accepting applications from any interested party and deciding who
should get loans according to the expected profit of lending to one
rather than another of the various applicants. Equality of opportunity
also requires that the access of economic firms to investment and
operating capital by borrowing money through sales of bonds and
through sales of shares in the ownership of the enterprise (stocks)
should occur through processes that give all firms and economic agents
the same opportunities for gain.
More generally, equality of opportunity in the market setting
requires that firms and individuals deal with one another impartially
as opportunities for gain. When formal equality of opportunity is
satisfied in a market setting, each participant regards all others as
potential partners for interaction and selects partners for a deal or
a venture according to the extent to which interaction with those
particular individuals or firms promises to further one's morally
innocent economic goals. An alternative formulation would have it that
when a market economy satisfies formal equality of opportunity, each
market agent selects partners for interaction according to the extent
to which interaction with those particular individuals or firms would
further one's legally permitted goals.
The ideal of formal equality of opportunity has limited scope. Its
sphere of application is public life, not private life. Where to draw
this line between public and private for this purpose is itself an
unsettled and controversial issue. Certainly decisions about whom to
invite to be a dinner guest, whom to regard as a potential date or
marriage partner, whom to cultivate with a view to forming a personal
friendship are not decisions that fall within the sphere of equality
of opportunity. This is not to deny that such decisions can be made in
a way that reflects wrongful prejudice. This surely happens, and is
morally criticizable. But equality of opportunity as normally
understood is a norm that regulates a political and civil society, a
common life in which all members participate, rather than every aspect
of the conduct of individual lives. However, this scope restriction is
open to challenge.
The idea of equality of opportunity tends also to be limited in
scope along another dimension. Its domains are political societies or
nation-states taken one at a time. If all Austrian universities are
open to all Austrian youth and all Chinese universities are open to
all Chinese youth, it is not ordinarily thought to be objectionable if
Austrian universities are not open to Chinese and Chinese universities
are not open to the Austrians. Thus limited in scope, formal equality
of opportunity would be compatible with far greater educational
opportunity being available to Austrian than to Chinese
youth. However, nothing prevents broadening the scope of application
of equality of opportunity. For example, one might uphold the ideal of
a global marketplace in which all transactions conform to formal
equality of opportunity applied world-wide.
It should be noted that formal equality of opportunity so
understood puts moral constraints on market decisions. Equality of
opportunity is violated if investors decline to invest in a company
just because its CEO is a black, or a woman, and they are prejudiced
against blacks and women. If one operates a business and provides a
product or service to the public for sale, formal equality of
opportunity is violated if one refuses to sell to some class of
potential customers on grounds that are whimsical (no sales to people
with brown hair, or wearing black shoes) or prejudiced (no sales to
people of some disfavored race, religion, or skin color). By the same
token, the ideal of formal equal opportunity puts constraints on the
behavior of customers of firms and purchasers of goods and services as
well as constraints on would-be providers. If a Jewish individual
starts a business and people decline to purchase goods from her in
virtue of the fact that she is Jewish, formal equality of opportunity
is violated. In the same way, to refuse to purchase a product on the
ground that its manufacture employed the labor of women in skilled
jobs violates formal equality of opportunity.
Suppose the owner of a small business hires her family members or
friends instead of advertising job openings and picking among the
applicants according to the merits of their applications. This might
be deemed a private matter and, for this reason, not a violation of
formal equality of opportunity. However, if this same small business,
a restaurant, serves whites only and refuses to accept blacks,
Hispanics, and others as customers, this decision might well be deemed
to lie in the public sphere and to constitute a violation of formal
equality of opportunity. A perhaps controversial case of a type of
decision that might be thought to lie in the public or in the private
sphere with respect to the application of equality of opportunity
would be decisions of business-oriented social clubs that are
traditionally exclusively male or white in their membership to
continue to deny membership to nonwhites and nonmales who might seek
admission. Since valuable business contacts are made at these private
social clubs, and business deals are sometimes made on the premises,
the exclusion of women and minorities from membership in them might be
deemed wrongfully discriminatory and a violation of equality of
opportunity.
Notice that selection among applicants for a job by a random
procedure that gives all applicants an identical chance of getting the
job actually violates formal equality of opportunity as here
interpreted (on equal opportunity as a lottery procedure, see Rae et
al. 1981). At least, if there are relevant standards of merit that
could be applied to the applicants and that would predict successful
job performance, a lottery to select who gets the job would not
qualify as selection according to merit. Only if all applicants are
equally qualified or there is no feasible and cost-effective way to
distinguish among the applicants according to their merit would a
lottery satisfy the ideal of equality of opportunity.
The idea of being most qualified for a post is not transparently
clear. One might hold that being qualified is meeting perfectionist
criteria of excellence that are internal to roles and crafts. A good
carpenter has the skills and other traits that render one competent at
using wood to build things. The position or post is associated with a
goal, and excellence is what enables nonaccidental successful pursuit
of the goal.
If a post is associated with several goals, there may be no
definitive ranking of their relative importance, hence no definitive
precise notion of being more qualified than another candidate for the
post. A good psychotherapist may help patients in several distinct
ways, so there may be only partial commensurability in rankings of
psychotherapists.
A post may be associated with quite different conflicting goals,
some problematic. Suppose a mediocre professional hockey player tends
to become embroiled in brawls during games. His thuggish conduct
pleases fans, and raises ticket sale revenues. If the purpose of
professional hockey is to create profits for hockey team owners, the
mediocre hockey player may be more qualified for a position on the
team than better players. The carpenter with excellent skills and an
unwillingness to do shoddy work may not be qualified for a job with
the construction firm whose profit-maximizing business strategy is to
build cheap affordable houses. Similar issues can arise in the
nonprofit sector. An international aid agency may do better to hire
photogenic young aid workers, who will attract favorable press
coverage, rather than workers more able to do the work that will help
the agency's intended beneficiaries.
If airline business travelers prefer to be served by physically
attractive women rather than attractive men or unattractive
individuals of either sex, a profit-seeking firm will regard being
female and attractive as job qualifications (Yuracko 2004a). If white
workers rebel at being bossed around by a supervisor who is not
white-skinned, being white-skinned may be a job qualification for the
supervisor post. One response to these examples is to identify the
most qualified applicant for a post as the one whose hiring will do
most to advance the morally legitimate purposes of the
enterprise. This formulation allows the construction firm to consider
the excellent carpenter who insists on working to the highest
standards as unqualified and likely guides us to regard hiring the
airline stewards and stewardesses as a difficult borderline case.
These verdicts are plausible. But notice that the firm that caters to
the racist prejudices of its workers has the morally innocent aim of
making profits. One problem here is that the firm pursues its aim by
catering to wrongful desires, and indeed wrongful desires of just the
type that equal opportunity aims to overcome. In contrast, selecting a
black actor to play the lead role in Othello seems
unproblematic, and so does selecting a female medical doctor to serve
as a gynecologist for a clientele of women who feel more comfortable
being treated by a woman rather than a man.  However, the latter
example is not beyond challenge. The judgment of the case may depend
on the underlying motivation of the customers, as seems probable if we
introduce variations of the example. We might imagine that the women
who prefer a female gynecologist simply dislike men as such. In an
alternative scenario, imagine that the women clients feel more
comfortable being treated by a male gynecologist because they view the
doctor's role as involving a social authority that properly belongs to
males. Here there seem to be violations of formal equality of
opportunity.
A society could satisfy the careers open to talents ideal even
though the economy is overwhelmingly oriented to satisfying wrongful
consumer desires for unhealthy food and cruel sports spectacles, just
so long as the desires being satisfied are not wrongful by virtue of
offending against an element of the formal equality of opportunity
ideal. How to draw the line between desires that are offensive in this
way and those that are not is a tricky matter. The desire of consumers
not to purchase products in which the labor of those deemed
lower-caste individuals is embedded in any except menial roles is
clearly on the wrong side of the line. The desire of elderly women to
be attended by female nurses is clearly not. Several factors may be in
play. One is that desires that express hostile attitudes against
people in virtue of their group membership are inherently inimical to
careers open to talents. Another is that desires that reflect accurate
statistical judgments are not inherently offensive to equal
opportunity. Perhaps elderly women believe correctly that they are
more apt to receive sensitive, caring treatment from members of their
own sex. Desires that arise in group-hierarchical culture and would
not have arisen in an equal opportunity society are arguably not just
on this basis reasonably deemed offensive to careers open. Another
factor that perhaps ought to guide classificatory judgments in this
area is disparate impact (on which, see
 section 6.1).
The formulation toward which this discussion points is that for
purposes of determining whether formal equality of opportunity is
satisfied in given circumstances, any member of society must be
allowed to apply for positions that confer advantage, applications
must be judged on their merits, and selection of applicants for the
position must proceed by selecting the top-ranked applicant first,
then successively lesser-ranked applicants, in order of their fitness
for the post as revealed by their applications. An application is
meritorious to the degree that it shows that selecting this individual
would better advance the morally legitimate aims of the enterprise by
means that are not morally forbidden and specifically not wrongfully
discriminatory than would selecting any other applicants. If an
applicant would do better in a post by satisfying desires and choices
of customers that are in violation of equality of opportunity, then
hiring the applicant on that basis would also violate equality of
opportunity (Wertheimer 1983).
This formulation does not rule out some selection decisions that
some might want to classify as violations of formal equality of
opportunity. Consider this example: Two lawyers apply for a job in a
law firm. One is better at lawyering work but comes from a nonwealthy
family background; the other is worse at lawyering work but comes from
a wealthy family, has many wealthy friends, and can be expected to
draw more wealthy clients and thus more revenue to the firm than her
less connected fellow applicant. The wealthy applicant is chosen,
because hiring her would do more for the firm's expected profits than
hiring the other. The example illustrates that even if the ideal of
formal equality of opportunity is uncontroversial if abstractly and
vaguely stated, any detailed specification of the norm will be
controversial.
Another controversial selection criterion is age. Suppose that
state-funded openings for qualifying education for medical doctors are
restricted to applicants whose age does not exceed some stated
maximum. Or suppose there is a compulsory retirement age set by law
for certain occupations, or set by some individual business firms. Are
such public or private policies wrongfully discriminatory so as to
render them violations of formal equality of opportunity? (On age
discrimination, see also the discussion in
 section 2.3 of this entry.)
Another controversial selection criterion is physical appearance
(see Post 2000). In January 1992, the City Council of Santa Cruz,
California, considered a proposed city ordinance that would have
prohibited discrimination against individuals on the basis of physical
appearance. In the context of employment, such an ordinance would rule
out disfavoring an application for hiring or promotion on the ground
that the candidate is physically attractive or unattractive, and also
on the grounds that the candidate fails to conform to conventional
standards of dress or appearance. The proposed ordinance would have
allowed an exception when physical appearance is a bona fide
occupational qualification (BFOQ), when a certain appearance is
required in order to carry out essential functions of the job.  Would
passage of such an ordinance represent an advance or a setback for the
cause of formal equality of opportunity or careers open to
talents?
The candidate ordinance clearly overreaches by casting its net of
prohibition too widely. A business might aim to attract customers by
presenting a dressed-up or dressed-down tone, and refusing to follow
the appearance code for staff that is intended to achieve the desired
tone should not be protected behavior under an antidiscrimination
norm, even if appearance does not qualify as an essential job
function.  On the other hand, an appearance code can reinforce
conventional beliefs that hinder disfavored groups from genuine equal
access to the workplace. Suppose an appearance code requires women to
use cosmetics and maintain their hair in expected styles while no
comparable requirements are imposed on men in the same job role.  How
to draw boundary lines here is not easy to discern (see Yuracko
2004a,b).
Deborah Hellman proposes that wrongful discriminatory treatment
occurs if and only if the discrimination demeans some of those who are
being treated. In turn, to “demean is to treat someone in a way
that denies her equal moral worth.” Hellman elaborates:
“To demean is not merely to insult but also to put down, to
diminish and denigrate” (Hellman 2008, at 29).
Hellman's proposal offers a principled way of resolving disputed
boundary lines between acceptable and unacceptable discrimination,
which set the standard of formal equality of opportunity. In this
tangled area of thought, the success of the proposal is hard to
judge. One worry is that even if the proposal gives a sufficient
condition for wrongful discrimination, the proposal may fail as a
necessary condition. Suppose a society's employment practices are set
by a religion that reveres women but dictates that their proper role
is that of traditional homemaker, and that the only public sphere
employment suitable for women is temple prostitute (a highly regarded,
indeed sacred calling). These practices of discrimination do not
demean women, but their this-worldly consequences are seriously
harmful to women and arguably, in virtue of this fact, wrongly
discriminatory. Another concern is that the proposal may fail as a
sufficient condition as well. Suppose a society countenances giving
lesser weight, in public and private decision making, to the interests
of severely cognitively disabled individuals than to the nondisabled,
on the ground that these human individuals fail to have the rational
agency capacities that qualify sentient beings as full persons. The
practices of the society may demean the severely cognitively disabled
without being wrongfully discriminatory. (On Hellman, and on wrongful
discrimination generally, see Lippert-Rasmussen 2014, and on
discrimination against the severely cognitively impaired, see McMahan
1996).
 
Formal equality of opportunity (careers open to talents) as
characterized so far could be satisfied in a society with guild
restrictions that are legally enforced, so long as the restricted
economic positions and roles are open to all applicants and
applications are assessed on their merits. This feature of the
characterization is open to objection. Consider a society in which no
one is allowed to practice law, medicine, college teaching,
haircutting and manicure provision, real estate, carpentry, plumbing,
taxicab driving, and so on without special schooling and a special
state-supplied license, few of which are available for distribution.
Even if the procedures for certifying schools and selecting recipients
for licenses are impeccably fair and fairly administered, the system
is subject to criticism on grounds of unfairness, and in particular,
criticizable for denying equal opportunity as between the officially
licensed provider of goods and services and the individual unlicensed
to provide goods or services of that type who wants to sell them to
willing customers.
It is possible that the restrictions on free trade just described
amount to state-established cartels. If so, there is a case for
maintaining that these restrictions constitute a denial of equality of
opportunity in an intuitive sense and the definition of the term
should be revised to accommodate this judgment.
It is also possible that the restrictions on free trade just
described are justifiable on the ground that consumers lack the
knowledge and judgment appropriately to determine whether the
complicated services being provided are worth their price and best
satisfy their preferences all things considered. If this is so, and if
the restrictions qualify as justifiable paternalism—restriction
of people's liberty against their will for their own good—then
the restrictions would not plausibly be regarded as violating equality
of opportunity rightly construed.
Given that the restrictions could conceivably be sustaining
cartels, one might hold that the notion of formal equality of
opportunity should be reinterpreted to accommodate this
possibility. An opposed view would urge that the examples of restraint
of trade are objectionable, but not an offense against the ideal of
equality of opportunity, rather an offense against the different ideal
of free trade. In favor of holding cartel-establishing restraints on
free trade to be a violation of equality of opportunity is this
consideration. It is plausible to judge that if the king imposes
unjustified restrictions on people's opportunities to interact with
each other on mutually agreeable terms, that in itself counts as
violation of the ideal of careers open to talents or equal opportunity
in the formal sense. Here is an alternative formulation of formal
equality of opportunity that accommodates this judgment: Careers open
to talents requires that individuals be free, under justified
regulation, to buy and sell goods and services on mutually agreeable
terms and that enterprises that confer positions of advantage select
individuals to fill these posts through competitions open to all, with
applications assessed by relevant criteria of merit.  Promotions and
advancement of individuals in positions of advantage should be
conducted in a similar meritocratic way.
 
Although whimsical hiring violates formal equality of opportunity
just as much as discrimination against some applicants done because
the applicant is a member of a socially disfavored group, the latter
is evidently a more serious violation of formal equality of
opportunity.  Whereas being the object of discrimination because one
belongs to a group that has been targeted for oppressive treatment in
the past is likely to be a wound to one's sense of dignity and
self-respect, being the victim of whimsical or idiosyncratic hiring
practices is less likely to inflict a significant psychic wound over
and above the loss of the job itself. Also, since whimsical
discrimination is idiosyncratic, it will not lead to cumulative harm
by causing anyone to be the object of economic discrimination time
after time (unless whimsical hiring were common and one were extremely
unlucky). Also, in the context of a competitive market, there is the
pressure of market competition that punishes whimsical economic
decisions that lead to subpar economic performance, so one expects
whimsy to be a marginal economic phenomenon.
Discrimination on the basis of group membership might under certain
conditions be rational behavior on the part of economic agents and
might lead to efficient outcomes. Market competition would not tend to
drive out such discrimination. Consider stereotypes, rough
generalizations about traits of groups. If a stereotype is
“sufficiently” accurate, it can make sense to treat all
group members the same for some purpose without investing resources in
determining the actual traits possessed by individual group
members. For example, if an employer seeking factory workers values
steady attendance at work, and absenteeism is known to be somewhat
higher among African-American youths than other youth, the employer
might simply set aside all applications from African-American youth
and choose workers among the remainder of the applicant
pool. Discrimination that is cost-effective in this way and does not
involve any misuse of available information is sometimes called
statistical discrimination.  The results for people who
become the objects of statistical discrimination can obviously be
bad. But this does not mean that statistical discrimination violates
formal equality of opportunity.  Does it?
As so far specified, formal equality of opportunity requires that
applicants be assessed by appropriate criteria relevant to performance
on the post and that the most qualified candidate be offered the post.
But it would be excessively demanding to require that no expense be
spared to discover, so far as is possible, which candidate is really
most qualified. If the general idea of formal equality of opportunity
in a market setting is that all agents must be treated equally as
potential means of gain, then those means of selecting candidates
should be required that maximize the hiring firm's prospects for gain
(unless the firm's prospects register wrongfully discriminating
behavior by its customers or suppliers). Seen this way, statistical
discrimination would not violate formal equality of opportunity.
In some societies, the law of equal opportunity forbids statistical
discrimination when the basis of the discrimination is race or
sex. The employer must base hiring and promotion decisions on facts
about the individual applicants other than their being black or white,
male or female, or the like (even if basing decisions on accurate
stereotypes is the most cost-effective way to proceed). The rationale
for this legal policy might be to ensure that historically invidious
forms of discrimination are not continued by prohibiting forms of
discrimination that are superficially similar and reminiscent of past
evils. Formal equality of opportunity as characterized in this entry
would not rationalize this legal policy.
Discrimination against members of a group might be based on
aversion to the group, which might exist quite independently of the
actual characteristics of actual group members. For example, an
employer might simply dislike Catholics or Jews or women, and be
averse to hiring them, or to hiring them for other than unskilled
low-paid jobs. One might suppose that if one has a taste for
discrimination of this sort, one must incur costs if one acts on it
(Becker 1971). If one refuses to hire Catholics or Jews or women even
when they are most qualified, the product one offers for sale will be
more costly to produce as a result, and if the market for this product
is competitive, one cannot raise the price at which one sells it but
must accept lesser profit than one would have obtained had one's
hiring decisions been unprejudiced.  On this basis one might speculate
that competitive markets will tend to drive out such
discrimination. However, if large numbers of people share a
discriminatory social norm, one can see that the market will reward
compliance with the norm and punish noncompliance, so there will in
that case be no tendency for the market to squeeze out discriminatory
behavior. For example, if consumers will not purchase widgets that are
manufactured with the skilled labor of Catholics, Jews, or women, and
if skilled Protestant male workers employed in the widget industry
will not cooperate with Catholics, Jews, or women if they are hired as
skilled co-workers, the widget manufacturer who simply wishes to
maximize her profits will be led to comply with the social norm
against the employment of the targeted groups in skilled jobs (Akerlof
1976, 1980).
Discrimination against people on the basis of their observable
group traits is an enemy of equality of opportunity. This is a
common-sense observation. If all discrimination were statistical
discrimination, the common-sense observation would be true only to a
very limited degree. If observable group traits such as skin color or
sex are correlated with traits that employers reasonably value, hiring
on the basis of the observable group traits can be rational from the
standpoint of the employer seeking both to hire qualified workers and
minimize hiring search costs.
Discrimination can also express and reinforce group status
hierarchies. If possession of white skin confers status and attracts
the esteem of others, derogating nonwhite individuals can help to
build and sustain a top position for whites in the skin color
hierarchy. Discrimination can take the form of favoring whites in
hiring and promotion decisions, but can also take the form of
participating in caste rituals and practices that proclaim the
superiority of whites over others. Discrimination of this sort aims to
preserve caste subordination. A successful discriminatory regime
produces economic advantages for the dominant caste members, and also
sweeping social advantages, so that sheer possession of white skin
will predict that one will enjoy better life prospects than those who
lack white skin. Group status hierarchies are entrenched and sustained
by social norms that dictate costly individual behaviors directed at
favoring fellow group members if one belongs to the superior group and
at exhibiting deferential and submissive behavior if one belongs to a
disfavored group. Conformity to the norms is rewarded and deviations
punished (McAdams 1995). 
The stability of group status hierarchy regimes raises the
question, what motivates individuals to follow the norms that sustain
the regime and to punish those who deviate even though following and
punishing incur costs and often run against the individual's
self-interest. Part of the answer appears to be that in an ongoing
status hierarchy, people internalize the norms and esteem those who
follow the norms, and the desire for this esteem motivates one to
conform. Expressing admiration of those who adhere to social norms one
accepts is often not costly behavior for an individual, but rather a
pleasant activity. Moreover, we humans evidently have a native
disposition to be rule-following punishers, who tend to accept current
dominant social norms and to desire to punish those who violate them
even when doing so is disadvantageous for us (Bicchieri 2006: chapter
3 and Henrich and Henrich 2006: chapters 7–8). The same generic
trait that leads us to be disposed to punish those who steal and lie
and neglect their children can also lead us to be disposed to punish
those who challenge established group status hierarchy norms such as
white supremacy.  State-enforced laws can help create and sustain such
a regime, as with Jim Crow segregation laws in the U.S. South in the
twentieth century, but discriminatory social norms can arise and
thrive and confer benefits on dominant caste members in the absence of
legal enforcement.
Group status hierarchy can form on the basis of any arbitrary
observable trait—skin color, supposed race, ethnicity, sex,
heterosexual or nonheterosexual sexual behavior, age, and so
on—but a trait that is exploited for this purpose will not be
regarded as arbitrary by those who uphold the hierarchy. If the basis
of the status hierarchy is white skin color, white skin will be prized
as inherently attractive and as a marker for other valuable qualities
such as intelligence and virtue. Those who uphold the status hierarchy
can then see themselves not simply as advancing group self-interest
but as defending a desirable moral order. A status hierarchy then will
be ideological, based on false beliefs that serve some people's
interests.
This thumbnail sketch of derogatory discrimination and group status
hierarchy helps explain how and why public policy measures to enhance
equality of opportunity tend to be controversial in complicated
ways. When a group status hierarchy is officially dismantled, people
may disagree widely on such questions as whether the underlying
prejudiced attitudes have disappeared or have persisted in subtler and
less overt forms. 
The problem with formal equality of opportunity is that it is
merely formal. Imagine a society ruled by a hereditary warrior class
(as in B. Williams 1962). Reformers bring about a change. From now on,
membership in the warrior class will not be drawn exclusively from the
wealthy stratum of the society. Warriors will instead be selected on
the basis of a competitive examination in military prowess
administered to any young adult member of society who seeks admission
into this elite class. However, it turns out that only scions of the
wealthy stratum pass the exam and become warriors. Everyone in society
except the wealthy is poorly nourished, and being well nourished is a
prerequisite for developing the military skills needed to succeed on
the competitive examination. In this setting, advocates for the
nonwealthy strata of society might object that none but members of the
traditional wealthy elite have a chance to satisfy the eligibility
requirements for admission to the warrior class.
Even if all are eligible to apply for a superior position and
applications are judged fairly on their merits, one might hold that
genuine or substantive equality of opportunity requires that all have
a genuine opportunity to become qualified. In the example just
sketched, this would mean that all members of society have the
opportunity to develop the needed military skills. One can imagine the
society taking a variety of steps to provide opportunities to
all. Nutrition supplements are made available to those whose diet is
inadequate.  Scholarships to military academies can be won by poor
children. Warrior skills coaches are dispatched to every village. As
more is done to provide opportunities that enable ambitious and
talented youth from any social group to acquire proficiency at warrior
skills, at some point the complaint that none but the wealthy have a
chance to enter the warrior class begins to sound hollow. At some
point it might be held that sufficient or good enough opportunities to
become qualified have been provided to all. The idea would be that
substantive equality of opportunity prevails with respect to some
desirable position or ranked order of positions just in case all
members of society are eligible to apply for the position,
applications are fairly judged on their merits and the most
meritorious are selected, and sufficient opportunity to develop the
qualifications needed for successful application is available to
all.
Further development of this proposal would give an account of what
level of opportunity provision is “good enough.” Evidently
the level would be set by balancing the costs and benefits of greater
provision of opportunities versus the costs and benefits measured in
terms of other values with which opportunity provision conflicts.  But
wherever the “good enough” level of provision is set, it
could be that members of society still have unequal opportunities to
become qualified for formal equality of opportunity contests.
Scholarships are provided for some poor children, but wealthy parents
can hire private fencing and jousting tutors. Some families own horses
and can impart horse riding skills to their children, which gives them
a competitive advantage over others. And so on.
Pursuing to the limit the idea of reducing the competitive
advantages that favorable circumstances confer on some individuals,
one arrives at the ideal that John Rawls has called “fair
equality of opportunity” (Rawls 1999: section 12 and Rawls 2001:
section 13). Fair equality of opportunity (FEO) is satisfied in a
society just in case any individuals who have the same native talent
and the same ambition will have the same prospects of success in
competitions that determine who gets positions that generate superior
benefits for their occupants.  In other words, if Smith and Jones have
the same native talent, and Smith is born of wealthy, educated parents
of a socially favored ethnicity and Jones is born of poor, uneducated
parents of a socially disfavored ethnicity, then if they develop the
same ambition to become scientists or Wall Street lawyers, they will
have the same prospects of becoming scientists or Wall Street lawyers
if FEO prevails. Rawls writes that 
 assuming there
is a distribution of natural assets, those who are at the same level
of talent and ability, and have the same willingness to use them,
should have the same prospects of success regardless of their initial
place in the social system. (Rawls 1999: 63)
It should be noted that the specification of FEO just given departs
from the specification in Rawls 2001. There Rawls defines FEO so it
requires only that the socio-economic status into which one is born
has no impact on one's competitive prospects. There is also the issue
to be discussed below, whether the rights of parents to raise their
children as they choose take priority over FEO and constrain its
fulfillment. The eminent Rawls interpreter Samuel Freeman roundly
declares that even setting aside the family freedom issue, we should
see that all in all “Rawls does not understand FEO as requiring
equal chances for the equally endowed” (Freeman 2007: 98). He
sees FEO as instead demanding that all individuals especially
including the disadvantaged should have opportunities to develop their
talents. What extent of opportunities? This formulation looks like
weak tea. Rawls exegesis aside, the formulation that sees FEO as
requiring equal chances for the equally well endowed, a perfect
meritocracy if you will, is interesting, controversial, and resonates
with concerns about chances for mobility in the context of modern
market economies. In the remainder of this entry, FEO refers to this
broader ideal.
FEO articulates the ideal of a classless society of a sort. If the
mark of a class society is that positions in the social hierarchy are
passed along from generation to generation, then the society that
satisfies the FEO ideal is classless in so far as parents can pass
along advantages to their children only by genetic inheritance and by
socialization that instills ambition. (Notice that FEO so understood
is violated if some individuals gain significant advantages by gift or
inheritance. One could amend FEO so that it permits gift and
inheritance, deemed private transactions, and imposes constraints only
on public sphere competitions.) Otherwise the advantages that well-off
parents can confer on their children by providing better education and
socialization than others receive or by providing access to a social
network of well-off individuals are entirely eliminated or offset in
the FEO society. If wealthy parents provide high-quality day care and
nursery school and private tutoring for their children, society
arranges public education practices so that children of nonwealthy
parents get the same or equivalent advantages. In the same spirit, if
some parents, rich or poor, are more strongly motivated than others to
help their children get ahead in life, these efforts are somehow
exactly offset, so having the good luck to have especially concerned
parents does not affect one's comparative life prospects. The end
result is that one can try to give one's own children a leg up in
social competition, but whatever boost one provides will be met by a
similar boost provided for other children whose native talent is the
same as that of one's own children. (In passing it should be noted
that when better-off parents provide various amounts of special boost
for their children, FEO taken strictly and literally requires that
whatever is the maximal special aid provided for individuals with a
certain genetic talent endowment and ambition, the equivalent of that
aid must also be provided to all other individuals, including
individuals of better-off parents who are getting less than the
maximal aid.)
FEO as characterized here is a demanding ideal. What if FEO becomes
impossible to satisfy if inequalities in outcome become too extreme?
In that case FEO requires extinguishing any inequalities in outcome
among members of one generation that would bring it about that FEO
cannot be satisfied among members of subsequent generations.  In the
Rawlsian system of nested and hierarchically ordered principles, FEO
has less priority than the basic equal liberties principle.  If FEO
could be satisfied only by encroaching on free speech or the right to
vote or other basic liberties, then according to Rawls it should give
way. Up to conflict with equal basic liberties, FEO rules the
roost. 
FEO might be adopted in conjunction with formal equality of
opportunity or by itself as a freestanding moral requirement. The
difference between FEO alone and FEO paired with formal equality of
opportunity emerges when one pictures a society that satisfies FEO but
not formal equality of opportunity. A society might be composed
equally of members of two hostile groups, who discriminate against
each other at every opportunity. If the groups command the same amount
of economic resources, it could happen that formal equality of
opportunity is always violated, because in every context of
interaction people favor members of their own group regardless of
their qualifications. If men discriminate against women, and women
against men, these effects might counterbalance so that freestanding
FEO is still satisfied. The following discussion of FEO for the most
part interprets it as an inclusive doctrine containing formal equality
of opportunity.
Fair equality of opportunity can seem an inspiring ideal or a
nightmarish vision reminiscent of George Orwell's 1984.  The
ideal of a classless society that has shed all trace of caste
hierarchy is inspiring to many. But any scheme to implement FEO would
apparently require extensive meddling by government or some other
agent of society in family life, and such meddling can appear
nightmarish (Fishkin 1983). The negative response to the prospect of
implementation of FEO might not reflect rejection of the principle
itself but merely a sense that this ideal should not be pursued
wholeheartedly whatever the cost to other values. Equality of
opportunity is typically advanced as a justice value, and the mark of
justice norms is that they take priority over others. Even so,
equality of opportunity might be one among several justice norms, and
not the top-rated.
One might also question the assumption that the pursuit of FEO
could not proceed to a significant extent without invasive
interference in family life. For example, society could resolve to
devote far greater resources to the education of children of poor and
uneducated parents than to the education of other children. This would
be done knowing that educated and wealthy parents will be inclined by
affection for their children to give them special socialization and
education advantages and that these will roughly counterbalance the
special state expenditures on disadvantaged children. Policies of this
sort could be pursued without sending out state inspectors to monitor
the degree to which middle-class parents provide extra educational
resources or informal props to self-efficacy and self-esteem that
other children are not getting. Also, if the members of a society were
committed to the ideal of FEO, they would not find reasonable and
cost-effective measures to achieve it to be onerous. The issue
becomes, how great a value is FEO, and to what extent does its pursuit
warrant sacrifices in other values.
FEO might be thought to conflict with the freedom of individuals to
raise their own children as they choose. A parent (or someone else
entrusted with the guardian role over a child) might want to impart
his culture and values to his children, and the result of parents with
different culture and values acting with that goal will predictably
bring it about that children who have the same native talent and
ambition but are raised in different ways will have unequal chances of
competitive success. Parents might want to encourage the development
of their children's potential talents. If parents vary in how strongly
they are moved to act on this desire and in how effective they are at
boosting their children's personal development, the result again will
be that individuals with the same native talent and the same ambition
will come to have unequal chances of competitive success, in violation
of FEO. An alternative view on the conflict between family life and
fulfillment of FEO is that the freedom to mate with anyone on mutually
agreeable terms and raise children as one sees fit within broad limits
is a basic liberty that takes priority over FEO. But a large question
is now open: to what extent exactly is the fulfillment of FEO limited
by the basic liberty of family freedom?
Harry Brighouse and Adam Swift propose that it would be morally
wrong to insist on complete fulfillment of FEO, because parents have
legitimate interests in helping their children to have good life
prospects. There is a legitimate interest in acting for their
children's sake, and also a legitimate interest, an important
constituent of the parent's good, in creatively expressing themselves
in how they fulfill the parent role and in developing and sustaining
special asymmetrical friendship bonds with their children that are
unique to parent-child relations. As they put it, parents have a
“nonfiduciary interest in being able to play a fiduciary
role” with respect to their children” (Brighouse and Swift
2009: 54.). They work to distinguish inequality-promoting parental
behaviors such as reading bedtime stories to children that are
essential to achieving the special values of parent-child relations
and other inequality-promoting behaviors such as sending children to
expensive private schools that do not make essential contributions to
parental relations and that might be discouraged or taxed or even
prohibited without inflicting damage on parent-child relations.
The assumption that achieving FEO would require limiting parents'
freedom to raise their children as they choose, so that if either
parents have moral rights to this freedom or it is morally desirable
on other grounds to sustain it, we must accept less than complete
fulfillment of FEO, has some plausibility but does not survive
reflection. In principle, society could allow parents to act pretty
much as they please and simultaneously maintain in place flexible
policies that adjust the social provision of aid to children so that
whatever parents do that would result in nonfulfillment of FEO if its
impact were left standing is entirely offset, so the end result is
that FEO is completely fulfilled. If wealthy parents give their
children special tennis lessons and fancy tutorial assistance, social
agencies increase aid to children whose parents do not or cannot
lavish such resources on their upbringing, so the inequality-boosting
tendency of the special parental provision is entirely nullified.  In
principle no limits on parental freedom would be needed to achieve FEO
completely (though limits on secret parental helps might need to be
curbed, and what might strike us as privacy-violating intrusions on
family life to monitor effects of special parental provision would be
needed). This possible public policy stance sounds bizarre only
because its costs would clearly be enormous, and arguably not worth
the moral gain in extra fulfillment of FEO they would achieve.
The question then is raised, to what degree the fulfillment of FEO
should take priority, or rather take a back seat, when this moral aim
conflicts with others that might be regarded as justice aims or on
other grounds morally mandatory aims.
Although FEO carries the idea of offsetting the advantages of being
well-born to its logical limit, it should be noted that by allowing
differential ambition legitimately to affect individuals' life
chances, FEO may not go far enough toward defining an ideal of genuine
equal opportunity. The simple elimination of ambition from the FEO
formula would be implausible. Let us stipulate that two individuals
are equally ambitious with respect to some goal when they desire it
with equal fervor and are disposed to work equally hard to achieve
it. If Sally desires to go to a selective college and works hard at
her high school classes whereas equally talented Samantha does not
have the same strong desire and avoids doing her high school
classwork, no reasonable conception of substantive equality of
opportunity is violated when Sally gains admission to an elite college
and Samantha does not. The FEO ideal embodies a division of
responsibility between individual and society, with ambition falling
on the side of individual not social responsibility.
But other cases are different and call in question this division of
responsibility. Suppose that FEO obtains in a society but
overwhelmingly boys develop the ambition to pursue challenging and
lucrative careers and girls overwhelmingly do not. The explanation is
that boys and girls alike are subjected to a rigid form of
socialization which instills ambition in boys and quashes it in girls.
In this case one might say that even though FEO is not violated when
Sam and Ben become lawyers and doctors and Sally and Samantha, equally
talented as Sam and Ben but far less ambitious, become homemakers and
check-out clerks in convenience stores, genuine substantive equality
of opportunity has not yet been achieved. In the society with rigid
sex-stereotyped socialization, Sally and Samantha have not had a fair
opportunity to develop the ambition that Ben and Sam have developed
because only the latter benefited from the good luck of receiving
favorable socialization. One might modify FEO so that if two people
have the same native talent, but one ends up with lesser prospects of
success in competitions for positions of advantage because her
ambition has been reduced by prejudicial or discriminatory
socialization, then FEO is violated (on this issue, see Okin
1991). (Again, to satisfy modified FEO one must either effectively
prevent parents and other guardian figures from rearing their children
in ways that distort ambition formation or effectively institute
social policies that entirely offset this untoward influence on
children's upbringing. Also, to fully implement modified FEO one would
be required either to eliminate diffuse social distortions operating
on ambition formation or effectively counteract them.)
The idea of one person having the same native talent as another,
invoked in the statement of FEO, is unclear. Consider a simple
example.  Suppose we could install just one of two educational
programs in a two-person society consisting of Smith and Jones. One
provides more intensive education, the other a more relaxed
schooling. Under the intensive regime, Jones ends up with higher
earnings prospects, and under the relaxed regime, Smith ends up with
higher earnings prospects.  Which to choose? Equality of fair
opportunity does not say. Or taken strictly, with the construal that
the capacity to respond to schooling is a talent, FEO requires only
that persons with identical dispositions to develop exactly the same
skill level in any schooling and socialization regime qualify as
having the same talent, and the proposal is silent about choices that
would produce different results for different individuals with
different talents in this strict sense.  Since in practice we only
discover what talents people have by subjecting them to one or another
schooling regime, FEO, which had looked severely strict, now looks to
be lax and undemanding. What must be added to FEO to respond to this
difficulty is some sensible continuity requirement, so that if two
individuals' capacities to develop skills through schooling are
“close”, the developed skills they acquire (and ultimately
their competitive success) should not be “too
dissimilar.”
Equal opportunity norms are linked to the ideal of a society in
which wrongful discrimination does not occur. Regarding fair equality
of opportunity, the linkage is not tight.
What look to be wrongful discrimination and fulfillment of FEO
could coexist, if FEO is not construed as incorporating formal
equality of opportunity but as a freestanding requirement. Suppose
society is divided into mutually hostile racial and ethnic groups,
each of which has roughly the same wealth, population, and social
power.  Members of each group favor their own in economic decision
making. The result is that the economy is divided into racial and
ethnic spheres of influence. People of Scandinavian ancestry dominate
the winter resort industry; people of Asian ancestry dominate the
financial services industry, and so on. Formal equality of opportunity
is routinely violated, because applicants of Scandinavian background
are favored in winter resort hirings, applicants of Asian background
are favored in competition for financial service posts, and so on. But
overall, it happens to turn out that those with equal talent and equal
ambition have overall equal prospects for success in competitions for
positions that confer advantages, so FEO is satisfied. (Either members
from each group form only ambitions for success in the types of
enterprises in which members of their particular group are dominant,
or for each person with given talents, lack of opportunity in one
range of competitions for advantage is exactly offset by above-average
opportunity is some other range of competitions for advantage, so each
person with the same talent and same ambition has the same prospects
for competitive success.)  The situation just described might seem
unlikely to persist, but we might imagine government policy operating
to sustain the conditions in which non-inclusive FEO is fulfilled even
though formal equality of opportunity is not.
We might also imagine a more benign version of a society in which
members of each separate and distinct group in society cluster
together and favor each other in economic and social interactions. We
would then see industrial and occupational clumping: Those of Korean
descent might dominate the hotel industry, while those of Hispanic
descent might dominate construction; women might be more likely to be
lawyers and doctors, men more likely to be business entrepreneurs, and
so on. We might imagine that group members are not moved by prejudice
or animus against members of other groups. Rather people find it more
comfortable to work with fellow group members rather than outsiders;
trust is easier to build and sustain within groups than across
them. We would expect opportunities to be vastly unequal across group
lines when this situation obtains, but it is conceivable that this is
not so: suppose non-inclusive FEO is satisfied. The situation might be
one in which reasonable statistical discrimination is rampant: the
fact that one is a woman is a good indicator one will prove to be a
good team member in a law firm consisting of women lawyers, and so
on. If this is so, the society exhibiting social group clustering in
economic cooperation might satisfy formal equality of opportunity as
well as non-inclusive FEO. Another possibility is that formal equality
of opportunity is massively violated in this society, yet
non-inclusive FEO is satisfied. The example presses on our attention
the issue, which norm should take priority, have greater weight,
formal equality of opportunity or non-inclusive FEO, when they come in
conflict.
 
Equality of opportunity ideals apply to the process that selects
political rulers and political decisions. Consider two conceptions of
democratic equality. Formal democratic equality requires that all
long-term residents of a political society be eligible to become
citizens and that all citizens are eligible to vote and stand for
office in free and fair elections that pick law-makers for the
society.  In addition, formal democratic equality requires that
influential officials charged with executing the law should either be
(1) elected in fair and free elections or (2) appointed by the
law-makers or (3) appointed through some process that selects
applicants according to their qualifications. As sketched, formal
democratic equality could be satisfied in a society in which only
wealthy individuals are in practice able to run for political office
and only graduates of certain elite schools are able to have any
influence at all on the policy decisions and laws enacted by the
government. One might then espouse a substantive ideal of democratic
equality, which would be satisfied in a formally democratic society
just in case any individuals with the same political talent and the
same ambition to influence public policy have the same prospect of
influencing public policy choice (Rawls 1999, 2001; Christiano
1996).
Substantive democratic equality is akin to Rawlsian fair equality
of opportunity in the sphere of politics. (Only “akin to”,
because the former requires that those with equal developed political
talent and political ambition have the same prospects of political
influence, whereas the latter requires equal prospects for those with
equal native talent and equal ambition.) One can view recent political
controversies regarding initiatives to limit the impact of lobbyists
and wealthy political donors on the democratic political process
through the lens of this ideal. A society might institute public
funding of political campaigns and restrictions on private donations
to political campaigns in order to make progress toward approximating
the democratic equality ideal.
Implementing the substantive ideal of democratic equality might
conflict with other justice norms (Estlund 2000). Suppose that
restrictions on campaign financing and lobbying by interest groups
reduce the influence of the wealthy on political policy choices, so
that democratic equality is more nearly fulfilled. It might be the
case that the now prohibited extra contributions of the wealthy would
have enhanced the quality of political deliberation and produced
better informed and substantively more just political decisions and
hence more just laws and public policies. If it was discovered that a
trade-off of this sort exists, one might believe that the pursuit of
substantive democratic equality should be curtailed and that an
optimal balance among the conflicting justice values should be
defined. Some might hold that the point of democratic politics is to
produce just laws and policies and substantively just outcomes
generally and that substantive democratic equality should have no
weight against this fundamental aim and should be pursued just to the
extent it is a means to substantive justice.
Fair equality of fair opportunity is a severe doctrine. Its
requirements extend far beyond the injunction to eschew public-sphere
discrimination. How stringent the policy implications of FEO become
depends on the relative priority assigned to this principle as against
other fundamental moral requirements.
The question arises whether there is some plausible intermediate
position that renders equality of opportunity more demanding than
formal equality of opportunity but less demanding than FEO. One such
intermediate position already described combines formal equality of
opportunity with the additional requirement that society provide good
enough opportunities for all its members to develop their native
talents so as to become qualified for competitive positions. The idea
here would be that there is some threshold level of opportunity to
develop one's native talents into skills to which all are
entitled. The challenge for one attracted to this position would be to
develop a theory of the “good enough.”
Another possible intermediate position combines formal equality of
opportunity with the requirement that present effects of past wrongful
violations of formal equality of opportunity should be fully offset.
According to this conception of equal opportunity, if Catholics
suffered violations of formal equality of opportunity for many years
in a nation in which Protestantism was the officially privileged
state-established religion, and these wrongful violations reduced the
wealth of Catholics and their descendants, ceasing now to impose any
further violations of formal equality of opportunity on Catholics does
not establish a regime of genuine equality of opportunity, since some
continue to benefit, others to suffer, from past wrongs. But once
recompense is made for past wrongful discrimination, formal equality
of opportunity suffices. An extension of this view would hold that the
effects of all unjust policies and practices insofar as they affect
people's present opportunities to become qualified for competitions
regulated by formal equality of opportunity should be undone (Buchanan
et al. 2000: chapter 3).
A third possible intermediate position combines formal equality of
opportunity with the requirement that state action should treat all
citizens equally and not confer arbitrary advantages on some along
with arbitrary disadvantages on others. On this view, even the
substantive aspect of equality of opportunity is a deontological
requirement, a moral constraint on permissible action, not a
specification of a goal that morally ought to be achieved. Call this
position the deontological requirement interpretation of
equality of opportunity. Unlike FEO, the deontological requirement
does not hold that substantive equality of opportunity is violated if
some parents provide better educational opportunities for their
children than other parents. The deontological requirement does not
specify that a society must establish a system of state-funded
education. But if the state does operate schools or provides funds to
defray the costs of some children's education, the state violates the
deontological requirement if its schools or disbursements of funds to
parents earmarked for children do not operate in an evenhanded manner
but instead arbitrarily confer advantages on some over
others. Operating schools for Roman Catholics only or paying for the
school tuition only of children who attend Roman Catholic schools
would be clear cases of violation of the deontological
interpretation. A perhaps more controversial example would be the
operation by the state of public schools funded by general tax
revenues that are formally open to all resident children but are
physically accessible only to children who can walk normally or set at
a level such that some severely retarded or otherwise cognitively
impaired children can gain no benefit from the instruction that is
provided. According to the deontological requirement of equal
treatment, these policies would be violations of equality of
opportunity if and only if they arbitrarily advantage some children
and disadvantage others.
The equal treatment norm, strictly interpreted, is a significant
constraint on policy choice. Suppose equal treatment is interpreted as
requiring that a government service that is provided to some citizens
shall be provided to all without discrimination against any group of
citizens. Next imagine that the government proposes to provide health
care coverage to all citizens and to ration coverage so as to maximize
the number of quality-adjusted years of life (QALYs) secured by health
care. Any scheme of this sort will recommend discrimination against
disabled citizens, in the sense that the scheme will tend to recommend
provision of treatment to an otherwise able person afflicted with some
illness while recommending against treatment of a disabled person
afflicted with a comparable case of the same illness (this
recommendation occurs whenever this course of action is
QALY-maximizing) (Brock 2000). Virtually any distributive norm that
recommends raising or lowering the level of benefits to be provided
for individuals depending on a comparison of costs of provision to
well-being gains achieved for the recipient will conflict with equal
treatment interpreted as requiring no discrimination among citizens on
such a basis.
A problematic but illuminating case is age discrimination (Daniels
1988, McKerlie 1989, 1999, 2013; Temkin 1993: chapter 8). A society
might establish a state policy that mandates transfers of resources
from older to younger citizens, by using public funds to operate
schools for the education of children. A society might also follow a
health care policy that rations life-preserving care made available to
the very old in order to reduce the extent to which expensive medical
technology extends the lifespans of very old people with reduced
quality of life. In the same spirit, the society might tilt health
care policies toward saving the lives of very young people threatened
with premature death. In short, the society enacts coercive state
policies that favor the young over the old. Such a policy counts as
denial of equal treatment if the units to be treated equally are
persons (of any age) at a given time. The policy is arguably
consistent with equal treatment if the units to be treated equally are
individuals over their whole lives. At least, this would be so if all
individuals lived through youth to the same old age. In the world in
which everyone lived to old age, discrimination against the old would
be unlike discrimination in favor of Catholics and against
Protestants, or in favor of men and against women, or in favor of
whites and against Hispanics. The exception to all these cases,
discrimination against the old would be consistent with equal
treatment of each individual over the course of her life. If the
unrealistic assumption that all live to the same old age is dropped,
then equal treatment with the units to be treated equally being
individuals over the course of their lives would seem to forbid any
expenditure at all on the health care of the old who have already
received more than those who died at a young age.
The example of age discrimination either discredits the equal
treatment norm or indicates that it cries out for further
interpretation. Surely some denials of literal equal treatment do not
violate any plausible equal opportunity norm. If the state provides
health care coverage to all citizens, the sick will get treatment and
the well will get no treatment, but this is not an invidious
inequality. One might say all equally are eligible for health care if
they need it. But in general, many seemingly morally acceptable state
policies will have different effects on different groups of citizens.
If a law is passed instituting policies to preserve the environment
for future generations, some present citizens will benefit, and some,
such as loggers who have been working on old-growth redwoods, will
lose. One might interpret the equal treatment norm as requiring that
in the aggregate over the long haul, coercive state policies should
benefit roughly all citizens to an equal extent. (But why must
benefits in the long run be equal for all?) On this view,
society acting through the state is not required to do anything to
offset inequalities it has not caused (included in this set of
inequalities are many that would be eliminated under a Rawlsian FEO
policy). But if the state acts in a way that affects people's life
prospects, it should act in an evenhanded way that boosts everyone's
life prospects to roughly the same extent. Notice that the equal
treatment norm would be unproblematically satisfied by a state that
did nothing for its citizens. Also, if children of wealthy parents
will receive excellent education whatever the state does and will have
fine life prospects that can be boosted only by a little bit by state
provision of education, then equal treatment would seem to require the
state to provide only small amounts of state-provided or state-funded
education with benefits spread so none get a significantly bigger
boost than the children of the wealthy get from state aid. (But see
Pogge 1989: 44–46.)
The variety of conceptions of equality of opportunity suggests the
complexity of the task of assessing what are called “affirmative
action” programs in societies that are marred by a history of
caste hierarchy and systematic discrimination that excludes some
groups in the population from any significant access to the fruits of
social cooperation.
Consider a stylized example. Suppose that in the U.S., whites have
enjoyed superior social status, enforced by law and social custom, for
decades, going back to times in which blacks were enslaved. Now whites
on the average have greater wealth and education and blacks have less.
Suppose that formal equality of opportunity is now proclaimed as the
law of the land and embraced by popular morality. Still, most superior
positions in society continue to go to whites. In this context a
variety of measures might be adopted with the aim of increasing the
effective opportunities enjoyed by blacks. Special educational
resources might be channeled to them. For a time, to unsettle the
status quo in which whites enjoy the lion's share of social
privileges, quotas might be imposed by law or social custom. The quota
requires that special preference be given to blacks when employment
decisions are made until blacks and whites share in the superior
positions and posts of society in proportion to their numbers.
Affirmative action programs of this sort might be justified on the
ground that in a world where discrimination persists, coercive
imposition of quotas helps here and now to bring about greater
fulfillment of formal equality of opportunity. The quota might exert
an effect that roughly counter-balances the opposite effect of
continuing unacknowledged discrimination. Here is a stylized example
that illustrates how this could occur. Suppose that those responsible
for making hires are prejudiced, and this takes the form of (in
effect) assigning extra points to white applicants. A white applicant
who merits 60 points on a 100 point scale gets assigned 70 points. If
we respond by legally requiring the assignment of 10 extra points to
all nonwhite applicants, to offset the bias, the hiring officials
might unconsciously respond by boosting the scores of white applicants
still further, so that the tilt in favor of hiring whites remains
intact. In these circumstances, if (a big if) the social planner can
estimate what proportion of nonwhite applicants will be more qualified
than whites, a rigid quota that requires the hiring of a specified
proportion of nonwhite to white applicants can bring about hiring
results that do better at achieving formal equality of opportunity
than either the policy of letting firms hire as they please or the
policy of requiring firms to favor nonwhite applicants by boosting the
merit ratings of their applications.
Another, more likely scenario is that the two components of the
Rawlsian FEO might come into conflict in situations of persistent
disadvantage imposed on people on the basis of their supposed race or
skin color. Suppose that educational opportunities for nonwhites,
compared to those provided for whites, are subpar. The result is that
individuals of different races with the same native talent and the
same ambition face very unequal prospects of competitive
success—greater if they are white, lesser if they are nonwhite.
Now imagine that an affirmative action plan of reverse discrimination
is put into effect. In violation of formal equality of opportunity,
nonwhite applicants are favored over equally qualified
whites. Depending on the details of the affirmative action plan,
especially the extent to which the plan favors nonwhites over whites,
the result might be that while formal equality of opportunity is
violated, substantive equality of opportunity (those with the same
native talent and the same ambition have the same prospects of
competitive success) is more nearly achieved than it would have been
had formal equality of opportunity been sustained.
One might doubt that any good would come of attempts to achieve the
substantive equality of opportunity component of FEO by violating
formal equality of opportunity. Hiring the unqualified will bring it
about that they flounder in their posts, the jobs are less well done,
social conflict increases, and society suffers. So one might
speculate. This dismal outcome might or might not come
about. Violating formal equality of opportunity to fulfill substantive
equality need not dictate hiring the unqualified, just the less
qualified. The affirmative action plan might be constrained by a rule
that forbids stretching the preference given to nonwhites to the point
that basic competence to perform the tasks associated with the post
that is being filled is lacking in those selected. In some cases,
those denied educational advantages but natively talented may if hired
respond with alacrity to the demands of the position in which they
find themselves, and learn on the job faster than might have been
expected. But whether the expected consequences generated by an
affirmative action plan that violates formal equality of opportunity
are bad, good, or neutral, there remains the violation of formal
equality of opportunity, which some will view as in itself a grave
injustice. 
Defenders of affirmative action programs that violate the careers
open to talents norm might respond in either of two ways to the
concern that "Don't discriminate against applicants
on the basis of race, sex, creed, or color" is a strict deontological
requirement, a constraint on just public policy.  
One response would be to uphold the substantive equality of
opportunity component of Rawlsian FEO as itself a strict deontological
requirement and one that trumps careers open to talents. Another
response would be to defend affirmative action on the ground that its
judicious deployment would be likely to increase the extent to which
FEO is fulfilled in the long run. Here the idea presumably would be
that the existence of quotas would unsettle expectations and lead to
changes in socialization and belief formation. The factual claims on
which this type of justification rests might be disputed. But disputes
might also pit the two components of FEO, formal and substantive
equality of opportunity, against each other. To settle such disputes
would require a definitive assessment of the conceptions of equality
of opportunity and an authoritative determination of the weight that
equality of opportunity on its various construals should have against
other justice values.
Does a society that embraces and fulfills equality of opportunity
(rightly interpreted) necessarily provide social mobility? In a word,
No. To illustrate the point, consider a society whose population is
divided into deciles by household income (the income of adult partners
combined and of each adult living alone and as sole head of
household). Identify social mobility in this society with the chance
that any given individual will as an adult live in a household that
places in a higher decile of household income than the one in which he
was placed as a child, along with the chance that he will end up in a
lower decile. Social mobility in the society is high to the degree
that knowing an individual's decile of family origin is not predictive
of his own decile and low to the degree that this information is
predictive.
A low degree of social mobility may be an indicator that the idea
of careers open to talents is significantly violated. Children of poor
families are not eligible to apply for plummy positions, or if they
are eligible and do apply, their applications are discounted, not
fairly assessed on their merits with a guide to choosing who gets
offered the positions. A low degree of social mobility might also be
an indicator the society fails by a very wide margin to satisfy
FEO. Of course learning that society fails to satisfy FEO would hardly
be a surprise: surely no modern society has ever done so.  But a
society might be closer or further from satisfying FEO, and low social
mobility might indicate that the society's divergence from FEO is very
large indeed.
But what might be so here is not necessarily so. A society could in
theory perfectly satisfy careers open to talents while the position in
the social hierarchy into which an individual is born entirely
determines the prospects for becoming qualified for desirable
competitive posts and being selected to fill them. A perhaps more
interesting possibility is that a society could perfectly satisfy FEO
or some other version of substantive equality of opportunity and also
exhibit a very low degree of social mobility or even none at all.  In
the illustrative example, this scenario unfolds if the family of
origin income decile of every member of society perfectly predicts
that person's own family income.
There are two ways, both of them disturbing and unsettling, by
which a society of zero social mobility could simultaneously satisfy
FEO. One is that the rank order of each person's genetically given
native talent endowment mirrors the rank order of each person's family
of origin income. If there are 100 persons in the current generation
of individuals and your native talent endowment is overall
40th-best, your family of origin income is also
40th-best, and the same holds for every other member of the
current generation. If any two people in society have the same native
talent endowment and the same ambition, they have the same prospects
for competitive success, and their family of origin incomes will also
be the same. Another possible mechanism is that ambition formation
tracks family of origin income position (via some process that does
not itself violate FEO), so that no persons with the same native
talent endowment and different family of origin incomes have the same
ambition, so their having different prospects of competitive success
does not violate FEO. There could also be social dynamics that involve
mixes of the two ways to produce satisfaction of FEO along with zero
social mobility.
Many contemporary societies have made undeniable progress toward
satisfying careers open to talents, and some have at least moved
forward by inches toward the distant goal of satisfaction of FEO. In
these societies one can detect seeds that could blossom into a highly
meritocratic society with no social mobility.
Here is a stylized description of the recent history of affluent
industrialized societies. Social barriers to women's participation in
the labor market and in the full range of economic roles are gradually
dismantled, and women do come to participate on more equal terms with
men. These developments increase the degree to which careers open to
talents and FEO are fulfilled. There is real progress. The twist is
that one might speculate that via assortative mating, over time those
with more native talent than others are more successful and have
children who have more native talent than others and in turn are more
successful. In the long run, native talent endowment and family of
origin social class position run together for all members of
society. Even now, “The winners in the new economy are marrying
each other and consolidating their gains”, a sociologist
describing U.S. marriage trends comments (Cherlin 2010: 179; see also
Esping-Anderson 2009: 59–70).
Of course the couples described in this statement are consolidating
their gains not simply by passing on their genes to their offspring
but also by investing resources in their children to give them a
special boost over others in the social competitions they will face as
adults. So the trend involves behavior that if unopposed produces
continuous large violations of FEO. But notice that in theory a
sorting of people with more favorable genetic endowment into higher
income classes could yield a situation in which the favorably endowed
rich lavish resources on their children to enhance their competitive
skills, so rich kids get far better education and socialization than
poor kids, yet those with the same native talent potential and the
same ambition still end up with the same chances of competitive
success, so FEO is satisfied. In theory a perfect meritocracy
(satisfying both careers open and non-inclusive FEO) can be a rigidly
stratified class hierarchy with no movement of individuals from the
social class of their birth.
Even if the scenario just described in empirically far-fetched, its
conceptual possibility raises questions about equal opportunity
norms. Should we view the envisaged triumph of meritocracy with
equanimity or moral alarm? One response is that this line of thought
just reinforces the point that these two equal opportunity norms do
not add up to a full theory of social justice. Maybe satisfaction of
equal opportunity norms is necessary but not sufficient for social
justice. Another response is that reflection on the idea of a
meritocracy drives home the point that the various norms of equal
opportunity can in practice come into conflict with each other and
with other social justice ideals. To some extent our wholehearted
embrace of equal opportunity may be supported by a tendency to imagine
that increasing fulfillment of equal opportunity goes hand in hand
with increasing fulfillment of several social justice desiderata. A
halo effect influences our judgment. A recognition of this bias in
judgment prompts the question, how much if at all we ought to care
about equal opportunity norms for their own sakes, when their greater
fulfillment comes at the cost of lesser fulfillment of other
values.
The relationships among the various values and norms jostling for
position here are complex. Notice that if our foremost concern were to
establish and sustain a society in which careers open to talents along
with the substantive equality component of FEO is satisfied and there
is also a high level of social mobility, one strategy would be to ban
assortative mating or enact policies that discourage
it. “Assortative mating” simply refers to people choosing
to cohabit with those who are like themselves along some favored
dimensions of similarity. These dimensions might include race,
religion, national origin, level of education, inherited wealth,
physical attractiveness, charm, or marketable talent. The assortative
mating that reduces social mobility involves sorting by factors that
give rise to unequal income, wealth, and status.  Although many might
dislike the outcomes of such assortative mating, few would countenance
restrictions on individual liberty to date and marry in whatever way
people happen to come together by mutual consent. However, social
policies could alter people's incentives without directly restricting
their liberty to date and mate as they choose. For example, highly
progressive taxation rates on income and wealth would reduce the
financial gains that two well-off persons could achieve by getting
married.
The question also arises whether we should care about maintaining a
high level of social mobility for its own sake, as opposed to caring
about other features of society with which social mobility might be
contingently associated and causally linked. For example, it might be
the case that establishing and sustaining a society of democratic
equality in which all members share a fundamental equal status and
relate as equals might be incompatible with a skewed distribution of
income and wealth beyond some threshold level and with lack of social
mobility below some threshold level. If so, then if we have good
reason to care about democratic equality either for its own sake or
instrumentally we also have good reasons to care about increasing
social mobility as its prerequisite. 
There is a dimension of equality of opportunity not yet mentioned.
Imagine a warrior society in which only martial prowess and
accomplishment confer status and reward. The society might perfectly
conform both to formal and substantive equality of opportunity. Any
adult member of society is encouraged to apply for any warrior post
that becomes open and all applications are assessed fairly on their
merits. The most qualified candidate is offered the post and, if she
turns down the offer, the second-most-qualified receives an offer, and
so on. Moreover, educational arrangements bring it about that any two
persons in the society with the same ambition and native abilities
will have the same prospects of success in competition for warrior
posts.  Despite fulfilling formal and substantive equality of
opportunity, the society just sketched is deficient from the standard
of equality of opportunity. To see this, consider that no talents and
accomplishments except those of warriors are encouraged, developed,
and rewarded. Those who have the ability to be artists, farmers,
singers, story-tellers, rock musicians, or anything else, are just out
of luck. These people have a complaint that their abilities have no
scope for expression.
The example suggests that equality of opportunity prevails in a
society only when all worthy human capacities are encouraged,
developed, and rewarded. The wider the range of worthy capacities and
abilities that a society fosters, other things being equal, the
greater the extent to which it achieves equality of opportunity. The
more this condition is met in a society, the wider the scope it
provides for equality of opportunity (see Schaar 1967 and Galston
1986).  Feminists have raised this concern with emphasis on its
application to the condition of women. A society could satisfy even
stringent equal opportunity norms even though dominant males control
resources and set the goals of institutions so that opportunities to
develop capacities that men tend to favor are plentiful and
opportunities to develop capacities that suit women are scarce.
The wide-scope condition on an equality of opportunity ideal admits
of stronger and weaker versions. On the strong version, all worthy
human capacities must be equally encouraged, developed, and rewarded.
On the weakest version, each of these worthy human capacities must be
encouraged, developed, and rewarded to some extent. One could concoct
requirements of intermediate strength. The strong version seems
demanding to a bizarre extreme, and illustrates the point that an
equality of opportunity ideal only seems uncontroversial when left
vague and unspecified. An alternative view of scope requirements would
hold that certain social processes that restrict the scope of
opportunity are unacceptable, but no particular extent of scope is
mandatory for a society.
The equality of opportunity ideals canvassed to this point have
been designed mainly for application to the economic sphere of life
broadly construed. When opportunities are equal, people have equal
opportunities to get ahead. However, it is not obviously the case that
when people advance equal opportunity claims, the background ideal to
which they are appealing is limited to any one sphere of social
life. Historic struggles have been waged to secure equal voting rights
and equal rights to participate in the political process for
disenfranchised groups including women, those disfavored on racial
grounds, and members of lower-ranked castes. The vote can be used to
advance one's economic interests but its significance is not limited
to that. Having the freedom to participate in political affairs on the
same terms as other members of society is an element in being a full
member of society equal in fundamental status to all others.
At least two possible generalizations of equal opportunity norms
are worth consideration. One generalization is to all public sphere
interactions. Another is to all interactions across the board, private
as well as public.
Public sphere formal equality of opportunity obtains in a society
if and only if all public sphere institutions and practices and
associations are open to all members of society, with selection for
especially favorable treatment or appointment to any position in any
sphere being made on a meritocratic basis. Anyone is eligible to apply
for favorable treatment or special appointment, applications are
judged on their merits, according to relevant criteria of merit for
that particular institution, practice, or association, and selection
proceeds in order of merit. Public sphere substantive equality of
opportunity obtains if and only if formal public sphere equal
opportunity obtains and in addition all members of society have some
substantial opportunity to develop traits that would render them
qualified for any public sphere positions they might seek. Public
sphere fair equality of opportunity (FEO) obtains if and only if any
two individuals with the same native talent potential for becoming
qualified for any type of public sphere position and the same ambition
to become qualified have identical prospects of success in the
competition for such positions.
What these wide equal opportunity norms require depends on how one
should draw the line between public and private spheres.  Institutions
established and run by the state are in the public sphere, as are
business firms that seek to sell products and services to individuals
or to other businesses. A club devoted to playing a sport or promoting
a hobby is in the public sphere, as is a league of such
clubs. Friendships are in the private sphere. Dating and mating are in
the private sphere. Many aspects of family relations involving
socializing among family members are in the private sphere. Several
friends cooperating together on a project or activity are engaged in
private sphere association, but establishing a club or association to
promote a general purpose is engaging in the public sphere. The line
between public and private for purposes of applying the public sphere
equal opportunity norms will no doubt be blurry and indefinite, but
that does not per se drain the norms of content or
significance.
When wide formal equality of opportunity is satisfied in a society,
people receive equal treatment in the judicial system, in the sense
that one's likelihood of success in legal proceedings depends only on
the merits of one's case and not at all on other factors such as one's
race, creed, color, sex or sexual orientation, and so on. In criminal
proceedings, juries are not more likely to convict or acquit a
defendant just because she is white or black or brown, Catholic or
Hindu or atheist, male or female, heterosexual or nonheterosexual, and
so on. Nor are judges more or less likely to treat one as one ought to
be treated according to one's legal rights, depending on one's
particular group memberships.
Consider the practice of racial profiling in police work (Risse and
Zeckhauser 2004). Suppose that police stop and frisk individuals who
appear, by a variety of indicators, to be engaged in criminal
activity, and that among the indicators is the apparent race or
ethnicity of the individual. Does such a practice violate wide formal
equality of opportunity? The policy might just reflect racial and
ethnic prejudice and animus on the part of those who control police
practices, but might instead reflect statistical discrimination, if
individuals vary by apparent race or ethnicity in their proclivity to
criminal activity. In the latter case, racial profiling might not
violate wide formal equality of opportunity. If people engaged in
crime are more likely to target as victims members of their own social
groups, then failure to engage in racial profiling might bring it
about that being of one or another race or ethnicity makes it more
likely that one will be a victim of crime, and that fact might violate
wide fair equality of opportunity. 
When wide formal equality of opportunity is satisfied in a society,
people receive equal treatment at the hands of state administrative
agencies and also in noncompetitive receipt of services from business
firms and nonprofit agencies. If you are in medical need, and have
purchased the same medical insurance coverage, you do not receive
better or worse care depending on how treatment providers are disposed
to respond to your salient group memberships. Same goes if you are a
customer in a restaurant, a client of a professional golf trainer, an
applicant for a driver's license or for social security benefits to
which one might be entitled, and so on. 
A still wider interpretation of equal opportunity norms extends the
domain of equal opportunity to all domains both public and
private. Call this universal equal opportunity.  Formal
universal equal opportunity obtains in a society if and only if in any
and all interactions among members of society, partners and
participants for interaction are selected according to relevant
criteria, depending on the nature of the interaction proposed.
Substantive universal equal opportunity requires that all members of
society have substantial opportunity to develop traits that would
render them eligible for any type of interaction they might seek, and
universal fair equality of opportunity (FEO) is defined in a similar
way.
Universal equality of opportunity has some appeal (see
Lippert-Rasmussen 2014). Consider selection of friends and romantic
mates and marriage partners. In present-day society, barriers of
culture, social status, race, and class stand in the way of personal
relationships that might otherwise form. If I am white and Christian,
and feel an inchoate aversion to blacks and Jews, I do not form
friendships with members of these groups, or such friendships with
them as I do strive to build are fraught and unstable. In the society
of universal formal equality of opportunity, no one is moved by any
such bias of discriminatory animus or prejudice; we all are
color-blind and race-blind and ethnicity-blind and social status-blind
and creed-blind in selecting participants in temporary and long-term
schemes of interaction. If this universal freedom from prejudice and
distrust is common knowledge among members of society, or close to
that, one might plausibly conjecture that this common knowledge
becomes a basis of social solidarity and general civility.
Objection: partners for friendship and romance are not selected
according to “relevant criteria for interaction”, or at
least, are not only selected by any selective process. One can simply
become attracted to another person or group of persons from any
arbitrary cause, and establishing interaction in this arbitrary way is
not just appropriate for many kinds of informal interaction but is
quintessentially appropriate.
Reply to objection: For informal interaction, the relevant criteria
for selection may include brute attraction on any basis. For some
forms of interaction, the only relevant criterion is brute attraction
on any basis. For such basically merit-free interactions, universal
formal equality of opportunity still plays a regulatory role. The role
consists of ruling out as inappropriate brute attraction on
discriminatory grounds. The way you wear your hat, the way you sing
off-key, and virtually anything else may render you eligible for
someone's affection, but not your skin color, your race, your ethnic
background, your social or economic status, and so on. Notice that
statistical discrimination is not per se objectionable from
the standpoint of formal equality of opportunity, and this holds for
the wider extensions of equal opportunity as well. So selecting a
friend in part on the basis of accurate stereotypes (not prejudices)
about the traits of members of her salient social group, that may be
predictive of likely successful and fruitful friendship, does not
per se violate formal universal equality of
opportunity. However, if someone's group membership traits are
predictive of successful friendship with me because I have a brute or
prejudiced aversion to members of certain salient social groups,
hooking together for interaction on that basis offends against that
wide equal opportunity norm. To sum up: Formal universal equality of
opportunity is not inherently inappropriate for the assessment of
people's engagement in personal and private and intimate
interaction. Moreover, the norm would have substantive content in this
application, and restrain the types of interaction formation in which
people engage. The ideal is essentially the ideal of a social world in
which people lack irrational prejudice and animus against members of
other groups, and this ideal is just as attractive in private as in
public settings. Just as it would be morally wrong for me to decline
to write a letter of recommendation for someone for a job because I
harbor hostility to his racial makeup, it would be morally wrong for
me to decline an offer of friendship from the same person just from
aversion to his racial makeup.
State enforcement of universal formal equality of opportunity in
its private sphere applications would almost certainly do more harm
than good. However, the fact that we do not want the police arresting
people who choose friends on some allegedly prejudiced basis does not
rule out enforcement of this universal social norm. Enforcement of
social norms including this one might be carried out effectively by
enlightened public opinion expressing itself in attitudes and private
sphere choices. One might hold that for a genuine social norm to be in
place in a society, there must be some enforcement mechanism in
place. The norm states what in some sense you ought to do, and what
you will be in some sense punished for not doing.
Although informal enforcement of wide equal opportunity norms is
possible, one might question the desirability of the ideals and the
acceptability of their enforcement. Maybe any feasible social norm of
this sort would exercise too much regulatory control over matters that
are best left to wide unencumbered individual freedom, and dampen too
much that is merely idiosyncratic, eccentric, or just nondeliberative
and spontaneous. 
Equality of opportunity in its various guises would appear to be
apt for legal enforcement. Equal opportunity is proclaimed to be an
essential plank in the edifice of social justice, and justice demands
are obligatory not optional. The moral presumption is that justice
demands should be enforced, and in the absence of anarchy, the state
has the role of coercive enforcement of justice.
In practice, in modern societies, the modes of legal enforcement
are various, and pursued with varying degrees of commitment.  For
example, vigorous enforcement of prohibitions of violent assault
across a territory would contribute to the equal opportunity of women
along with men to move freely and with safety across the
territory. Here wide formal opportunity of opportunity is at
stake.
We might move in the direction of fair equality of opportunity by
maintaining public schools financed by general tax revenue.  Further
moves are possible. A state might require that local governments
equalize spending per pupil across school districts of varying
wealth. A state might mandate extra spending per pupil in low-income
school districts, with a view to offsetting extra resources provided
to children with affluent and well-educated parents. A state might
mandate mixing students from different neighborhoods in comprehensive
schools so that children from low-income and high-income families are
evenly spread across area schools. A state might ban privately
financed schools at the primary and secondary level in order to
prevent high-income parents from avoiding measures to promote equal
opportunity in public schools. And so on. In the contemporary U.S.,
even the first-mentioned of these FEO-promoting measures is
controversial.
As with almost any legal rule, the hope is that enforcing equal
opportunity norms will not simply coerce people's behavior but will
contribute to changing the hearts and minds of men and women so that
the norms become internalized. Liberals propose free debate, along
with justified coercion of behavior, as the engine propelling this
change. Limits on freedom of expression might be proposed to the same
purpose. Catharine MacKinnon observes that 
 it is
impossible for an individual to receive equality of opportunity when
surrounded by an atmosphere of group hate. (MacKinnon 1993)
 In this spirit, section 319(2) of the Canadian
Criminal Code states that 
 Every one who, by
communicating statements, other than in private conversation,
willfully promotes hatred against any identifiable group
 is guilty of a criminal offense, except that
there are exceptions for any statements that are true, good faith
religious argument, good faith contributions to public debate on
matters of public interest, and statements that call attention to
hate-promoting conditions with a view to their removal.  Some other
nations have similar provisions against hate speech.
In the same vein, some feminists have argued that some of what used
to be regarded as obscene materials should be reclassified as
pornography that constitutes a violation of the civil rights of women
and counts as discrimination against them. The antifemale pornography
that these arguments target is sexually explicit material that
portrays women as inferior or as apt for subordination or other forms
of mistreatment. Some suggest that the publication and dissemination
of this material impinges on the freedom of speech of women by
creating a social atmosphere in which their would-be contributions are
not taken seriously and not treated on their merits in public debate
and in some cases cannot be understood (so some members of the public
are effectively unable to make certain assertions) (Mackinnon 1987,
1993; Langton 1993). The issues raised here can serve as illustration
of the ways in which pressing an equal opportunity agenda might not
only unsettle traditional views about how to balance conflicting
political values but might also transform our understanding of exactly
what values are in play in such a balancing exercise.
In modern societies, legal prohibitions and restrictions of
discrimination clearly aim in some sense at establishing and
sustaining equal opportunity. In what sense? Legal doctrines of
discrimination are complex and differ from country to country. In many
jurisdictions the law distinguishes between disparate treatment and
disparate impact.
For example, U.S. employment law forbids disparate treatment of
protected groups in an employer's decisions about hiring, promotion,
and conditions and benefits of work. Disparate treatment includes
denying an applicant a position for which she is otherwise qualified
on the basis of her race. The law also regulates disparate impact, as
follows. If an employer uses a hiring procedure that has a disparate
impact on members of protected groups, defined by race, color,
religion, sex, and national origin, that fact establishes a prima
facie case. Disparate impact occurs if the proportion of
protected-category applicants who are hired is smaller than their
proportion in the relevant labor pool. If the employer is sued, and a
prima facie case is established, she can rebut the prima
facie case by showing that the hiring procedure in question is
job-related and justified by business necessity, unless the government
agency or individuals bringing suit can propose an alternative hiring
test that is just as good for the purpose and would not have disparate
impact. The comparable Canadian law requires that an employer make
“reasonable accommodation, short of undue hardship” to
avoid disparate impact roughly as just described.
The disparate treatment of U.S. employment law forbids statistical
discrimination against members of protected groups. For example, an
employer might consider being prone to absenteeism a decisive
disqualification for a particular job, and have sound statistical
evidence that women (who might have caretaking responsibilities that
prevent them from coming to work) and blacks (who must rely on
unreliable public transportation to arrive at the work site) are more
likely than white and Hispanic males to display absenteeism, and
restrict hiring to white and Hispanic males on this basis. The law
requires that an employer's decision to hire should be based on
particular evidence about individual candidates not statistical
generalizations.
Some have raised doubts about the justifiability of disparate
impact restrictions on employers. The claim is that disparate
treatment involves wrongful discrimination, an appropriate target of
legal prohibition. In contrast, disparate impact restriction targets a
supposed bad effect that arises from the aggregate of many innocent
acts by business firms making employment decisions. If the point of
the law is to bring about a more just distribution of opportunities,
this should be done by public policy instruments that spread the
burden of advancing this desirable social goal across all members of
society in some fair manner. There is no basis for singling out the
group of employers whose practices happen to result in disparate
impact and requiring them to shoulder the load for all of us. 
Some go further and raise doubts about whether disparate impact
legal restrictions can be justified as seeking to promote (what should
be regarded as) a just distribution of opportunities. Further doubts
concern whether these laws, even if aimed at a genuine justice goal,
are an effective means to any such goal.
However, the contrast between laws that aim to advance a public
policy aim and laws that aim to prohibit or restrict wrongful conduct
may be ill drawn. Suppose that disparate impact laws amount to a mild
form of affirmative action. The law requires that if an employer can
choose among several alternative employment practices, all roughly
equally effective in advancing her business aims, she must choose the
one that does the most to advance the hiring and promotion of members
of protected and under-represented groups. If the affirmative action
goals the law promotes are worthwhile, and disparate impact is a
reasonably effective means of advancing them, then the individual
arguably does wrong by not cooperating in this social justice
initiative by conforming to law. The wrong does not consist in conduct
that can be characterized as immoral apart from the existence of the
law, but is simply wrongful violation of a justified law. (An
alternative view would be that if there was a widespread voluntary
practice of accepting certain restrictions on conduct to advance a
social justice goal, an individual who deviates from the practice
without good reason would be unfairly failing to contribute her bit to
this justice-promoting practice and hence behaving wrongly.) This
train of thought assumes that the scheme to advance the social justice
goal does not unfairly disadvantage an affected class of people, but
this constraint does not necessarily demand equal sharing of burdens
among all members of society.  Sometimes the fact that one is uniquely
well placed to advance a worthy goal at small expense to oneself
warrants requiring one to absorb the costs of taking the necessary
steps.
Affirmative action, as already noted in this entry, might serve
several distinct equal opportunity goals. Affirmative action including
disparate impact restrictions might simply be a cost-effective means
to squash disparate treatment that would otherwise escape legal
constraints. In a situation where disparate treatment exists but would
be hard to prove, disparate impact may be easier to prove. If so,
disparate impact laws would be aimed at increasing the degree to which
the ideal of careers open to talents is fulfilled.
Affirmative action might in some circumstances involve imposing
temporary violations of careers open to talents in order to increase
the long-term fulfillment of this ideal. Affirmative action might
serve as a form of redress for past wrongs, compensating victims of
wrongful discrimination in the past for their losses. Affirmative
action might be a means to advance fair equality of opportunity (FEO)
or some other substantive ideal of equality of opportunity.
Any or all of these proposed rationales might be challenged either
on the ground that the rationale itself is normatively objectionable
or that the means used to advance it are unfair or unduly restrictive
of liberty or the like. 
The conceptions of equality of opportunity canvassed so far are
intended to be components of a theory of justice, but not all of it or
even the central core of it. The general idea is that on some
unspecified basis, a social hierarchy with superior and inferior
positions is justified. The question then arises, on what basis should
individuals gain access to superior positions (and be relegated to
inferior positions)? Equality of opportunity is proposed as an answer
or partial answer to that question. Equality of opportunity for access
to superior positions might also be advanced as a condition that must
be satisfied (among others) if the social hierarchy itself is to be
morally acceptable.
Equality of opportunity of a sort has also been proposed as an
answer to a quite different question. In this role equality of
opportunity is conceived to be playing the central core role in a
theory of distributive justice. The central question of distributive
justice might be formulated in this way: Under what conditions is the
distribution of liberties, opportunities, and goods that society makes
available to persons just or morally fair? The equality-of-opportunity
distributive justice theorist answers that the distribution is just
only if it satisfies the norm of equality of opportunity, which
requires that unchosen and uncourted inequalities should be eliminated
and allows that when some individuals are worse off than others but
could have avoided this condition by taking care or by making choices
that would have been reasonable to make, given equal initial
conditions and a fair framework for interaction, these inequalities
may be left standing. (This condition might be claimed to be
sufficient for just distribution as well as necessary.) This
conception of equal opportunity proposed as the central element of
distributive justice has been called the level playing field
ideal (Roemer 1995, 1998), and is also known as luck
egalitarianism (Cohen 1989, 2004, 2009; Mason 2006; Segall 2013;
for criticism, see Anderson 1999, 2010; Pogge 2000; Buchanan et
al. 2000; Scheffler 2003, 2005; and Fleurbaey 1995, 2008; for a
response, see Tan 2008, 2012). The term “luck
egalitarianism” was introduced by Elizabeth Anderson. The idea
is that justice requires levelling the playing field by rendering
everyone's opportunities equal in an appropriate sense, and then
letting individual choices and their effects dictate further
outcomes.
If equality of opportunity is a constraint on acceptable social
hierarchy, luck egalitarian equality of opportunity presses the
constraint so far as to subvert the idea of acceptable social
hierarchy. When luck egalitarianism is fully satisfied, the only
inequalities that are acceptable are such that those who get the short
end of the stick could have become as well off as anyone else by
pursuing a course of action it would have been reasonable for them to
take and not impossible for them to take and not so difficult to
pursue that it would be unreasonable to hold them responsible for not
pursuing it. Hence one advocate characterizes luck egalitarianism as
“socialist equality of opportunity” (Cohen 2009).
Another way to mark the difference between formal and substantive
equality of opportunity on the one hand and level-the-playing-field
(luck egalitarian) equality of opportunity on the other is to note
that the former sets conditions on people fairly gaining advantageous
positions in society but says nothing about the amount and kind of
advantages that should attach to these positions. In contrast, the
latter view when fully elaborated will specify both when and to what
extent it is morally acceptable that some people are better off, enjoy
greater advantages, than others. 
A complication is that one might conceivably formulate a version of
luck egalitarianism so that it says that all those who try equally
hard or are otherwise equally meritorious or virtuous—regardless
of their native talent or talent potential—should have the same
prospects of gaining especially advantageous or better than average
outcomes, while leaving it entirely open what should be the spread
between the best and worse outcomes available in the society.  This
version of luck egalitarianism would be a more demanding version of
substantive equality of opportunity than FEO. In contrast, luck egalitarianism as
characterized here specifies that people's condition should be equal
unless those who get the short end of the stick are appropriately held
responsible for their condition. In addition to taking equality to be
the moral default position, a fully elaborated luck egalitarian
doctrine would specify the factors that determine, when inequality is
warranted, what degree of inequality is warranted. For example, the
view might be that when inequalities are voluntarily courted or chosen
via fair interaction, whatever spread between worse off and better off
develops is acceptable. A different elaboration would hold that when
people are unequally well off, each person's level of advantages
enjoyed ought to be in proportion to her degree of deservingness as
fixed by some standard of desert.
Luck egalitarian equal opportunity theorists start by
distinguishing unchosen circumstances and individual choices. The
former are matters imposed on an individual in ways that she could not
have influenced or controlled; these matters are just given. It makes
no sense to hold the individual responsible for anything that falls in
the category of circumstances. Prominent circumstances include the
socialization and early environment provided by one's parents or other
guardians, one's genetic makeup, and the features of the world in
which one finds oneself prior to any opportunity for responsible
choice. People face very unequal circumstances, but this inequality,
due to unchosen good or bad luck, should be eliminated: People's
initial circumstances should be made equal. But once individuals make
choices to lead their lives in one or another way starting from
initial equality, justice does not demand further compensation if
risks taken happen to turn out badly and in fact justice demands that
further compensation should not occur. At least this is so if people
are making choices under conditions of interaction that are fair and
no sheer good or bad luck beyond anyone's power to foresee or control
intervenes. “Fair conditions for interaction” may be taken
to be an environment in which individuals are free to make deals on
mutually agreeable terms and contracts are enforced, individuals are
prohibited from deliberately harming each other by physical assault,
extortion, coercion, fraud, theft of property and the like. Also,
individuals are either prevented from imposing the costs of their
activities on others who do not consent to be so involved or they are
required to pay appropriate compensation for harm done that is
tortious in this way.  Fair conditions of interaction also include an
initial equality of circumstances. Different luck egalitarian equality
of opportunity theorists propose different conceptions of how to draw
the line between circumstances to be equalized and choices for which
individuals themselves are properly held responsible. They also
propose different conceptions of how to assess circumstances for
purposes of distributive justice and how to measure them so that one
can determine when one individual's circumstances overall are equal or
unequal to another's.
The most prominent and explicit luck egalitarian conception of
distributive justice is that advanced by Ronald Dworkin in two essays
published in 1981 (reprinted along with other essays in Dworkin 2000;
see also Arneson 1989; Cohen 1989; Nagel 1991; Temkin 1993; and Sen
1992). Dworkin distinguishes brute luck that simple befalls an
individual and option luck, which is 
 a matter of
how deliberate and calculated gambles turn out—whether someone
gains or loses through accepting an isolated risk he or she should
have anticipated and might have declined. (Dworkin 2000: 73)
 According to Dworkin, egalitarian justice
requires correcting for brute luck inequalities but letting stand
inequalities arising from option luck. But Dworkin's views in this
connection are intricate; he has himself repudiated the label
“luck egalitarian” as suggesting an inaccurate
interpretation of his social justice views. 
For further discussion of these conceptions of distributive
justice, see the entries on affirmative action, egalitarianism,
equality, and distributive justice in this Encyclopedia.
Two lines of thought converge to support a conception of
distributive justice that may be regarded as luck egalitarian.  One
responds to conservative and libertarian critics of social justice
doctrines that demand that everyone's condition be equal in some
way. Another suggests that the ethical view underlying formal equality
or careers open to talents drives one to accept a presumption in favor
of equality of condition provided that those holding the short end of
the stick have not made themselves responsible for this condition by
their own conduct.
A familiar conservative objection to the idea that justice demands
the maintenance of equality of condition across persons is that
starting from an equal position (or for that matter from any
distribution of advantages and disadvantages taken to be just),
individuals left free to choose will use their resources and
opportunities in different ways, so that initial equality among free
persons inevitably gives way to inequalities across persons.  Given
equal money holdings, some will save and some will consume and some
will invest and produce, and soon people end up with very unequal
money holdings. To sustain equality of condition one would have to do
one of two things: either restrict people's liberty by forbidding them
to pursue their individual projects and plans in ways that lead to
inequality, or continually redistribute resources from those with more
to those with less, roughly from those who save and work (ants, in the
fable) to those who consume and play (grasshoppers, in the same
fable). Either of these policies would be morally unacceptable. So
pursuing sustained social equality is a fool's errand.
The luck egalitarian responds that we should distinguish between
inequalities for which people can and cannot reasonably be held
responsible. If people begin life with equal opportunities, against
the background of a fair framework for economic and personal
interaction and cooperation, and then use and abuse their
opportunities in different ways, the resultant inequalities in their
condition do not call for redress. The egalitarian should uphold
equality of opportunity not equality of outcome.
A second line of thought also supports an equality of opportunity
conception of distributive justice. This line of thought is
discernible in chapter two of John Rawls's classic treatise on justice
(Rawls 1999; see also Barry 1989: chapter 6). If we accept that people
ought to enjoy formal equality of opportunity or careers open to
talents, we should be concerned that morally arbitrary good and bad
fortune can determine whether individuals have the opportunity to
develop their potential talents and become qualified for positions
that confer special advantages and favorable life prospects. If we
accept that this morally arbitrary good and bad fortune should not
determine people's prospects, we are led to accept FEO. This
substantive equal opportunity doctrine is satisfied when all those
with the same native talent and the same ambition have the same
prospects of competitive success. 
When FEO is satisfied, the luck beyond one's power to control of
being born in a favorable or an unfavorable social environment does
not play any role in determining one's life prospects. The effects of
unfavorable initial circumstances are entirely smoothed out by
equalizing policies we institute. However, from the standpoint of
preventing people's life prospects from being unduly influenced by
morally arbitrary factors entirely beyond their power to control,
there remains a residual unfairness even when FEO is completely
satisfied. In that circumstance, an individual's prospects for doing
well in public sphere interactions with others depend not just on her
own ambition and effort but also on her native talent
endowment—her genetic endowment considered as a potential for
talent development. But if anything just befalls a person and is
beyond her power to control, it is her native talent endowment. As
Rawls writes, 
 once we are troubled by the
influence of either social contingencies or natural chance on the
determination of distributive shares, we are bound, on reflection, to
be bothered by the influence of the other. (Rawls 1999:
64)
FEO demands that those with the same native talent and the same
ambition to exercise that talent toward competitive success should
have equal competitive prospects. The further assertion that the
natural lottery of talent potential is also morally arbitrary yields
the idea that those with the same ambition should have equal
prospects. This idea needs interpretation. It can hardly be a
plausible principle of justice that demands that social arrangements
should bring it about that slow runners have just the same chances of
winning foot races as fast runners with the same desire to win, or
that the medically incompetent and competent should have the same
chances of becoming medical doctors and having successful careers in
that profession, and so on. The sensible thought here is that the
benefits that economic and social cooperation yield should go in equal
amounts to equally responsible and ambitious individuals regardless of
the social contingencies and natural chance factors that enable some
to succeed more than others in competitive social life. This is
roughly the luck egalitarian or level playing field conception of
equality of opportunity, now proposed as the distributive justice
standard for assessing institutions and practices.
Dworkin's contributions clarify and sharpen the idea of luck
egalitarianism just described and move the idea in a particular
direction. Suppose we ask, what fixes whether a distribution of
benefits or opportunities across people is equal? Dworkin urges that a
distribution is equal just in case people have equal resources to
pursue whatever aims and ambitions they might have. A distribution of
material resources across persons can be regarded as equal when no one
would prefer to have any one else's bundle. A hypothetical
implementation of this idea would involve imagining people assigned
equal bidding resources and holding an auction to distribute the
material resources at hand, with the auction concluded only when no
one wishes to change her bid for any bit of the stuff being divided by
auction. 
Dworkin adds that the ideal of equality of resources should be
conceived as operating over time, so that if Smith is assigned a
certain resource bundle including arable land and works the land so
that the resource bundle increases, one does not envy Smith's
augmented bundle if one could have achieved the same augmentation with
the same work output but prefers not to sacrifice present consumption
for future profit in this way. Dworkin adds a further twist: he
affirms that personal traits such as native charm and intelligence
potential and physical strength should also be regarded as resources,
so equality of resources demands compensation for shortfalls in
personal trait endowments. He suggests that the appropriate
compensation measure would consist of hypothetical insurance markets,
in which individuals equally situated, knowing the disabilities they
might have and their incidence but not whether they themselves have
them or not, and knowing their personal traits but not what prices
their use might fetch in market trading, have the opportunity to
purchase insurance against the possibility of being afflicted with
disabilities or of having a trait endowment of low market value.
This equality of resources ideal can be compared to an alternative
equality of welfare approach that Dworkin rejects. Consider various
examples in which someone becomes worse off than others in some
respect and the question becomes whether level playing field justice
requires compensation to restore equality across people in that
respect. The measure used to assess people as better or worse off
interacts with notions of personal responsibility regarded as shaping
egalitarian requirements. Suppose one person subscribes to a religion
that requires expensive ritual displays by its adherents. In
principle, the disadvantages in welfare that the religious adherent
incurs would ground a claim for compensation from the standpoint of
welfarist egalitarian justice. If the believer has chosen his religion
in such a way that he can reasonably be deemed responsible for this
choice, equal opportunity for welfare would not require equalizing
compensation, but if the believer cannot reasonably be regarded as
responsible for his religious commitment, equal opportunity for
welfare would demand equalizing compensation. For Dworkin, one cannot
coherently demand compensation for any aspect of one's aims and
commitments and tastes and ideals that one is glad to have. One cannot
both be happy to be motivated by an aim and also regard having that
aim as an affliction for which one should get compensation. This
constraint applies to religious commitment and also to expensive
taste. I cannot both be glad that I have a discerning taste in wine or
opera performances and yet regard these expensive tastes as
afflictions for which I should get equalizing compensation (Williams
2002). In Dworkin's phrase, distribution should be ambition-insensitive but
endowment-sensitive. You are not owed more from society by way of fair
shares in virtue of the fact that your ambitions are large rather than
small, demanding rather than undemanding, but you are owed more from
society by way of fair shares in virtue of the fact that your initial
resource holdings are scant or the fact that your native talent
endowment is more meager than that of others.
An objection lurks here. Dworkin distinguishes between my
circumstances, for which I am not reasonably held responsible, and my
ambitions, for which I am reasonably held responsible, and includes
native talent endowment among circumstances. But my native talent
endowment may unfortunately leave me with poor value-forming and
ambition-forming and choice-making ability, so that shortfalls in my
condition that result from my acting on my ambitions may just express
a shortfall in my native talent endowment. So according to Dworkin I
both am and am not reasonably held responsible for my condition.
The distinction between one's ambition and the rest of one's
circumstances as deployed by Dworkin draws a certain concern for
individual freedom and responsibility into the account of distributive
justice. If we start from initial fair shares, and then you pursue
fancy vegetable farming, risky but potentially lucrative, and I put my
resources in a bank account, and you end up with a more intrinsically
rewarding and lucrative work life than I manage to get, the
differences in life outcomes at which we arrive are not inequalities
that register as unfair or as demanding equalizing compensation in
Dworkin's framework. Welfare or well-being inequalities across people
are not a concern of social justice, in that framework.
In Dworkin's later writings on distributive justice, hypothetical
insurance assumes a more prominent role than in his 1981
essays. Dworkin had written that although the hypothetical ideal
auction and insurance markets for talent and handicap cannot be
implemented, we ought to set in place institutional arrangements that
will mimic as closely as possible the results we calculate these ideal
mechanisms would deliver. Later, a somewhat different thought becomes
central. This is the idea that what we owe to one another by way of
health care policy, unemployment compensation, other welfare state
arrangements, and inheritance tax and transfer schemes is set by what
level of insurance coverage in each of these policy domains the
average member of the community would take under full knowledge of
actual and expected circumstances modified by a veil of ignorance
adjusted to be fair for each particular policy domain. To yield just
outcomes, these imaginary insurance decisions should be made against
the backdrop of a fair framework for interaction including a free
market economy based on private ownership of resources with
appropriate contract law and tort law and regulation of
externalities. To appreciate the flavor of these proposals, notice
that the level of health care coverage the average member of the
community would purchase under the hypothetical conditions would vary
depending on what afflictions one might suffer, what medical care can
do to prevent or alleviate such conditions with expected available
medical technology, and what else one might do, and with what personal
benefit, with the money one is imagining having available to spend on
one's health insurance. The hunch that lies behind Dworkin's idea of
justice as fair insurance is that the various factors that would
affect the hypothetical insurance choices people would make are
factors relevant to the determination of what we owe one another by
way of fair shares and that the hypothetical insurance construction
accurately registers the determining weight they should have.
Whatever the merits of Dworkin's ideal of distributive justice as
fair insurance, it looks to be rejecting the idea of justice as luck
egalitarianism. Whereas the luck egalitarian holds that chosen and
courted inequalities do not qualify for compensation to restore
initial equality, Dworkin's hypothetical insurance schemes would allow
compensation for health woes triggered by voluntary behavior and
unemployment compensation for the person who loses her job through her
faulty conduct (but for a contrary interpretation, see Ripstein 2007:
100). Whether compensation ought to be carried out depends on what the
average member of the community would purchase under the imaginary
conditions deemed to be fair. Moreover, whether compensation is owed
to a particular individual does not depend on the particular values,
desires, risk preferences, aims and ambitions, and so on of the
particular individual, rather on what the average member of the
community would choose. The key divide for distributive justice is no
longer, in Dworkin's mature view, the divide between what lies within
the individual's power to control and what does not. Depending on how
one evaluates Dworkin's later views, one might regard the divergence
between later Dworkin and luck egalitarian or level-playing-field
equality of opportunity as either a criticism of the former or of the
latter (for criticisms of Dworkin's views from opposed perspectives,
see Anderson 1999; Scheffler 2003; Cohen 2004; and Fleurbaey 2008:
chapters 6–10).
The Dworkinian ideal of justice as fair insurance both incorporates
a particular notion of personal responsibility into distributive
justice and displaces the identification of justice and equal
opportunity. Provided society brings it about that you get the fair
insurance payout, and maintains a fair framework of interaction, how
you fare is your responsibility in the sense that others are under no
obligation to eliminate shortfalls in advantage that might come about
as the result of your own choices. The initial opportunities for
individuals that justice guarantees need not be equal across
individuals, because what anyone is owed is set by the insurance
decisions the average member of the community would make.  Bringing
about equal resources broadly understood among able and disabled
individuals would be incredibly costly, so choosing insurance in
ignorance of one's actual disability status, one would not choose a
coverage that would yield initial equality across able and disabled,
Dworkin supposes.
Justice as fair insurance supposes that an ex ante
perspective determines what we owe one another; fair shares are set by
simulated choices made in ignorance of what disabilities any one
actually has and in ignorance of what payoffs one's risky choices will
bring about. Some reject this ex ante perspective. If money
will be of more use to people in the event that they are able than it
will be in the event that they are disabled, people in the
hypothetical insurance market might tend to choose insurance that pays
out if they turn out to be able and requires them to pay in if they
turn out to be disabled—but then distributive justice would
require transfers from worse off people to better off people on the
basis not of any actual choices they make but on the basis of their
presumed hypothetical choices—some find this a perverse result
(on Dworkin and insurance, see Roemer 2002 and Fleurbaey 2008).
If we assume that the parties involved in hypothetical insurance
choice know that in the aftermath of their choice they will live in a
market economy with private ownership and that the insurance against
misfortune they are selecting will be implemented by general taxation
of income and wealth and some form of redistribution, they will regard
themselves as in effect gambling on their prospects. If they turn out
to be winners in the market economy they will do better with a low tax
rate for redistributive purposes, and if they are losers in the market
economy they will do better with a higher tax rate and more
redistribution. It is not clear why their preferences over this risk
should fix what count as fair shares in the theory of distributive
justice. Stipulating with Dworkin that the preferences of the average
member of the community should be the determining preferences in this
exercise does not clarify the issue.
Let us set aside Dworkin's intricate revisionism and return to the
basic luck egalitarian project. To reiterate, the basic idea is that
justice establishes a moral presumption in favor of equality in the
advantages people have (in different versions of the view the idea of
“advantage” is variously interpreted). The presumption is
overturned when people have the opportunity to be as well off as
others but make choices or behave in ways that (a) render them worse
off than others and (b) make it the case that compensating them or
ameliorating their condition to restore equality of condition between
them and others is morally inappropriate or at least not a high
priority moral desideratum. The b condition admits of two broadly
different construals. One is that when an individual behaves in a way
that renders him worse off than others, if some reasonable choice he
might have made or reasonable behavior he might have performed would
have lessened the probability that he would end up worse off, then
there is less egalitarian reason to eliminate this shortfall in his
advantage level. Another is that when an individual's faulty or
undeserving choice or behavior renders him worse off than others,
there is no, or less, egalitarian reason to eliminate this shortfall
in his advantage level. The difference between these construals
becomes evident if we imagine a person performing an heroic rescue,
when she might reasonably and without blame have held back from
rescue, and suffers misfortune as a result (Eyal 2007 and Temkin
2011).
The basic idea might be stated in the language of personal
responsibility. If some are worse off than others, under what
conditions are those who are worse off appropriately held responsible
for their unequal condition in the sense that no one has any moral
obligation (or responsibility) to make good their shortfall? The luck
egalitarian answer is that if your coming to be in a bad state
compared to others lay within your power to control, you bear
responsibility for your being in that state. The condition you are in
is properly attributable to you. We then need an account of what
renders individuals responsible in these ways. If hard determinism is
true, no one is ever responsible in the requisite way, and the luck
egalitarian equality of opportunity conception of distributive justice
dictates equality of condition across persons. On other conceptions,
people can be responsible for their varying fortunes, when the right
background is in place, and when this is so, equal opportunity can
coexist with inequality of outcome.
 
In other words, we should level the playing field on which
competition for superior positions in the social hierarchy will
eventually take place. The playing field is leveled when unchosen
circumstances of individuals are equalized, so that individuals can
reasonably be held responsible for their choices that determine their
eventual places in the social hierarchy. One might picture
level-playing-field (LPF) equality of opportunity as operating in the
sphere of education and socialization and health care to prepare young
people for adult status when responsible agency in a field of social
competitions will be expressed. Opportunities are equalized when
unchosen circumstances including native talents are counterbalanced so
that nothing but the quality of people's choices (to the degree they
can reasonably be held responsible for them) and their foreseeable
effects determines their fate in social competitions. The effects of
unchosen luck are to be eliminated.
Consider educational policy from the standpoint of the LPF
conception of equal opportunity. The aim of educational policy in this
perspective would be to bring it about that individuals have equal
opportunity for labor market and entrepreneurial success. If some
individuals enter school with greater potential for market success due
to favorable genetic makeup and early childhood socialization, then
extra educational resources should be expended on the unlucky so that
so far as is possible, when all individuals leave school, all who
exhibit equal ambition and perseverance in working toward chosen goals
will have the same prospects of lifetime economic success. Or perhaps
we had better say that educational resources are deployed so that
anyone who works as hard as can reasonably be expected in school will
leave school with the benchmark equal prospect of market success.
One could consider health care policy from the same
perspective. The object of the LPF equal opportunity advocate would be
to design a health care policy that compensates individuals for bad
luck in unchosen health care circumstances, offsetting adverse
unchosen health conditions so that lifetime health prospects for all
who behave equally responsibly are the same. (Segall 2009).
One difficulty this approach faces is to clarify the basis for
holding people responsible for their choices and the extent to which
people will be held responsible for the effects of their choices that
fall on themselves. John Roemer has developed a framework for
addressing this difficulty. His idea is one that societies with
different notions of how much responsibility for choice to assign to
individuals could use to determine what equal opportunity would
require given their favored notion of individual responsibility
(Roemer 2002 and 2003; for criticism, see Risse 2002 and Hurley
2003).
Roemer proposes that the population be divided into types on the
basis of characteristics for which society deems individuals not
reasonably to be held responsible. One then examines the distribution
of a good such as education or health care or labor market
success. For each such good, there is assumed to be a single measure
of effort for which individuals are to be held responsible. This might
be years of persevering in school, for example. If there are many
individuals in each type, one takes the effort distribution for the
type as a feature of the type and hence something for which the
individual should not be held responsible. What the individual is
deemed accountable for is the amount of effort she puts forth by
comparison with the effort put forth by others of her type. The
Roemerian equality of opportunity norm regards those who are at the
same centile of effort for their type to have exercised a comparable
degree of responsibility. Ideally society should equalize outcomes for
each centile of every type, but in general this will not be possible,
so one seeks a logically possible approximation to this ideal and
identifies this as equality of opportunity. Roemer offers his account
as an ecumenical proposal that a society could employ whatever its own
collective opinion as to what characteristics of individuals should be
deemed to be effectively beyond their power to control and hence to
identify relevant types for purposes of defining the requirements of
equality of opportunity.
Since Roemer does not offer a full theory of justice within which
his LPF version of equality of opportunity would be included, one
cannot say what sort of social hierarchy he envisions, fair access to
which is to be regulated by this level playing field conception of
equality of opportunity. (He might be espousing a radical version of
substantive equality of opportunity or instead uphold the background
idea that equality of condition should be sustained unless
considerations of personal responsibility provide reasons to deviate
from it.) But a difficulty he himself notes raises a worry about the
attractiveness of the approach (Roemer 1998: chapter 12). If society
needs excellent basketball players, ballet dancers, bankers, medical
researchers, nuclear scientists, and so on, then society needs to
train the best individuals for those social roles, and if the social
roles are valuable, no doubt special advantages and rewards should be
attached to them. To say that “society needs” such elite
education is to speculate that with elite education all members of
society can be made better off than they would be if elite education
is foregone. But this means that many social justice principles will
imply that the LPF conception of equal opportunity should not be
pursued because giving special advantages to people on the basis of
unchosen circumstances such as their native possession of specially
valued talents works to everyone's advantage including especially the
advantage of the worse off fraction of society. However, Roemer can
reply that one can uphold LPF equal opportunity as part of justice
without insisting it is the entirety of justice. Justice might favor
equality of opportunity and also favor more and better opportunities
for people rather than fewer and worse. 
According to Immanuel Kant's doctrine of right, the existence of a
state is required to establish a condition of equal freedom for
all. In this condition each is free to use her person and property in
ways consistent with everyone else's similar freedom. In the absence
of a functioning coercive state that specifies who is entitled to what
property, no one has determinate rights; there is no clear
“mine” and “thine”. The state enforces a set
of rules binding on all that partly establishes and partly constitutes
a condition of equal freedom. People are morally obligated to
cooperate with others to create a state if no effective legal order
exists and to cooperate to sustain an existing state that rules them,
even a very defective state.
The rightful condition of freedom that a functioning state sustains
is the freedom to act for any innocent purpose one chooses with one's
body and whatever means one owns, along with the right not to be
forced to act to serve the purposes of other people or to suffer one's
property being used to serve the purposes of others.  Everyone has the
same freedom, and others acting freely may bring it about that one's
opportunity to achieve one's desires may be sharply curtailed. Other
people's legitimate exercise of their freedom does not lessen your
freedom in the relevant sense, even if their choices put you at a
disadvantage or preclude your attaining any particular level of
welfare or well-being. For example, others might purchase all the food
at the store, leaving you with no opportunity to buy any. No matter,
from the Kantian perspective. So long as you are not subject to the
will of others, forced to serve their purposes in the absence of your
voluntary agreement to do so, your equal freedom is neither reduced
nor compromised.
Equal freedom for all sets limits to your subjecting yourself to
the will of others: an agreement to become the slave or serf of
another is void. Becoming utterly impoverished, so that one must beg
or subject oneself to the will of another to survive, is also
incompatible with equal freedom for all; so the state must establish
some public policies to keep the poor from falling into a state of
utter dependence on others.
The equal freedom that the state establishes and sustains is a
formal freedom. Being equally free along with all fellow members of
society does not guarantee that I have the option to achieve the
purposes they can achieve or indeed any particular set of purposes at
all. Others having lots of property and me having very little is
compatible with all of us enjoying equal freedom and none being a
master of any other, controlling the will of some other person.  Nor
does your having many more valuable options and fruitful courses of
action available to choose than I have constitute any deprivation of
my right to equal freedom. Nor does your having the good fortune to be
born with a large endowment of talent potential and no disabilities
and born into a nurturing family possessing lots of means while I have
bad fortune in these respects amount to any erosion of the condition
of equal freedom that a rightful legal order yields for us.
The equal formal freedom that the rightful state sustains according
to the Kantian doctrine can be regarded as a species of formal equal
opportunity. If the Kantian doctrine of right can be defended, then we
have good grounds to uphold a version of formal equal opportunity
without being under normative pressure of good reasons to go further
and embrace any substantive equal opportunity doctrine. In a nutshell,
the Kantian claim will be that embracing more expansive notions of
equal opportunity, substantive equal opportunity or the yet more
expansive luck egalitarian family of doctrines, will prove
incompatible with maintaining formal equal freedom for all and with
sustaining the condition in which no adult person is the master of any
other (if substantive equality is sustained, then some people are
being forced to use their persons and forced to suffer their property
being used for the private purposes of others—a fundamental
violation of right). This may be one of those argumentative standoffs
in which, as Brian Barry once remarked, one man's reductio ad
absurdum is another's Quod Erat Demonstrandum. (For
Kant's views on equal freedom and the doctrine of right, see Guyer
2000 and Ripstein 2009). For more on Kantian moral and political
philosophy, see other entries in this Encyclopedia. 
As characterized here, formal and substantive equality of
opportunity ideals regulate the procedures by which individuals come
to acquire especially advantageous positions. The scope of equality of
opportunity is broader, the wider the range of worthy capacities and
abilities that are fostered and rewarded in the society that satisfies
these equal opportunity ideals.
Neither of these principles attempts to address the issue, what
extent of inequality across the individuals in society and across the
social positions that social arrangements establish or engender is
morally acceptable. Equality of opportunity would have no application
if all social positions were equally advantageous and desirable. But
equality of opportunity does not say whether the gap between the top
rung of society and the bottom rung should be large or small. Equality
of opportunity principles assert that if there is to be inequality in
the rewards and remuneration and status dispensed by social
arrangements, all members of society should have equal opportunity
suitably defined to gain the superior positions. (To reiterate, just
in this respect luck egalitarianism takes a different stance.)
The term “meritocracy” is sometimes used to refer to a
society that fulfills formal and substantive equality of opportunity
norms. It should be noted that the term sometimes names a broader
ideal. A meritocracy in this broader sense is a society in which (a)
equality of opportunity obtains and (b) rewards and remuneration
gained by individuals are proportional to their individual desert. The
difference between narrow and broad meritocratic norms is that the
latter assert a standard for assessing social arrangements in so far
as they attach rewards and remunerations to positions and fix the
extent of social inequality. These arrangements should give
individuals what they deserve, and what they deserve is at least
partly fixed independently of existing social arrangements and so can
serve as a standard for criticizing them (see Daniels 1978; Sher 1987;
Scheffler 1992, 2000; and Miller 1999: chapters 7–9).
According to the broad meritocracy ideal, a justification for
equality of opportunity is that its fulfillment is necessary if it is
to be the case that individuals genuinely get what they deserve. If
equality of opportunity is violated, then either the less qualified
are selected over the more qualified or not all individuals have equal
chance to become qualified. Equality of opportunity is then either a
means to meritocracy or partly constitutive of it.
It should be noted that broad meritocracy might be upheld either as
a complete view of social justice or as one justice value to be
balanced against others.
Theories of desert are various. Principles of desert can be
comparative or noncomparative. A comparative desert principle
specifies what makes people more or less deserving relative to one
another. A noncomparative desert principle associates a proper amount
of recognition, remuneration, or reward with an individual's
particular level of deservingness. For example, the claim that medical
doctors and business executives are paid too much compared to what
manual workers get is a claim of comparative desert. The assertions
that no one deserves to starve and that those guilty of perpetrating
torture-murder deserve the death penalty are claims of noncomparative
desert. An individual is rightly regarded as deserving only on the
basis of some personal characteristic such as her traits or doings (on
varieties of desert principles, see Hurka 2003, and for a systematic
exploration of desert, see Kagan 2012).
Some hold that what makes any person fundamentally deserving of
good or bad fortune is her level of virtue or moral merit. Other
theorists hold that there are plural bases of desert that in different
settings establish what people deserve and what treatment society
should accord them (Sher 1987). On this view, desert comes in
different flavors. For example, deserving athletes should be cheered,
deserving poets should be appreciated for their insight and aesthetic
merit. This view provides a critical standard. If a society jeers at
its good athletes and poets, it is deficient, and its practices should
be reformed so that the deserving are rewarded in due proportion.
If economic desert or merit is regarded as measurable and the
desert theorist holds that in a just political economy, individuals
are remunerated and rewarded in proportion to their level of desert,
justice as deservingness becomes a candidate theory of justice. In
principle, the view fixes what inequalities in people's conditions of
life are morally acceptable. Whereas the libertarian holds that social
justice is achieved when Lockean rights are respected, and the
Rawlsian holds that justice in general requires that society be
arranged to maximize the primary social goods holdings of the least
advantaged, the desert theorist asserts that justice is
meritocracy. In a meritocracy, each individual has good fortune in
proportion to her deservingness (Rawls 1999; Nozick 1974; Miller
1999).
The idea that individuals become economically deserving in so far
as they are economically productive (as measured by what people are
willing to pay for their goods and services) comes under pressure from
two directions. On the one side, a well-functioning competitive market
is responsive to supply and demand. The ensemble of circumstances that
determine supply and demand and hence what remuneration anyone gets
for her market activity varies capriciously in ways that confront
economic agents as sheer luck. For example, what equally hard-working
and skilled auto workers will earn in Germany and China is affected
enormously by different economic conditions in the two countries,
including actions by other agents, their level of wealth, and so
on. There is no remotely sensible notion of individual desert that
varies with the benefits that people gain from their economic
production. This is not any defect of markets; there is no reason to
expect them to somehow distribute benefits according to any
common-sense norms of desert. 
So if it was thought morally imperative that the ordinary operation
of a market economy should proportion rewards to desert, we would have
to entirely redesign and remake economic institutions with this end in
view. But if one asks, why markets should be reformed so they reward
the deserving, the notion of desert in play here looks under scrutiny
to be too insubstantial to justify the demanded changes. The thought
that people deserve in proportion to their meritorious doings runs up
against the fact that all such accomplishments depend to an
indeterminate extent on native talent and favorable early
socialization, sources of meritorious agency that are entirely beyond
the individual's power to control. This is not to say there is nothing
in one's conscientious strivings for which one can take credit, but
what one can take credit for is so intermingled with what simply falls
on one's plate as good or bad luck that the idea of rewarding desert
in any fine-grained way is impractical. The idea that people become
economically deserving by being economically productive and should be
remunerated according to their productivity is at odds with the
effective functioning of actual markets. To try to revamp the economy
so it rewards the truly deserving would be a fool's errand. (Rawls
1999: sections 47 and 48; but see Miller 1999: chapters
7–9).
The ideal of a society in which people do not suffer disadvantage
from discrimination on grounds of supposed race, ethnicity, religion,
sex, sexual orientation is widely upheld as desirable in itself. For
many, the ideal is more compelling than any argument that might be
offered to support it.
However, what is objectionable is wrongful discrimination.
Distinguishing wrongful from innocent discrimination is tricky
(Alexander 1992). Statistical discrimination is not per se
wrong. A black man may correctly perceive black skin to be roughly
correlated with traits such as common experiences and outlook that he
values in friends, and prefer blacks as friends on this basis. This is
surely not morally wrong. Nor would it be wrong to desire on the same
basis to be employed in a firm that employs mainly blacks. It might
well be the case, however, that acting on such a desire in concert
with others might have significant negative consequences for
others. Heterosexuals flocking together in the workplace might tend
sharply to limit employment opportunities available to
nonheterosexuals. On grounds of equal opportunity, then, law and
social custom might be framed to restrict or prohibit acting on the
desire to club together with others whom one identifies as like
oneself in certain salient ways, even though this sort of
discrimination is not deemed per se wrong.
Formal and substantive equality of opportunity ideals require more
than avoidance of discrimination. These broader ideals might be
regarded as morally valuable per se and unconditionally. They
might also be justified on instrumental grounds. For example, when
women are excluded from the labor force, markets function less
efficiently, and the ensemble of people's desires can in many settings
be satisfied more fully if equal opportunity for men and women is
secured.
Since formal and substantive equality of opportunity norms are
proposed as components of a moral theory of justified social
inequality, the full justification of any candidate conception of
equality of opportunity must be sought by way of examining the
justification of the full theory of justice in which the candidate
conception is to play a part. In much the same way, one examines a
component of a car, a candidate design for a carburetor for instance,
by seeing how the component would function in the car and how well the
car with that component in place would perform.
A conception of equality of opportunity, deemed to be morally
valuable per se, might be deemed so either as a deontological
requirement or as a valuable state of affairs to be promoted. A
deontological requirement specifies ways in which each agent should
always treat other people. An absolute deontological requirement
demands to be obeyed come what may, a less than absolute requirement
may be overridden if conformity to it produces an excessively bad
outcome or conflicts with other deontological requirements that taken
together have greater moral weight.
Rawls himself says surprisingly little by way of justification of
fair equality of opportunity. In his theory of justice, justice
concerns are nested in strict lexical priority relations. First
priority is assigned to a principle that demands equal basic liberties
such as freedom of speech for all. Second priority goes to fair
equality of opportunity, which is interpreted as a prerequisite for
justified inequalities in the distribution of social primary goods,
basic resources suitable for advancing a wide range of plans of
life. Inequalities in people's holdings of primary social goods must
(a) be attached to positions and offices open to all according to fair
equality of opportunity and (b) must work to the maximal advantage of
the least advantaged social group. In Rawls's system, (a) takes strict
lexical priority over (b).  In broad terms, Rawls insists that fair
equality of opportunity rules out improving the condition of the worst
off by instituting practices that generate inequalities that fail to
satisfy FEO.
One argument in support of the Rawlsian priority for FEO assumes
that FEO regulates opportunities for self-realization whereas the
principle that demands maximization of the social primary goods
holdings of the worst off regulates consumption activities. If we add
that self-realization should take strict lexical priority over mere
consumption activities in anyone's reasonable plan of life, we get an
argument for the priority of FEO (Taylor 2004). Another argument
starts from the observation that Rawls says nothing about why FEO
should get less priority than the principle that protects basic
liberties. This suggests a strategy for defending FEO: find arguments
that support the priority of the basic liberties, and explore to what
extent they also support giving priority to FEO as well (Shiffrin
2004). Following this strategy of argument, some have proposed that
FEO protects the opportunity to contribute to social cooperation by
engaging in challenging, meaningful work, and having this opportunity
helps one to fulfill one's basic moral interest in developing and
exercising a sense of justice. Not by self-interest alone does man
live. Another consideration is that self-respect is of utmost
importance for any individual, so one should give priority to
sustaining the social bases of self-respect, and a society that
strictly protects basic liberties and FEO sustains the social bases of
self-respect.
In reply: the arguments that purport to defend the priority of FEO
look vulnerable. Many goods, including free time apart from paid work
and income, are useful for self-realization, so the assumed priority
of self-realization does not support priority for FEO.  If
inequalities in people's distributive shares work to advance the
interests of the worse off, there is good reason to accept them even
if they violate FEO. Anyway consumption activities, even if generally
less valuable than self-realization, have some value, so a lot of
consumption gains may outweigh a small bit of self-realization gains,
contrary to the claim of lexical priority for FEO. If meaningful work
is a great good, crucial for human fulfillment, that consideration
arguably supports the justice requirement that all people have genuine
opportunities to participate in meaningful work, not merely the right
to equal chances for meaningful work for all with equal native talent
and ambition that FEO entails.
A complication here is that Rawls does not anyway insist on FEO
come what may, even though the heavens should fall. We should probably
follow Rawls on this point. An insistence on equality in Rawls is
really a insistence on a presumption of equality. He proposes equal
basic liberties for all, but allows that some restrictions of basic
liberties might be needed to strengthen the system of basic liberties
over time, and such restriction, even unequal restriction, is
acceptable provided the lesser liberty is acceptable from the
standpoint of those who suffer the basic liberty deficit. In a similar
way he proposes that social and economic inequalities are acceptable
only if attached to positions that are open to all under FEO, but
allows that inequalities of opportunity ruled out by FEO can yet be
acceptable provided they “enhance the opportunities of those
with lesser opportunity” (Rawls 1999: 266).
The idea seems to be that allowing some socially advantaged persons
to have greater chances of competitive success than equally natively
endowed socially disadvantaged persons is unacceptable if the talented
socially disadvantaged are compensated just in terms of income and
wealth. FEO is a constraint on allowable inequality. But suppose the
prospects for competitive success, and so access to desirable
positions and offices offering meaningful work, can be made unequal in
such a way that those with the short end of the stick have more such
opportunities than they would have if it were demanded that FEO must
be upheld even in this case. Here insistence on FEO might seem to be
biting off one's nose to spite one's face. Here Rawls says deviation
from FEO is morally acceptable. Example: if we allow socially
privileged entrepreneurs access to competitive success in violation of
FEO, they do things that stimulate employment growth, and those denied
equal competitive opportunity end up with better competitive
opportunity. Why not?
This proposal raises several questions. One is whether an important
moral line can be drawn between denial of equal opportunity that
merely yields higher income and wealth and denial of equal opportunity
that yields better job opportunities for those denied the condition of
FEO. After all, noble projects have material prerequisites, and the
extra income I might get if unequal opportunity is permitted might be
crucial to my life fulfillment. Another worry is that the elaborate
set of rules seems to give undue weight to the interests of those who
are natively talented but socially disadvantaged as opposed to those
who are both socially and native-talent-wise disadvantaged. Suppose I
am one of the latter truly disadvantaged types, and the contemplated
relaxation of FEO affects the competitive success prospects only of
better-off individuals and promises mere income and wealth benefits to
people like me. Whether the relaxation of FEO is justifiable then
hinges on what it does for the competitive success opportunities of
the better off people and not at all on the impending benefits to
worse-off types.
These questions are not posed as conversation stoppers. The
justifiability of FEO seems to be a wide open question, yet to be
answered. Rawls's reticence does not show there is nothing cogent to
be said in defense of FEO or another norm in the wider family of
substantive equality of opportunity norms. Sometimes it is said that
insistence on FEO preserves the status of all members of society as
free and equal persons, but this claim seems to presuppose that
dropping or downgrading FEO would be unjustified. If dropping or
downgrading would be justified, free and equal persons could accept
this without forfeiting their status. 
According to the Lockean libertarian, justice is done when each
person respects every other person's Lockean rights (see Nozick 1974). One's
Lockean rights roughly amount to the right to do whatever one chooses
with whatever one legitimately owns so long as one does not thereby
harm others in certain ways that either violate or infringe their
rights. The “certain ways” of harming are specified by a
list: no theft, fraud, breach of contract, extortion, coercion or
forcing, assault, infliction of physical damage on persons or their
property. Violations of rights are forbidden infringements.  One must
not violate anyone's rights, come what may.  Infringements of rights
include violations and mere infringements. The latter may permissibly
be done provided compensation is paid to any victim who suffers harm
as a result of having one's rights infringed. Each adult person is the
full rightful owner of herself, unless she has forfeited this right of
dominion by grave misconduct or signed it away by exchange or free
gift or waiver. The Lockean libertarian holds that a self-owning
person may appropriate unowned land and moveable parts of the earth
and thereby become their full rightful owner; these rights may then be
transferred to others by gift or exchange or forfeited under certain
circumstances.
The bearing of these claims on the moral validity of equal
opportunity norms is supposed to arise from the consideration that if
one legitimately owns property, one is not morally bound to use it in
ways that satisfy equality of opportunity. If one owns a factory, one
may let it sit unused and allow no one to trespass on the premises, or
one may invite anyone one chooses to enter the premises and work in
the factory one owns on any mutually agreeable terms. One's Lockean
rights fill the moral space that conceptions of equal opportunity are
thought to occupy and as it were leave no room for them. Just as one
may choose to become friends with anyone on any mutually agreeable
terms, rather than offer one's friendship to all who might wish it and
to choose among applicants according to the merits of the
applications, one may do the same with any property one owns.  Lockean
property rights preclude its being the case that anyone is morally
entitled to be treated according to equality of opportunity norms or
that anyone is morally obligated to treat anyone according to such
norms (unless one has signed a contract or promised to do so).
The Lockean critique or rather counter-assertion of libertarian
rights in the face of contrary claims that people have rights to equal
opportunity applies to formal as well as to substantive equal
opportunity ideals. According to the Lockean libertarian, a white male
landowner who wishes to hire laborers to work his fields may refuse to
hire people of any religion, ethnicity, sex, sexual orientation, or
the like that he chooses to regard as a bar to employability. Or he
can decide to hire blacks and women and Hindus only for low-skill jobs
and whites and men and Christians exclusively for skilled and
managerial jobs. These decisions might be subject to appropriate moral
criticism.  What one has a moral right to do may nonetheless be
morally wrong. The claim that one has a moral right to do X
implies that others should not coercively interfere with one's doing
X or violate any of one's rights to prevent one from doing
X. The libertarian denies that anyone has a moral right in this
sense to be treated in accordance with equal opportunity norms. This
stricture applies to formal equality of opportunity and a
fortiori to substantive equal opportunity and
level-the-playing-field conceptions as well.
The Lockean libertarian can also be viewed as proposing a
minimalist conception of equal opportunity that should supersede the
more expansive notions of equal opportunity. The libertarian view is
that people's opportunities are equal in the relevant sense when each
person equally faces other possible interaction partners in a regime
in which everyone's Lockean rights are respected. This requires that
no state or government prohibit persons from transacting with others
on any mutually agreeable terms (that do not impose harms of certain
sorts on nonconsenting others). Laws that coercively enforce Jim Crow
racial exclusion (no blacks are legally permitted to work at skilled
jobs or enter learned professions or form certain sorts of
entrepreneurial business partnerships and so on) would violate
libertarian equal opportunity so conceived.
The Lockean libertarian proposes that everyone's Lockean rights
should be respected by everyone as inherently just and fair.
Respecting Lockean rights is deemed morally valuable for its own sake,
not merely for the sake of good consequences it might bring about.
One can also regard Lockean rights as instruments, morally valuable
not in themselves but for the consequences compliance with them brings
about. On this approach, to the extent that rigid adherence by
individuals or the government to Lockean rights would not produce the
best consequences, adherence should be selectively abandoned.
Richard Epstein recommends something rather close to a regime of
Lockean libertarian rights on the ground that compliance with this
regime of rights is utility maximizing (increases aggregate well-being
of persons) over the long run (Epstein 1995: chapter 1). Epstein
himself is doubtful of interpersonal utility comparison, so he tends
to favor policy moves that are Pareto improvements, improving
someone's utility while reducing no one's. Still, one might
countenance interpersonal comparison and try to defend Lockean
libertarian rights on aggregative utility-maximizing grounds. The
Epstein regime of rights is only a rough approximation of a strict
Lockean libertarian regime, for the former approves utility-promoting
curtailment of individual rights. For example, in an Epstein but not a
strict Lockean regime, a hiker caught in a blizzard in the mountains
who stumbles upon a privately owned cabin may trespass and use the
cabin without prior permission of the owner provided compensation is
paid for any damage done to the cabin and its provisions. But Epstein
holds that enforcement of nondiscrimination norms and equality of
opportunity would tend to lessen not promote people's long-run
utility. As this formulation suggests, Epstein is concerned with the
question, what rules and norms should be enforced by force of law. As
against the simple rule that permits all and only deals that elicit
the voluntary consent of the participants, the rule forbidding
discrimination is costly to administer and enforce, charges of
discrimination being easy to make and difficult to prove. According to
Epstein, competitive markets pressure people to do what is
cost-effective, which generally means hiring the most qualified
applicant and selling to any willing customer who is able to pay.
The conjecture here is that over time competitive markets tend in a
rough and ready way to come close enough to satisfying formal equality
of opportunity. One might also postulate a tendency in competitive
markets to move closer over time to satisfaction of FEO, but this
tendency would be offset by, for example, the extra benefits of
interacting with socially well connected people as opposed to equally
natively talented people who lack lucrative social
connections. Moreover, training a talented socially disadvantaged
person so she becomes productive generates wide positive
externalities, and one does not expect a competitive market
automatically to deliver these in optimal qualities. Epstein is
doubtful that ham-fisted government regulation can (except in rare
cases) in practice improve on the mix of benefits and losses a
competitive market economy tends to deliver. In short, according to
Epstein, by facilitating mutually profitable interactions among
strangers, the competitive market promotes a cultural atmosphere of
tolerance and prosperity more effectively than governmental regulation
would do.
One might object to the substantive and level playing field
conceptions of equality of opportunity canvassed so far in this entry
on the ground that they all presuppose a world of individuals of given
genetic makeup. Given a population of individuals each with a
particular genetic makeup that fixes for that individual a profile of
native talent, the question for the equal opportunity theorist is what
must be done to or for such individuals if they are to be rightly
regarded as enjoying equal opportunity. This framework of discussion
takes for granted that native talent differentials are an unalterable
natural fact. The objection is that what this framework presupposes
may not be so or may eventually not be so. Advances in biological
knowledge suggest that at some time in the future people can by
deliberate choice alter the genetic makeup of their children or the
children born in their society in order to eliminate unwanted traits
and augment desired traits. The genetic influences on human traits
will become subject to human control. This might occur by using
genetic knowledge either to alter the genetic constitution of
individuals yet to be born or to provide therapeutic interventions on
already existing individuals to alter their genetic makeup. Along this
line some argue that advances in genetic knowledge unsettle current
moral conceptions including conceptions of equal opportunity by
falsifying their factual presuppositions (Buchanan et al. 2000:
chapters 3 and 7).
Of course affecting the genetic makeup of children by deliberate
choice is not new. Assortative mating done with the hope that by
selection of a mate with desirable traits one will affect the
likelihood that one's children will have similar desirable traits is a
means of influencing the genetic makeup of individuals that does not
require advanced genetic knowledge. What is new is the possible scope
for deliberate choice in the world of advanced genetic knowledge that
is just now being glimpsed.
At least, a question becomes more salient as genetic knowledge
increases: What does fairness require by way of care and due regard in
the design of individuals? What kinds of persons should be brought
into existence? Call the answers justice in conception. 
Although this question is of undoubted importance, it does not in any
obvious way render equality of opportunity in its various guises a
consideration of no importance. In the future world with greater
genetic knowledge and techniques of control of human reproduction, a
population of individuals will emerge, whether in ways that conform to
justice in conception or in ways that offend it. Either way, the
institutions and practices into which this population is born might
bring about a caste hierarchy or a different sort of hierarchy that
satisfies equality of opportunity norms. Nothing said so far suggests
the difference between caste hierarchy and the society that eliminates
caste hierarchy is not morally significant.
Recall that Fair Equality of Opportunity (FEO) requires social
arrangements that bring it about that any persons with the same native
talent and the same ambition will have roughly equivalent competitive
prospects. Suppose there is enhanced technological capacity to alter
people's genetic makeup, and hence their native talents, now or in the
future. This change might be thought to put pressure on the advocate
of FEO to revise her principle to require equalization of native
talents so that all individuals with the same ambition will enjoy
roughly equivalent prospects for competitive success (and why not
consider the proclivity to be ambitious a trait like another that
might be altered by social engineering in the service of a strong
equal opportunity principle?). The issue here turns on what the
fundamental underlying rationale for FEO is thought to be, or should
be thought to be.
The problems posed by the existence of individuals with severe
disabilities might suggest an objection against formal and substantive
conceptions of equality of opportunity or at least raise doubts about
their ethical importance. Consider a society in which formal equality
of opportunity and Rawlsian FEO are perfectly achieved. All posts and
positions that confer superior advantages and benefits go to
individuals selected by fair competitions that satisfy both formal
equality of opportunity and FEO. All of this is compatible with the
existence of a class of individuals who lack qualifications for any
positions whatsoever. These individuals are effectively excluded from
participation in society. The jobs and positions that confer superior
rewards might require complex cognitive skills, and some cognitively
deficient individuals are incapable of performing these complex tasks.
Jobs might also require complex physical dexterity, which some
physically impaired individuals are incapable of developing. Despite
perfectly conforming to demanding equality of opportunity norms, the
society as so far described might appear to be unjust by too stingy
provision of opportunity to its least qualified members.
Unease on this score is increased with the reflection that what
qualifies a person as able or disabled (or for that matter as talented
or untalented) is not simply a function of her natural attributes but
is rather a function of the mesh between her natural attributes and
the traits that are valued by people given the organization of society
(Buchanan et al. 2000: chapter 3 and 7; Wikler 1983). In a complex
technological society, individuals are excluded from participation in
its main activities who would be included in a different form of
society. A person who could manage an ox cart might be unable to drive
a car and hence significantly handicapped in a social order that
relies on transportation by car. A person who could carry out valuable
tasks in a hunter-gatherer society might be incapable of sophisticated
mathematical and literacy skills required in a complex modern economy.
The question then arises, to what extent must society be organized so
that all of its members are able to participate as full members in the
activities that constitute a decent life in the society?
For many, this question will trigger a belief that even a society
that perfectly implements equality of opportunity and in which
superior positions always go to those who most merit them could not be
a substitute for a more complete theory of justice that addresses the
issue, what sorts of social hierarchy are morally acceptable. Equality
of opportunity is not the full story about social justice. It might
also turn out that reflection on the morality of inclusion might yield
the result that equality of opportunity is only a rather thin chapter
in the story of social justice. A decent society might tolerate in the
name of justice significant deviations from perfect equality of
opportunity in order to achieve other justice values. For example,
inclusion of people with low native talent might be achieved by
channeling extra educational resources to them and by subsidizing
their hiring by private and public firms even at substantial cost to
FEO and even to the less controversial careers open to talents.
It might be useful to compare the concern about the morality of
inclusion discussed in this section with the concern about the scope
of equality of opportunity discussed in
 section 3. A society provides too little
scope of opportunity if it provides insufficient ways for a wide range
of worthy human talents to be recognized, developed, and exercised. A
society fails to be sufficiently inclusive if in order to shape
institutions and practices in order to increase the satisfactions they
offer (or to achieve some other goal) it sets educational and
occupational and related standards so high that some individuals are
unfairly prevented from participating in any meaningful way in the
activities and practices valued by the society. A society could
satisfy appropriate scope demands but fail to be sufficiently
inclusive, or it could be sufficiently inclusive but fail to satisfy
appropriate scope demands.
The luck egalitarian conception of equal opportunity has attracted
the criticism that distributive justice should not be interpreted as
calling for the elimination of inequalities between persons arising
from natural endowments rather than social arrangements (Nagel 1997
and Anderson 1999). On its face, this is a puzzling claim, because
whether being born with a propensity to be tall rather than short
turns out to be an advantage or disadvantage depends on social
arrangements—on whether the individual gets adequate nutrition
to grow tall, and on whether activities that are better performed by
tall persons are valued in the society, and so on. The idea might be
that if having a native propensity to acquire a trait will give rise
to advantage or disadvantage given ordinary upbringing and ordinary
free market arrangements, the propensity counts as a natural endowment
advantage On this view, luck egalitarianism goes wrong by
overreaching, insisting on undoing unproblematic inequalities.
Those who voice this criticism sometimes couple it with another:
that the equality that is morally compelling is equality of status as
a free and equal person in democratic society, not any sort of
distributive equality guaranteeing that all should have the same or be
treated the same. On this view, fair shares of resources need not
involve initial equal opportunity for resources or welfare or any
other sort of advantage. Rather, distributive justice requires that
the distribution of resources across members of society should not
subvert the status of all as free and equal. All should have
opportunity to participate in democratic society on a footing of
equality (Scheffler 2003, 2005; Anderson 1999); for
critical response, see Tan 2008). Moreover, the moral imperative of
sustaining equal opportunity to be a full participating member of
society is not dampened or extinguished when members of society behave
in ways others regard as imprudent or unvirtuous or undeserving. Being
a responsible member of society might be a good thing but one's moral
entitlement to equality of status is not conditional on good
behavior.
In response: A society could satisfy the democratic equality ideal
(sustaining equal opportunity for all to be participants in democratic
society) even though some portion of its members ends up with meager
provision and meager material opportunities and squalid unfulfilling
lives. Some might hold that distributive justice principles should
register such a condition as injustice. Also, while a reasonable
conception of fair shares might require more than initial equal
opportunity, and might require that individuals who start to make a
mess of their lives be given second, third, or fourth chances, that
does not gainsay the responsibility of individuals to use the
opportunities they have judiciously and the imperative of integrating
a sensible norm of personal responsibility into sensible norms of
distributive justice. (See the entries on
 egalitarianism and on
 distributive justice.)
Any doctrine that asserts that it is morally desirable or morally
required per se or for its own sake that everyone should be
equally well off attracts the leveling down objection. The objection
is simply that if equality of condition is noninstrumentally morally
valuable, then it is morally better, in one respect, if those
currently better off than others are made worse off (so long as they
do not fall below the average level), even if worsening the condition
of these people brings about no gain or benefit for anyone
else—but it is implausible to hold that such leveling-down
changes in and of themselves improve the situation in any respect. The
objection applies to any ideal of equality of condition and also to
any ideal of equality of treatment. Recall an ancient quip attributed
to the philosopher Sidney Morgenbesser. Roughed up and arrested by the
police in the course of student protests at Columbia University, he
was asked whether he thought he had suffered unfair, unjust
treatment. He replied that the treatment unleashed by the police was
unjust (because beating up innocent people is unjust) but not unfair
(because “they were beating everybody”). The proponent of
the leveling down objection denies that it is in any respect better to
beat up more innocent people rather than fewer in order to achieve
equality of treatment across innocent people.
Applying to any view that says people should have the same or enjoy
the same condition or be treated the same, the leveling down objection
applies to equality of opportunity views. As characterized in this
entry, formal equality of opportunity just insists on no wrongful
discrimination, but the leveling down objection denies that it would
be in any respect noninstrumentally morally better to discriminate
equally across a group of people who do not merit this treatment as
opposed to discriminating against some but not all in the group. The
leveling down objection applies straightforwardly to FEO and to
level-the-playing-field or luck egalitarian distributive justice
doctrines. (On the leveling down objection, see Parfit 2000; Holtug
2010: chapter 7, and for criticism, Temkin 1993: chapter 9.) However,
this claim is just a suggestion in the absence of some proposed metric
for determining how to rank possible deviations from FEO and luck
egalitarian doctrines. The hunch to be confirmed is that for any
plausible measure, the result will be that this version of equality
will say that there is something to be said in favor of moving close
to equality (of opportunity) by making better offs worse off without
offering any improvement in the condition of worse offs. The
counterclaim will be that there is no respect in which leveling down
improves the situation.
Related to the leveling-down objection but distinct from it is the
suggestion that opportunities should be maximized, or maximined,
rather than equalized. To illustrate the suggestion, consider a world
in which formal equality of opportunity and Rawlsian fair equality of
opportunity are perfectly fulfilled. In this situation, there will be
a certain number of opportunities that are regulated by these equal
opportunity principles that are available to those who have the least
of these opportunities. For simplicity suppose these opportunities
consist of places in attractive postsecondary colleges and
universities and other schools (where the number of applicants for
slots exceeds the number of available slots), employment opportunities
consisting of starting places in public and private firms and
promotions in these enterprises, bank loans available for investment
purposes including self-employment and starting a business, and
licenses provided by the state that are legally required for engaging
in certain occupations. Issues will arise here as to how to
individuate and count opportunities; just suppose we can limit our
attention to situations in which judgments that more or fewer
opportunities are available to groups are uncontroversialy
unproblematic. Now consider the hypothesis that if equal opportunity
regulations were reduced or eliminated, opportunities overall would
increase, and in particular opportunities available to those who have
the fewest opportunities available would increase.  We should not be
impressed if the number of opportunities increases by multiplying the
number of very bad opportunities available to people, so let it be
stipulated that opportunities increase only if the lucrativeness of
some options, the nonpay desirable characteristics of some options,
the significant variety of equally good options, and the overall
desirability of options rated best by every individual, all
increase. The suggestion is that when this hypothesis holds, it would
be morally inappropriate to insist on maintenance of equal
opportunity. One might propose amending an equal opportunity principle
to allow deviations from it when deviations increase the regulated
opportunities available to those who have the least such
opportunities. Rawls allows deviations from his fair equality of
opportunity norm when this condition is met.
The suggestion that insistence on equal opportunity might reduce
the opportunities available to the worst off in this regard might
prompt a broader rejection of equal opportunity principles. The
rejectionist proposes dropping equal opportunity norms altogether in
favor of maximining competitive opportunities. A less egalitarian
development of the suggestion would favor maximization of such
opportunities rather than maximizing the opportunities available to
those who enjoy the least of them.
The fact that both formal and substantive conceptions of equality
of opportunity and the rival level playing field conception as well
are proposed as ancillary requirements or supplements to a theory of
justified social hierarchy poses a general issue concerning their
justification. The setting in which equal opportunity is proposed is
one in which a theory of justified hierarchy is on hand. Equal
opportunity asserts that the desirable positions in the social
hierarchy should be accessible to all members of society according to
the equality of opportunity norm. But the social hierarchy itself is
justified on some independent basis. Let us suppose that in general
the theory of justice holds that a social hierarchy is desirable to
the extent that it produces morally desirable consequences. The theory
of justice identifies the morally desirable consequences that
institutions and practices are to be arranged to promote. For example,
in John Rawls's theory of justice, it is asserted that institutions
and practices should be arranged so that the worst off are as well off
over the long run as possible. More specifically, Rawls proposes that
inequalities in social and economic benefits (other than basic civil
liberties that are regulated by another principle) are just or fair if
they satisfy two conditions--they are attached to positions and
offices open to all under fair equality of opportunity and they work
to the maximal advantage of the worst off members of society.
It might be the case that the inequalities that would maximize the
advantage level of the worst off would also as a matter of fact also
satisfy fair equality of opportunity. Still, one might ask if fair
equality of opportunity is justified as a free-standing moral
requirement or as instrumental to the achievement of other justice
goals (for criticism of FEO as a free-standing requirement, see Pogge
1989, chapter 4). To investigate the issue, one must look at possible
cases in which the fair equality of opportunity norm constrains the
pursuit of other justice values (Arneson 1999, 2013).
In some, perhaps many circumstances, FEO will be a nonbinding
constraint on the maximization of the primary social goods prospects
for the least advantaged. In such cases FEO either helps boost the
advantages of the least advantaged or is a nonfactor. But it may well
be that sometimes adherence to FEO requires us to forego hierarchy
that would work to the advantage of the worst off. In such cases, why
insist on FEO? For example, allowing the rich to buy a head start for
their children, though it violates FEO, may cause many to try harder
to become rich and might thereby greatly enhance economic effort to
the benefit of all. For another example, the resources needed to
police individual behavior so that FEO is even remotely close to
satisfied might well be enormous. These resources could instead be
diverted into public expenditure intelligently designed to improve the
condition of the worse off.
There is a more general conflict in this area. One might not uphold
the maximizing of primary goods prospects for those in society who are
worst off in this respect as a high-priority justice principle. One
source of doubt is the thought that the ultimate justice aim should be
promoting genuinely good lives for people with good fairly
distributed. From this welfarist perspective, how big a pile of
resources and opportunities society enables one to attain is not of
fundamental moral importance; what matters is what one is enabled to
accomplish and does accomplish with whatever resources and
opportunities one gets. Another source of doubt is the thought that
the Rawlsian difference principle, the identification of distributive
justice with maximizing the prospects of the very worst off (subject
to the FEO constraint), is too extreme in the priority it assigns to
achieving gains for the very worst off. The difference principle in
effect says that one should prefer a penny more for the worst off when
that group has one member to the alternative of bringing about gains
of any magnitude however large for any number of better than worst off
persons however huge. Priority for the worse off plausibly takes a
less extreme form. So in considering the plausibility of the fair
equality of opportunity constraint on boosting the advantages of the
worst off when enabling inequalities is the best means to helping the
worst off, the difference principle should serve as a stand-in for
whatever broadly egalitarian distributive justice aims we take to be
most compelling. FEO does not become more acceptable if the Rawlsian
principle to which FEO is attached as a constraint is deemed
implausible. So conflict between fair equality of opportunity and the
Rawlsian difference principle is merely illustrative of further
conflict.
For concreteness, suppose that the advantages for the worst off
members of society could be maximized by a regime that combines
libertarian labor markets with high taxation of incomes and
redistribution that enhances the quality of life of the worst off. But
under libertarian labor markets, neither formal nor substantive
equality of opportunity is required. Instead contract at will
prevails.  In this society, if markets come to operate more as
networks of trade among people who know and trust one another than as
textbook exchange among strangers, networks might follow lines of
family, clan, and ethnicity, so that even formal equality of
opportunity is violated. In this setting, consider a white woman who
is denied a promotion in her firm just because she is white and a
woman. She suffers a disadvantage, the denial of the promotion, merely
because of features of herself that are either unalterable or that she
should not be expected to alter in order to gain fair access to
economic opportunity. But if the society that tolerates these
violations of equality of opportunity thereby maximizes the advantage
level enjoyed by the worst off, then there is no way to alter social
laws and practices so as to render this woman and people who suffer
similar disadvantage better off by enforcing careers open to talents
without thereby making someone worse off than she and they are who is
also disadvantaged by features of herself that are beyond her power to
control. The person with small talent who finds herself in the worst-
off class in a properly functioning society that rewards talent in
order to stimulate economic productivity and ultimately the benefit
level of the worst off might well regard herself as having a stronger
claim to consideration than the better off person with significant
talent who finds herself disadvantaged by the failure of society to
enforce equality of opportunity when equal opportunity norms are not
effective means to boost the long-run advantage of the least
advantaged. 
In the situation envisaged, FEO assigns priority to helping a
better off person in a certain respect: enable the person to have the
same prospects of competitive success as anyone else with the same
native talent and ambition. In contrast, priority to the worse off
says institute whatever policies will increase a function of aggregate
well-being that gives greater weight to achieving gains for a person,
the worse off she would otherwise be. The claim then will be that if
the weights are properly set, priority appropriately balances the
desirability of achieving benefits for better-off and worse-off
people. From this standpoint, FEO goes wrong in several ways—in
privileging resources over welfare outcomes, in failing to allow
inequalities that advance priority-weighted well-being if the FEO
constraint cannot be satisfied, and in demanding that resources flow
to better-off people, when required to fulfill the FEO constraint,
even when those resources would do more priority-weighted good by
being deployed elsewhere, such as to the worse off.
Faced with this example, many will insist that equality of
opportunity norms should prevail, or at least have some weight against
other justice values. But one wonders if the underlying rationale for
this insistence is not the residual shadow of a meritocratic belief
that the person with superior native talent has a strong entitlement
to gain any superior rewards that society dispenses if society does
not insist on strict equality of benefits for all. Why else adopt
norms that in the example above favor the talented woman disadvantaged
through no fault of her own (because she is white and a woman) over
the worse off untalented person also disadvantaged through no fault of
her own (because she had the bad luck of being born untalented)?
The slogan “equality of opportunity” commands wide
allegiance among the members of contemporary societies. Under
scrutiny, equality of opportunity divides into several different
ideals, some of them being opposed rivals. It is controversial which
of these ideals, if any, are morally acceptable, and which, if any,
should be coercively enforced as requirements of justice. (For a
moderately skeptical overview, see Cavanagh 2002.) Debates about the
seemingly banal norm of equality of opportunity reveal profound
disagreements as to the nature of fair terms of cooperation in the
modern world.