Cassirer was born on July 28, 1874, to a wealthy and cosmopolitan
Jewish family, in the German city of Breslau (now Wroclaw, Poland).
Part of the family lived in Berlin, including Cassirer’s cousin Bruno
Cassirer, the distinguished publisher, who later published most of
Cassirer’s writings. Cassirer entered the University of Berlin in 1892.
In 1894 he took a course on Kant with Georg Simmel, who recommended
Hermann Cohen’s writings on Kant in particular. Cohen, the first Jew to
hold a professorship in Germany, was the founder of the so-called
Marburg School of neo-Kantianism, famous for interpreting Kant’s
transcendental method as beginning with the “fact of
science” and then arguing regressively to the presuppositions or
conditions of possibility of this “fact.” Kant was thus
read as an “epistemologist [Erkenntniskritiker]”
or methodologist of science rather than as a
“metaphysician” in the tradition of post-Kantian German
idealism. After learning of Cohen’s writings from Simmel, Cassirer
(then nineteen years old) proceeded to devour them, whereupon he
immediately resolved to study with Cohen at Marburg. He studied at
Marburg from 1896 to 1899, when he completed his doctoral work with a
dissertation on Descartes’s analysis of mathematical and natural
scientific knowledge. This appeared, in turn, as the Introduction to
Cassirer’s first published work, a treatment of Leibniz’s philosophy
and its scientific basis [Cassirer 1902]. Upon returning to Berlin in
1903, Cassirer further developed these themes while working out his
monumental interpretation of the development of modern philosophy and
science from the Renaissance through Kant [Cassirer 1906, 1907a]. The
first volume of this work served as his habilitation at the University
of Berlin, where he taught as an instructor or Privatdozent
from 1906 to 1919.
In 1919 Cassirer was finally offered professorships at two newly
founded universities at Frankfurt and Hamburg under the auspices of the
Weimar Republic. He taught at Hamburg from 1919 until emigrating from
Germany in 1933. During these years Cassirer completed his three-volume
Philosophy of Symbolic Forms [Cassirer 1923, 1925, 1929b],
which broke fundamental new ground beyond the neo-Kantianism of the
Marburg School and articulated his own original attempt to unite
scientific and non-scientific modes of thought (“symbolic
forms”) within a single philosophical vision. In 1928 Cassirer
offered a defense of Weimar [Cassirer 1929a] at the University’s
celebration of the tenth anniversary of the Republic, and in 1929–30 he
served as the rector of the University, as the first Jew to hold such a
position in Germany. In the Spring of 1929 Cassirer took part in a
famous disputation with Martin Heidegger in Davos, Switzerland, where
Heidegger explicitly took Cohen’s neo-Kantianism as a philosophical
target and defended his radical new conception of an “existential
analytic of Dasein” in the guise of a parallel interpretation of
the philosophy of Kant [Heidegger 1929]. Cassirer, for his part,
defended his own new understanding of Kant in the philosophy of
symbolic forms – against Heidegger’s insistence on the
ineluctability of human finitude – by appealing to genuinely
objectively valid, necessary and eternal truths arising in both moral
experience and mathematical natural science (see
[Friedman 2000] [Gordon 2010]).
After his emigration Cassirer spent two years lecturing at Oxford
and then six years at the University of Göteborg in Sweden. During
this time he developed his most sustained discussion of morality and
the philosophy of law as a study of the Swedish legal philosopher Axel
Hägerström [Cassirer 1939a] (see [Krois 1987, chap. 4]). He
also articulated his major statement on the relationship between the
natural sciences and the “cultural sciences” [Cassirer
1942], which contained, among other things, an explicit rejection of
Rudolf Carnap’s “physicalism” (see [Friedman 2000, chap.
7]). Cassirer, like so many German émigrés during this
period (including Carnap) then finally settled in the United States. He
taught at Yale from 1941 to 1944 and at Columbia in 1944–45. During
these years he produced two books in English [Cassirer 1944, 1946],
where the first, An Essay on Man, serves as a concise
introduction to the philosophy of symbolic forms (and thus Cassirer’s
distinctive philosophical perspective) as a whole and the second,
The Myth of the State, offers an explanation of the rise of
fascism on the basis of Cassirer’s conception of mythical thought. Two
important American philosophers were substantially influenced by
Cassirer during these years: Arthur Pap, whose work on the
“functional a priori” in physical theory [Pap 1946] took
shape under Cassirer’s guidance at Yale, and Susanne Langer, who
promulgated Cassirer’s philosophy of symbolic forms in aesthetic and
literary circles (see, e.g., [Langer 1942]). Cassirer’s American
influence thus embraced both sides of his philosophical personality.
One can only speculate on what this influence might have been if his
life had not been cut short suddenly by a heart attack while walking on
the streets of New York City on April 13, 1945.
As indicated above, Cassirer’s first writings were largely
historical in character – including a discussion of Leibniz’s
philosophy in its scientific context [Cassirer 1902] and a large-scale
work on the history of modern thought from the Renaissance through
Kant, Das Erkenntnisproblem in der Philosophie und Wissenschaft der
neueren Zeit [Cassirer 1906, 1907a]. The latter, in particular, is
a magisterial and deeply original contribution to both the history of
philosophy and the history of science. It is the first work, in fact,
to develop a detailed reading of the scientific revolution as a whole
in terms of the “Platonic” idea that the thoroughgoing
application of mathematics to nature (the so-called mathematization of
nature) is the central and overarching achievement of this revolution.
And Cassirer’s insight was explicitly acknowledged by such seminal
intellectual historians as E. A. Burtt, E. J. Dijksterhuis, and
Alexandre Koyré, who developed this theme later in the century
in the course of establishing the discipline of history of science as
we know it today (see, e.g., [Burtt 1925], [Koyré 1939],
[Dijksterhuis 1959]). Cassirer, for his part, simultaneously
articulates an interpretation of the history of modern philosophy as
the development and eventual triumph of what he calls “modern
philosophical idealism.” This tradition takes its inspiration,
according to Cassirer, from idealism in the Platonic sense, from an
appreciation for the “ideal” formal structures
paradigmatically studied in mathematics, and it is distinctively modern
in recognizing the fundamental importance of the systematic application
of such structures to empirically given nature in modern mathematical
physics – a progressive and synthetic process wherein
mathematical models of nature are successively refined and corrected
without limit. For Cassirer, it is Galileo, above all, in opposition to
both sterile Aristotelian-Scholastic formal logic and sterile
Aristotelian-Scholastic empirical induction, who first grasped the
essential structure of this synthetic process; and the development of
“modern philosophical idealism” by such thinkers as
Descartes, Spinoza, Gassendi, Hobbes, Leibniz, and Kant then consists
in its increasingly self-conscious philosophical articulation and
elaboration.
In both the Leibniz book and Das Erkenntnisproblem, then,
Cassirer interprets the development of modern thought as a whole from
the perspective of the basic philosophical principles of Marburg
neo-Kantianism: the idea that philosophy as epistemology
(Erkenntniskritik) has the articulation and elaboration of the
structure of modern mathematical natural science as its primary task;
the conviction that, accordingly, philosophy must take the “fact
of science” as its starting point and ultimately given datum;
and, most especially, the so-called “genetic” conception of
scientific knowledge as an ongoing, never completed synthetic process
(see below). From a contemporary point of view, Cassirer’s history may
therefore appear as both “Whiggish” and
“triumphalist,” but it cannot be denied that his work is,
nevertheless, extraordinarily rich, extraordinarily clear, and
extraordinarily illuminating. Cassirer examines an astonishing variety
of textual sources (including both major and minor figures) carefully
and in detail, and, without at all neglecting contrary tendencies
within the skeptical and empiricist traditions, he develops a
compelling portrayal of the evolution of “modern philosophical
idealism” through Kant which, even today, reads as extremely
compelling and acute.
Cassirer must thus be ranked as one of the very greatest
intellectual historians of the twentieth-century – and, indeed,
as one of the founders of this discipline as it came to be practiced
after 1900. He continued to contribute to intellectual history broadly
conceived throughout his career (most notably, perhaps, in his
fundamental studies of the Renaissance and the Enlightenment [Cassirer
1927a, 1932]), and he had a major influence on intellectual history
throughout the century. Aside from the history of science (see above),
Cassirer also decisively influenced intellectual historians more
generally, including, notably, the eminent intellectual and cultural
historian Peter Gay and the distinguished art historian Erwin Panofsky
(see, e.g., [Gay 1977], [Panofsky 1939]). As we shall see below,
intellectual (and later cultural) history is an integral part of
Cassirer’s distinctive philosophical methodology, so that, in his case,
the standard distinction between “historical” and
“systematic” work in philosophy ends up looking quite
artificial.
It was noted above that Cassirer’s early historical works interpret
the development of modern thought as a whole (embracing both philosophy
and the sciences) from the perspective of the philosophical principles
of Marburg neo-Kantianism, as initially articulated in [Cohen 1871]. On
the “genetic” conception of scientific knowledge, in
particular, the a priori synthetic activity of thought – the
activity Kant himself had called “productive synthesis”
– is understood as a temporal and historical developmental
process in which the object of science is gradually and successively
constituted as a never completed “X” towards which the
developmental process is converging. For Cohen, this process is
modelled on the methods of the infinitesimal calculus (in this
connection, especially, see [Cohen 1883]). Beginning with the idea of a
continuous series or function, our problem is to see how such a series
can be a priori generated step-by-step. The mathematical concept of a
differential shows us how this can be done, for the differential at a
point in the domain of a given function indicates how it is to be
continued on succeeding points. The differential therefore
infinitesimally captures the rule of the series as a whole, and thus
expresses, at any given point or moment of time, the general form of
the series valid for all times,
Cassirer’s first “systematic” work, Substance and
Function [Cassirer 1910], takes an essential philosophical step
beyond Cohen by explicitly engaging with the late nineteenth-century
developments in the foundations of mathematics and mathematical logic
that exerted a profound influence on twentieth-century philosophy of
mathematics and natural science. Cassirer begins by discussing the
problem of concept formation, and by criticizing, in particular, the
“abstractionist” theory characteristic of philosophical
empiricism, according to which general concepts are arrived at by
ascending inductively from sensory particulars. This theory, for
Cassirer, is an artifact of traditional Aristotelian logic; and his
main idea, accordingly, is that developments in modern formal logic
(the mathematical theory of relations) allows us definitively to
reject such abstractionism (and thus philosophical empiricism) on
behalf of the genetic conception of knowledge. In particular, the
modern axiomatic conception of mathematics, as exemplified especially
in Richard Dedekind’s work on the foundations of arithmetic and David
Hilbert’s work on the foundations of geometry, has shown that
mathematics itself has a purely formal and ideal, and thus entirely
non-sensible meaning. Pure mathematics describes abstract
“systems of order” – what we would now call
relational structures – whose concepts can in no way be
accommodated within abstractionist or inductivist philosophical
empiricism. Cassirer then employs this “formalist”
conception of mathematics characteristic of the late nineteenth
century to craft a new, and more abstract, version of the genetic
conception of knowledge. We conceive the developmental process in
question as a series or sequence of abstract formal structures
(“systems of order”), which is itself ordered by the
abstract mathematical relation of approximate backwards-directed
inclusion (as, for example, the new non-Euclidean geometries contain
the older geometry of Euclid as a continuously approximated limiting
case). In this way, we can conceive all the structures in our sequence
as continuously converging, as it were, on a final or limit structure,
such that all previous structures in the sequence are approximate
special or limiting cases of this final structure. The idea of such an
endpoint of the sequence is only a regulative ideal in the Kantian
sense – it is only progressively approximated but never in fact
actually realized.  Nevertheless, it still constitutes the a priori
“general serial form” of our properly empirical
mathematical theorizing, and, at the same time, it bestows on this
theorizing its characteristic form of objectivity.
In explicitly embracing late nineteenth-century work on the
foundations of mathematics, Cassirer comes into very close proximity
with early twentieth-century analytic philosophy. Indeed, Cassirer
takes the modern mathematical logic implicit in the work of Dedekind
and Hilbert, and explicit in the work of Gottlob Frege and the early
Bertrand Russell, as providing us with our primary tool for moving
beyond the empiricist abstractionism due ultimately to Aristotelian
syllogistic. The modern “theory of the concept,”
accordingly, is based on the fundamental notions of function, series,
and order (relational structure) – where these notions, from the
point of view of pure mathematics and pure logic, are entirely formal
and abstract, having no intuitive relation, in particular, to either
space or time. Nevertheless, and here is where Cassirer diverges from
most of the analytic tradition, this modern theory of the concept only
provides us with a genuine and complete alternative to Aristotelian
abstractionism and philosophical empiricism when it is embedded within
the genetic conception of knowledge. What is primary is the generative
historical process by which modern mathematical natural science
successively develops or evolves, and pure mathematics and pure logic
only have philosophical significance as elements of or abstractions
from this more fundamental developmental process of “productive
synthesis” aimed at the application of such pure formal
structures in empirical knowledge (see especially [Cassirer
1907b]).
Cassirer’s next important contribution to scientific epistemology
[Cassirer 1921] explores the relationship between Einstein’s general
theory of relativity and the “critical” (Marburg
neo-Kantian) conception of knowledge. Cassirer argues that Einstein’s
theory in fact stands as a brilliant confirmation of this conception.
On the one hand, the increasing use of abstract mathematical
representations in Einstein’s theory entirely supports the attack on
Aristotelian abstractionism and philosophical empiricism. On the other
hand, however, Einstein’s use of non-Euclidean geometry presents no
obstacle at all to our purified and generalized form of
(neo-)Kantianism. For we no longer require that any particular
mathematical structure be fixed for all time, but only that the
historical-developmental sequence of such structures continuously
converge. Einstein’s theory satisfies this requirement perfectly well,
since the Euclidean geometry fundamental to Newtonian physics is indeed
contained in the more general geometry (of variable curvature) employed
by Einstein as an approximate special case (as the regions considered
become infinitely small, for example). Moritz Schlick published a
review of Cassirer’s book immediately after its first appearance
[Schlick 1921], taking the occasion to argue (what later became a
prominent theme in the philosophy of logical empiricism) that
Einstein’s theory of relativity provides us with a decisive refutation
of Kantianism in all of its forms. This review marked the beginnings of
a respectful philosophical exchange between the two, as noted above,
and it was continued, in the context of Cassirer’s later work on the
philosophy of symbolic forms, in [Cassirer 1927b] (see [Friedman 2000,
chap. 7]).
Cassirer’s assimilation of Einstein’s general theory of relativity
marked a watershed in the development of his thought. It not only gave
him an opportunity, as we have just seen, to reinterpret the Kantian
theory of the a priori conditions of objective experience (especially
as involving space and time) in terms of Cassirer’s own version of the
genetic conception of knowledge, but it also provided him with an
impetus to generalize and extend the original Marburg view in such a
way that modern mathematical scientific knowledge in general is now
seen as just one possible “symbolic form” among other
equally valid and legitimate such forms. Indeed, [Cassirer 1921] first
officially announces the project of a general “philosophy of
symbolic forms,” conceived, in this context, as a philosophical
extension of “the general postulate of relativity.” Just
as, according to the general postulate of relativity, all possible
reference frames and coordinate systems are viewed as equally good
representations of physical reality, and, as a totality, are together
interrelated and embraced by precisely this postulate, similarly the
totality of “symbolic forms” – aesthetic, ethical,
religious, scientific – are here envisioned by Cassirer as
standing in a closely analogous relationship. So it is no wonder that,
subsequent to taking up the professorship at Hamburg in 1919, Cassirer
devotes the rest of his career to this new philosophy of symbolic
forms. (Cassirer’s work in the philosophy of natural science in
particular also continued, notably in [Cassirer 1936].)
At Hamburg Cassirer found a tremendous resource for the next stage
in his philosophical development – the Library of the Cultural
Sciences founded by Aby Warburg. Warburg was an eminent art historian
with a particular interest in ancient cult, ritual, myth, and magic as
sources of archetypal forms of emotional expression later manifested in
Renaissance art, and the Library therefore contained abundant materials
both on artistic and cultural history and on ancient myth and ritual.
Cassirer’s earliest works on the philosophy of symbolic forms appeared
as studies and lectures of the Warburg Library in the years 1922–1925,
and the three-volume Philosophy of Symbolic Forms itself
appeared, as noted above, in 1923, 1925, and 1929 respectively. Just as
the genetic conception of knowledge is primarily oriented towards the
“fact of science” and, accordingly, takes the historical
development of scientific knowledge as its ultimate given datum, the
philosophy of symbolic forms is oriented towards the much more general
“fact of culture” and thus takes the history of human
culture as a whole as its ultimate given datum. The conception of human
beings as most fundamentally “symbolic animals,”
interposing systems of signs or systems of expression between
themselves and the world, then becomes the guiding philosophical motif
for elucidating the corresponding conditions of possibility for the
“fact of culture” in all of its richness and diversity.
Characteristic of the philosophy of symbolic forms is a concern for
the more “primitive” forms of world-presentation underlying
the “higher” and more sophisticated cultural forms –
a concern for the ordinary perceptual awareness of the world expressed
primarily in natural language, and, above all, for the mythical view of
the world lying at the most primitive level of all. For Cassirer, these
more primitive manifestations of “symbolic meaning” now
have an independent status and foundational role that is quite
incompatible with both Marburg neo-Kantianism and Kant’s original
philosophical conception. In particular, they lie at a deeper,
autonomous level of spiritual life which then gives rise to the more
sophisticated forms by a dialectical developmental process. From
mythical thought, religion and art develop; from natural language,
theoretical science develops. It is precisely here that Cassirer
appeals to “romantic” philosophical tendencies lying
outside the Kantian and neo-Kantian tradition, deploys an historical
dialectic self-consciously derived from Hegel, and comes to terms with
the contemporary Lebensphilosophie of Wilhelm Dilthey, Henri
Bergson, Max Scheler, and Georg Simmel – as well as with the
closely related philosophy of Martin Heidegger.
The most basic and primitive type of symbolic meaning is
expressive meaning, the product of what Cassirer calls the
expressive function (Ausdrucksfunktion) of thought, which is
concerned with the experience of events in the world around us as
charged with affective and emotional significance, as desirable or
hateful, comforting or threatening. It is this type of meaning that
underlies mythical consciousness, for Cassirer, and which explains its
most distinctive feature, namely, its total disregard for the
distinction between appearance and reality. Since the mythical world
does not consist of stable and enduring substances that manifest
themselves from various points of view and on various occasions, but
rather in a fleeting complex of events bound together by their
affective and emotional “physiognomic” characters, it also
exemplifies its own particular type of causality whereby each part
literally contains the whole of which it is a part and can thereby
exert all the causal efficacy of the whole. Similarly, there is no
essential difference in efficacy between the living and the dead,
between waking experiences and dreams, between the name of an object
and the object itself, and so on. The fundamental Kantian
“categories” of space, time, substance (or object), and
causality thereby take on a distinctive configuration representing the
formal a priori structure, as it were, of mythical thought.
What Cassirer calls representative symbolic meaning, a
product of the representative function (Darstellungsfunktion)
of thought, then has the task of precipitating out of the original
mythical flux of “physiognomic” characters a world of
stable and enduring substances, distinguishable and reidentifiable as
such. Working together with the fundamentally pragmatic orientation
towards the world exhibited in the technical and instrumental use of
tools and artifacts, it is in natural language, according to Cassirer,
that the representative function of thought is then most clearly
visible. For it is primarily through the medium of natural language
that we construct the “intuitive world” of ordinary sense
perception on the basis of what Cassirer calls intuitive space and
intuitive time. The demonstrative particles (later articles) and tenses
of natural language specify the locations of perceived objects in
relation to the changing spatio-temporal position of the speaker
(relative to a “here-and-now”), and a unified
spatio-temporal order thus arises in which each designated object has a
determinate relation to the speaker, his/her point of view, and his/her
potential range of pragmatic activities. We are now able to distinguish
the enduring thing-substance, on the one side, from its variable
manifestations from different points of view and on different
occasions, on the other, and we thereby arrive at a new fundamental
distinction between appearance and reality. This distinction is then
expressed in its most developed form, for Cassirer, in the linguistic
notion of propositional truth and thus in the propositional copula.
Here the Kantian “categories” of space, time, substance,
and causality take on a distinctively intuitive or
“presentational” configuration.
The distinction between appearance and reality, as expressed in the
propositional copula, then leads dialectically to a new task of
thought, the task of theoretical science, of systematic inquiry into
the realm of truths. Here we encounter the third and final function of
symbolic meaning, the significative function
(Bedeutungsfunktion), which is exhibited most clearly,
according to Cassirer, in the “pure category of relation.”
For it is precisely here, in the scientific view of the world, that the
pure relational concepts characteristic of modern mathematics, logic,
and mathematical physics are finally freed from the bounds of sensible
intuition. For example, mathematical space and time arise from
intuitive space and time when we abstract from all demonstrative
relation to a “here-and-now” and consider instead the
single system of relations in which all possible
“here-and-now”-points are embedded; the mathematical system
of the natural numbers arises when we abstract from all concrete
applications of counting and consider instead the single potentially
infinite progression wherein all possible applications of counting are
comprehended; and so on. The eventual result is the world of modern
mathematical physics described in Cassirer’s earlier scientific works
– a pure system of formal relations where, in particular, the
intuitive concept of substantial thing has finally been replaced by the
relational-functional concept of universal law. So it is here, and only
here, that the generalized and purified form of (neo-)Kantianism
distinctive of the Marburg School gives an accurate characterization of
human thought. This characterization is now seen as a one-sided
abstraction from a much more comprehensive dialectical process which
can no longer be adequately understood without paying equal attention
to its more concrete and intuitive symbolic manifestations; and it is
in precisely this way, in the end, that the Marburg “fact of
science” is now firmly embedded within the much more general
“fact of culture” as a whole.
Cassirer emphasizes the kinship between his Philosophy of
Symbolic Forms and Hegel’s Phenomenology of Spirit
in the Prefaces to both the second (1925) and third (1929)
volumes. Recent commentators ([Skidelsky 2008] [Moss 2015]) have
illuminatingly built on this circumstance in further articulating the
relationship between Cassirer and Hegel. Considerable light is
shed on this relationship by Cassirer’s treatment of the problem
of the Naturwissenschaften and Geisteswissenschaften
in The Logic of the Cultural Sciences (1942). 
Hegel had conceived nature (Natur) and spirit
(Geist) as two different expressions of a single divine
infinite Reason, which manifests itself temporally from two different
points of view. His project of an encyclopedia of philosophical
sciences had three parts, the logic, the philosophy of nature, and the
philosophy of spirit, where the logic had the task of depicting the
dialectical conceptual structure of infinite divine Reason
itself. But this Hegelian project for securing the ultimate
logico-metaphysical identity of nature and spirit found ever fewer
followers as the century progressed, as the rising tide of
neo-Kantianism – aided by further developments within the natural
sciences instigated by Hermann von Helmholtz – undermined the
appeal of the original Naturphilosophie of Schelling and Hegel
together with their Absolute Reason. The result was the problem
of the Naturwissenschaften and Geisteswissenschaften
as it presented itself to the late nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries. [Cassirer 1942] develops a characteristically
methodological perspective on this problem by treating both disciplines
as empirical rather than “speculative” sciences
(in the sense of Schelling and Hegel) and elucidating their
methodological relationship within the philosophy of symbolic
forms.
[Cassirer 1942] argues that the empirical evidential basis for the
cultural sciences starts from the same realm of perceived physical
objects and processes distributed in space and time as do the natural
sciences – in this case documents, artifacts, rituals,
performances – but it goes on to imbue them with a symbolic
“sense” or “meaning” that is not at issue in
the natural sciences. We must distinguish, in particular, between
the representative function (Darstellungsfunktion) and the
expressive function (Ausdrucksfunktion) of thought, and only a
prejudice privileging “thing perception
[Dingwahrnehmen]” over “expressive perception
[Ausdruckswahrnehmen]” can support the idea that the
natural sciences have a more secure evidential basis than he cultural
sciences. (It is precisely this prejudice which, according to
Cassirer, lies behind Carnap’s “physicalism.”) 
For Cassirer, by contrast, both forms of perception are equally
legitimate. While the natural sciences take their evidence from
the sphere of thing perception, the cultural sciences take theirs from
the sphere of expressive perception – and, in the first instance,
from our lived experience in a human community sharing a common system
of “cultural meanings.” 
Yet we also have the capacity, in the cultural sciences, to
extend such meanings beyond their originally local contexts. 
Whereas intersubjective validity in the natural sciences rests on
universal laws of nature ranging over all (physical) places and times,
an analogous type of intersubjective validity arises in the cultural
sciences independently of such laws. Although every
“cultural object” has its own individual place in
(historical) time and (geographical-cultural) space, it can still
continuously approach a universal cultural meaning (in history or
ethnography) as it is continually interpreted and
reinterpreted from the perspective of other times and
places. Universal cultural meaning thereby emerges only
asymptotically, in a way similar to the genetic conception of knowledge
of the Marburg School (now seen as based on the significative function
of thought). Rather than an abstract mathematical relation of
backwards-directed inclusion, however, we are concerned, in the
historical cultural sciences, with a hermeneutical relation of
backwards-directed interpretation and reinterpretation – and, as a
result, there is no possibility, in these sciences, of reliably
predicting the future.
We can further illuminate Cassirer’s evolving attempt to
situate himself between Kant and Hegel by considering his evolving
relationship to Heidegger. In the 1929 Disputation at Davos
Cassirer challenged Heidegger’s radical “finitism” by
appealing to the presumed necessary and eternal validity found in both
the mathematical sciences and morality. And after the Disputation
Cassirer added five footnotes to Being and Time (1927) in
The Phenomenology of Knowledge before its publication, where
he suggested that his attempt to begin the Hegelian phenomenology with
mythical thought rather than ordinary sense perception could also
address Heidegger’s concerns. In 1931, however, Cassirer
published a review of [Heidegger 1929], which took a different approach
from his remarks at Davos. Instead of primarily emphasizing the
“eternal” validity found in the mathematical sciences,
Cassirer now placed his main emphasis on the ethical and aesthetic
dimensions of Kant’s thought, as expressed in the Critique of
Practical Reason and the Critique of the Power of
Judgement. His main point was that, whereas the
Transcendental Analytic of the Critique of Pure Reason may
indeed be written from the perspective of human finitude, the rest of
Kant’s system embeds this perspective within a wider conception
of “the intelligible substrate of humanity.” 
[Cassirer 1931] mirrors his just-completed attempt to embed the
Marburg genetic conception of knowledge within a wider conception of
the development of human culture as a whole. The way in which
Cassirer situates his new philosophy of culture with respect to both
Hegel and Heidegger then illuminates his fundamental divergence from
Hegel – as it came to be expressed in Cassirer’s works on
history and culture after he left Germany for good in 1933. By
building the Marburg conception of knowledge, in his new philosophy of
culture, on top of the more primitive forms of mythical thought
[Ausdruckswahrnehmen] and ordinary language
[Dingwahrnehmen], Cassirer takes himself to have done justice
to the insights of both Hegel and Heidegger while avoiding both the
infinite divine reason of the former and the radical human finitude of
the latter. Yet he has now conceded to Heidegger that
Kant’s theory of human cognition involves only the notion of
potential rather than actual infinity. In particular,
Kant’s treatment of the regulative use of the ideas of reason
from a merely theoretical point of view leaves their actual
content quite indeterminate. In the case of the idea of
transcendental freedom, for example, we are only able to determine it
negatively (from a theoretical point of view), as a species of
causality that is not bound by the conditions of
time-determination governing the phenomenal world. 
In the Critique of Practical Reason, however, Kant asserts
that transcendental freedom acquires a determinate content from pure
practical reason, through our immediate awareness of the moral
law as normatively binding on our will (as a fact of reason), and that
the (practical) objective reality thereby conferred on this idea can
then be transferred to the ideas of God and Immortality. This is
because the moral law unconditionally commands us to seek the Highest
Good – the realization of the Kingdom of Ends here on
earth – which is an infinite task requiring
infinite (practical) faith and hope. The resulting
divergence from the indeterminate and merely potential infinity arising
within theoretical reason is visible in the famous passage on the
starry heavens above me and the moral law within me at the end of the
Critique of Practical Reason, from which Cassirer quotes in
his 1931 review of Heidegger.
What the Critique of the Power of Judgement adds to this
conception is then the further idea that rigorous mathematical
scientific understanding of the phenomenal world
(“mechanistic” understanding) runs out considerably before
we arrive at the history of human culture, so that the future is in
principle open to the possibility of our continuously approximating the
Highest Good without limit. But Cassirer, as we have just seen,
has now achieved a parallel result though his methodological
distinction between the natural and the cultural sciences. He is
thereby in a position to replace what he takes to be the oppressive
(speculative) infinity of Hegel’s Absolute Reason with the
liberating (practical) infinity of our human (practical) reason
[Cassirer 1939, 28]: “In his philosophy of history Hegel
wanted to provide the definitive speculative demonstration that reason
is substance and infinite power. For this, however, we must,
according to him, above all attain the insight that reason is
‘not so powerless as to pass for a mere ideal, a mere
ought.’ This form of proof has become shaky; the
critique of the foundations of the Hegelian system has pulled the
ground out from under it. If we turn back from the Hegelian
meaning of idea to the Kantian, from the idea as ‘absolute
power’ back to the idea as ‘infinite problem,’ we
must of course give up the speculative optimism of the Hegelian view of
history. But, at the same time, we thereby also avoid fatalistic
pessimism with its prophecies and visions of decline. [Our]
acting again has a free path to decide for itself out of its own force
and responsibility, and it knows that the direction and future of
culture will depend on the manner of this decision.” It is
in this way, for Cassirer, that our cultural future always lies open
and is always up to us.