Although philosophers have contemplated the meaning and value of
eugenics at least since Plato recommended a state-run program of
mating intended to strengthen the guardian class in
his Republic, the modern version of eugenics had its start
with the 19th century cousin of Charles Darwin, British
scientist Francis Galton (1883). Galton was interested in
“improving human stock” through scientific management of
mating; his explicit goal was to create better humans. His ideas were
taken up widely in the early part of the 20th century by
seemingly well-intended scientists and policy makers, particularly in
the United States, Britain, and the Scandinavian countries. Notable
eugenicists included Alexander Graham Bell and Margaret Sanger. (For
an excellent history of eugenics, see Kevles 1985.)
Eugenicists had two-fold aims: to encourage people of good health to
reproduce together to create good births (what is known as
“positive” eugenics), and to end certain diseases and
disabilities by discouraging or preventing others from reproducing
(what is known as “negative” eugenics). In the United
States, programs to encourage positive eugenics involved the creation
of “Fitter Family Fairs” in which families competed for
prizes at local county fairs, much in the way that livestock is judged
for conformation and physical dexterity (Stern 2002). Negative
eugenics took the form of encouraged or forced sterilizations of men
and women deemed unfit to reproduce (in the language of the day, this
included individuals who were “poor, mentally insane,
feeble-minded, idiots, drunken” and more). At the time, many
eugenicists seemed to assume that social and behavioral conditions,
such as poverty, vagrancy or prostitution, would be passed from parent
to child, inherited as traits rather than shared as common social
situations. (For an interesting discussion of the relevant social
moral epistemology, see Buchanan 2007.) 
Racist, sexist, and classist assumptions pervaded the discourse.
Alarm calls were raised about the lower birth rates among white
Protestant Americans compared to the large immigrant Catholic
populations of Italian and Irish descent. German scientists and
policymakers visited the United States to learn from their methods,
and when the Nazis came to power in Germany, they began eugenic
policies of their own. Early German policies called for involuntary
euthanasia of people in institutions whose physical or mental
illnesses were considered incurable. Such individuals were considered
to have “lives unworthy of life” (lebensunwertes
Leben). The Nazis also encouraged selective breeding for Aryan
traits (e.g., athletic, blond and blue-eyed). This policy quickly
expanded to include bans on marriage between particular groups, forced
sterilization, and then internment in concentration camps for
individuals belonging to groups deemed inferior (i.e., people who were
disabled, homosexual, diagnosed with psychiatric conditions,
communists, considered to be Roma/gypsies, and/or Jewish). The
purported aim was to promote the “health” of the German
population by controlling those who were “unhealthy.”
Prisoners faced extremely hard labor, medical experimentation that was
torturous and designed to test the limits of the human body (Lifton
1986) and daily degradation and abuse.  Eventually, Nazis escalated
their eugenic program to the “final solution” of death
camps, ultimately killing more than six million Jewish people in the
name of promoting Germany's health.
Following the end of WWII, the term “eugenic” was so
closely associated with the horrific programs of Nazi Germany that
eugenics societies across the world changed their names (e.g., the
American Eugenics Society became the Society for the Study of Social
Biology) and tempered their aims. Yet many of the same practices and
beliefs continued under a different guise. Involuntary eugenic
sterilizations of “feeble-minded” women in a variety of
states didn't officially end until the 1970s, and may continue covertly in some state institutions. California had the highest rate of
involuntary sterilizations, which were widely performed on prison
inmates, people in mental institutions, and women considered to be bad
mothers. Such sterilizations were motivated by both perceived
individual and social goods, but had deep-seated prejudice as well as
scientific inaccuracies built into their assumptions (Stern 2005).
Concepts of “feeble-mindedness” were historically
entangled in deeply problematic ways with ideas of race, class and
gender (Stubblefield 2007).
Later, attempts to promote positive eugenics were renewed with the
creation of the Repository for Germinal Choice, a sperm bank created
in 1978 with the idea of collecting sperm from Nobel laureates, others
deemed “geniuses” and Olympic level athletes. Given the
availability of in vitro fertilization, women could now
choose to reproduce with men presumed to have high-quality genes,
without needing to form relationships with them. Although most Nobel
prizewinners proved reluctant to donate to the sperm bank, the general
idea took off. Even today, print and online ads in college newspapers
regularly request sperm or eggs from donors who meet certain
qualifications for health, intelligence, athleticism and/or
attractiveness. Individuals or couples who require gamete donation to
reproduce can shop around for a donor who meets their criteria.
The widespread practice of prenatal genetic testing (traditionally
through chorionic villus sampling or amniocentesis in the second
trimester of pregnancy, but now more routinely done through
non-invasive blood tests in the first trimester, at least as a first
screen), similarly presents the opportunity for individuals or couples
to identify genes or genetic markers for traits they prefer for their
fetuses not to have. If prenatal testing identifies an undesired gene,
prospective parents may choose to continue the pregnancy, or to abort
the fetus, often with the plan to later attempt a new pregnancy.
Studies suggest that in the United States, 90% of
“positive” diagnoses from prenatal testing result in
abortion (Rothschild 2005). With the advent of pre-implantation
genetic diagnosis, prospective parents can choose to use in
vitro fertilization, and then test early cells of the created
embryos to identify embryos with genes they prefer, or prefer to
avoid. In this way, they avoid the potential need for abortion by
choosing to implant only embryos that contain the desired genes. The
aim of this practice certainly appears eugenic, though without an
obviously coercive structure, and for the benefit of the individual
family. The profession of genetic counseling, started in the 1990s,
provides prospective parents with detailed information about the
meaning of the tests, and the opportunity for discussion of test
results. In part due to concerns about eugenic overtones, genetic
counseling is built on a policy of “non-directiveness” to
ensure that the reproductive autonomy of prospective parents is
respected. That tenet of genetic counseling has been challenged by
scholars who argue that we ought to balance parental autonomy with the
child's future autonomy (see, e.g., Davis 2010).
Finally, advances in genetic technology suggest the possibility that
our ability to test for (if not manipulate directly) a much larger
array of genes and genetic markers related to a wide variety of
diseases and traits may be on the near horizon. Prenatal testing
panels currently include attention to conditions such as Trisomy 13,
Trisomy 18, Trisomy 21 (Down Syndrome), Tay-Sachs, and more. Yet we
allow adults to be tested for genetic markers linked to late onset
disorders such as breast cancer, Huntington's disease, and Alzheimer's
disease. Should such genetic tests be available on prenatal testing
panels if parents request them? Or for all prospective parents who
request prenatal testing? What about other additions that might be of
interest to particular parents, even if the genetic linkages to the
particular traits are less direct or even only mildly predictive:
diabetes, obesity, homosexuality, or psychiatric conditions such as
bipolar disorder or schizophrenia? (Informative discussions of the
expansion of genetic testing can be found in Davis 2010 and Botkin
2003.) Deciding how to deal with the vast array of potentially
genetically-linked markers—as a society, and potentially as
individual prospective parents—is a monumental task that
requires clarity about the benefits and drawbacks of testing, and
requires us to revisit the meaning of eugenics, and the problems
associated with it.
A much simpler and more clearly linked trait of interest is
chromosomal sex. In the United States, parents can choose to find out
their fetus's chromosomal sex via amniocentesis, or through an
increasing number of early first trimester blood tests. In the U.K.,
by contrast, parents typically do not learn the sex of their fetus
until birth, a policy put in place by the Human Fertility and
Embryology Authority (HFEA) with the aim of avoiding sex
discrimination and shoring up the line between genetic intervention
for disease and non-disease traits. One of the concerns raised by
critics of sex selection is what Mary Ann Warren deemed gendercide, in
her book of the same name (Warren 1985). Indeed, evidence from around
the world suggests a relatively strong bias in favor of male children
(South Korea is now an exception), or at least male children first
(Davis 2010). China and India, countries where cultural norms and
practices still decidedly favor men, are facing significant sex ratio
imbalances as a result of the use of technologies (and non-technical
practices such as infanticide) to select against girls (for a
discussion, see Davis 2010: Chapter 5). In response to concerns about
sex ratios and underlying sexism, the American Congress of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) has recommended a policy of
only allowing sex selective interventions to be used to avoid
sex-linked diseases, or for “family balancing” purposes
(e.g., only for the second child in a family)(ACOG 2007). Concerns
about the uses of sex selective technologies against a background of
unjust sexism (see Bayles 1984; Rogers et al. 2007) illustrate the
difficulties of arguing straightforwardly for unfettered reproductive
choice about the traits of children.
As this short history should make clear, past, state-run, involuntary
eugenic endeavors have been unjust and socially disastrous.  Yet
certain practices that have eugenic features continue today, albeit
framed differently. Prenatal testing and preimplantation genetic
diagnosis, for instance, are understood to enhance patient choice and
expand prenatal knowledge, even as they are clearly used by
prospective parents to determine which individuals should come into
existence.  Should they be considered eugenic practices? Is that
necessarily morally troubling? As technological advances push us to
figure out how many more, if any, kinds of genes and genetic markers
we ought to be able to test for or choose prenatally, we may need to
reassess our current practices to explore their justifications, and
sort through the ways in which they are eugenic and potentially
morally troubling.
 
Advocates of liberal eugenics intend to distinguish it from troubling
historical predecessors by highlighting four main differences. First,
it is individual in nature rather than state-sponsored. The
intended benefit of any eugenic intervention is individual/private
welfare (that of the child-to-be, or of the family), rather than the
welfare of the state as a whole. Second, it is premised on
individual liberty, the freedom of parents to choose
according to their own values and conceptions of the good life. The
state does not mandate contraception, sterilization, prenatal testing,
abortion, or any other form of eugenic intervention (note: there are
potential exceptions in which judges or states have offered long-term
contraception such as Norplant as a condition of probation related to
a criminal offense or for the continued provision of welfare, see
e.g., Dresser 1996). Rather, it allows individuals to choose among a
range of alternatives. Third, it presumes value pluralism,
recognizing that individual parents will often desire different things
for their offspring. This means allowing others to choose in ways that
we ourselves would not, in the interest of preserving a liberal
society that is neutral about particular conceptions of the good. The
aim of a liberal eugenic program is to expand reproductive
choices for individuals, in contrast to the historical eugenic
programs that clearly cut off reproductive options for many. (That
said, even liberal eugenics advocates typically presume
that some limits would need to be in place, to ensure that
prospective parents could not act in ways clearly contrary to the
interests of their future children, or in ways that seem clearly
vicious; how and where those limits would be set are intensely
controversial, as will be discussed below.) Finally, advocates of
liberal eugenics highlight the difference between the kind and quality
of the science underlying the reproductive policies. Past eugenic
programs relied on views of race, intelligence, and genetics that
were, from our current perspective, “hopelessly wrong”
(Agar 2004: 7). A cursory summary of these kinds of distinctions
between old and “new” eugenics can be found in Caplan
2004, and the same collection of distinctions underlies most liberal
or “new” eugenic arguments. 
Many theorists argue in favor of permitting parents to make choices
about their children's genetics, while explicitly arguing against any
obligation to improve or enhance their children. Such arguments run
the gamut from a completely laissez-faire market system—or
“genetic supermarket”—of the sort considered by
Robert Nozick (1974: 315) to a more highly regulated system, with
controls to protect the well-being of future children as well as
socially valued goods (e.g., rough equality, efforts to eliminate
discrimination) that might be put at risk in a completely free market
environment. Common to these arguments is a presumption that treatment
of disease may be obligatory, while enhancement is not. (For an
excellent discussion of this distinction and its problems, see Parens
1998a.)
Liberal eugenics arguments often start by recognizing the value of
treatment of disease. Disease, typically defined as a negative
departure from species typical functioning (Boorse 1975; Daniels
1994), can interfere with an individual's participation in society
and/or individual flourishing. Buchanan et al. (2000) link disease to
a reduction of opportunity, and so argue that provision of medical
treatment for disease is a way for the state to promote equality of
opportunity. Parents are obliged to ensure that their children get
medical treatment for disease, and can be charged with negligence if
they fail to do so. Only diseases that result in relatively small
negative effects on participation (e.g., mild asthma) or where the
overall benefits of treatment are still somewhat uncertain (e.g., some
cancer treatments) can go untreated. Parents whose conceptions of the
good life do not include medical treatment for disease—as in
some religious communities—are not allowed to impose this view
on their children, because the children deserve the opportunity to
choose to adopt those views or not when they are adults.  Mandatory
life-saving treatment of their childhood diseases helps to ensure that
they survive to make such decisions as adults (Feinberg 1980). This
requirement has been the subject of some debate (see, e.g., DesAutels,
Battin and May 1999).
Buchanan et al. (2000) note that as technology advances, theories of
justice need no longer consider “natural inequalities” to
be given, or outside the scope of distribution. If equality of
opportunity is one of the aims of a society, then, provision of
certain forms of genetic intervention—including interventions
that determine who will be brought into existence—may
become owed to future people. If parents can decide between
implanting an embryo that carries a genetic marker associated with a
serious disease— e.g., Tay Sachs—or an embryo without that
marker, they would be obliged to choose the latter, in the name of
promoting the health and well-being of the future child (impersonally,
perhaps, given the non-identity problem). To be clear, though, they do
not suggest that all prospective parents would be obliged to seek
reproductive counseling and use in vitro fertilization in
order to fulfill their parenting or impersonal duties. Such a
requirement would be overly demanding on parents and an infringement
on their procreative liberty, and would be unlikely to succeed in any
case, given the prohibitive costs and relatively low success rates of
IVF treatment. Most liberal eugenics advocates (Agar 2004; Glover
2006; Green 2007) move from a commonly accepted position of the
requirement to treat serious diseases in children, to a requirement
for people using genetic interventions (e.g., pre-implantation genetic
diagnosis or perhaps one day technology to create “designer
babies”) in reproduction to use them in ways that avoid serious
diseases.  The obligation doesn't extend to mandates on prenatal
testing or abortion to avoid giving birth to a child with a serious
disease, because of considerations related to women's rights to their
bodies and religious freedom.
Treatments for disease aside, liberal eugenics advocates recognize
that many prospective parents may be interested in enhancing their
children. Why settle for the likelihood of normal functioning if one
could safely engineer improvements in functioning? At least two
reasons lead most such theorists to stop short of advocating a moral
obligation to enhance. First, there is the difficulty of determining
just what counts as an improvement (beyond addressing serious
disease). Second, many see value in diversity and in allowing many
Millian “experiments in living” to take place. For
instance, Agar (2004) questions whether it is obviously better for a
child to be highly intelligent (roughly approximated by a likely IQ of
160). Might some parents reasonably choose a more moderate level of
intelligence for a child, presuming he will have greater social
opportunities in the latter case? Perhaps the overall freedom of the
child of moderate intelligence will be greater than that of the child
with high intelligence, even though on that one dimension his
capacities are comparatively lower. Erik Parens' provocatively titled
essay—“Is Better Always Good?” (Parens
1998a)—suggests we may have reason to question the general
notion that adding more of a capacity is good. The chapters in Parens'
edited volume Enhancing Human Traits (Parens 1998b) point to
a variety of ways the enhancement project might be misled by a
seemingly valuable target that ends up producing negative effects or
undermining other values we cherish. Additionally, even if many people
agree on the value of an enhancement and it becomes so common that
practically its possession is required for equal participation in
society, we might want to resist the temptation to make that
intervention obligatory. For example, Agar (2004: 85)
suggests this might happen with the trait “being somewhat
happier than is now normal” if treatment tied to 5-HTTLPR, a
genetic marker associated with upbeat temperament, became common. The
now-typical temperament is not a disease, but a mere variety within
the capacious normal range of functioning, and would likely remain so
even in a future society of 5-HTTLPR-enhanced
people. A liberal eugenics cannot mandate any one view of the
good life for its citizens.
Still, even mere permissibility to use genetic enhancements raises
significant moral concerns. Critics fear obsessively focused
prospective parents who design their children in ways that are
overbearing or narrowly focused on a particular goal of the parents
(Kass 2003; Sandel 2007). To avoid this problem, liberal eugenics
advocates propose various limits on genetic interventions for
enhancement purposes. There is widespread agreement that interventions
should not harm the future child (by creating a life so miserable as
to be not worth living, as might be the subject of a wrongful life
suit).  Beyond that, variations include, for instance: (1) only
enhancements that will benefit the future children no matter what life
plan they decide to pursue and that do not reinforce problematic
social norms (Agar 2004), or (2) only enhancements that preserve a
child's right to an open future (Davis
2010), or (3) only
enhancements that preserve open futures and protect some central core
of our human nature (Glover 2006), or (4) only enhancements that
rational people will agree can be understood to be in the best
interest of the child (Green 2007).
How might one harm a child through choosing genetic traits? Perhaps by
selecting for traits that clearly cause significant suffering and a
typically short life span (e.g., Tay-Sachs disease, Lesch-Nyan
syndrome). Such a requirement may seem a bit unnecessary, given that
most parents do not intentionally desire painful states for their
children, and would not seek to engineer them in this way. Also,
relatively few genetic conditions will be so inherently debilitating
as to make life obviously miserable, to the extent that one could not
say that life is, on balance, a benefit.
The more contentious territory has to do with choosing between lives
that would be worth living, but have different features. How might we
ensure a child's capacity to choose from a variety of life plans, or
the right to an open future? Davis argues that “parents ought
not deliberately to substantively constrain the ability of their
children to make a wide variety of life choices when they become
adults” (Davis 2010: 84). In other words, if they use
genetic interventions in reproduction, they must not use them to
narrow the range of options their child will likely have. So parents'
choices must not substantively diminish the future options for their
children, though they might in some way alter the range or nature of
those futures possibilities. For Agar, the phrasing is slightly
different: parents must not “infringe on a child's ability to
choose a life plan and to successfully pursue it” (2004:
102). He employs Sen's capabilities approach, identifying various
important human capabilities that individuals ought to have, and can
then decide whether or not to exercise as they pursue their chosen
life plans.
Davis and Agar both point to deafness as a useful case for
clarification. If hearing is a core human capacity, or even if it is
simply necessary for a wide variety of life plans, then engineering a
child to be deaf will limit that child's future options. This is not,
of course, to say that deaf individuals cannot live rewarding lives in
which they flourish. Indeed, Agar recognizes that in some
circumstances, lacking a capacity like hearing will only lead to a
small difference in relative freedom, and if so, then we might not
have a “general requirement to replace genetic arrangements
linked with deafness” (2004: 105). On his view, prospective
parents could engineer a child to be hearing because it would increase
her real freedom, but could not engineer a child to be deaf, though
they might be permitted to leave a deaf fetus/child deaf. Weighing in
on the now widely analyzed case of two Deaf (the capital
“D” marks membership in the linguistic-cultural group of
the Deaf; a small “d” only signifies the physical state of
the body) women who sought out a deaf sperm donor in hopes of having a
deaf child (Spriggs 2002; Mundy 2002), Agar argues that they reduced
their child's real freedom by attempting to ensure that he would be
deaf. (One might still wonder whether their method of reproducing
should even count as an enhancement technology for Agar, given that
had one of the women simply partnered with the deaf man, the genetic
deafness of their child would not be an issue of engineering.) Davis,
too, acknowledges the claims of Deaf culture, and the reasons parents
might prefer to have a child more like themselves, but argues that
deliberately trying to conceive a child who will have relatively
limited options—limited, in her view, not just due to enduring
discrimination and social constraints, but also to bodily
deficits—is morally impermissible.
A somewhat different argument is offered by Green (2007), who rejects
the “right to an open future” language, in part because he
thinks parents must be allowed to do things that are more for their
own interests than for the sake of their children, even when doing so
affects how the children develop. He argues that parents are allowed
to
 mold the child's nature in directions shaped by the
parents' own hopes for their child, including the use of gene
modification… [W]ithin limits, parents have the right to impose
their dreams on a child. (2007: 127)
Following William Ruddick, he thinks of parents as both guardians and
gardeners (2007: 125)—protecting their children so that they can
grow as they will, but also shaping how they grow in line
with the parents' hopes. Because he thinks “parental love almost
always prevails” (2007: 114)—when we are faced with the
actual child of ours, we will (typically) love it, regardless of its
traits—he finds it morally acceptable that parents might want to
choose traits for their children that do not strictly speaking
preserve an open future. If parents want a child with a good shot at
an athletic career, for instance, why not allow them to engineer for
athleticism or great vision? Doing so might narrow other life
opportunities, but not to the extent that the child couldn't choose
how his life goes. His future would still be open enough.
Green emphasizes parental reproductive autonomy, and the continuum
between shaping the future possibilities for our existing children
through parental values, education, religion, and more, and doing so
through genetic interventions. Although he acknowledges the
possibility that 
 subtle types of pressure that the
critics fear—coercion from non-governmental actors and
self-coercion as parents race to keep up with the Joneses—could
happen, (2007: 164)
he dismisses these worries as overstated, and not significantly
different from pressures we already experience and apparently find
acceptable. Green's central recommendation, then, is that genetic
interventions should be aimed at what is reasonably in the
child's best interests (2007: 216), recognizing that the parents' own
interests are also relevant. By “reasonably” he means
that 
 it is not enough for parents to think that
something is in their child's best interests; their judgment must
accord with that of most other informed members of society; (2007:
216)
once that condition is satisfied, parents would be permitted to
choose, according to their own tastes and preferences, within a wide
range of options of relatively “all-purpose” traits (2007:
218). Just who the “informed” members of society are, is
of course, a matter of some contention (for discussion, see Hayry
2010).
Children's future options can, of course, be limited due to the makeup
of their bodies, or to the unwelcoming or oppressive social situations
into which they are born, or both. Given the history of eugenics, most
liberal eugenics advocates recognize the need to attend carefully to
unjust social circumstances and to control for existing bias. For
instance, if we could change a child's future sexuality through
genetic intervention, it might appear that we should permit parents to
engineer in either direction, because heterosexuality and
homosexuality both permit the successful pursuit of a wide variety of
life plans. But if we attend to current social situations, we will
recognize that homophobia is still common in many quarters, despite
advances in anti-discrimination legislation and improvements in at
least some conscious attitudes, and people who identify as homosexual
are more likely to experience social ostracism, bullying, and physical
assault. As such, engineering a homosexual child might appear to
decrease a child's future options in this society. Thus, if
we take the social situation into account, we would only allow
engineering to create heterosexual children. Yet doing so would
“end up colluding with prejudice, worsening its effects”
(Agar 2004: 109–110).
Given existing social norms—even those that are unjust—one
might worry that a “free market” approach to genetic
enhancement of future children would result in pressure toward
homogeneity. Parents who are free to choose characteristics for their
offspring may be inclined to choose similarly, either because they
agree (perhaps wrongly) that those characteristics are better, or
because they worry their child will be at a substantial disadvantage
relative to other children if they choose what is unpopular (or simply
fail to intervene to ensure what is popular). If so, societal
pressures on parental choices will have effects similar to policies
enforced by a state—homogeneity of traits selected across the
population. In this case, it appears that enhancement technologies
“will grant racism and homophobia an unprecedented
efficacy” (Agar 2004: 148) and as such, “concern for
prospective welfare may result in genocide by stealth” (2004:
149). Davis (2010) shares this kind of concern, but focuses more on
sex selection than selection in respect to sexual orientation.
One way to address this problem is to note that some characteristics
will only be harmful to the individual in a morally defective social
environment, while others will be harmful regardless of the
environment (e.g., for Agar, this gets to the difference between
genetic markers linked to homosexuality and deafness, respectively,
2004: 151). In the first case, we seem to misdiagnose the problem if
we think altering the genome will help address it. What we need to do
instead is change attitudes and social practices. In the second case,
however, he argues that the condition itself (deafness) limits options
for the child, even if we can recognize some of the disadvantages of
the condition to be social.
We might nevertheless think it could be permissible to use genetic
engineering to address social problems, if the genetic interventions
are at hand and would reduce some suffering, and the social solutions
are distant and rather unlikely. For instance, Agar acknowledges that
it would be preferable to eliminate racism (2004: 155), but given how
entrenched it is in many societies, he considers whether we might want
to allow some genetic interventions (e.g., engineering lighter skin
tone) that could help individuals avoid suffering from it. Ultimately,
however, he claims that we should not allow this kind of genetic
engineering—not simply because it seems to collude with a
morally defective social environment, but because
it reinforces and perhaps exacerbates that
environment (it undermines work toward changing the morally defective
social environment) (2004: 156–157). 
Green also recommends against interventions that would reinforce or
increase unjust inequality and discrimination, economic inequality, or
racism (2007: 216–226), but he does so with some reservations.
Parents understandably might want to reduce social burdens on their
children through genetic interventions, and if we make doing so
illegal, they will likely go elsewhere or underground to get what they
want. He also—optimistically—suggests that stereotypes and
fashions ebb and flow, and may be self-corrective (2007: 227).
Some advocates of liberal eugenics more carefully explore the
possibility that our current social norms might be “morally
defective” in respect to disability. For instance, Glover
defends the permissibility of parental choice within some limits, but
he investigates just what counts as a disability. He proposes that a
disability involves a functional limitation that “impairs the
capacity for human flourishing” (2006: 9), either by itself or
in conjunction with social disadvantage. Thus, although racism results
in social disadvantage, having dark skin is not itself a disability,
because it has no associated functional limitation. Some conditions
previously considered disabilities—e.g.,
achondroplasia—need not be disabilities at all, according to
this view (for more on achondroplasia, see Miller 2006 and Davis
2010).  Glover understands “functional limitations” as a
contrast to normal human functioning, a species-based notion that
itself involves significant degrees of variation and the matter of
setting (rather than discovering) boundaries. As such,
“normal” is not purely statistical, but also partly
normative (see also Buchanan et al. 2000). Glover recognizes the
conceptual messiness of “normal functioning” but still
prefers it to alternatives. If an individual prefers a bodily state
that might otherwise count as a functional limitation (his example is
Asperger's syndrome), then it isn't a disability for her
(2006: 14); it doesn't affect her flourishing. He is much less
sanguine about blindness and deafness. Both conditions, he suggests,
confer significant functional limitations, and although
they can certainly allow individuals to have lives of great
worth and flourishing—he explores conflicting first person
accounts about going blind and gaining sight to explore the positive
sides of the conditions and the negative side of normalizing (2006:
15–22)—he concludes that they are nonetheless disabilities
that confer clear disadvantages (related to navigation, safety,
etc.). As such, they can be understood to be disabilities that are
understandably acceptable to some, but that ought not be chosen for
future children. Such future children, like their parents, might be
able to flourish with the condition, but engineering it means
intentionally impairing at least some capacities commonly relevant to
flourishing. Interestingly, Glover concludes that the Deaf lesbian
couple who sought a deaf sperm donor did nothing wrong in conceiving
their deaf child (the child cannot be harmed by his clearly worthwhile
existence), but he argues they would be wrong in not giving him a
cochlear implant if the technology were perfected (2006:
26). Glover's attention to the difficulty of defining disability is
helpful, and he emphasizes the importance of taking seriously the
perspectives of people who have lived with the disabilities in
question. Such first person accounts are, however, but one source of
information about the relative value of the condition in question.
A different sort of societal harm that might follow from the
permissibility of genetic enhancement is increasing polarization
between people who have the finances to afford genetic enhancements,
and those who do not. The wealthy already have advantages; if we allow
them to give their children genetic enhancements—such that they
are smarter, faster, stronger, and with less need to sleep,
etc.—they will be ever more competitive, and liable to increase
the divide between rich and poor. (Lee Silver explores this dystopian
possibility with the GenRich and the Naturals in his Remaking
Eden, 1997.) One way to avoid the problem would be to attempt to
make genetic enhancements available to all, at least for enhancements
that offer significant advantages (Buchanan 2011). Traits that only
offer positional advantages—being taller than, perhaps faster
than—would then be self-defeating (Buchanan et al. 2000) if
available to all, and the allure might fade. Other
traits—perhaps enhanced concentration, memory, or
immunity—might be advantageous regardless of how many people
have them. Providing funding to improve accessibility would then be
necessary in order to ensure fairness. Many proponents of liberal
eugenics treat the threat of polarization as a relatively minor
concern. For example, Green (2007) notes that all innovations have a
period of diffusion, during which early adopters pay higher prices and
take some risks for the potential of leading the way forward, and
then, if the technology is successful, prices drop and the wider
public gains access through the market. In Beyond Humanity,
Buchanan compares genetic intervention to literacy, numeracy and
agriculture: these innovations were only available to a few at the
start, but that does not take away from their great benefits to
humanity. 
In addition to considering concerns about social effects of genetic
enhancement related to homogeneity and polarization, Glover also looks
at whether we need to resist some forms of genetic enhancement in
order to defend a “central core of human nature” (2006:
81). What might that be? Not simply all the functional states we
currently have—those could well change over time, perhaps for
the better.  Indeed, some advocates of liberal eugenics are
particularly attentive to the “status quo bias” (Green
2007; Bostrom and Ord 2006) and likely unjustifiable intuitions that
our present nature is worth preserving (Buchanan 2011). Nonetheless,
Glover proposes two potential features of great value in our current
nature: our capacity to rein in our violent and destructive
tendencies, and our capacity to aim for a good life (for Glover, this
is about a balance between happiness and flourishing). These are very
tentatively offered, with many qualifications about possible linkages
to other traits of value, and the likelihood that we might be more
successful in securing containment through non-genetic means. Still,
the suggestion is that if parents might be tempted to select for
genetic markers linked to, for instance, extreme selfishness or
emotional coldness, in an attempt to have their child succeed in
gaining power and riches, doing so would seem to endanger parts of our
nature that we can widely agree are deeply valuable for society as a
whole. Therefore, on Glover's view, even a liberal eugenics should
exclude such choices.
In sum, theorists who argue for the permissibility of genetic
enhancement emphasize the need to protect the future child's options,
so long as doing so does not reinforce unjust social prejudices or
threaten deeply held core values. At the same time, they seek to
preserve parental reproductive autonomy, and to expand rather than
reduce parental options. One problem with this thesis, to be explored
more in depth below in the section on critiques, is the appropriate
scope of its central claims. Some critics (e.g., Asch 2000; Saxton
2000; Sparrow 2005), for instance, suggest that it fails to recognize
that many of the presumptions about social prejudice could be extended
to prejudice against people with disabilities, many of whom live
relatively well with traits or characteristics that genetic enhancers
may well desire to eliminate or attempt to improve upon. If we ought
not collude with and exacerbate the social prejudices of sexism and
racism through our reproductive genetic choices, why is doing the same
for ableist norms permissible? The cynical critic might wonder if
there are, in fact, any traits that will meet the criteria for being
relatively all-purpose enhancements (Sparrow 2011b; Trommelmans
2006). Other critics express concern about the meaning and value of
relative freedom, particularly when identifying what counts
as a decrease in freedom seems to depend significantly on the
positioning and values of the particular prospective parent or
cultural community (Sparrow 2005). When one parent insists that
getting rid of a trait will increase her child's relative freedom and
the group of people who live with that trait point to the ways that
the choice contributes to and reinforces social prejudice against
their group (Lane and Grodin 1997; Saxton 2000; Asch 2000), how are we
to proceed with the regulation of “liberal” eugenics?
Agar forthrightly declares,
 I have argued that the addition of the word
“liberal” to “eugenics” transforms an evil
doctrine into a morally acceptable one. (2004: 135)
For him, that single word changes the fundamental assumptions about
how and why genetic interventions are pursued. Liberal states remain
neutral about what constitutes the good life, but impose certain
restrictions (laws, policies) and offer education or aid (public
health campaigns, food stamps) in the name of ensuring that citizens
are safe, relatively stable, and have equal opportunity to pursue
their goals.  But critics point out the many ways that a collection of
individual choices, pressured by unjust social norms and assumptions,
may lead to results not wholly unlike those of historical eugenics
programs (Duster 1990). They fear that regulations put in place by
advocates—whether in the form of laws, restrictions of the use
of federal or state funds, or mere recommendations or guidelines from
medical societies—will not be sufficient to avoid the negative
consequences of eugenic enhancement. Green optimistically suggests, in
the final line of his book, “By moving responsibly into this
emerging era of genetic choice, we can incorporate gene technology
into the ongoing human adventure” (2007: 230). Groups who have
experienced significant discrimination over many generations will
understandably reject such optimism. Such groups have more to fear,
however, from those who do not merely argue for permission to enhance,
but for an obligation to do so.
Other advocates of liberal eugenics (e.g., Harris 2000, 2007;
Savulescu 2001; Kahane and Savulescu 2008) recognize the potential
benefits of genetic enhancement, and forthrightly argue in favor of
moral obligations to pursue them. Some such enhancements might be
relatively minor, while others might be radical enough to eventually
create a new species (Glover 2006). These arguments for the obligation
to enhance tend to arise in the context of consequential moral
reasoning, but with a libertarian qualification. According to early
work by Savulescu, for instance, parents have an obligation to produce
the best children possible, but the state need not (indeed, should
not) legally coerce them to do so (Savulescu 2001). To the contrary,
the state must balance the benefits of potential enforcement against
its existing obligations to protect reproductive liberties.
Nonetheless, the state might have good reason to encourage parents to
take such action, through education and persuasive campaigns (not
unlike anti-smoking campaigns). On this stronger view, others, too,
would be right to express disapproval:
 Egregious procreative choices deserve our disapproval
just like other failures to meet one's obligations, such as failure to
protect the welfare of one's children. (Kahane and Savulescu 2008:
278)
A similar position is advocated by Harris (2007). Although the
arguments are about a moral obligation to enhance, the
authors recognize that other competing priorities (e.g., autonomy of
parents, welfare of other siblings, harm to others) could potentially
trump this obligation.
Savulescu's early paper on the obligation to intervene genetically
argued for a seemingly perfectionist stance—if we decide to
reproduce, we are morally obligated to have the best children we, as
parents, can have. His Principle of Procreative Beneficence (PPB)
holds that 
 couples (or single reproducers) should select the
child, of the possible children they could have, who is expected to
have the best life, or at least as good a life as the others, based on
the relevant available information. (2001: 415) 
This obligation can't be owed to any particular child (given the
non-identity problem), but is an impersonal obligation, to make the
world a better place. If parents are using pre-implantation genetic
diagnosis, they should always choose the embryo with the best chances
at the best life. If our best genetic information suggests that one
embryo has a chance of mild asthma, and the other does not, and they
are alike in other respects, Savulescu claims it is obvious that the
parents should choose the embryo not inclined to asthma. He also
offers a much longer list of traits that may have genetic markers,
including bipolar disorder, alcoholism, aggression and criminal
behavior, memory and intelligence, neuroticism, and maternal behavior
(2001: 417). Why?  Even if these are not all disease-genes, they are
linked to conditions that can positively or negatively influence how a
life will go.  Savulescu imagines that the rational parent could make
no other decision but to avoid the negative linkages and promote the
positive ones, where possible.
Deciding which traits are positive, and of those, which are better
than others, is a task that will not be simple. “The most
advantaged child” is inherently comparative. Critics point to
the difficulty of ranking the expected well-being of future possible
lives, given 1) disagreement about what is positive and negative (and
the need to contextualize that in a particular environmental and
family situation), and 2) the reality that most embryos will have a
complex mixture of positive and negative traits making meaningful
pairwise comparisons very difficult (de Melo Martin 2004; Parker
2007). Kahane and Savulescu reply that we do this kind of ranking all
the time, and that it needn't rely on a single vision of what a
perfect child would be.
 [A]iming at the best is compatible with thinking that
the concept of the most advantaged life is plural and open-ended. If
different forms of life are equally good, or if the amount of
well-being realized in each is incomparable, then parents can
reasonably choose either option. But there are plenty of cases where
we can rank the goodness of lives. We do so in numerous moral
decisions in everyday life, especially in bringing up and educating
our children. (Kahane and Savulescu 2008: 279)
While this response suggests some greater flexibility in their view
than might be apparent from the language of PPB, they do not always
seem consistent in advocating for this flexibility. How will
we know when different forms of life are equally good or when
the associated well-being is incomparable? The fact that some cases
will be very clear can be handled by the regulatory structure of a
philosophical position that sets a relatively low bar; the space
between ruling out selection for traits that clearly cause pain and
suffering, for instance, and demanding those that create the
“best”, is vast.
Rather than giving a substantive account of well-being (and offering a
prima facie list of rankings), Kahane and Savulescu imply only that we
will be able to find an agreeable one. They offer simple examples to
illustrate their view. Mild asthma, though only a minor impediment to
well-being, is nonetheless not acceptable to choose if we have the
information, and an alternative without the mild asthma. Deafness is
clearly a detriment to well-being—at least in this
society—and so should not be selected. They are careful to add
that their view can appreciate deafness, and recognize that it is
clearly compatible with a good, even flourishing life. But a
life without asthma or deafness, they submit, would clearly be better.
Our obligation is to produce the best, not just a life compatible with
flourishing. So they see the need for two steps: finding a reasonable
theoretical model of well-being, and then investigating whether a
particular trait or condition is, on balance, a detriment to overall
well-being on that view (2008: 288).
Despite their confidence, we have reason to think there will be
significant disagreement in both steps. A theory of well-being that is
acceptable to most might be so abstract as to not offer significant
help, and then the matter of determining how traits or conditions in
question are related to expected well-being—such that we can do
a comparison and select the best—will be even more difficult
(Parker 2007). Parents who see value in a wide variety of ways of
being in the world—both for the individual, and for society as a
whole—may welcome children who have traits that are not
standardly considered advantageous. (Consider positive accounts about
raising children with Down syndrome, Berube 1998 and Estreich 2011,
and even profound cognitive and physical disability, Kittay 1999).
Welcoming such children who are “naturally” produced might
be different from engineering them to be so, but Kahane and Savulescu
go a step further. They admit that women need not undergo IVF
treatment just for relatively negligible improvements in the life
prospects of their future children, but 
 we believe that PB instructs women to seriously
consider IVF if natural reproduction is likely to lead to a child with
a condition that is expected to reduce well-being significantly, even
if that condition is not a disease. This is clearest if natural
reproduction is likely to result in a child disposed to, say, clinical
depression or autism. But we believe that reproducers also have strong
reasons to seek to prevent even an innate tendency to negative affect,
or the severe impairment in social skills associated with Asperger's
syndrome. (2008: 281)
The moral obligation to produce the best child one can, then, can
include an obligation to take on the risks and impositions of
IVF.
One worry regarding the obligation to produce the best
child—particularly the best child in a particular
society—is that unjust societal norms will then exert their
force even more strongly. The “most advantaged” child in a
sexist society is likely to be a boy. If the society is also racist
and homophobic, that boy will be light skinned and heterosexual (see
Sparrow 2011a). Interestingly, Kahane and Savulescu stand by
PPB—there is a moral obligation to produce the best
child, who would, in this case, be a light-skinned heterosexual
boy—but they note that we have other moral reasons that outweigh
the moral reasons offered by PPB in this case. 
 Parents shouldn't choose the fair skinned child
because of the expected prejudice. It's better to change pernicious
attitudes than to reinforce them through capitulation. (2008:
290)
How would we change the attitudes? Perhaps by education and
anti-discrimination laws for existing people. For Kahane and
Savulescu, it doesn't make sense to restrict access to genetic
interventions regarding sex, sexuality or skin color, in order to
ensure no such capitulation to these unjust norms. In his earlier
paper, Savulescu (2001) notes that in a sexist society, we have to
address the unfair treatment of women, but it doesn't make sense to do
that through regulation of reproductive decision-making. 
 Reproduction should not become an instrument of social
change, at least not mediated or motivated at a social level. This
also illustrates why Procreative Beneficence is different to
eugenics. Eugenics is selective breeding to produce a better
population. A public interest justification for interfering in
reproduction is different from Procreative Beneficence, which aims at
producing the best child, of the possible children, a couple could
have. That is an essentially private enterprise. (2001:
424)
Buchanan (2011) is broadly optimistic about biomedical enhancement
technologies—seeing them as not significantly unlike other
enhancing societal innovations, such as literacy, numeracy and
agriculture— and argues in favor of funding research and
development into a broad array of enhancements. While he mainly argues
against conservative critics of bioenhancement (e.g,. Kass 2003;
Sandel 2007; Fukuyama 2003), he also considers the likelihood of a
shift from individual to social justifications of enhancement
interventions. If biomedical enhancements that improve individual
well-being become available, governments may rightly be interested in
funding enhancements and perhaps even making them mandatory (2011:
128), because doing so will be socially good: good for economic growth
to avoid problems of illiteracy, sickness, etc. that can accompany,
for instance, lower intelligence and merely typical immune systems.
Buchanan recommends the creation of a Global Institute for Justice in
Innovation (2011: 255) in order to ensure that such benefits would be
made more widely available, given that some individuals and
governments would not otherwise be able to afford them. He recognizes
that the social justification for enhancement, with the possibility of
mandatory participation, starts to sound surprisingly like past
eugenic policies, but he seems to think they are different, at least
in part because individuals should benefit as well. Indeed, he
explicitly states
 To justify encouraging or even requiring biomedical
enhancements, governments wouldn't have to resurrect the bad science
and bizarre master-race theories that warped eugenic thinking.  They
would only have to appeal to the same reasons we all invoke when we
justify public education, health insurance, public health measures
like vaccination, and policies designed to help American business be
more competitive in a global economy. (2011: 124)
If we think it makes sense to support these programs, the implication
is that we ought to support genetic enhancements as well. The result
might be mandatory enhancement for your own good—and that of
society.
Other theorists likewise offer social benefit justifications for
genetic enhancement. Elster (2011) advocates a principle of general
procreative beneficence, changing the last part of Savulescu's PPB to
an obligation to produce the best child, of those possible,
“whose life will maximize the expected overall value in the
world.” (2011: 483). Rather than focus on individual welfare, he
recommends a system of obligations that starts from general social
goods. Parents considering reproduction are then bound by a maximizing
duty to the world.
Although Savulescu highlights the well-being of the individual in his
work on PPB, in more recent work, the obligation to produce the best
seems to have shifted from an obligation to improve the world by
privately producing the best individuals, to an obligation to improve
the world by producing individuals who will help to solve social
problems. For instance, he argues with Persson (Persson and Savulescu
2012) that we are obligated to fund and explore moral
bioenhancement (2012: 2)—the idea that we could genetically
or pharmacologically enhance our moral motivation, to reduce
selfishness and aggression, and increase our sense of fairness,
altruism, and our willingness to cooperate (see also Douglas
2008). Given the massive threats to human well-being presented by
global climate change and the abundance of weapons of mass
destruction—and the fact that solutions to these large scale
problems will require collective action to prevent future
problems—Persson and Savulescu claim that traditional methods of
moral change (e.g., education, public campaigns) will be unlikely to
be effective. If we care to save the planet—and we
should—then we are obligated to invest in moral bioenhancement
research, and presumably ensure that if successful, it gets wide
uptake (Persson and Savulescu 2012). Buchanan (2011) is sympathetic,
noting that critics who worry about whether we will use this
technology wisely may be short-sighted: 
 [I]f you think we should avoid enhancements because
you think our present character is so flawed that we are bound to
misuse them, you're assuming that our character is fixed. It may not
be. (2011: 171)
This suggestion about moral bioenhancement has sparked
criticism focused on threats to human freedom (Harris 2011; Simkulet
2013), the meaning of being virtuous (Kabasenche 2013), and the
complexity of human moral psychology (Zarpentine 2011).
Critics of the argument regarding moral obligations to enhance are
highly skeptical of the claim that such arguments can escape the
charge of being problematically eugenic. Bennett (2008) notes: 
 [F]or all this well-meaning talk of liberalism and
freedom, an obligation to bring to birth the best children possible
arguably entails very “unliberal” notions and
consequences. I argue that this obligation can only be established by
placing a lower moral value on those with disabilities or otherwise
impaired lives and, if accepted, this obligation, produces a strong
argument in favour not only of infringing individual reproductive
autonomy but also of introducing eugenic policies. (2008:
270) 
Sparrow (2011a) is also sharply critical:
 Only through a very particular and not especially
plausible negotiation of the uneasy relationship between their moral
theory and their policy prescriptions can Harris and Savulescu obscure
the fact that the gap between the new and the old eugenics is not that
large at all…[with] implications that most people would find
profoundly unattractive. (2011a: 33)
Koch (2011) highlights similarities to past eugenic policies and
accuses the central theorists of hubris—even a “huckster's
promise” (p. 199)—in presuming not only that we will be
able to engineer complex traits like intelligence, but that they can
know the appropriate regulatory limits and speak for all parents. The
title of Persson and Savulescu's book—Unfit for Life
(2012)—combined with its thesis regarding the need for tightened
controls on liberal societies in order to preserve human security,
makes unavoidable comparisons to the Nazi idea of lives unworthy of
life. (For a chilling review of Savulescu's recent work, see
Munsterhjelm 2011.)
Criticisms of the trend toward advocating liberal
eugenics—whether regarding permission or obligation—come
from a variety of corners. Disability rights advocates highlight the
problematic conceptions of disability that underlie many of the
arguments as well as the negative effects liberal eugenics is likely
to have on existing people with disabilities (Asch 1999; Saxton 2000;
Amundson 2005). Other theorists—attentive to the pervasive
unjust discrimination in respect to sexism, racism, classism, and
heterosexism—emphasize the broadly negative consequences of
promoting or allowing liberal eugenics policies, given the aggregation
of many individual choices, and the slippery slope to an older style
of coercive eugenics (Duster 1990; De Melo Martin 2004; Sparrow
2011a).  Some highlight potential damage to the parent-child
relationship in a world where particular features of children are
chosen, fearing both a loss of openness to the unbidden and of
unconditional love (Sandel 2007). When parents attempt to design their
children, critics argue, they demonstrate a lack of humility in the
face of nature, and more specifically, an attempt to control where
they should instead appreciate novelty (Kass 2003). 
The disability right critique of the “new” eugenics takes
on current practices such as prenatal testing and selective abortion,
as well as futuristic options such as enhancement and design.
 
In what is known as the expressivist argument, disability
theorists have argued that prenatal testing followed by selective
abortion sends a negative message—“It is better not to
exist than to have a disability” (Saxton 2000), “We do not
want any more like you” (Wendell
1996)—to
existing people with disabilities, particularly those living with
disabilities for which testing is routinely done. The negative message
is harmful and might be considered a form of discrimination. The
expressivist argument is often defended by theorists who are staunchly
pro-choice about abortion; they typically defend a woman's legal right
to choose abortion for any reason, but present a moral argument
against particular reasons for abortion. In making this distinction,
they rely on the “any/particular” distinction proposed by
Asch (2000); a woman who does not want any child because she
is not ready to be a mother is different from one who is eager to be a
mother but then rejects this particular fetus, based on prenatal
testing. A different version of the expressivist argument looks beyond
the individual act of testing to focus on the social offer of
prenatal testing, particularly in a society where it has become
routinized, to consider the negative evaluation it expresses about the
lives of existing people with disabilities (Press 2000).
Objections have been raised regarding the meaning of such
“expressions” (see, for instance, Buchanan 1996; Nelson
2000), and the necessity of the message (Baily
2000; McMahan
2005), as well as the relative moral significance of the message even
if it is negative and expressed (Edwards 2004). Many theorists
emphasize that one can value the person with a disability, while
devaluing the disability (Savulescu 2001; Glover 2006; McMahan
2005). Glover, for instance, is careful to note that we should be very
clear about expressing support for existing people with disabilities
even as we seek prenatal testing or other genetic interventions: 
 [W]e need to send a clear signal that we do not have
the ugly attitudes about disability. It is important to show that what
we care about is our children's flourishing: that this, and not
shrinking from certain kinds of people, or some horrible project of
cleansing the world of them, is what motivates us. To think that a
particular disability makes someone's life less good is not one of the
ugly attitudes. It does not mean that the person who has it is of any
less value, or is less deserving of respect, than anyone else. (2006:
35)
That distinction however, can be difficult to accept for individuals
who experience their disability as a central part of their identity
(for discussion, see Wendell 1996; Saxton 2000; Edwards 2004). Furthermore, as Holm
(2007) notes, even if we could conceptually separate prenatal testing
from the disrespectful and discriminatory messages about people with
disabilities, that doesn't mean they aren't deeply intertwined in the
current practice.
Some disability rights advocates reject the expressivist argument, and
are more concerned with the fairness and completeness of the
information provided in the context of prenatal testing than in the
practice as a whole (Shakespeare 2006). On that note, Klein
(2011) finds
evidence of “a disregard for disability experience and sustained
ignorance of disability issues” in the attitudes, practices,
education and research of professionals involved in administering
prenatal testing. In sum, the expressivist argument highlights the
ways in which prenatal testing feels threatening to people with
disabilities and their allies/advocates. As Parens and Asch point
out, 
 If one thinks for even a moment about the history of
our society's treatment of people with disabilities, it is not
difficult to appreciate why people identified with the disability
rights movement might regard such testing as dangerous. …
living with disabling traits need not be detrimental either to an
individual's prospects of leading a worthwhile life, or to the
families in which they grow up, or to society at large. (2000:
4)
The expressivist argument applies equally to the use of
pre-implantation diagnosis, and similar concerns about misperceptions
regarding potential quality of life for people with disabilities or
non-typical modes of functioning apply to the quest for enhancement
technologies as well.
Part of what concerns disability rights advocates is the questionable
relation between the existence of certain impairments or bodily
anomalies and the availability of equality of opportunity or
well-being (Silvers, Wasserman, and Mahowald 1998; Amundson 2005; Asch
and Wasserman 2005) that seems to be a common presumption in liberal
eugenics theories. Broadly, they worry that many theorists are
relatively uninformed about the life experiences of people with
disabilities, or unfairly dismissive of their claims (Amundson 2005;
Goering 2008), and thus rely on an overly negative evaluation of their
quality of life. As such, efforts to promote “good birth”
undervalue existing people with disabilities. Additionally, advocates
of liberal eugenics, it is argued, allow one trait to stand in for all
of what a potential person can be (Asch and Wasserman 2005), and
underestimate the value of human diversity that includes non-standard
modes of human functioning linked to disability (Silvers 1998), and
the possibility of “gains” made possible through living
with disability (Garland-Thomson 2012). (For more discussion, see SEP entries
on disability: definitions, models, experience;

and feminist perspectives on disability.)
Other critics point to potentially troubling assumptions in the
theoretical framework of liberal eugenics. Bennett, for instance,
looks at whether an appeal to impersonal or non-person-affecting harm
can get us out of the non-identity problem without resorting to
troubling social justifications for a purportedly individualistic
eugenics. She claims, 
 What this obligation [for PPB] is built on is an idea
of making the world a better place than it could otherwise have been,
not in terms of any individual person's welfare, but in terms of
creating the greatest total score for what is regarded as the goods of
life. If a project is not interested in the welfare of particular
people but in creating what those proposing this project believe is
the best world possible, then this is exactly what eugenics
is—promoting social and not personal goods. (Bennett 2008:
272)
So, even though advocates of procreative beneficence claim to value
people equally (while acknowledging that their lives can go better or
worse), this does not square with the idea of some worlds
being morally preferable simply because they do not contain
even mild disabilities.
Sparrow (2011a) targets the arguments for an obligation to enhance by
pointing to the “profound tension” between their
consequential justifications and assurances about the preservation of
reproductive liberties. For example, he highlights the fact that in
order to get out of the problem of colluding with unjust social
norms—which he does by admitting that in certain cases parents
ought not choose the “best” child for their social
environment, given sexism, racism, etc.—Savulescu must revert to
attending to social consequences, rather than individual welfare.
Liberal eugenics is supposed to be about promoting individual
well-being. 
 As soon as we begin sacrificing the well-being of
individuals for the sake of social goals, such as diversity, we are
firmly back in the territory of old eugenics. (2011a:
35–36)
Sparrow also questions the justification for the assumption that
parents ought to have the best child they could have. If we
are morally obligated to produce the best, and if any embryos we can
produce are not likely to rank very high relative to those of others,
wouldn't there also be an obligation to use a donated embryo (or a
clone of the embryo that is the best) (Sparrow
2011a)? To be fair, Savulescu argues that other moral reasons can
trump the PPB, and some degree of reproductive autonomy will surely
fit there. Sparrow limits his criticism to what we are apparently
morally obligated to do under the PPB, pointing to the odd
consequences of the maximizing feature of the principle. Finally,
Sparrow suggests that even if advocates of an obligation to
enhance—like Savulescu and Harris—deny any requirement for
the government to coerce individuals to participate in genetic
interventions for the sake of enhancement, governments might be
obligated to implement policies that are not strictly coercive, e.g.,
systems of incentives and targeted health campaigns. Doing so would be
a form of state-sponsored control—even if only through
non-coercive pressure—of reproduction, and thus much more like
troubling old-style eugenics. 
A further concern about the general framing of the “best
child” obligation regards the possibility of creating a clear
ranked list of traits. To identify the best possible child with the
best possible chance at life one must not simply have a general view
of traits that can make life go well or poorly. Rather, one must be
able to rank collections of such traits in relation to their
capacity to bring about the best possible life. The limited
information we get from prenatal testing or preimplantation diagnosis
could incline parents toward particular choices, but would be
underdetermining for identifying the best possible
child. Parker notes that 
 [C]omplex concepts, such as those of the good life,
the best life, and human flourishing, are not reducible to simple
elements or constituent parts which might be identified through the
testing of embryos. (Parker 2007: 281)
Further, given the diversity of preferences for different combinations
of traits and beliefs about how they relate to the likelihood of a
good life—given differing conceptions of the good life—it
is difficult to envision how rationality could point us to only one
best possible child. Even if many circumstances produce a variety of
equally good possible options, as Savulescu suggests, identifying what
makes that set of options equally good is not clear. Parker takes this
objection to show that while parents might have an obligation to
consider whether a child they bring into existence will have a
reasonable chance at a good life, it does not require them to produce
the best possible child.
A third variety of critic highlights what might be called the
troubling aggregate effect of individual choices, particularly when
they are often ill-informed or relatively biased (De Melo Martin 2004;
Goering 2000). Such theorists need not be against all forms of
enhancement, but they emphasize the need for strict regulation given
the deeply entrenched social injustices that pervade many societies,
and that would typically inform individual free choices. Tremain
(2006) discusses this effect in relation to disability. Russell (2010)
argues that taking race to be a morally neutral feature (as Harris
does) is only a “veiled attempt” to distinguish
contemporary from historical eugenics practices. Perhaps race should
be morally neutral, but it is not commonly treated as such, and
opening up “choice” for people who harbor explicit or
implicit biases related to race allows for those biases to shape the
next generation.  Oliver (2010) likewise highlights the trick of
labeling gender a morally neutral category in a world filled with
sexism, and also rightly emphasizes the levels of surveillance and
control over women that are likely to follow the implementation of
liberal eugenics. The unintended negative effects on pregnant women of
increased attention to prenatal testing and surveillance of pregnancy
generally are explored in Katz Rothman (1986), Rapp (1999), and Kukla
(2008), but tend not to be widely discussed by liberal eugenics
advocates (see Oliver 2010).  (See also SEP entry
on pregnancy, birth and medicine.)
Sparrow (2011b) suggests that the advocate of liberal eugenics faces a
dilemma: if parents should be the ones determining future well-being
of children, then they will likely choose in ways that a) some
liberals find counter-intuitive, as with Deaf kids, and b) may,
through market pressures and social norms, lead to homogeneity from
“tyranny of the majority” (2011b: 515); if, however,
parents should not have this leeway, then we end up putting decisions
about enhancements in the hands of the state, and then
“new” eugenics looks a lot like old eugenics, with all its
attendant concerns. While most advocates of liberal eugenics express
concern about the problem of aggregate effects of individual choices,
they often end up seeming to dismiss them (Green 2007), presuming that
education or other modes of dealing with the problems will be
sufficient (Savulescu 2001), or just adding a qualification about the
need to avoid reinforcing unjust social norms (Agar 2004), without
fully exploring the difficulty of doing so.
Still other critics (Sandel 2007; Kass 2003) highlight the ways in
which the motivations for the enhancement project express hubris, a
“drive to mastery” (Sandel 2007: 27) that, left unchecked,
threatens to alter the nature and meaning of parent-child
relationships, from openness to the “unbidden” and
unconditional love to design and manufacture (Kass 2003). As Sandel
puts it, “the deepest moral objection to enhancement lies less
in the perfection it seeks, than in the human disposition it expresses
and promotes” (2007: 46).
The problem with a drive to mastery, for Sandel, is that we think we
can (and should) control everything, and in so doing, we fail to
appreciate the “gifted character of human powers and
achievements” (2007: 29). To appreciate our giftedness, he says,
we must understand that our abilities are not “wholly of our own
doing, nor even fully ours” (2007: 27). We recognize, in other
words, how indebted we are to good luck, and how we and others may be
unfortunate, rather than simply irresponsible. In so doing, we remain
humble, and we build solidarity with other people through recognition
of our shared situation. If we lose that appreciation for giftedness,
as he thinks we will by employing enhancement technologies that create
precise expectations about how our children will be, we may lose
important human goods (humility, reasonable responsibility,
solidarity). Even though we might undertake enhancement for the
benefit of our offspring, in so doing, we make them into creatures who
must be indebted to us for their gifts, and for whom our love may be
conditional on fulfilling our intentions. Sandel recognizes that many
parents already exert excessive influence on their children's lives,
and may fail to love them unconditionally, but he worries that genetic
enhancement technologies will only exasperate that tendency. If a
parent designs a child to be a certain way, her investment will
increase her demands. In a similar vein, Kass notes that parental
hopes will become parental expectations if we allow the designing of
children (Kass 2003). The concern about parental expectations,
prenatal testing, and how choice might affect the unconditional love
we envision for parents is also explored by disability scholars
(Kittay and Kittay 2000; Asch and Wasserman 2005).
 One difficulty with these arguments is that much of what we
attempt to do in medicine to create treatments for disease could
itself fit under a “drive to mastery” and might likewise
question our commitment to being “open to the unbidden”
(see Buchanan 2011). Also, if the point is simply that we must be
attentive to our inclinations to hubris—we might get carried
away in thinking we can enhance appropriately—then we could heed
that warning without rejecting the enhancement project entirely. Other
critics simply deny the value of humility (Glover 2006: 113).
Kamm (2005) dismisses Sandel's worries about mastery and openness to
the unbidden, but she raises a different kind of worry about the
enhancement project (one related to the worry about aggregate effects
of individual choice). Her fear is that we may “lack
imagination” to see how a variety of traits (and different
combinations of traits) can create goods we have yet to envision or
experience. 
 [W]hen creatures of limited imagination do not design
themselves and others, they are likely to extend the range of their
appreciation of goods because the range of goods is likely to be
larger. A parent who might have designed his child to have the good
trait of composing classical music, could not have conceived that it
would be good to have a child who turns out to be one of the Beatles.
(To have conceived it, would have involved creating the style before
the Beatles did.) …[T]oo much control will limit the number and
combination of goods from what is possible. (Kamm 2005:
14)
 Figuring out how to heed these warnings based on hubris and
 mastery—what they mean for the enhancement project—is not
 at all clear.
Another worry linked to the desire for control comes from Habermas
(2003) who grounds his arguments in a deontological framework. He
argues that by engineering our children in very specific
ways—beyond the treatment of disease—we may undermine
their capacity for self-definition, their sense of being responsible
for themselves (in respect to creating their own identities), and
their freedom (2003: 12–13). He claims that it is not genetic
engineering per se that is the problem, but rather the 
 mode and scope of its use….[and] moreover
the attitude in which interventions in the genetic makeup of
members of our moral community are carried out that provides the
standards for an assessment of their admissibility. (2003:
43)
In this case, the wrong attitude is one that is not attentive to
likely second person consent to the changes—would the child have
granted approval for the selected traits? For Habermas, what matters
is the attitude of appreciating the need for the future person's
presumed consent, rather than the idea of making the change merely
according to parental preferences.  Further, he worries that parents
who engineer their children will have expectations of their children
“without, however, providing the addressee [the child] with an
opportunity to take a revisionist stand” (2003:
51). Why not? 
 The genetic program is a mute, and in a sense,
unanswerable fact; for unlike persons born naturally, someone who is
at odds with genetically fixed intentions is barred from developing,
in the course of a reflectively appropriated and deliberately
continued life history, an attitude toward her talents (and handicaps)
which implies a revised self-understanding and allows for
a productive response to the initial situation. (2003:
62)
The basis for this claim seems to rest on a distinction between
“the grown and the made” p. 52—being created to be a
particular way is being made, and so objectified, a product
of the parents. Being grown, by contrast, recognizes the individual
subjectivity of the new person, who is equal to her parents and not
defined by them. This objection shares much with Kass's concerns about
genetic despotism—control of one generation by the previous one
(2003).
As many critics (Buchanan 2011; Glover 2006; Green 2007) point out,
though, it is unclear why the genetically designed child could
not be revisionist in her response to her parents. Designing
a child to have features that make, for example, an athletic career
possible (even likely) is not the same as ensuring such a career, or
even an athletic body. Parenting would not lose its challenges simply
because of the origins of the features of the child in question.
However, perhaps there are some morally relevant differences in the
means parents take to try to shape their children, such that the
longer iterative process of educating a child enforces a kind of
communicative engagement that simply cannot be part of engineering an
embryo, and that negatively affects the parent-child relationship
(Malmqvist 2011).  Of course, as Hayry notes, deciding not to
enhance a child is also a decision that would seem to require consent
from the future child, and we surely do not want to insist that the
only way to respect future generations is not to produce them at all
(Hayry 2010: 42).