Everett developed his relative-state formulation of quantum mechanics
while a graduate student in physics at Princeton University. His
doctoral thesis (1957a) was accepted in March 1957 and a paper (1957b)
covering essentially the same material was published in July of the
same year. DeWitt and Graham (1973) later published Everett’s
longer, more detailed description of the theory (1956) in a collection
of papers on the topic. The published version was revised from a
longer draft thesis that Everett had given John Wheeler, his Ph.D.
adviser, in January 1956 under the title “Wave Mechanics Without
Probability”. While Everett always favored the description of
the theory as presented in the longer thesis, Wheeler, in part because
of Bohr’s disapproval of Everett’s critical approach,
insisted on the revisions that led to the much shorter thesis that
Everett ultimately defended.
Everett took a job outside academics as a defense analyst in the
spring of 1956. While subsequent notes and letters indicate that he
continued to be interested in the conceptual problems of quantum
mechanics and, in particular, in the reception and interpretation of
his formulation of the theory, he did not take an active role in the
debates surrounding either. Consequently, the long version of his
thesis (1956) is the most complete description of his theory. Everett
died in 1982. See (Byrne 2010) for further biographical details and
(Barrett and Byrne 2012) for an annotated collection of Everett’s
papers, notes, and letters regarding quantum mechanics. See also
(Osnaghi, Freitas, Freire 2009) for an excellent introduction to the
history of Everett’s formulation of quantum mechanics.
Everett’s no-collapse formulation of quantum mechanics was a
direct reaction to the measurement problem that arises in the standard
von Neumann-Dirac collapse formulation of the theory. Everett
understood this problem in the context of a version of the
Wigner’s Friend story. Everett’s solution to the problem
was to drop the collapse postulate from the standard formulation of
quantum mechanics then deduce the empirical predictions of the
standard collapse theory as the subjective experiences of observers
who were themselves modeled as physical systems in the theory. The
result was his relative-state interpretation of pure wave mechanics.
There have been many mutually incompatible presentations of
Everett’s theory. Indeed, it is fair to say that most
no-collapse interpretations of quantum mechanics have at one time or
another either been directly attributed to Everett or suggested as
charitable reconstructions. The most popular of these, the many worlds
interpretation, is often simply attributed to Everett directly and
without comment even when Everett himself never characterized his
theory in terms of many worlds. 
In order to understand Everett’s proposal for solving the
quantum measurement problem, one must first clearly understand what he
took the quantum measurement problem to be. We will start with this,
then consider Everett’s presentation of his relative-state
formulation of pure wave mechanics quantum mechanics and the sense in
which he took it to solve the quantum measurement problem. We will
then contrast Everett’s views the many-worlds interpretation and
a number of other alternatives. 
Everett presented his relative-state formulation of pure wave
mechanics as a way of avoiding conceptual problems encountered by the
standard von Neumann-Dirac collapse formulation of quantum mechanics.
The main problem, according to Everett, was that the standard collapse
formulation of quantum mechanics, like the Copenhagen interpretation,
required observers always to be treated as external to the
system described by the theory. One consequence of this was that
neither the standard collapse theory nor the Copenhagen interpretation
can be used to describe the physical universe as a whole. He took the
von Neumann-Dirac collapse theory to be inconsistent and the
Copenhagen interpretation to be essentially incomplete. We will follow
the main argument of Everett’s thesis and focus here on the
measurement problem as encountered by the standard collapse theory.
In order to understand what Everett was worried about, one must first
understand how the standard collapse formulation of quantum mechanics
works. The theory involves the following principles (von Neumann,
1955): 
Everett referred to the standard von Neumann-Dirac theory the
“external observation formulation of quantum mechanics”
and discussed it beginning (1956, 73) and (1957, 175) in the long and
short versions of his thesis respectively. While he took the standard
collapse theory to encounter a serious conceptual problem, he also
used it as the starting point for his presentation of pure wave
mechanics, which he described as the standard collapse theory but
without the collapse dynamics (rule 4b). We will briefly describe the
problem with the standard theory, then turn to Everett’s
discussion of the Wigner’s Friend story and his proposal for
replacing the standard theory with pure wave mechanics. 
According to the eigenvalue-eigenstate link (rule 3) a system would
typically neither determinately have nor determinately not have a
particular given property. In order to determinately have a particular
property the vector representing the state of a system must be in the
ray (or subspace) in state space representing the property, and in
order to determinately not have the property the state of a system
must be in the subspace orthogonal to it, and most state vectors will
be neither parallel nor orthogonal to a given ray.
The deterministic dynamics (rule 4a) typically does nothing to
guarantee that a system will either determinately have or
determinately not have a particular property when one observes the
system to see whether the system has that property. This is why the
collapse dynamics (rule 4b) is needed in the standard formulation of
quantum mechanics. It is the collapse dynamics that guarantees that a
system will either determinately have or determinately not have a
particular property (by the lights of rule 3) whenever one observes
the system to see whether or not it has the property. But the linear
dynamics (rule 4a) is also needed to account for quantum mechanical
interference effects. So the standard theory has two dynamical laws:
the deterministic, continuous, linear rule 4a describes how a system
evolves when it is not being measured, and the random, discontinuous,
nonlinear rule 4b describes how a system evolves when it is
measured.
But the standard formulation of quantum mechanics does not say what it
takes for an interaction to count as a measurement. Without specifying
this, the theory is at best incomplete since it does not indicate when
each dynamical law obtains. Moreover, if one supposes that observers
and their measuring devices are constructed from simpler systems that
each obey the deterministic dynamics, as Everett did, then the
composite systems, the observers and their measuring devices, must
evolve in a continuous deterministic way, and nothing like the random,
discontinuous evolution described by rule 4b can ever occur. That is,
if observers and their measuring devices are understood as being
constructed of simpler systems each behaving as quantum mechanics
requires, each obeying rule 4a, then the standard formulation of
quantum mechanics is logically inconsistent since it says that the two
systems together must obey rule 4b. This is the quantum measurement
problem in the context of the standard collapse formulation of quantum
mechanics. See the section on the measurement problem in the entry on
 philosophical issues in quantum theory.
The problem with the theory, Everett argued, was that it was logically
inconsistent and hence untenable. In particular, one could not provide
a consistent account of nested measurement in the theory. Everett
illustrated the problem of the consistency of the standard collapse
theory in the context of an “amusing, but extremely
hypothetical drama” (1956, 74–8), a story that was a
few years later famously retold by Eugene Wigner. 
Everett’s version of the Wigner’s Friend story involved an
observer \(A\) who knows the state function of some system
\(S\), and knows that it is not an eigenstate of the measurement
he is about to perform on it, and an observer \(B\) who is in
possession of the state function of the composite system \(A{+}S\).
Observer \(A\) believes that the outcome of his measurement on
\(S\) will be randomly determined by the collapse rule 4b, hence
\(A\) attributes to \(A{+}S\) a state describing \(A\) as
having a determinate measurement result and \(S\) as having
collapsed to the corresponding state. Observer \(B\), however,
attributes the state function of the room after \(A\)’s
measurement according to the deterministic rule 4a, hence \(B\)
attributes to \(A{+}S\) an entangled state where, according to rule
3, neither \(A\) nor \(S\) even has a determinate
quantum-mechanical state of its own. Everett argued that since
\(A\) and \(B\) make incompatible state attributions to
\(A{+}S\), the standard collapse theory yields a straightforward
contradiction. 
It would be extraordinarily difficult in practice for \(B\) to
make a Wigner’s Friend interference measurement that would
determine the state of a composite system like \(A{+}S\), hence the
“extremely hypothetical” nature of the drama. Everett was
careful, however, to explain why this was entirely irrelevant to the
conceptual problem at hand. Indeed, he explicitly rejected that one
might simply “deny the possibility that \(B\) could ever be
in possession of the state function of \(A{+}S\).” Rather, he
argued, that “no matter what the state of \(A{+}S\) is, there
is in principle a complete set of commuting operators for which it is
an eigenstate, so that, at least, the determination of these
quantities will not affect the state nor in any way disrupt the
operation of \(A\),” nor, he added, are there
“fundamental restrictions in the usual theory about the
knowability of any state functions.” And he concluded
that “it is not particularly relevant whether or not \(B\)
actually knows the precise state function of \(A{+}S\). If
he merely believes that the system is described by a state
function, which he does not presume to know, then the difficulty still
exists. He must then believe that this state function changed
deterministically, and hence that there was nothing probabilistic in
\(A\)’s determination” (1956, 76). And, Everett
argued, \(B\) is right in so believing.
That Everett took the Wigner’s Friend story, which involves an
experiment that, on the basis of decoherence considerations, would be
virtually impossible to perform, to pose the central conceptual
problem for quantum mechanics is essential to understanding how he
thought of the measurement problem and what it would take to solve it.
In particular, Everett held that one only has a satisfactory solution
to the quantum measurement problem if one can provide a consistent
account of nested measurement. And concretely, this meant that one
must be able to tell the Wigner’s Friend story consistently.
Being able to consistently tell the Wigner’s Friend story then
was, for Everett, a necessary condition for any satisfactory
resolution of the quantum measurement problem.
In order to solve the measurement problem Everett proposed dropping
the collapse dynamics (rule 4b) from the standard collapse theory and
taking the resulting physical theory to provide a complete and
accurate description of all physical systems in the context of all
possible physical interactions. Everett called the theory pure wave
mechanics. He believed that he could deduce the standard statistical
predictions of quantum mechanics (the predictions that depend on rule
4b in the standard collapse formulation of quantum mechanics) in terms
of the subjective experiences of observers who are themselves treated
as ordinary physical systems within pure wave mechanics. 
Everett described the proposed deduction in the long thesis as
follows:
Everett’s goal, then, was to show that the memory records of an
observer as described by quantum mechanics without the collapse
dynamics would agree with those predicted by the standard formulation
with the collapse dynamics. More specifically, he wanted to show that
observers, modeled as servomechanisms within pure wave mechanics,
would have fully determinate relative measurement records and the
probabilistic assertions of the standard theory will correspond to
statistical properties of typical sequences of such relative
records.
In his version of the Wigner’s Friend story, Everett insisted on
three things simultaneously: (1) there are no collapses of the
quantum-mechanical state, hence \(B\) is correct in attributing
to \(A{+}S\) a state where \(A\) is in an entangled
superposition of having recorded mutually incompatible results, (2)
there is a sense in which \(A\) nevertheless got a fully
determinate measurement result, and (3) such determinate results
satisfy the standard quantum statistics. 
The main problem in understanding what Everett had in mind is in
figuring out precisely how the correspondence between the predictions
of the standard collapse theory and the pure wave mechanics was
supposed to work. Part of the problem is that the former theory is
stochastic with fundamentally chance events and the latter
deterministic with no mention of probabilities whatsoever, but there
is also a problem even accounting for determinate measurement records
in pure wave mechanics. In order to see why, we will consider how
Everett’s no-collapse proposal plays out in a simple interaction
like \(A\)’s measurement in the Wigner’s Friend
story. 
Consider measuring the \(x\)-spin of a spin-½ system. Such a
system will be found to be either “\(x\)-spin up” or
“\(x\)-spin down”. Suppose that \(J\) is a good
observer. For Everett, being a good \(x\)-spin observer meant
that \(J\) has the following two dispositions (the arrows below
represent the time-evolution of the composite system as described by
the deterministic dynamics of rule 4a): 
If \(J\) measures a system that is determinately \(x\)-spin
up, then \(J\) will determinately record “\(x\)-spin
up”; and if \(J\) measures a system that is determinately
\(x\)-spin down, then \(J\) will determinately record
“\(x\)-spin down” (and we assume, for simplicity,
that the spin of the object system \(S\) is undisturbed by the
interaction). 
Now consider what happens when \(J\) observes the \(x\)-spin
of a system that begins in a superposition of \(x\)-spin
eigenstates: 
The initial state of the composite system then is: 
Here \(J\) is determinately ready to make an \(x\)-spin
measurement, but the object system\( S\), according to rule 3,
has no determinate \(x\)-spin. Given \(J\)’s two
dispositions and the fact that the deterministic dynamics is linear,
the state of the composite system after \(J\)’s
\(x\)-spin measurement will be: 
On the standard collapse formulation of quantum mechanics, somehow
during the measurement interaction the state would collapse to either
the first term of this expression (with probability equal to
\(a\) squared) or to the second term of this expression (with
probability equal to \(b\) squared). In the former case,
\(J\) ends up with the determinate measurement record “spin
up”, and in the later case \(J\) ends up with the
determinate measurement record “spin down”. But on
Everett’s proposal no collapse occurs. Rather, the
post-measurement state is simply this entangled superposition of
\(J\) recording the result “spin up” and \(S\)
being \(x\)-spin up and \(J\) recording “spin
down” and \(S\) being \(x\)-spin down. Call this state
\(\boldsymbol{E}\). 
On the standard eigenvalue-eigenstate link (rule 3) \(\boldsymbol{E}\)
is not a state where \(J\) determinately records “spin
up”, neither is it a state where \(J\) determinately
records “spin down”. So Everett’s interpretational
problem is to explain the sense in which \(J\)’s entangled
superposition of mutually incompatible records represents a
determinate measurement outcome that agrees with the empirical
prediction made by the standard collapse formulation of quantum
mechanics when the standard theory predicts that \(J\) either
ends up with the fully determinate measurement record “spin
up” or the fully determinate record “spin down”,
with probabilities equal to \(a\)-squared and \(b\)-squared
respectively. More specifically, here the standard collapse theory
predicts that on measurement the quantum-mechanical state of the
composite system will collapse to precisely one of the following two
states: 
and that there is thus a single, simple matter of fact about which
measurement result \(J\) recorded. 
Everett, then, faced two closely related problems. The
determinate-record problem requires him to explain how a measurement
interaction like that just described might yield a determinate record
in the context of pure wave mechanics. And the probability problem
requires him to somehow recover the standard quantum statistics for
such determinate records. 
Everett took the key to the solution of both problems to be the
principle of the fundamental relativity of states: 
One might understand Everett as adding the fundamental principle of
relativity of states to pure wave mechanics to allow for a richer
interpretation of states than that provided by just the
eigenvalue-eigenstate link (rule 3). The resulting theory is the
relative-state formulation of pure wave mechanics. Central to this
theory is the distinction between absolute and relative states. This
distinction played an essential explanatory role for Everett.
While the absolute state \(\boldsymbol{E}\) is one where
\(J\) has no determinate measurement record and \(S\) has no
determinate \(x\)-spin, each of these systems also has relative
states by dint of the correlation between \(J\) recording
variable and \(S\)’s \(x\)-spin. In particular, in
state \(\boldsymbol{E}, J\) recorded
“\(x\)-spin up” relative to \(S\) being
in the \(x\)-spin up state and that \(J\) recorded
“\(x\)-spin down” relative to \(S\)
being in the \(x\)-spin down state.
So while \(J\) has no absolute determinate record in state
\(\boldsymbol{E}\), in each of these relative states,
\(J\) has a determinate relative record. It is these relative
records that Everett’s takes to solve the determinate record
problem: 
Absolute states, then, provide absolute properties for complete
composite systems by way of the standard eigenvalue-eigenstate link,
and relative states provide relative properties for subsystems of a
composite system. And on Everett’s account of the empirical
faithfulness of pure wave mechanics, he identifies an observer’s
determinate measurement records with the modeled observer’s
relative memory states. 
In particular, it is that each relative memory state describes a
relative observer with a determinate measurement result that explains
determinate measurement records on Everett’s view. Why this was
enough to fully explain our experience of determinate measurement
records ultimately rests on his understanding what it means for a
physical theory to be empirically faithful. 
While the physicist Bryce DeWitt would later argue for his own
particular reconstruction of Everett’s theory (see below), when
DeWitt first read Everett’s description of pure wave mechanics,
he objected because its surplus structure made the theory too rich to
represent the world we experience. In his 7 May 1957 letter to
Everett’s adviser John Wheeler, DeWitt wrote 
The thought was that the richness of pure wave mechanics indicated an
empirical flaw in the theory because we do not notice other branches.
As DeWitt put it: 
Wheeler showed Everett the letter and told him to reply. In his 31 May
1957 letter to DeWitt, Everett began by summarizing his understanding
of the proper cognitive status of physical theories. 
In the final long version of his thesis, Everett further explained in
a footnote that “[t]he word homomorphism would be
technically more correct, since there may not be a one-one
correspondence between the model and the external world” (1956,
169). The map is a homomorphism because (1) there may be elements of
the theory that do not directly correspond to experience and because
(2) a particular theory may not seek to explain all of experience. It
is case (1) that is particularly important here: Everett considered
the surplus experiential structure represented in the various branches
of the absolute state to be explanatorily harmless.
In his letter to DeWitt, Everett described how he understood the aim
of physical inquiry: “There can be no question of which theory
is ‘true’ or ‘real’ — the best that one
can do is reject those theories which are not isomorphic to
sense experience” (Barrett and Byrne 2012, 253). The task
then was to find our experience in an appropriate way in the
relative-state model of pure wave mechanics.
So, for Everett, a theory was empirically faithful and hence
empirically acceptable if there was a homomorphism between its model
and the world as experienced. What this amounted to here was that pure
wave mechanics is empirically faithful if one can find
observers’ experiences appropriately associated with modeled
observers in the model of the theory. In short, Everett took pure wave
mechanics to be empirically faithful because one could find quantum
mechanical experience in the model as relative memory records
associated with relative modeled observers.
While he left significant room in precisely how one might interpret
the theory, the core of Everett’s interpretation involved four
closely related arguments. 
Together the following four arguments indicate the sense in which
Everett took pure wave mechanics to be empirically faithful and,
hence, to recapture the empirical predictions of the standard collapse
theory. 
As suggested earlier, Everett held that one can find our actual
experience in the model of pure wave mechanics as relative measurement
records associated with modeled observers. In the state
\(\boldsymbol{E}\), for example, since \(J\) has a different
relative measurement record in each term of the superposition written
in the determinate record basis and since these relative records span
the space of quantum-mechanically possible outcomes of this
measurement, regardless of what result the actual observer gets, we
will be able to find his experience represented as a relative record
of the modeled observer in the interaction as described by pure wave
mechanics. 
More generally, if one performs a sequence of measurements, it follows
from the linearity of the dynamics and Everett’s model of an
ideal observer that every quantum-mechanically possible sequence of
determinate measurement results will be represented in the entangled
post-measurement state as relative sequence of determinate measurement
records. This is also true in the theory if one only relatively,
rather than absolutely, makes the sequence of observations. In this
precise sense, then, it is possible to find our experience as
sequences of relative records  in the model of pure wave
mechanics. 
Everett took such relative records to be sufficient to explain the
subjective appearances of observers because in an ideal measurement,
every relative state will be one where the observer in fact has, and,
as we will see in the next section, would report that she has, a fully
determinate, repeatable measurement record that agrees with the
records of other ideal observers. As Everett put it, the system states
observed by a relative observer are eigenstates of the observable
being measured (1957, 188). For further details of Everett’s
discussion of this point see (1956, 129–30), (1955, 67), (1956
121–3 and 130–3), and (1957, 186–8 and 194–5).
Note that Everett did not require a physically preferred basis to
solve the determinate record problem to show that pure wave mechanics
was empirically faithful. The principle of the fundamental relatively
of states explicitly allows for arbitrarily specified decompositions
of the absolute universal state into relative states. Given his
understanding of empirical faithfulness, all Everett needed to explain
a particular actual record was to show that is that there is some
decomposition of the state that represents the modeled observer with
the corresponding relative record. And he clearly has that in pure
wave mechanics under relatively weak assumptions regarding the nature
of the actual absolute quantum mechanical state. 
It was important to Everett to explain why one would not ordinarily
notice the surplus structure of pure wave mechanics. In his reply to
DeWitt, Everett claimed that pure wave mechanics “is in full
accord with our experience (at least insofar as ordinary quantum
mechanics is) ... just because it \(is\) possible to show that no
observer would ever be aware of any ‘branching,’ which is
alien to our experience as you point out” Barrett and Byrne
(eds) (2012, 254).
There are two distinct arguments that Everett seems to have had in
mind. 
First, one would only notice macroscopic splitting if one had access
to records of macroscopic splitting events, but records of such events
will be rare precisely insofar as measurements that would show that
there are branches where macroscopic measurement apparata have
different macroscopic measurement records for the same measurement
would require one to perform something akin to a Wigner’s Friend
measurement on a macroscopic system, which, as Everett indicated in
his characterization of his version of the Wigner Friend story as
“extremely hypothetical,” would be extraordinarily
difficult to do. The upshot is that, while not impossible, one should
not typically expect to find reliable relative measurement records
indicating that there are branches corresponding to alternative
macroscopic measurement records. 
Second, Everett repeatedly noted in his various deductions of
subjective appearances that it follows directly from the dynamical
laws of pure wave mechanics that it would seem to an ideal
agent that he had fully determinate measurement results. Albert and
Loewer presented a dispositional version of this line of argument in
their presentation of the bare theory (a version of pure wave
mechanics) as a way of understanding Everett’s formulation of
quantum mechanics (Albert and Loewer 1988, and Albert 1992; see also
the bare theory chapter of Barrett 1999). 
The idea is that if there are no collapse of the quantum mechanical
state an ideal modeled observer like \(J\) would have the
sure-fire disposition falsely to report and hence to believe
that he had a perfectly ordinary, fully sharp and determinate
measurement record. The trick is to ask the observer not what result
he got, but rather whether he got some specific determinate
result. If the post-measurement state was: 
then \(J\) would report “I got a determinate result, either
spin up or spin down”. And he would make precisely the same
report if he ended up in the post-measurement state: 
So, by the linearity of the dynamics, \(J\) would
falsely report “I got a determinate result, either spin
up or spin down” when in the state \(\boldsymbol{E}\): 
Thus, insofar as his beliefs agree with his sure-fire dispositions to
report that he got a fully determinate result, it would seem to
\(J\) that he got a perfectly determinate ordinary measurement
result even when he did not (that is, he did not determinately get
“spin up” and did not determinately get “spin
down”). 
So, while which result \(J\) got in state
\(\boldsymbol{E}\) is a relative fact, that it would seem to \(J\)
that he got some determinate result is an absolute fact. (See the discussion below and Albert (1992) and Barrett (1999) for further details regarding such
dispositional properties. See Everett (1956, 129–30), (1955, 67), (1956, 121–3 and 130–3), and (1957, 186–8 and 194–5)
for parallel discussions in pure wave mechanics.) 
While sometimes extremely difficult to detect, Everett insisted that
alternative relative states, even alternative relative macroscopic
measurement records, were always in principle detectable. Hence they
do not, as DeWitt worried, represent surplus structure at all. Indeed,
since all branches, in any basis, are in principle detectable, all
branches in any decomposition of the state of a composite system were
operationally real on Everett’s view. As he put it in the long
thesis: 
While Everett understood decoherence considerations, he did not
believe that they rendered the detection alternative measurement
records impossible. Indeed, as indicated in his discussion of the
Wigner’s Friend story above, Everett held that it was always in
principle possible to measure an observable that would detect an
alternative post-measurement branch, and it was this that he
used to argue the other direction. It is precisely because the linear
dynamics requires that all branches of the global wave function are at
least in principle detectable that pure wave mechanics requires that
all branches are equal real.
And, again, note that this does not mean that only branches in one
physically preferred basis are real. Rather, it means that every
branch in every decomposition of a composite system is real in
Everett’s operational sense of ‘real’ since any such
state might in principle entail observational consequences. That
Everett considered alternative branches of the universal wave function
to be in principle empirically detectable and hence operationally real
represents a significant difference between his position and most
subsequent many-worlds interpretations, where alternative worlds are
typically assumed to be undetectable.
Because alternative branches are required by the linear dynamics and
in principle detectable, they do not represent surplus structure on
Everett’s view. In this sense, pure wave mechanics provides the
simplest possible theory compatible with the operational consequences
of the linear dynamics. 
One upshot is that pure wave mechanics allows one to have a specific
sort of inductive empirical evidence in favor of the theory. In
particular, since real for Everett means has observable
consequences, any experiment that illustrates quantum
interference provides empirical evidence for the operational existence
of alternative Everett branches on some decomposition of the state.
Again, Everett was an operational realist concerning all branches in
every basis insofar as they might be detected. Specifically, one
provides increasingly compelling evidence in favor of pure wave
mechanics correctly describing macroscopic measurement interactions
the closer one gets to being able to perform something like a
Wigner’s Friend interference experiment. 
Everett did not solve the probability problem by finding probabilities
in pure wave mechanics. Indeed, as suggested by his original thesis
title, he repeatedly insisted that there were no probabilities and
took this to be an essential feature of the theory. Rather, what it
meant for pure wave mechanics to be empirically faithful with respect
to the statistical predictions of quantum mechanics is that one can
find the standard quantum statistics we experience in the distribution
of a typical relative relative sequence of a modeled observer’s
measurement records. In explaining this, Everett appealed to a measure
of typicality given by the norm squared of the amplitude associated
with each relative state in an orthogonal decomposition of the
absolute state. See Barrett (2017) for a detailed discussion of the
notion of typicality in Everett. 
The thought then is that if an observer supposes that his relative
measurement records will be faithfully represented by a
typical relative sequence of measurements records, in
Everett’s norm-squared measure of typicality, he will expect to
observe the standard statistical predictions of quantum mechanics.
Everett got to the result in two steps. First, he found a well-behaved
measure of typicality over relative states whose value is fully
determined by the model of pure wave mechanics. Then he showed that,
in the limit as the number of measurement interactions gets large,
almost all relative sequences of measurement records, in the sense of
almost all given by the specified measure, will exhibit the
standard quantum statistics. Note that it is typically false that most
relative sequences by count will exhibit the standard quantum
statistics, and Everett knew this. This is why his explicit choice of
how to understand typicality is essential to his account of the
standard quantum statistics. (See Everett 1956, 120–30) and
1957, 186–94) for discussions of typicality and the quantum
statistics. 
note that if one assumes that one’s relative records are
typical, in the precise sense that Everett specified, then they should
be expected to exhibit the standard quantum statistics. Were such an
assumption added to the theory, then one should expect to see the
standard quantum statistics as determinate relative records. But note
also that one cannot derive the standard quantum probabilities, or
anything else about probabilities, without an auxiliary assumption
that somehow ties Everett’s notion of typicality to one’s
probabilistic expectations. Such an assumption would represent a
significant addition to pure wave mechanics. 
For his part, Everett did not try to deduce probabilities
from pure wave mechanics. Rather, he simply argued that the sequence
of results in a typical branch, in his specified sense of typical,
should be expected to satisfy the standard quantum statistics. It was
this this that Everett took to establish that his
relative-state formulation of pure wave mechanics was empirically
faithful over the standard quantum statistics. 
Pure wave mechanics, then, is empirically faithful since (1) one can
find an observer’s determinate measurement records as the
relative records of an idealized modeled observer in the theory and
(2) the model of pure wave mechanics provides a typicality measure
over relative states corresponding such that a typical relative
sequence of measurement records in that measure will exhibit the
standard quantum statistics. The first result is Everett’s
resolution of the determinate record problem, and the second his
resolution of the probability problem. 
The upshot is that if one associates one’s experience with
relative records and if one expects one’s relative sequence of
records to be typical in the norm-squared-amplitude sense, then one
should expect one’s experience to agree with the standard
statistical predictions of quantum mechanics, wherever it makes
coherent predictions. And where the standard collapse theory and the
Copenhagen interpretation do not make coherent predictions, as in the
Wigner’s Friend story, one should expect to see evidence that
the linear dynamics always correctly describes the evolution of every
physical system whatsoever. So while pure wave mechanics explains why
one would not typically observe other branches, it also predicts that
other branches are in principle observable, and hence do not represent
surplus structure. 
One might, of course, want more than empirical faithfulness from a
satisfactory formulation of quantum mechanics. In keeping with his
view that pure wave mechanics is quantum mechanics without
probabilities, Everett simply conceded that every relative state under
every decomposition of the absolute state in fact obtains. The
resulting problem, one might feel, is that empirical faithfulness, in
Everett’s sense at least, is a relatively weak form of empirical
adequacy. This can be seen by considering how one should understand
the very notion of having a differential expectations when every
physically possible measurement result is in fact fully realized in
the model of the theory. 
For Everett to call his norm-squared-amplitude measure a measure of
typicality might suggest that a sample relative state is
somehow selected with respect to the measure. If that were the case,
then it would be natural to expect, by stipulation as suggested
earlier, one’s relative sequence of measurement records to be
typical. But then it would also be natural to suppose that it would be
probable that a relative sequence of measurements records
exhibit the standard quantum statistics, and, for Everett, there were
no probabilities in the theory. And indeed, there are no probabilities
whatsoever in the statement of the theory, and hence no way to derive
them without adding something to the theory. 
But the problem here is more fundamental that that might suggest.
Insofar as a probability is a measure over possibilities where
precisely one is in fact realized and insofar as all possibilities are
realized in pure wave mechanics, there simply can be no probabilities
associated with alternative relative sequences of measurement records.
Similarly, any understanding of typicality that somehow involves the
selection of a typical relative sequence of records rather than an
atypical sequence of records is incompatible with pure wave mechanics
since the theory describes no such selection. Neither can the
typicality measure represent an expectation of the standard quantum
statistics obtaining for one’s actual relative sequence of
measurement records at the exclusion of the rest since all such
sequences are equally actual in Everett’s operationalist sense
of actual. Insofar as the theory describes any possible result as
occurring, it describes every possible result as occurring, so there
is no particular sequence of measurement records that is realized
satisfying, or failing to satisfy, one’s prior expectations.
That Everett’s notion of empirical faithfulness is a relatively
weak version of empirical adequacy, then, is exhibited in what pure
wave mechanics, being empirically faithful, does not explain. In
particular, it does not explain what it is about the physical world
that makes it appropriate to expect one’s relative sequence of
records to be typical in the norm-squared-amplitude sense, or any
other sense. In short, while one can get subjective expectations for
future experience by stipulation, the theory itself does not describe
a physical world where such expectations might be understood as
expectations concerning what will in fact occur. One might take
Everett’s typicality measure to determine the subjective degree
to which I should expect a particular relative sequence of records
being (relative) mine, but to get even this would require
careful explanatory amendments to Everett’s presentation of the
theory. One can get a concrete sense of what such a strategy would
involve by contrasting pure wave mechanics with something like Bohmian
mechanics the many-thread or many-maps formulations of quantum
mechanics where one has a clear notion of subjective quantum
probabilities (see below and Barrett 1999 and 2005 for discussions of
this approach).
While he was initially skeptical of Everett’s views, DeWitt
became an ardent proponent of the many-worlds interpretation, a theory
that DeWitt presented as the EWG interpretation of quantum mechanics
after Everett, Wheeler, and DeWitt’s graduate student R. Neill
Graham. In his description of the many-worlds interpretation DeWitt
(1970) emphasized that its central feature was the metaphysical
commitment to physically splitting worlds. DeWitt’s description
subsequently became the most popular understanding of Everett’s
theory. See Barrett (2011b) for further discussion of Everett’s
attitude toward DeWitt and the many-worlds interpretation. See Lewis
(2016) and Saunders, Barrett, Kent, and Wallace (eds) (2010) for
discussions of recent formulations of the many-worlds interpretation.
DeWitt described the theory in the context of the Schrödinger’s
cat thought experiment. 
DeWitt took this view to follow from “the mathematical formalism
of quantum mechanics as it stands without adding anything to
it.” More specifically, he claimed that EWG had proven a
metatheorem that the mathematical formalism of pure wave mechanics
interprets itself: 
He gave Everett credit for the metatheorem, Wheeler credit for
encouraging Everett, and Graham credit for clarifying the metatheorem.
DeWitt and Graham later described Everett’s formulation of
quantum mechanics as follows: 
For his part, DeWitt conceded that this constant splitting of worlds
whenever the states of systems become correlated was counterintuitive:
That said, he strongly promoted the theory at every turn, and
Everett’s views quickly came to be identified with DeWitt and
Graham’s many-worlds interpretation.
While Everett’s presentation of his theory was unclear at
several points, DeWitt’s exegesis did little to help clarify
pure wave mechanics. Since a number of these confusions persist in
discussions of Everett, we will briefly consider DeWitt and
Graham’s interpretation and compare it against Everett’s
description of the relative-state formulation of pure wave mechanics.
To begin, since purely mathematical postulates entail only purely
mathematical theorems, one cannot deduce any metaphysical commitments
whatsoever regarding the physical world from the mathematical
formalism of pure wave mechanics alone. The formalism of pure wave
mechanics might entail the sort of metaphysical commitments that
DeWitt and others have envisioned only if supplemented with
sufficiently strong metaphysical assumptions, strong enough to
determine a metaphysical interpretation for the theory. Concerning the
claim that pure wave mechanics interprets itself by way of a
metatheorem that Everett proved, on even a broad understanding of what
might count as such a metatheorem, there is nothing answering to
DeWitt’s description in either the long or short versions of
Everett’s thesis. 
Second, contrary to what DeWitt, Graham, and others have supposed,
Everett was not committed to causally isolated worlds. In contrast, as
we have seen, Everett held that it is always in principle possible for
branches to interact. More specifically, he argued that “no
matter what the state of [Wigner’s Friend] is, there is in
principle a complete set of commuting operators for which it is an
eigenstate, so that, at least, the determination of these
quantities will not affect the state nor in any way,” he denied
that there are fundamental restrictions about the “knowability
of any state functions,” and he believed that the sense
in which all branches of the global state are equally actual is given
by the ever-present possibility of interaction between branches. So
while one clearly can describe situations where there is no
post-measurement interference between the branches representing
incompatible measurement records, one can also describe interactions
where there is, and for Everett there was no special physical
distinction to be made between the two cases. 
Third, there was no consensus between Everett, Wheeler, DeWitt, and
Graham concerning what Everett’s theory was. In particular, we
know what Everett thought of Graham’s formulation of the theory.
In his personal copy of DeWitt’s description of the many worlds
interpretation, Everett wrote the word “bullshit” next to
the passage where DeWitt presented Graham’s exegesis of
Everett’s views (See Barrett and Byrne 2012, 364–6 for
scans of Everett’s handwritten marginal notes). 
Finally, as indicated in the discussion of empirical faithfulness
above, Everett’s understanding of pure wave mechanics was
decidedly non-metaphysical. In particular, He carefully avoided talk
of multiple, splitting worlds, his understanding of the reality of
branches was purely operational, and he explicitly denied that the aim
of physics was to produce true theories. That the proper aim, rather,
was to produce empirically faithful theories in the sense that he
described, was an essential part of Everett’s argument for why
his theory was not only acceptable but ought to be preferred to the
other formulations of quantum mechanics that he knew (which explicitly
included the standard collapse theory, the Copenhagen interpretation,
and Bohmian mechanics; see Barrett and Byrne 2012,
152–5).
For Everett, the relative states of its subsystems provided a way to
characterize branches of the absolute state of a composite system.
Insofar as the principle of the fundamental relativity of states
allows one to consider the quantum-mechanical state in any specified
basis, there is no canonical way to individuate branches. This makes
it natural perhaps to think of the existence of branches
operationally, as Everett did. Rather than take the branches
determined by a physically preferred basis or those determined by, or
roughly determined by, some decoherence condition to determine which
physically possible worlds were real, he took every branch in any
basis to have observational consequences and hence to be real in
his operational sense. Given how he understood branches and their role
in determining the empirical faithfulness of the theory, Everett never
had to say anything concerning how a particular physically preferred
basis is selected because none was required. 
While Everett himself did not do so, one might nevertheless designate
a special set of branches of the global absolute state, say those that
satisfy exhibit an appropriate sort of stable diachronic identity, to
represent worlds, or emergent worlds, or approximate emergent worlds.
But how one understands such physical entities cannot be determined
solely by the mathematical formalism of pure wave mechanics.
This has led recent many-worlds proponents like David Wallace (2010
and 2012) to add explicit interpretative assumptions to the formalism
of pure wave mechanics. In contrast with DeWitt, who seems to have
taken worlds to be basic entities described by the global absolute
state, Wallace takes the quantum state as basic, then seeks
to characterize worlds as emergent entities represented in its
structure. The analogy he gives is that pure wave mechanics describes
the quantum state just as classical field theory describes physical
fields (2010, 69). Worlds then are understood as physically real but
contingently emergent entities that are identified with approximate
substructures of the quantum state, or as Wallace puts it,
“mutually dynamically isolated structures instantiated within
the quantum state, which are structurally and dynamically
‘quasiclassical’” (2010, 70). Just a bit more
carefully, one would expect such emergent worlds to be more or less
isolated depending on the physical situation and properties one seeks
to describe and the degree of decoherence in fact exhibited by the
systems as characterized.
On this account, there is no simple matter of fact concerning what or
even how many emergent worlds there are because such questions depend
on one’s level of description and on how well-isolated one
requires the worlds to be for the explanatory considerations at hand.
But, however one individuates them, the emergent worlds correspond to
approximately determinate decoherent substructures of the quantum
state. Hence, only some relative states describe physically real
worlds.
In contrast, as we have seen, when Everett claimed that all branches
were equally real, he had something less metaphysical and more
empirical in mind, which, in turn, suggests a quite different
understanding of branches. In particular, since every branch in every
decomposition of the state has potential empirical consequences for
the results of one’s future observations, every branch, not just
those represented in a favored decohering basis, is operationally
real. In short, every relative state describes something that the
linear dynamics requires one to take as real in the only sense that
Everett understood.
There is certainly a place for a decoherence account of
quasiclassicality akin to the sort that Wallace and others favor as an
extension of Everett’s project insofar as it yields a yet richer
sense in which one might find our experience in the model of pure wave
mechanics. But, given how he understood his theory and what was
required for it to be empirically acceptable, Everett’s
explanatory goals were arguably more modest than those of many
Everettians and hence more readily attained.
Consider probability again. If one were to take pure wave mechanics to
be directly descriptive of the real physical world, one might feel
that one should explain what it is about the world that makes it
appropriate to expect one’s relative sequence of records to be
typical in the norm-squared-amplitude sense when every physically
possible outcome is in fact realized as a relative state. For his
part, however, Everett believed that all that was required to explain
the standard quantum statistics was that one be able to find them
somehow associated in a precise and unambiguous way with the relative
records of an ideal modeled observer. And he arguably did just this.
That such an account does not, without additional assumptions, explain
why one should expect one’s measurement records to exhibit the
standard quantum statistics in a world directly described by pure wave
mechanics is a weakness of the account, but, arguably, one that need
not have worried Everett given the relatively modest explanatory aim
of empirical faithfulness. (See the entry on the 
 many-worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics 
 for further details regarding the approach.)
What Albert and Loewer have called the bare theory of quantum
mechanics (Albert and Loewer, 1988, and Albert, 1992) is pure wave
mechanics with the standard interpretation of states. On this reading
of Everett, one supposes that he intended to drop the collapse
dynamics from the standard theory and keep the standard
eigenvalue-eigenstate link as the theory’s only interpretational
principle. Here there is no special distinction between absolute and
relative states nor does one require the addition of a special notion
of typicality to the theory. Rather, one uses Everett’s model of
an idealized observer to argue that it would appear to such
observers that they had the perfectly determinate measurement outcomes
predicted by the collapse dynamics when they in fact did not. This
captures Everett’s thought of deducing the standard predictions
of quantum mechanics as the subjective appearances of observers who
are themselves treated within the theory.
We have already seen the basic argument here. Since \(J\) would report that he had a determinate result in post-measurement state
and would report that he had a determinate result in post-measurement state
\(J\) would, by the linearity of the dynamics, have the surefire disposition to falsely report that he had when in post measurement state
More concretely, in the superposed state he would be in a
superposition of reporting “I got a determinate result, either spin up
or spin down” (relative to the first branch) and reporting “I got a
determinate result, either spin up or spin down” (relative to the
second branch), which sounds precisely like the absolute
report “I got a determinate result, either spin up or spin
down.”
Thus, if one assumes that the observer’s reports are in fact
true of his experience, it would appear to \(J\) (as a
simple, absolute fact) that he got a perfectly determinate ordinary
measurement result even when he did not (that is, he did not
determinately get “spin up” and did not determinately get “spin
down”).
One can similarly argue from the linear dynamics and the properties of
an ideal observer that if \(J\) repeats his spin measurement, he
will end up with the sure-fire disposition to report that he got the
same result for the second measurement as for the first (even when he
did not in fact get an ordinary determinate result for either). Hence,
it will appear to him that there has been a collapse of the
quantum-mechanical state when there has been no collapse, splitting of
worlds, or anything else that would produce an ordinary determinate
measurement record. The subjective appearance of a collapse here is an
illusion produced by the linear dynamics together with the
observer’s dispositions.
The linear dynamics also entails a sort of inter-subjective agreement
between different observers. If a second observer were to
check \(J\)’s measurement result, the second observer would
end up believing that her result agreed with his (even when neither
observer in fact has an ordinary determinate measurement record). In
this sense, there is subjective agreement on the apparent result of
the apparent collapse.
Finally, one can show that an observer who repeats a measurement on an
infinite sequence of systems in the same initial state will approach a
state where he reports that his measurement results were randomly
distributed with the standard quantum relative frequencies (when in
fact he got no ordinary determinate results for any of his
measurements). This is the feature of quantum mechanics without the
collapse postulate that Everett himself found the most
compelling. (See Albert (1992) and Barrett (1999) for further
discussion of the suggestive properties of the bare theory. See
Everett (1956, 129–30), (1955, 67), (1956, 121–3 and
130–3), and (1957, 186–8 and 194–5) for his
discussions of these properties.)
While one can tell such stories about the sort of
illusions that an observer would experience (each corresponding to
specific argument that Everett himself gave in both his long and short
theses), there are at least two serious problems with the bare theory. One is
that the bare theory is not empirically coherent: if the theory were
true, it would be impossible to ever have reliable empirical evidence
for accepting it as true given the radical sort of illusions it
predicts (See Barrett (1996) for a discussion of the idea of
empirical coherence). Another is that if the bare
theory were true, one would most likely fail to have any determinate
beliefs at all since, on the linear dynamics, one would expect the
global state to almost never be an eigenstate of any particular
observer being sentient (or even existing). (For a further discussion
of how experience is supposed to work in the bare theory and some the
problems it encounters see Albert 1992; Bub, Clifton, and Monton,
1998; and Barrett, 1994, 1996 and 1999.)
Everett held that on his formulation of quantum mechanics “the
formal theory is objectively continuous and causal, while subjectively
discontinuous and probabilistic” (1973, p. 9). Albert and Loewer
(1988) capture this feature directly in their many-minds theory by
distinguishing between an observer’s physical state,
which evolves in a continuous, deterministic way, and the
observer’s mental state, which evolves in a
discontinuous, stochastic way.
A curious feature of this theory is that in order to get the
observer’s mental state in some way to supervene on his physical
state, Albert and Loewer associate with each observer a continuous
infinity of minds. The observer’s physical state, like all other
physical systems, always evolves in the usual deterministic way, but
each mind jumps randomly to a mental state corresponding to one of the
Everett branches that is produced in each measurement-like
interaction. The probability that a particular mind will experience an
Everett branch associated with a quantum-mechanical amplitude
\(q\) is equal to \(q\) squared. On the mental dynamics,
then, one should expect \(a\)-squared proportion of
\(J\)’s minds to end up associated with the result “spin
up” (the first term of the expression above) and \(b\)-squared
proportion of \(J\)’s minds to end up associated with the
result “spin down” (the second term of the expression above). The
mental dynamics is also memory-preserving so that once a mind is
associated with a particular branch, the mental state of the mind
remains compatible with the measurement records represented in that
branch.
An advantage of many-minds theory over DeWitt’s original version
of the many-worlds theory is that there is no need for a physically
preferred basis here. One must choose a preferred basis in order to
specify the mental dynamics completely but this choice has nothing to
do with any physical facts; rather, it can simply be thought of as
part of the description of the relationship between physical and
mental states. Another advantage of the many-minds theory is that,
unlike the standard variety of many-worlds theories where worlds and
observers split and are copied in measurement-like interactions, the
many-minds theory simply predicts the standard forward-looking quantum
probabilities for the future experiences of each particular mind.
This, of course, requires one to understand the minds as having
transtemporal identities, which Albert and Loewer clearly do as part
of their unabashed commitment to a strong mind-body dualism. Finally,
the many-minds theory is one of the few formulations of quantum
mechanics that are manifestly compatible with special relativity. (For
a discussion of why it is difficult to solve the quantum measurement
problem under the constraints of relativity see Barrett 2000 and 2002,
for discussions of locality in the many minds theory, see Hemmo and
Pitowski 2003, and Bacciagaluppi 2002, and for the relationship
between relativity and the many worlds theory see Bacciagaluppi
2002.)
The main problems with the many-minds theory concern its commitment to
a strong mind-body dualism and the question of whether the sort of
mental supervenience one gets is worth the trouble of postulating a
continuous infinity of minds associated with each observer. Concerning
the latter, one might well conclude that a single-mind theory, where
each observer has precisely one mind that evolves randomly given the
evolution of the standard quantum mechanical state and determines the
observer’s experiences and beliefs, would be preferable. (See
Albert, 1992 and Barrett, 1995 and 1999, for further discussions.)
Both the single-mind and many-minds theories can be thought of as
hidden-variable theories like 
 Bohmian mechanics.
 But instead of position being made determinate, as it is in
Bohm’s theory, and then assuming that the determinate positions
of particles will provide observers with determinate measurement
records, it is the mental states of the observers that are directly
made determinate here, and while this is a non-physical parameter, it
is guaranteed to provide observers with determinate measurement
records.
On the standard sort of many-worlds theory, worlds are taken to split
over time as new branches are produced in measurement-like
interactions. One problem with this is that the forward-looking
probability of an observer getting each quantum-mechanically possible
outcome for a measurement is simply one inasmuch as each possible
measurement outcome is in fact recorded by some future copy
of the observer one of the post-measurement branches. One way to get
the right forward-looking probabilities, the standard probabilistic
predictions of quantum mechanics, is to postulate worlds that never
branch. Such worlds might be characterized by their complete
histories. If one is in such a world, then one simply experiences its
history.
The idea here is closely related to many-history tradition of
interpreting Everett. Gell-Mann and Hartle (1990) characterized
Everett’s theory as one that describes many, mutually decohering
histories. On this sort of theory, one might think of each physically
possible trajectory through the Everett branches as a thread that
defines a world.
One can most clearly see how a many-threads theory provides
forward-looking probabilities by considering how one might construct
such a theory from Albert and Loewer’s many-minds theory. To
this end, consider each full trajectory that a particular mind of an
observer might take through the Everett branches. On the associated
many-threads theory, there is precisely one world for each such full
trajectory. What the mind would see is what in fact happens in this
world. In this way, each of an observer’s minds determines a
non-branching world. one then takes the quantum-mechanical amplitude
associated with the threads to determine a probability over the set of
worlds. This is represents the prior epistemic probability of each
possible non-branching world being in fact ours. These probabilities
are then updated as one learns more about the actual history of our
world. Since such worlds and everything in them have perfectly
ordinary transtemporal identities there is be no special problem here
in talking about forward-looking probabilities. The forward-looking
probability for a future event is just the epistemic probability that
the event in fact occurs in the world we in fact inhabit.
There is a close relationship between a no-collapse hidden-variable
theory like Bohmian mechanics and a non-branching many-worlds theory
like the many-threads theory. In Bohmian mechanics the wave function
always evolves in the usual deterministic way, but particles are taken
to always have fully determinate positions. For an \(N\)-particle
system, the particle configuration can be thought of as being pushed
around in \(3N\)-dimensional configuration space by the flow of
the norm squared of the wave function just as a massless particle
would be pushed around by a compressible fluid (the compressible fluid
here is the probability distribution in configuration space given by
the standard wave function). Here both the evolution of the wave
function and the evolution of the particle configuration are fully
deterministic. Quantum probabilities are the result of the
distribution postulate. The distribution postulate sets the initial
prior probability distribution equal to the norm squared of the wave
function for an initial time. One learns what the new effective wave
function is from one’s measurement results, but one never knows
more than what is allowed by the standard quantum statistics. Indeed,
Bohm’s theory always predicts the standard quantum probabilities
for particle configurations, but it predicts these as epistemic
probabilities. Bohm’s theory is supposed to give determinate
measurement results in terms of determinate particle configurations
(say the position of the pointer on a measuring device). (See Barrett
(1999) and the entry on
 Bohmian mechanics
 for more details.)
If one chooses position as the preferred physical observable and
adopts the particle dynamics of Bohm’s theory, then one can
construct a many-threads theory by fixing the initial wave function
and the Hamiltonian and by considering every possible initial
configuration of particles to correspond to a different full history
for a possible world. Here the prior probabilities are given by the
distribution postulate in Bohm’s theory, and these probabilities
are Bayesian updated on the results of measurements. The updated
epistemic probabilities yield the effective Bohmian wave function. So
the only difference between Bohm’s theory and the associated
many-threads theory is that the many-threads theory treats all
possible Bohmian worlds as simultaneously existing worlds, only one of
which is ours. A many-threads theory can be constructed for virtually
any determinate physical quantity just as one would construct a
hidden-variable or a modal theory. (See the entry on
 modal interpretations of quantum mechanics.)
The comparison with Bohmian mechanics makes clear the sense in which
the single-mind theory, the many-minds theory, and the many-thread
theory are hidden-variable theories. In each case, it is the
determinate value of a “hidden” variable (i.e. a variable
not determined by the standard quantum-mechanical state alone) that
determines our measurement records, and it is the dynamics of this
variable together with the prior probabilities that yields the
standard quantum statistics. For his part, Everett explicitly
considered such hidden-variable theories but held that his
relative-state formulation of pure wave mechanics did not need the
addition of such a variable to explain the experience of the modeled
observers. This is a good reason to take such theories are failing to
capture Everett’s preferred formulation of quantum
mechanics.
An approach that is close in spirit to Everett’s relative-state
interpretation of pure wave mechanics is to simply to deny that there
are any salient absolute matters of fact about the properties of
physical systems or the records, experiences, and beliefs of observers
and insist that all physical facts relevant to explaining our
experience are relative (see Saunders, 1995, 1997, and 1998, Conroy
2012, and
 relational quantum mechanics
 for examples of how this might work). In the experiment above, a
relational formulation of quantum mechanics would not describe the
observer \(J\) as believing that his result was “spin up” and
it would not describe him as believing that his result was “spin
down”. Rather, there would be no simple fact of the matter regarding
what result \(J\) recorded. Here \(J\) recorded that his
result was “spin up” relative to \(S\) being x-spin up and
\(J\) recorded that his result was “spin down” relative to
\(S\) being x-spin down. Similarly, the state of \(S\) is
x-spin up relative to \(J\) believing that his result was “spin
up”, etc. On this reading of Everett, physical facts are essentially
relative, and there are, hence, typically no simple matters of fact
about the properties of any individual physical system.
One way to understand this is to think of Everett branches as an
indexical akin to time. Just as one might have different incompatible
physical states obtain at different times, here one might have
different, incompatible physical states obtain at the same time
but at different branches. Rather than account for
determinate measurement records at a time, one denies that there
typically is any simple matter of fact concerning what an
observer’s measurement record is at a time. Insofar as there is
a matter of fact concerning the value of a measurement record, it is a
fact at a time and at a branch. On this proposal, one might propose a
different branch indexical for each complete basis one might specify.
But the complete set of relative facts at a time, the set of relative
facts that one gets by considering every possible branch indexical at
a time, does not require one to specify a preferred basis for the
theory.
Quantum probabilities here would not be descriptive of which Everett
branch is actual, since they all are. Rather, quantum probabilities
would presumably be descriptive of the structure of the branch
indexical perhaps somewhat as temporal duration is descriptive of
the time indexical. While it is unclear, at least on a
standard account of rational choice, why an agent should care to have
such probabilities inform her decisions, it is not impossible that one
might formulate a compelling story, perhaps akin to how temporal facts
may affect an agent’s preferences. (See
 relational quantum mechanics
 for a further discussion of such approaches.)
Everett took his version of the Wigner’s Friend story to reveal
the inconsistency of the standard collapse formulation of quantum
mechanics and the incompleteness of the Copenhagen interpretation. The
problem was that neither could make sense of nested measurement. And
since pure wave mechanics allowed one to provide a consistent account
of nested measurement, he took it to immediately resolve the
measurement problem. The task then was to explain the sense in which
pure wave mechanics might be taken to be empirically faithful over
determinate measurement records exhibiting the standard
quantum-mechanical statistics.
Everett’s relative-state formulation of pure wave mechanics has
a number of salient virtues. It eliminates the collapse dynamics and
hence immediately resolves the potential conflict between the two
dynamical laws. It is consistent, applicable to all physical systems,
and perhaps as simple as a formulation of quantum mechanics can be.
And it is empirically faithful in that one can find an
observer’s quantum experience as relative records in the model
of pure wave mechanics and one can find a measure over relative
sequences of records such that most such sequences exhibit the
standard quantum statistics. 
Insofar as Everett’s standard of empirical faithfulness just
involved finding measurement records associated with a modeled
observer in the theory that agree with one’s experience, it is a
relatively weak variety of empirical adequacy. The relative weakness
of this condition is illustrated by the fact that the way that
one’s experience is found in the model of pure wave mechanics
does not explain why one should expect to have that particular
experience in a world described by the theory. Judging a theory to be
empirically adequate when it tells us that there is a sense in which
everything physically possible in fact happens clearly puts pressure
on the very idea of empirical adequacy. But one might nevertheless
argue that the empirical faithfulness of the relative-state
formulation of pure wave mechanics represent a nontrivial empirical
virtue. 
There remain a number of alternative reconstructions of
Everett’s relative-state formulation of pure wave mechanics.
Insofar as one takes pure wave mechanics to provide a clear starting
point for addressing the quantum measurement problem, one might find
such alternatives naturally compelling. 