In many respects, the general idea of the possibility of species
change is an old concept. The reflections of Empedocles (ca.
495–35 BCE) and the views of the Greek Atomists among the
Presocratic nature philosophers formed a Classical heritage on which
later speculations could be developed. These Presocratic speculations
combined naturalistic myths of origins with reflections on the
workings of chance-like processes to create a naturalistic account of
the origins of existing forms of life (see the entry
 ancient atomism).
 Particularly as the Presocratic Atomist speculations were restated by
the Roman poet Titus Lucretius (ca. 99–50 BCE) in book five of
his On the Nature of Things (Lucretius [RN]), a source was
available in Antiquity that set out a speculative account of the
gradual origin of living beings from an initial atomic chaos through
an undirected process that sorts out the best adapted forms and
eliminates those not suited to their conditions.
The speculative accounts of the early atomists were, however, opposed
on several levels by the subsequent mainstream Platonic, Neo-Platonic,
Aristotelian, and Stoic philosophical traditions. The writings of
Plato (427–327 BCE), particularly his long creation myth,
Timaeus— the only Platonic dialogue available
continuously in the Latin Western tradition—provided an
influential non-Biblical source for arguments against the Atomist
tradition. This dialogue serves as the locus classicus for
the notion of an externally-imposed origin of living beings through
the action of an intelligent Craftsman (demiurgos) who orders
a mathematically-conceived matter into a rational cosmos that includes
living beings in accord with eternal archetypes or forms, realizing
through this activity both aesthetic and rational ends. Plato’s
account initiated the long tradition of reflection that was continued
in Neo-Platonism and in aspects of Stoicism to form the foundation of
the argument that organic beings could not be explained by chance-like
processes either in their origins or in their complex design.
Particularly as developed in the influential writings of the Greek
physician Claudius Galenus (129–200 CE), a long heritage in the
life sciences relied upon anatomy as evidence of rational design.
These interpretations of “teleological design” interacted
in complex ways with Jewish, Christian, and Islamic Biblical concepts
of creation (Sedley 2007). One common meaning of
“teleology” frequently encountered in discussions of
evolution since Darwin—that of externally imposed design by an
intelligent agency (demiurge, nature, God) on pre-existing
matter— originates in these ancient discussions and is not
accurately identified with the Biblical concept of creatio ex
nihilo (Carroll 2015).
In Aristotle’s (384–322 BCE) seminal biological writings,
the external teleology of a designer-creator was replaced by an
internal teleological purposiveness associated with the immanent
action of an internal cause—in living beings their informing
soul (psuche)— which functioned as the formal, final
and efficient cause of life (Aristotle, De Anima II: 415b,
10–30). Aristotle also did not endorse the concept of an
historical origin of the world, affirming instead the eternity of the
world order (Physics, I: 192a, 25–34). At least this
was how he was understood by a later tradition (Dales and Argerami
1991).
Another issue that Aristotle treated extensively with relevance to the
conception of species—embryogenesis—also had important
implications for later discussions. In the traditions indebted in some
way to Aristotle’s natural philosophy, sexual generation and the
subsequent embryological development of the individual from primordial
matter, is a sequential process that occurs in time under the
teleological action of the soul (psuche). In
Aristotle’s own account, this soul-as-form is typically derived
from the male parent, but it could also be derived even from the sun,
as employed in his explanation of the origin of
spontaneously-generated forms (Aristotle, De generatione
animalium, III: 762a, 20–35).
This theory of the passing on of soul-as-substantial form in
generation also formed the basis of one meaning of
“species” (eidos) in Aristotle’s biological
works—as the individualized enmattered form-as-soul that is
perpetuated in generation eternally. Although connected by a complex
theory of mental abstraction to the universal in thought and language,
a “species” in this biological sense is not a universal,
but an eternal serial sequence of one individual generating another
individual (De Anima, II: 415b, 1–10). The importance
of this meaning of “species” as distinct from the meaning
of “species-as-universal” bears on several issues explored
in Sections
 3.3
 and
 3.4
 below. One interpretive issue in the exegesis of Aristotle’s
conception of species concerns the degree to which he was committed to
asserting anything beyond the eternity of the three main groups
(gene)—plants, animals and humans—rather than the
eternity of each individual kind (eidos) (De generatione
animalium, II: 731b, 32–732a5).
The implications of Aristotle’s complex thought for subsequent
discussions of species, generated by the recovery of his writings in
the Latin West in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, were varied.
On one hand, Aristotle’s apparent metaphysical requirement that
the soul-as-form (eidos) be permanent and enduring through
the process of the generation of “like by like” seemed for
much of the tradition to amount to a denial of the possibility that
natural species could change over time in their essential properties,
even though local adaptation in “accidental” properties
was fully possible. Since individual beings were considered to be
dynamic composites of a material substrate and an immaterial and
eternal form, the accidental differentiation of the substantial form
in individuals did not affect the metaphysical endurance of the
species. It also made species extinction metaphysically impossible. In
living beings, the soul-as-form is serially passed on through time in
the act of generation to create an eternal continuity of the form.
This supplied a metaphysical foundation for the notion of species
permanence without reliance on an external creative agency.
In the background of the discussion of the high middle ages was also
the theory of divine creation endorsed in inherited Jewish, Christian
and Islamic thought. This required a distinction between the first
origin of species in historical time, and the normal generation of the
individual. If the origin of species was attributed to divine action,
the temporal emergence of these species was not necessarily
instantaneous. Such a doctrine was the basis of Augustine of
Hippo’s (354–430) theory of the original creation of
primordial seeds (rationes seminales) of each species at an
original moment in time, but with the emergence of species in
historical time a possibility (Augustine, VI.13.23–25, [GL,
175–76]). This theory of a temporalized creation, put forth
explicitly in detail in his treatise The Literal Interpretation of
Genesis, allowed Augustine to argue that species emerged
sequentially in historical time rather than all at once.
The great textual recoveries in the Latin West of Greek science,
medicine and philosophy of the twelfth through the fifteenth
centuries, generally accompanied by Islamic commentaries, introduced
these texts into a theological context that had been strongly defined
by Augustinianism and neo-Platonism. The interplay between this
pre-existent tradition with new philosophical views defined a complex
period of intellectual ferment that defined much of the subsequent
intellectual and scientific history of the West (Gaukroger 2006: chp.
2). The sustained efforts of major synthesizers, such as Thomas
Aquinas (1225–1274), to bring the massive body of
newly-recovered Aristotelian works into dialogue with Christian
Neo-Platonism and Augustinianism, demanded new insights into the
conception of the soul-body relation, the autonomy of the natural
order and the role of secondary causes in the creation of the
world.
Concerning the issue of species-permanence and origin, Aquinas treated
this in dialogue with Augustine’s theory of serial creation. As
he comments in his major synthesis, the Summa Theologiae:
“New species, if they appear, pre-exist in certain active
powers” (Pars I, Qu. 73, Rep Obj. 3). This claim suggests a
reading of Aristotle that assumed the essential fixity of each
definable substantial form, and the eternity of each species since
creation. But this conclusion must be read in the context of
Aquinas’s complex theory of creation and the discussions of the
problem of universals in late Scholastic philosophy (see the entry
 medieval problem of universals,
 and Wilkins 2009: Ch. 3). This context prevents any simple picture of
Scholastic thought concerning the issue of species permanence, and it
cannot be claimed that either Aristotle or later Scholastics such as
Aquinas are responsible for the strong “essentialist”
position often attributed to them in the literature (R.A. Richards
2010: chp. 2). As developed below, it can be argued that the species
concept was “hardened” only in the early modern period
with the rise of the mechanical philosophy and its attendant
preformationist embryology. The “strong essentialist”
position often attributed to Aristotle and Scholasticism (Hull, 1992),
is demonstrably a product of later historical developments (R.A.
Richards 2010; Wilkins 2009; Oderberg 2007: chp. 9; Winsor 2006;
Lennox 1985, 1987).
The re-introduction of Greek and Roman atomism in the Renaissance,
with the recovery (1417) and printing (1473) of Lucretius’
philosophical poem On the Nature of Things, introduced to a
literate European audience a series of influential cosmological
speculations that included a naturalistic account of the origin of
species integrated into a non-teleological materialist cosmology that
contrasted markedly with the received Scholastic, Aristotelian, and
Augustinian-Platonic traditions. Into the eighteenth century, these
speculations, and those drawn from other atomist sources (see the
entry on
 natural philosophy in the Renaissance),
 were often in the background of novel early modern reflections on
species origins and their possible transformation in time throughout
the eighteenth century (Bowler 2003: chp. 2; Oldroyd 1996; Greene
1959).
A new starting point in systematic reflections on the origin of the
earth and living beings, showing both some similarity and also major
differences from atomist speculations, dates specifically from the
synthesis of natural philosophy and metaphysics put forth by
René Descartes (1596–1650) in his Principia
philosophiae (1st ed. 1644; 2nd ed. 1647). This treatise expanded
and summarized issues he had developed earlier in Le Monde
(The World, or Treatise on Light), a work published only
posthumously in 1664, with an improved edition appearing in 1677.
It is important for understanding the subsequent reflections on the
“history” of nature to recognize that these Cartesian
speculations on the history of the earth and solar system were
introduced in the form of a counter-factual hypothesis that explicitly
sought to avoid conflict with accepted theological interpretations of
origin (Descartes 1647 [1983: 181]). In the hypothetical account
offered in the Principles of Philosophy, Descartes derived
the earth from a cooled star “formerly…like the
Sun” (ibid.). By its gradual solidification in a great celestial
vortex, the Earth took form. Subsequent drying and cracking formed the
ocean basins, the continents and the mountain ranges.
An outstanding lacuna in Descartes’s account, however, was his
failure to incorporate the origins of living beings into his
naturalistic story of creation by natural laws. Although manuscripts
display the degree to which Descartes attempted on several occasions
to work out some linkage between his general natural philosophy and
the embryological formation of living beings, these reflections did
not appear in print during his lifetime (Aucante 2006). The
Principles simply skips over the issue of a naturalistic
account of the origins of life and the origin of individual species.
Instead in Part IV, devoted generally to the origin and physical
properties of the Earth, he jumps (Proposition 188) from a discussion
of magnetism to a brief allusion to projected Parts V and VI of his
Principles that would deal with animals and humans (Descartes
1647 [1983: 275–276]). But the Principles only offers a
brief discussion of the various senses and body-soul interaction
similar to that put forth in his early unpublished Treatise on
Man (1st Latin ed. 1662, 2nd French ed. 1664). These speculations
were grounded on the concept of a hypothetical statue-machine created
directly by divine action, and possessed immediately of all human
functions and structures (Descartes 1664 [1972: 1–5]).
Descartes’s speculations conveyed to his successors at least two
issues relevant to the origin and history of living species. First, by
presenting the historical account of the origin of the solar system
and the world as a counterfactual hypothesis, a means of understanding
the history of nature that was adapted to the limitations of the human
mind, rather than as a literally true account, Descartes provided the
option of a purely fictionalist reading of historical science that
persisted into the nineteenth century (Sloan 2006a). Second, the
integration of living beings into the new natural philosophy of
mechanistic naturalism was left unresolved. If anything,
Descartes’s reflections accentuated the problem of providing a
naturalistic explanation of the origins of living beings.
Two traditions can be traced in the wake of Descartes’s
reflections. Beginning with the De solido intra solidum
naturaliter contento dissertationis prodromus of 1669 by the
Danish Cartesian Nicholas Steno (1638–86), efforts commenced to
draw the historical origins of living beings into the Cartesian
cosmology, in this case primarily by granting that fossils were the
remains of once existing organisms on an earth that had formed
historically. There was, however, no effort made to account for the
origins of these beings on Cartesian principles (Rudwick 1972).
A second tradition established a series of published reflections in
the later seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries that came to be
known in subsequent literature as “theories of the earth”.
This tradition commenced with the Telluris theoria sacra,
published in 1681 (English edition 1684) by the English clergyman,
Thomas Burnet (1635–1715). Burnet sought to reconcile a
Cartesian-derived historical account of the origins of the Earth with
the creation account of the Mosaic tradition. In Burnet’s
account, the Earth began from an original chaos fashioned by divine
action into the existing Earth through a series of changes that
involved the gradual separation of the continents, the reversal of the
poles, and the Mosaic flood. To explain the origin of living beings,
Burnet relied on the “spontaneous fruitfulness of the
ground” in the primeval Edenic world, rather than on the direct
creation of forms through divine action (Burnet 1684: bk 2, chp. 2,
para. 4, p. 187 [1965: 141]). By connecting this account to the
Biblical story of the first chapter of Genesis, Burnet broke
with Cartesian counterfactualism, offering for the first time a
presumably literal interpretation of a Cartesian-style developmental
history of nature that also included the origins of living forms.
The various accounts offered in the subsequent “theory of the
earth” tradition, as they were amplified by such natural
philosophers as John Ray (1627–1705), John Woodward
(1665–1728), and William Whiston (1667–1752), failed to
achieve a consensus position on the question of a naturalistic
explanation of the origins of organisms (Rudwick 1972, 2005). New
reflections on the embryological origin of the individual organism in
the seventeenth-century provided a particular point of focus, and the
reflections on this issue were closely tied to speculations about
species origins.
In its seventeenth-century context, the issue of species origins also
involved debates over the possibility of the spontaneous generation of
forms (Roger 1963 [1997: chp. 2]). The experimental refutations by
Francesco Redi (1626–67) of theories of origin relying on
abiogenesis, such as those proposed by Thomas Burnet, weakened, but
did not destroy, the belief in spontaneous generation. Evidence for
spontaneous generation could always be explained by appeal to
Augustine’s theory of the pre-existent “seeds” or
“germs”.
The extensive empirical researches on the generation of birds and
mammals carried out by William Harvey (1578–1657), and published
late in his life in his Exercitationes de generatione
animalium (Observations on the Generation of Animals) in
1651, proved to be a bombshell in this discussion. Harvey’s
careful studies claimed to refute on empirical grounds both the
Aristotelian form-matter theory of sexual generation as well as the
rival “two-seeds” theory based on the assumption of
equivalent male and female semen. This latter theory had been embraced
by ancient atomists, by Galenic and Hippocratic medical theorists, and
by the majority of Renaissance physicians. The two-seeds theory had
also been accepted by early-modern atomists such as Pierre Gassendi
(1592–1655) and Nathaniel Highmore (1613–85) (Fisher
2006). As a consequence, when Descartes’s own speculations on
embryonic formation were finally published posthumously in 1677, in
which he had also relied on the combination of male and female
semina organized by laws of nature and the vortex theory,
they commonly met with derision (see quote from Garden below).
Harvey’s detailed embryological enquiries of 1651 had already
seriously undermined the empirical bases of these claims. It is
difficult to find any author who endorsed the solution as offered by
Descartes.
These empirical difficulties with both the main inherited theories of
generation as well as with the new “mechanistic”
alternative accounts of embryogenesis of Gassendi, Highmore, and
Descartes produced a conceptual crisis within the program of universal
mechanism that suggested that universal mechanism could not deal
causally with one of the most important issues in the philosophy of
nature. Another solution needed to be found.
As a consequence of the failure of “mechanistic”
epigenesis, post-Cartesian mechanists resolved this issue with the
theory of “preexistence”. Scientific foundations of this
can be traced to the work of the microscopist Jan Swammerdam
(1637–80) in the late 1660s on the basis of his microscopic
observations on developing insects. The philosophical development of
this theory was made by the French Oratorian priest Nicholas
Malebranche (1638–1715), whose influential Recherche de la
vérité of 1674 recast many Cartesian principles
into a framework of “theistic” universal mechanism
(Gaukroger 2010: chp.2). In this work Malebranche offered a novel
theory of generation which is most accurately termed a
“preexistence” theory. On this view, the new organism is
not generated in secular time, but has pre-existed since the original
creation of the world. This theory, often supported by appeals to
Augustine’s theory of the creation of original seeds (see above
 Section 1.2),
 was to become the paradigmatic theory for nearly a century, and was
closely associated with some version of the mechanical philosophy.
Various expressions of the preexistence theory can be traced into the
public teaching and published works of such influential expositors of
academic medicine as Hermann Boerhaave (1668–1738) of the
University of Leyden. The theory is also endorsed in numerous
scientific treatises of the early eighteenth century. The question of
both individual and species origin was by this theory removed to
divine action at the first creation of the world (Pyle 2006; Roger
1963 [1997: chp. 6]).
At least three variants of the theory of pre-existence can be
distinguished. Two of these assumed the pre-existence of forms in
miniature, either encased in the ovaries of the female (Ovism), the
original version, or after the discovery of spermatozoa by Anton van
Leeuwenhoek in 1677, in the testes of the male (Vermism). These two
versions of “preformationism” generally became the main
options one finds expressed in the professional medical and
gynecological literature of the 1670–1740 period. A third
alternative, which had few followers in the seventeenth and early
eighteenth century, but which became particularly popular by the
1770s, was the theory of pre-formed “germs”, given its
first clear statement by Claude Perrault (1608–80). This
Perrault theory, which closely resembled the Augustinian account, held
that the first primordia of organisms were formed at the original
creation as seeds dispersed in the soil, from which they were taken in
with food. Under the proper conditions and within the correct
organisms, these “germs” became implanted in the ovaries
from which they then developed in response to fertilization. In all
three accounts, the act of fertilization provided the occasion, and
not the cause, of the development of organisms in time.
The theory of pre-existence was seen to solve many problems. First, it
explained the intimate interrelation of structure and function that
seemed to require the existence of parts of the organism in an
integrated system. The heart presumably could not beat without
ennervation, and the nerves could not exist without the heart.
Consequently, as the argument went, the entire organism must
pre-exist. The existence of such integrated systems seemed otherwise
difficult to explain by the sequential development of parts, as
implied in Aristotelian and other “epigenetic” theories of
development. Second, this account was easily harmonized with
theological developments in the seventeenth century, particularly on
the Continent, where the strong influence of Augustinian theology on
Calvinism (Protestant) and Jansenism (Catholic) was most in evidence.
As an example, it provided for the transmission of Original Sin. The
solution that emerged was a “theistic” mechanism that
emphasized God’s omnipotence and the corresponding passivity of
nature (Deason 1986; Roger 1963 [1997: chp. 6]). A third advantage of
the theory of preexistence, at least in the versions that embraced the
“ preformed germs” interpretation, was that it allowed for
the appearance of life in secular time, which seemed to be suggested
by the existence of fossil forms. At the same time no versions of
preexistence theory implied any change of species or development of
one species from another in time. Finally, some version of a theory of
the preformation of the embryo could be reconciled with the best
microscopic observations of the late seventeenth and early eighteenth
centuries, as these were reported by such experts on this instrument
as Anton van Leeuwenhoek (1632–1723), Jan Swammerdam, Marcello
Malpighi (1628–1694), and Henry Baker (1690–1774).
These preexistence theories of embryological origin directly affected
the question of species transformism. First, they effectively removed
the organism from the effects of local circumstance and environmental
conditions. Second, they all placed the origin of species, as well as
that of at least the primordia of the individual organism, at a moment
in the original divine creation. A quotation from a contemporary
review article illustrates several aspects of the thesis of
preexistence:
And indeed all the Laws of Motion which are as yet discovered, can
give but a very lame account of the forming of a Plant or Animal. We
see how wretchedly Des Cartes came off when he began to apply
them to this subject; they are form’d by Laws yet unknown to
Mankind, and it seems most probable that the Stamina of all
the Plants and Animals that have ever been, or ever shall be in the
World, have been formed ab Origine Mundi [from the foundation
of the world] by the Almighty Creator within the first of each
respective kind. (Garden 1691: 476–477)
The immediate consequence of this theory was a new rigidity given to
the concept of species that it had not possessed in the Aristotelian
and Scholastic traditions. Preexistence theory reinforced a sharp
distinction between “essential” and
“accidental” properties to a degree not implied by the
prior tradition. At the same time, preexistence theory made it
difficult to explain obvious empirical phenomena, such as monstrosity,
the regeneration of lost parts, the resemblances of offspring to both
parents, evidence for geographical variation, racial differences, and
the existence of hybrid forms such as the mule. It seemed necessary to
attribute these anomalies to divine action at an original creation.
These difficulties in the theory resulted in a variety of criticisms
that were eventually to lead to the downfall of preexistence theory in
its original form, although the theory was to have a long subsequent
history through a modification of the “germ” theory
(Detlefsen 2006; Roger 1963 [1997: chp. 7]; Roe 1981).
The dominance of some form of pre-existence theory of generation
between roughly 1670 and the 1740s provides some explanation for the
lack of efforts among natural philosophers to develop transformist
theories of species origins in the same period. A notable exception to
this claim was the Epicurean cosmology resembling some aspects of
Lucretius’s poem, developed by the French philosophe
Benôit de Maillet (1656–1738) in his privately circulated
manuscript Telliamed that was known in French circles for ten
years before its publication in 1748. In this work de Maillet offered
bold speculations on how sea creatures developed into land forms over
time. Nonetheless, the period before the middle of the eighteenth
century was dominated by a theory of organic generation that
effectively precluded the naturalistic development of species. The
development of scientific transformism can be seen to be intimately
tied to new theories of generation, and also to the development of
“active” rather than “passive” conceptions of
matter.
The introduction of Newtonian natural philosophy into this discussion
had ambiguous consequences depending on the interpretations given to
Newton’s natural philosophy. Newton’s
Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica
(Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy) of 1687, with
subsequent revised editions in 1713 and 1726, developed a fundamental
critique of Cartesianism, and also introduced the concept of
“attraction at a distance” into physical explanations.
Extending the concept of “active powers” to the
micro-level in the Opticks of 1704 (English), with important
revisions in editions of 1706 (Latin), 1717, 1721, and 1730, Newton
introduced into biological discussions new issues that played out in
complex ways in the subsequent decades.
On one reading of Newton, his conception of active forces introduced
back into life science a concept of “dynamic” matter that
could be used as a warrant for a new vitalistic embryology and even a
non-mechanistic conception of nature possessed of intrinsic powers
(Schofield 1970: chp. 9). This option was followed out by many French
medical writers who used Newtonian arguments to ground a
“vitalistic” medical theory, an interpretation
particularly developed at the University of Montpellier in the early
decades of the eighteenth century (Wolfe 2014; Gaukroger 2010: chps.
10–11).
But in the more “mechanistic” interpretation of
Newtonianism, this retained the inert character of matter and endorsed
many of the main features of Cartesian biomechanism, but with the
addition of mathematical quantification and some use of attractive and
repulsive microforces (Schofield 1970: chp. 1). In this tradition of
interpretation, one finds a commitment to mechanistic preformationism
and even strong “preexistence” theory. This can be
followed in the medical theories of Hermann Boerhaave, Archibald
Pitcairne (1652–1713), Richard Mead (1673–1754), and other
Newtonian iatromechanists who typically had contact with the great
Dutch medical schools (Guerrini 1987).
Newton had also argued in the long thirty-first Query to the
Opticks against “World-Building” of the Cartesian
form, as discussed above. Newton saw this as claiming that the world
“might arise out of a Chaos by the mere Laws of Nature”
(Newton 1730: 378), and condemned this as
“unphilosophical” (ibid., 401). Revival of
realistically interpreted historical cosmology in the eighteenth
century involved a clear break with these Newtonian strictures. This
shift will be developed in the following section.
The development of new conceptualizations of the relation of organic
beings to the history of the world, and the relation of species
permanence to this history, was achieved in the eighteenth century.
This included the breakdown of universal mechanism, the introduction
of dynamic theories of matter, new theories of embryological
formation, and a reconceptualization of the relation of time to the
material world. It also involved the formulation of progressive and
developmental, rather than “degenerating”, conceptions of
the history of life. The following discussion will selectively examine
aspects of these developments. The reader is referred to major recent
historical syntheses for further development of the more general
intellectual and scientific context (Zammito 2018a; Gaukroger 2010;
Reill 2005; Rudwick 2005).
In several respects these developments are connected in some way to
the introduction of more dynamic conceptions of matter that emerged in
the interplay between Newtonianism and Leibnizianism in the early
decades of the eighteenth century, particularly in French discussions
(Shank 2008). As described in the previous section, Newton’s
introduction in the Queries to the Opticks of the concept of
active microforces that could explain microchemical and electrical
phenomena opened up this discussion. The other great natural
philosophy developed on the Continent by Gottfried Leibniz
(1646–1716) and systematized and expanded into an influential
systematic philosophical program by Christian Wolff (1679–1754),
elaborated a more complex theory of matter that distinguished between
the properties of phenomenal “matter” as conceived by
Newton, and those of more fundamental active and
teleologically-directed “substance”, grounded in force
(vis). In physics this development played out on the
Continent in the vis viva controversy, which was concerned
initially with the conservation of force in collisions. It was then
extended to more fundamental metaphysical issues that had a complex
effect on the life sciences.
In the life sciences, these issues were manifest in debates over the
role of vital powers in the explanation of living properties, as these
were developed particularly in French discussions in the complex
interactions of Newtonian and Leibnizian-Wolffian natural
philosophies. An influential example of this synthesis is
Émilie Du Châtelet’s (1706–1749)
Institutions de Physique (first ed. 1740, second ed. 1742).
These hybrid Leibnizian-Newtonian syntheses, bringing together aspects
of Newton’s “active” forces with the monad
and substance theory of Leibnizianism, were subsequently extended into
discussions of embryology by Pierre de Maupertuis (1698–1759),
and as will be developed in the next section, by Georges-Louis
LeClerc, Comte de Buffon (1707–88) in the 1740s.
It is in these discussions that we encounter the first early modern
systematic speculations connecting naturalistic theories of earth
history, embryological development, and changes of organic species in
response to external changes of conditions of life. These connections
develop directly out of critiques of the preexistence theory of
generation by Maupertuis and Buffon, who in different but related ways
reformulated the “mechanistic” epigenetic embryology
previously advocated by Descartes and Atomist theorists. Similar to
these discarded theories (see above,
 Section 2.2),
 the existence of equivalent male and female “seeds” was
postulated, which were then assumed to combine in sexual generation to
form the embryo. The new eighteenth-century versions supplemented
these seventeenth-century accounts with a novel role for dynamic
conceptions of matter and inherent organizing forces. In the case of
Buffon, these claims were supported by controversial microscopic
observations that presumably refuted the opposing claims made by
William Harvey a century earlier.
We can conveniently date these developments from the speculations of
Pierre de Maupertuis, put forth in two treatises, the better known the
Physical Venus (Vénus physique) published in
1745. To deal with the difficulty of explaining how atomistic seeds
derived from the male and female could be formed into the complexity
of the embryo, Maupertuis drew upon a kind of Newtonian attraction
inherent in these seeds which also included elements of Leibnizian
monad theory. In his last formulation of 1751 he expanded on this with
the claim that the particles themselves were endowed with an internal
principle that led them to arrange themselves to form specific parts
of the fetus. Maupertuis’ dynamic “epigenesis”
incorporated both mechanism and dynamic materialism (Terrall 2002:
chp. 7; Hoffheimer 1982).
There are at least three ways in which the change in embryological
theory instituted by Maupertuis, and subsequently elaborated by
Buffon, proved to be relevant to the broader question of the
historical transformation of species. First, this new account of the
embryological origin of the individual organism meant that it actually
is organized in historical time rather than pre-existing and simply
unfolding at an opportune moment. Second, it involved a theory of
material inheritance that explained the passing on of physical traits
from one generation to the next through the transmission of particles
of matter. Third, the conservation of the identity of the species is
guaranteed only by the accurate transmission of this material
inheritance. If this transmission is affected by external
circumstances in any way, significant historical change in the lineage
of ancestor and descendant is possible. These options, opened up by
Maupertuis’s speculations, were subsequently developed within an
institutional setting by Buffon.
The complex set of issues described in the preceding section two were
all brought together in the work of Buffon. In a remarkable career
transition in 1739 in which he moved from his position as a pensioned
mathematician in the Paris Royal Academy of Sciences, to a royal
appointment to the Directorship of the King’s Garden and Natural
History Cabinet (Jardin du Roi) in Paris, Buffon brought with
him to the domain of natural history and to his reflection on issues
in biology his deep familiarity with the major theoretical debates
dividing Newtonians, Cartesians, and Leibnizians in his era. He was
also intimately acquainted through his friend Maupertuis with the
debates over generation theory and theories of the earth. He fashioned
these ingredients into a set of new perspectives that were to define
his novel approach to the life sciences over the last half-century of
the Bourbon monarchy. In the interpretation of this article, Buffon is
the major figure to put together a set of issues that formed the
pre-conditions for transformism in biology, although he would never
himself move into this theoretical region. Through his immensely
popular writings, which were translated into all major European
languages, he exerted an influence on discussions that ranged from St.
Petersburg in Russia to Virginia in the American colonies.
Buffon was able to exert such influence through the concrete
institutional basis provided by the Jardin du Roi, with its
attendant large Cabinet of specimens collected from all over
the world. Under his leadership was created a preeminent center of
research into comparative anatomy, chemistry, mineralogy, botany, and
biogeographical study (Spary 2000). By providing an institutional
setting for these inquiries, the speculations and theoretical
reflections of eighteenth-century natural historians could be
subjected to organized critique and specialized examination in a
context not found elsewhere in the natural-historical sciences of the
period. Buffon’s theoretical vision provided a concrete
framework against which those immediately associated with the
Jardin were able to develop further reflections on such
issues as the nature and duration of species, the significance of
comparative anatomical studies, the historical relationships of forms,
the meaning of fossils, and the systematic relations of living beings
to one another. Only Buffon’s contemporary, Carolus Linnaeus
(1707–1778), Professor of Medicine and Botany at the University
of Uppsala in Sweden after 1741, had similar authority in the domain
of natural history, and Linnaeus did not have the resources and the
institutional authority that characterized the Jardin in the
last days of the Bourbon monarchy.
This simultaneous emergence of these two major figures in the natural
historical sciences of the middle Enlightenment created a major
rivalry of traditions of inquiry that would play out on several
fronts. In Buffon, one had the model of the grand and eloquent
theoretician of nature who developed major themes in Enlightenment
natural philosophy and applied these to biological topics. In
Linnaeus, one had a pious systematizer of the natural world of his
era, whose monumental System of Nature (first edition 1735),
along with numerous other works, formed the basis for modern
biological classification. Their different approaches set the stage
for a major theoretical conflict of traditions in natural historical
science that would eventually be synthesized in the nineteenth century
(Hoquet 2007).
Buffon’s development of a broad theoretical inquiry into natural
science within the framework of a state-sponsored institutional
structure warrants the special attention given here to his
contribution in the history of evolutionary theory. These included:
(1) his methodological revolution in the epistemology of the
natural-historical sciences; (2) his analysis and proposed solution to
the problem of animal and plant generation; (3) his
reconceptualization of the concept of biological species; (4) his
bio-geographical approach to the issues of animal distribution and
variation; (5) his renewed theoretical attention to issues of
cosmology and the “theory of the earth;” and finally (6),
his concluding synthesis of earth and life history in the grand
naturalistic account publishes as his monumental Les
(originally Des) Époques de la Nature
(Epochs of Nature) of 1778–9, which provided a model
for similar syntheses of the nineteenth century. Through this
combination of several lines of earlier inquiry, Buffon posed a series
of theoretical questions that were further explored by important
successors associated with the Paris Museum in the nineteenth century
and in natural history more generally.
In his position as a natural philosopher, in dialogue with the works
of Newton, Descartes, Leibniz, Clairaut, the French
Encyclopedists, and major English philosophers of his period,
Buffon explored foundational methodological and philosophical
questions of the Enlightenment in combination with his analysis of
empirical questions. One expression of this wider vision was the
unusual way in which he sought to validate the inquiry into natural
history in relation to a naturalized epistemology that scholars have
seen as novel for its time (Hoquet 2005; Sloan 2006b; Roger 1963
[1997: chp. 9], 1989 [1997: chp. 6]). In developing a new
methodological approach to natural history, Buffon claimed to ground
his arguments on a form of empirical certitude—“physical
truth” [verité physique]—attained through
inquiries into the concrete relations of beings in their material
relations. This he opposed to the “abstractions” of
mathematical physics, extending, it seems, the Leibnizian-inspired
argument against Newton as developed in Émilie Du
Châtelet’s (1706–1749) Institutions de
Physique, a work Buffon is known to have read and admired as he
made his transition into his career in natural history (Sloan 2019).
Developing this argument in a long “Discourse on Method”
that opened the first volume of his Histoire Naturelle
(Natural History) (1749), Buffon argued that a science based
on repeated observation of concrete material relations of bodies can
achieve a degree of epistemic certitude that surpasses that available
from the mathematical analysis of nature (Hoquet 2005; Grene &
Depew 2004; Roger 1989 [1997: chp. 6]; Sloan 2006b). On the basis of
this novel epistemological framework, oriented to the search for
“physical” truth, Buffon thus directed natural history
away from a primarily classificatory project. The latter project,
exemplified by the work of his contemporary Linnaeus, Buffon
criticized for imposing “abstract” categories on nature.
In its place, Buffon sought to analyze living beings in relation to
their material conditions of existence. This was to be focused on
their reproductive relationships, biogeographical distribution, and in
his later work, on their connections to cosmology and historical
geology.
These insights were developed in Buffon’s major work, the
Histoire naturelle, générale et particulière,
avec la description du cabinet du roi (Buffon [HN]). In these
discussions Buffon dealt both with issues in the foundational
epistemology and methodology of the natural-historical sciences as
well as with the generalities and specifics of organic beings. The
work was originally intended as a survey of the entire range of
animals, plants, and minerals. In its actual realization, it was more
limited. The first series of fourteen volumes appeared between 1749
and 1767 and dealt with the genesis of the solar system and the earth,
the generation of animals, the varieties of the human species, and the
natural history of the primary quadrupeds and apes. The main quadruped
volumes of the first series, beginning in 1753, were written in
collaboration with the comparative anatomist Marie-Louis Daubenton
(1716–1800). A series of seven volumes of Supplements
(1774–89) offered additional reflections and additions to these
articles and expanded on his views on the history of the earth, the
quadrupeds, and anthropology. These also reported on experiments on
the strength of wood and the cooling of metals that he applied to
dating the age of the earth. In the fifth supplementary volume (1778),
Buffon presented his grand synthesis of cosmology, earth history, and
the history of life, the Les (subsequently Des)
Époques de la nature. An additional five volumes
(1783–88) dealt with issues of mineralogy, chemistry, fire, and
the main forces of nature, especially electricity and magnetism. 
The Epochs of Nature, which was separately printed (1779) and
translated into German in 1781, offered a grand synthesis of
historical cosmology, the history of the earth, and the history of
life which was influential on several subsequent syntheses developed
in German (Herder, Schelling), French (Lacépède) and
possibly English (Chambers) natural history. Continuations of the
special inquiries into animal groups after his death were made by his
understudy Bernard de Lacépède (1756–1825), who
extended Buffon’s general approach to the reptiles
(1788–89), fishes (1798–1803) and cetaceans (1804). The
“age of Buffon” became a defining era in natural history
and established the King’s garden and its Revolutionary
successor, the Muséum national d’histoire
naturelle, as the foremost institutional center of
natural-historical inquiry through the nineteenth century (Spary 2000:
chp. 1; Blanckaert et al. (eds) 1997; Corsi 1983 [1988], 2001).
In addressing the history of the earth, Buffon also broke with the
“counter-factual” tradition of Descartes. In its place he
offered a secular and scientifically literal account of the origins of
the earth and its life forms. Buffon’s new style of
natural-historical inquiry also disconnected it from its long
association with providential design-contrivance natural theology
developed particularly by British natural historians after John Ray
(1627–1705). This was another feature differentiating his style
of natural history from that of Linnaeus. If he was not alone
responsible for “bursting the limits of time”, he was
nonetheless one of the major figures in the “time
revolution” of the latter eighteenth century (Rudwick 2005).
Even though all these points were offered before the Epochs
of 1778–9 in fragmentary form, and often without satisfactory
development from a general philosophical point of view, their
presentation in Buffon’s widely influential work profoundly
affected the subsequent tradition of natural history.
The concrete manifestation of Buffon’s combination of novel
methodology and empirical inquiry is first displayed by his treatment
of embryological generation in the second volume of his Natural
History (1749). These principles also underlie his unusual
analysis of the meaning of “species” in natural history.
In both instances, the notion of epistemic certitude gained from a
“constant recurrence” of events seems to have played a
fundamental role in his reflections. Following the lead of his friend
Maupertuis, Buffon also endorsed the theory of the male and female
seeds to explain sexual generation, deriving the origin of the embryo
from the mechanical mixture of these ingredients. Amplifying upon
Maupertuis’s prior speculations (see above
 Section 2.4),
 he explained the organization of the particles of these two seeds
into a structured whole through microforces closely identified with
Newtonian attractive forces that formed an organizing force-field, an
“internal mold”, that assimilated matter in the proper
order for embryological development. Viewed in longer historical
perspective, Buffon’s theory of the internal mold functioned in
a way similar to Aristotle’s notion of an immanent substantial
form, and was likely influenced by Aristotle’s discussions in
De generatione animalium (see above
 Section 1.1).
 This “mold” serves as an immanent principle of
organization that acts in company with matter to structure the unified
organism by gradual development. The internal mold also guaranteed the
perpetuation of like by like over time. Unlike Aristotle’s
substantial form, however, Buffon’s internal mold is without an
internal finality in its action. It is also not a principle of
vitalization.
For this reason, Buffon was conceptually required to attribute some
new powers to matter to account for vital action. In pursuing this
option, he broke with universal mechanism and the assumption of the
passivity of matter that was an intrinsic component of the mechanical
philosophy and some interpretations of Newtonianism (see above
 Section 2.3).
 There are also important similarities of his new
“vitalism” to that found in Leibnizian discussions such as
was expounded in the Institutions de Physique of
Émilie Du Châtelet in 1740 (Sloan 2019). To give a
plausible account of embryological formation, vital properties
therefore had to be attributed to a specific kind of matter confined
to living beings, the organic molecules, which had their own
inherent dynamic and specifying properties.
The introduction of the concept of “vital” matter by
Buffon, even with restrictions on its actions, represents an important
development in the history of the life sciences of this period. It
broke with the uniformity of matter assumed by the Newtonian,
Gassendist, and Cartesian traditions, and in a limited way it
positioned Buffon at the opening of the “vitalist”
revolution which initiated the first reflections on genuine species
transformism, even though Buffon himself never moved into this new
domain (Reill 2005: chp. 1).
In his original presentations, Buffon conceptualized these internal
molds and specifying organic molecules to have originated from divine
creation. As the Natural History progressed, however, Buffon
increasingly viewed the organic molecules to be formed from an
original undifferentiated “brute” matter, and the internal
molds themselves were seen to arise spontaneously, obtaining their
specificity of action purely from the differential forces of
attraction between different shapes of organic particles (Buffon
“De la Nature. Seconde vue”, 1765, [OP, 38–41]).
It was following upon his proposed solution to the issue of organic
generation that Buffon then addressed the issue of organic species and
their permanence. In the fourth volume of the Natural History
(1753), devoted to the large domestic quadrupeds, Buffon first raised
the option of species transformism, only to reject it. In the article
“The Ass”, devoted to the domestic donkey, Buffon drew
attention to the close anatomical similarity between the horse and the
ass, as revealed by his collaborator Daubenton’s anatomical
descriptions. This similarity strongly suggested an underlying unity
of plan of all the quadrupeds, a similarity raising the possibility
that all quadrupeds might have been derived in historical time from a
single stem (souche) which “in the succession of time,
has produced, by perfection and degeneration, all the other
animals” (Buffon 1753, [OP, 355]). In a move that has confused
commentators every since, Buffon then rejected this possibility and
instead argued that because of the infertility of hybrids, species
must have been distinct from the beginning.
The explanation of Buffon’s initial 1753 rejection of
transformism, and his subsequent development of proto-evolutionary
views as the Natural History progressed, has taken many forms
(Bowler 2003: chp. 3; Lovejoy 1911 [1959]). The argument of this
article is that both Buffon’s initial rejection of transformism,
and his subsequent development toward the acceptance of historical
species change reflect a coherent and consistent development of his
concept of “physical truth” (see above
 Section 3.1).
 Drawing on his emphasis on serial recurrence as the foundation of
physical truth, the species is maintained in time and given its
ontological reality by the recurring passing on of the internal mold
which shapes the organic molecules into a new organism in time.
This analysis implied for Buffon a significant redefinition of the
concept of an organic species, a redefinition that has affected the
tradition of natural history and biology since the 1750s. Buffon
explicitly rejected the long-accepted meaning of ‘species’
as a universal— or, in modern parlance, a class concept,
constituted by a set of individuals on the basis of possession of
explicit defining properties . This was the meaning implicit in the
Linnaean classification of his time. This concept Buffon criticized as
an “abstract” meaning of species. By contrast, Buffon
defined a species in natural history exclusively as the historical
succession of ancestor and descendant linked by material connection
through generation. Such a species is 
… neither the number nor the collection of similar individuals
which forms the species; it is the constant succession and
uninterrupted renewal of these individuals which constitutes it.
(Buffon 1753, [OP, 355]) 
The empirical sign of this essential unity of the species over time is
the ability of its members to interbreed and produce fertile
offspring, a criterion that takes precedence over similarities of
anatomy or habits of life. The horse and ass must be two different
species because they cannot interbreed and produce fertile offspring,
whatever may be their anatomical resemblances. The dogs, on the other
hand, must, in spite of great morphological differences between
breeds, constitute one species because of their interfertility.
In setting forth this new meaning of ‘species’ in natural
history, and distinguishing it from the alternative meaning of species
as a logical universal, Buffon was doing more than distinguishing the
“category” from the “taxon” as these terms
have come to be understood in contemporary philosophy of biology. In
an important sense, Buffon introduced an opposition between
these two meanings of “species” found in the tradition
reaching back to Aristotle (see
 Section 1.1
 above), granting “reality” in biology only to species
conceived as material successions of individuals sharing in the same
internal mold spread out in time. By contrast, Buffon considered the
understanding of species in the sense of a universal class concept as
“abstract” and “artificial”.
This explicit opposition of two meanings of
“species”introduced by Buffon, contrasting concepts
previously linked together by a complex relation of thought and world
within the Aristotelian and Scholastic discussions, has been seen by
some commentators as marking the introduction of a fundamental
confusion over the conception of species in subsequent discussions in
the biological literature. This is at least one of the underlying
causes of the so-called “species problem”. In their
historical extension, these issues continue to generate contemporary
disputes that oppose conceptions of “species as sets” to
those of “species as spatio-temporal individuals”
(Dupré 1993; Ereshefsky (ed.) 1992; Ghiselin 1997; Hull 1999;
R.A. Richards 2010; Sloan 2013; Stamos 2003; Wheeler & Meier (eds)
2000; Wilkins 2009; R.A. Wilson (ed.) 1999; and the entry on
 species
 in this encyclopedia).
The subsequent developments in Buffon’s thought toward what an
older tradition of scholarship mistakenly interpreted to be
“evolutionism”, involved the gradual broadening of his
natural-historical or “physical” species to include wider
and wider degrees of material relationship. This expansion of his
original species concept Buffon expressed in the language of a
“degeneration” of forms in time in response to
environmental conditions.
The encounter with a wide body of new data from the colonies and
exploratory voyages returned to Paris during the course of the writing
of the Natural History impressed Buffon with the degree to
which species seemed to be affected by external circumstances such
that from a single source numerous “degenerations” could
arise in some groups. This formed the conceptual basis for his concept
of a race as distinguished from a Linnaean Variety.
A “race” in the Buffonian sense was a historical
degeneration from a common ancestor that maintained material and
historical connection to this common source form. But this lineage
could undergo substantial and quasi-permanent hereditary
differentiation into different lineages, with the cause of these
degenerations explained by slight changes in the organic molecules
produced by varying environmental circumstances as a given physical
species migrates to new environments. These slight changes in turn
affected the internal mold. Developed in greatest detail in his long
article, “On the Degeneration of Animals” in volume XIV
(1766) of the Natural History, Buffon’s theory of the
degeneration of species extended so far as to allow the lumping of the
quadrupeds of both the Old and New worlds into a limited number of
primary “families” (familles) and
“genera” (genres) that from points of origin in
the Northern European hemisphere, degenerated in time in response to
migration to new locales. By including human beings in this
naturalistic scenario in his later writings, and assuming that human
lineages underwent similar degenerative changes as they migrated from
their postulated point of origin of human beings in the Caucasus,
Buffon’s theory played a major role in the development of
Enlightenment racial theory (Sloan 1973, 2014).
Buffon subsequently made some steps toward combining the thesis of the
historical degeneration of species with his theory of historical
cosmology in Les (subsequently Des)
Époques de la Nature, first published as a supplement
to the Natural History in 1778. In this treatise he reworked
his earlier speculations on the “theory of the earth”,
first set out in 1749, adding to this a historical chronology of the
age of the earth determined experimentally in the 1770s by
quantitative studies on cooling spheres of metal. In this imaginative
synthesis, and drawing on an allegorical reading of Genesis
1, Buffon combined a history of the Earth with a historical sequence
of the emergence of living forms (Buffon 1779). In doing so he
expanded the time scale of earth history considerably beyond the
accepted “Mosaic” chronology of less than 10,000 years
from the beginning of the world to the present, to an estimate of
approximately 75,000 years in the published version, and over two
million years in his draft manuscript. In this treatise Buffon offered
a naturalistic solution to the two inherited Cartesian dilemmas.
First, his schema was offered as a realistic account. The Cartesian
language of counterfactualism has disappeared. Second, he integrated
the history of living forms into this comprehensive history of the
world. Further naturalizing his theory of the internal molds and
organic molecules, both were now seen to arise by natural laws from
the natural attraction of different shapes of matter and from the
changes in matter as the earth cooled from its origin in matter cast
off by the sun. Animals first originated by the spontaneous clumping
together of these organic molecules on the cooling earth (Buffon 1779:
Fifth Epoch).
The Epochs also offered a schema for a historical sequence of
forms in a series of six major “epochs” that were given
precise dates of duration. This begins with the origin of the earth
from a cooled star, and then describes the beginning of living nature
with marine life and plants in the early stages of the earth’s
history, terminating with present forms His account even suggested a
naturalistic origin of human beings, although this issue is left
vague. Humankind appears, without explanation in the text, in a
non-paradisal state in the northern latitudes of Eurasia, surrounded
by ferocious animals, earthquakes and floods, and in a primitive
social condition that required collaboration for survival.
Buffon’s liberal use of a form of spontaneous generation that
allowed for the origin of even major animal groups from the clumping
together of organic molecules as the earth cooled, rendered the actual
derivation of forms from previous forms unnecessary. In several
respects, the development of genuine transformist theories by
Buffon’s successors required a much more restricted use of the
possibility of spontaneous generation.
Beyond the confines of the Paris Jardin, the reflections
inspired by Buffon in wider discussions of the late Enlightenment were
complex. The reception of Buffon’s Des Époques de la
Nature, for example, was uneven (Roger “Introduction”
in Buffon 1779, [1988, cxxiv]). The work was never translated into
English until recently (2018), and it seems to have played an
insignificant role in anglophone discussions, in contrast, for
example, to the major impact of the works of Linnaeus, which received
a wide British exposition and translation. The boldly speculative
character of the Epochs was also at odds with the new
professionalized inquiries into geology and natural history undertaken
by a younger generation of naturalists who may have adopted
Buffon’s naturalism and extension of geochronology, but not his
grand rhetorical style (Rudwick 2005: chp. 3).
Historical research has shown, however, that the Epochs had
an influential history in the Germanies (Schmitt, 2019). The treatise
was quickly (1781) translated into German at St. Petersburg and it
seems to have played an important role in the development of German
historicism (Reill 1992). Although linkages are in need of further
scholarly research, the impact of Buffon’s Epochs on
the historical transformism sketched out a few years later by Johann
Gottfried Herder (1744–1803) in the first volume of his
magisterial Ideen zur Philosophie der Geschichte der
Menschheit (1784–91) is suggested by several lines of
evidence (Zammito 2018a: 180–185, 2018b).
Herder departed markedly from Buffon, however, in developing his own
historical theory of the cosmos and the development of life, and
eventually of human culture, on a framework of teleological progress
based on a “vital” theory of matter. For Herder, not only
the individual organism, but nature as a whole develops under the
causation of an internal organic force that leads it to develop higher
and higher stages of life, eventually resulting in the ultimate
development of humankind in history.
By the early nineteenth century, one can follow several lines of
reflection admitting some form of species transformism. In the
Germanies, Herder’s reflections formed a major ingredient in the
development of German Naturphilosophie and
“Romantic” science that was expanded in the writings of
Johann Goethe (1749–1832), Friederich Schelling
(1775–1854), Gottfried Treviranus (1776–1837) and several
others who advocated some version of a historically progressive
philosophy of nature with at least the “development” if
not actual transformism of species in time (Zammito 2018a: chps.
8,9,11; R. J. Richards 2002: chps. 2,3,8). In the British Isles in the
same period, the reflections in the second volume of his Zoonomia,
or the Laws of Organic Life (1794–1796) of Erasmus Darwin
(1731–1802), grandfather of Charles Darwin, offered a theory of
species development based on a concept of dynamic living matter. With
the acknowledgment of these multiple lines of reflection on the
issues, each of which can be followed out in detail, the institutional
development of these discussions of species transformism in relation
to geological history is most easily followed through their French
discussions, and these French reflections were particularly important
for the early formation of Charles Darwin’s own theoretical
developments.
Buffon’s leadership of the Jardin ended with his death
in April of 1788 on the edge of the massive social, political and
scientific changes that were to overtake France a year later. As the
only major scientific organization to survive the dismantling of all
other institutions of privilege by the Convention in the summer of
1793, the restructured Muséum national d’histoire
naturelle continued as the post-Revolutionary successor to the
Jardin du Roi (Blanckaert et al. (eds) 1997). In this new
form, it provided an institutional context in which several aspects of
Buffon’s grand undertaking in natural history were pursued in
the decades following his death (Corsi 1983 [1988: chp. 1]). In the
Revolutionary context of the new Republic, the Muséum
also incorporated a new appreciation of the work of Linnaeus and the
classificatory enterprise he had inspired. Linnaeus had been admired
and popularized by Jean Jacques Rousseau, and for Republican French
biology, Linnaeus and his descriptive approach to biology was often
seen in favorable contrast to that of Buffon, which was viewed as a
symbol of the Ancien régime. The two leaders of
natural history in effect became for the French naturalists what
George Cuvier (1769–1832) later described as “two
founts” from which they jointly drew their inspiration.
The Revolutionary reorganization of the Jardin also created a
new kind of specialization of research within what had previously been
conceived of as “natural history”. The reorganization of
1793 established within the Muséum twelve separate
Chairs of equal status that gave specific individuals control over
portions of the collections and the research work done within these
divisions, and in doing so instituted new disciplinary divisions into
natural history. “Mammals and Birds” were placed under
Etienne Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire (1772–1844). “Reptiles and
Fishes” were assigned to Buffon’s understudy Bernard de
Lacépède (1756–1825). “Human Anatomy”
was given to Antoine Portal (1742–1832). The creation of a new
Chair of Comparative Anatomy, with an attendant separate museum
established in 1802, provided the position for the young Alsatian
zoologist Georges Cuvier. The large conglomerate of forms, known
previously only as “Worms”, were placed under the control
of Buffon’s one-time understudy Jean Baptiste Pierre Antoine de
Monet, Chevalier de Lamarck (1744–1829). Other chairs in botany,
paleontology, comparative physiology, and anthropology were
established, or would be developed in the nineteenth century. All
these new institutional structures subdivided traditional
“natural history”, and facilitated professionalized
inquiries into specific areas of life science that related to the
nature of species, the interpretations of the classificatory systems,
and the history and biogeography of the earth (Corsi 1983 [1988: chp.
1]; Appel 1987).
It is in this context, and through his position as the first holder of
the Chair of “Worms” (Vers) that Jean Baptiste de
Lamarck developed during his tenure the first coherent theory of
species change over historical time, eventually known by the new
term—transformisme. Lamarck in many respects warrants
the claim to be the first genuine evolutionary thinker situated within
a professional scientific institution.
Lamarck’s theory of species transformism emerged gradually in
his annual Muséum lectures on the “animals
without vertebrae” that commenced in 1794. As the new occupant
of the Chair dedicated to this vast array of forms, Lamarck undertook
in 1794 a massive reorganization of the Muséum
collections of these animals. To accomplish this, he adapted for their
taxonomic organization the method of arrangement of the plant groups
he had developed in his earlier work on French botany (1778), created
during his formative years when he worked in the Jardin as a
botanist. In this early botanical work he had ordered groups serially
from most complex to most simple. Lamarck then adopted a similar
method for his initial arrangement of the invertebrate groups of
animals.
This linear form of rearrangement of the classification of the
invertebrates then provided him with an empirical base from which his
transformist theory was developed (Burkhardt 1977). Expounded though
his annual Muséum lectures, Lamarck was able to
develop these arguments against the wide array of collections of
invertebrate animals at the Muséum.
In view of the many interpretations of Lamarck’s views that have
emerged since the most developed presentation of his theory in his
1809 Philosophie Zoologique (Zoological Philosophy),
the primary features of Lamarck’s reflections need to be
carefully detailed. In most fundamental terms, his theory of species
change was tied to his reversal of the taxonomic ordering of
forms originally presented in his early systematic arrangements. In
his original classifications, these groups were ordered in a linear
series that began with the most complex invertebrates forms
(cephalopods) and terminated in the least organized (infusorians). By
1800, Lamarck decided that this ordering was artificial, and that the
“natural” arrangement was from simple to complex. The
evolutionary theory he subsequently developed involved the claim that
this new order of arrangement was also the historical
sequence by which forms had been generated one from another over
time.
These novel conclusions were first presented in the
Muséum lectures of 1800, and then were developed in
more detail in print in his Recherches sur l’organisation
des corps organisés (1802), with the full exposition in
his Philosophie zoologique (1809). His theoretical
conclusions were also concretely displayed in the arrangement of
specimens in the main zoology gallery of the Muséum
over which he had primary control. Some further significant
elaborations of his ideas were then expressed in his many articles for
the second edition of Joseph Virey’s Nouveau dictionnaire
d’histoire naturelle (extracted in Lamarck 1817–19
[1991]), and in the long introductory discourse to his major work of
taxonomic revision of the invertebrates, the Histoire naturelle
des animaux sans vertèbres (1815–22). The following
claims formed the core of his mature theory:
Revisions of the third point constitute the most significant change in
these five points after 1809, although the connection of these changes
to Lamarck’s original theory of transformism remains unclear.
Both in the diagram supplied as an Appendix to Part I of the
Philosophie Zoologique (1809) and in the Introductory
Discourse to the later Histoire naturelle des animaux sans
vertèbres (1815), Lamarck presented a branching image of
group development. Likely responding to criticisms by his younger
colleague Georges Cuvier that were directed at the concept of linear
relationships of groups (see below), Lamarck admitted a more complex
branching pattern of group relations, with some showing independent
lineages and even different points of origin. This issue was not,
however, developed in any theoretical elaboration by Lamarck himself,
and has not had significant impact on the historical understanding of
Lamarckianism. Some of these elements in Lamarck’s later theory
did, however, have some impact on British readings (Sloan 1997).
Within the confines of the Muséum, parallel, if not
immediately continuous, developments of related issues bearing on
species transformism were made by Lamarck’s younger colleague
and holder of the chair of Mammals and Birds, the comparative
anatomist Etienne Geoffroy St. Hilaire (1772–1844). Less
concerned with the issue of species transformism than with the
implications of comparative anatomy for the relations of forms,
Geoffroy St. Hilaire explored the anatomical “unity of
type”—the remarkable resemblance of anatomical structure
between organisms revealed by comparative anatomy. Pursuing this issue
in his Muséum lectures and in several papers, Geoffroy
St. Hilaire proceeded to work out the implications of the inner
anatomical similarities of vertebrates. Based upon two main
principles, the “principle of connection” and the
“law of balance”, Geoffroy St. Hilaire drew attention to
the implications of comparative anatomy for the unity of the animal
kingdom. In the mid-1820s, Geoffroy St. Hilaire developed a more
historical position on the relation of the unity of type to issues of
the fossil record and to the development of life (Le Guyader 1998
[2004: chp. 4]).
By 1823, Geoffroy St. Hilaire had extended his theory of the
“unity of type” to the claim that even the invertebrates
shared a common plan with the vertebrates, and by 1825 he had embraced
a limited version of transformism. This led him into direct opposition
to the claims of his one-time friend and colleague, Georges Cuvier,
holder of the chair of Comparative Anatomy. Cuvier’s researches
in comparative anatomy and paleontology led him to conclude that
animals were formed on a series of four distinct and autonomous body
plans (embranchments) that may display some unity of type
within the embranchments, but not between these plans. This
was the mainstay of Cuvier’s opposition to transformism, and it
served as a powerful source of opposition to transformism into the
Darwinian era.
These conflicts over the “unity of type” underlie the
“great debate” that broke out in French life science in
the late 1820s between Geoffroy St. Hilaire and Cuvier and their
respective disciples (Appel 1987). This debate also forms one of the
historic encounters between differing conceptions of biology that
affected many aspects of nineteenth-century life science. It drew
division lines within French, and even British, biology over the
relation of organisms to history, and it directly engaged the
possibility of species change. This debate also served to focus issues
within French life science in a way that significantly affected the
later negative French reception of Darwin’s work. This debate
eventually was to involve issues of paleontology, comparative anatomy,
transformism of species, and the relation of form to function.
Cuvier’s arguments, reinforced by the authority he carried in
French comparative anatomy and science generally, resulted in the
dominance of his positions within the Paris Académie des
sciences. Nonetheless, the tradition of Geoffroy St. Hilaire
remained a strong current within the Muséum. It was
continued by such individuals as Antoine Etienne Serres
(1786–1868), whose arguments for a historical sequence of forms,
backed by embryological evidence, were canonized in morphological
circles as the Meckel-Serres law of recapitulation (Gould 1977: chp.
3). Outside official Academic French science, Geoffroy Saint
Hilaire’s theories had broad appeal to those who saw the
relevance of developmental embryology for issues of group
relationship, an issue that Cuvier, as a moderate preformationist, had
ignored. Present interest in the relationship between evolution and
developmental biology—commonly termed
“evo-devo”— has stimulated new attention to Geoffroy
St. Hilaire’s views (Le Guyader 1998 [2004]).
Discussions of transformism in the British Isles in the pre-Darwinian
period were influenced particularly by the French reflections and the
French debates taking place at the Muséum, following
the cessation of the Napoleonic Wars in 1814–15 when extensive
new contacts developed between French and British scientists. In
addition to French reflections, there were also important
introductions of German progressive developmentalism that entered
British science in the early decades of the nineteenth century. The
recognition of these Continental transportations to the British Isles,
particularly in medical contexts, has supplied a new framework for
understanding the reflections on species change in Britain in the
period before the advent of Darwin’s work (Rupke 2009; R.J.
Richards 2002; Sloan 2007, 2003, 1992; Desmond 1989).
The Edinburgh comparative anatomist, Robert Edmond Grant
(1793–1874), played an important role in introducing the French
discussions into the British Isles. He would also serve as Charles
Darwin’s first mentor in science when Darwin was a young medical
student at the University of Edinburgh (1825–27). Grant was
directly engaged with the issues being debated at the time between
Geoffroy St. Hilaire, Cuvier and Lamarck, and he advocated a variant
of a Lamarckian-Geoffroyean transformism in his writings, themes
expounded in his lectures on comparative anatomy at the new University
College, London where he became the first professor of comparative
anatomy in 1827 (Desmond 1989).
To this Grantian tradition was also added a strong input of German
philosophy of nature which entered British discussions in the 1820s,
expounded particularly in the Hunterian Lectures in Comparative
Anatomy at the Royal College of Surgeons, delivered by the British
surgeon Joseph Henry Green (1791–1863). Green imported into his
lectures several dimensions of Schelling’s
Naturphilosophie which he used to develop a dynamic theory of
species relation which synthesized the work of Lamarck, Cuvier, and
the University of Göttingen medical theorist Johann Blumenbach
(1752–1840 (Sloan 2007). These themes would be continued in the
major series of lectures delivered by Green’s
protégé at the College of Surgeons, the comparative
anatomist, Richard Owen (1804–92), holder of the prestigious
Hunterian Chair in Comparative Anatomy from 1837 to 1856 (Rupke 1994,
1993; Sloan (ed.) 1992). Owen’s widely-attended lectures between
1837 and 1856 brought many of the issues of anatomy, biology, and
embryology to bear on the questions of species relationship and
change.
In these lectures and his published writings, Owen developed a
reinterpretation of the significance of the Cuvier-Geoffroy dispute
and brought it to bear on the issues of the historical development of
forms. It is also in these lectures that Owen posed the theory of the
archetypal vertebrate in his Hunterian lectures in 1845, a theme he
elaborated in an important set of publications in 1847 and 1848.
Employing aspects of William Whewell’s philosophy of science to
develop these arguments, Owen expounded the theory of the unity of
type in relation to Cuvierian form and function through the positing
of an ideal archetypal form. This abstraction functioned for Owen both
as a transcendental idealization similar to a Platonic form, and also
as an immanent law working in matter, conceived on the analogy of a
Newtonian law, which governed the development of forms in time (Sloan
2003; R. J. Richards 2002: chp. 14; Rupke 1993). By means of this
theory, Owen claimed he could coherently explain both the deep
resemblance of forms in their internal anatomy— the theme
emphasized by Geoffroy St. Hilaire—, and also the close fitting
of structure and function to the organism’s “conditions of
existence”, the insight emphasized by Cuvier.
To distinguish these two meanings of relationship, Owen introduced
into the literature a crucial distinction between resemblances of
“homology”, meaning the presence of the “same”
parts in every variety of form and function—Geoffroyean
relationships—and those of “analogy”, denoting
solely the similarity of parts in their functional
adaptations—Cuvierian relationships. Developing this concept of
homology in relation to his theory of the archetype, Owen claimed he
could at last give a coherent meaning to the concept of
“sameness” in anatomical relationships. Furthermore, as
Owen developed this theory in relation to his work on the fossil
record, the theory of the archetype, conceived also as an immanent law
working in history, led Owen to embrace a concept of branching and
diversifying relations of forms as divergences from this ideal
archetypal form over time. Owen thus broke with the linear historical
progressionism from simple to complex assumed in transformist theories
like those of Lamarck, particularly in Lamarck’s writings before
1815. He also distinguished this kind of historical relationship from
that advocated by some of the German proto-transformists who developed
their ideas on linear models.
On the other hand, Owen’s model cannot be considered genuine
species transformism—species do not change historically one into
another and the archetype exists in one sense as a quasi-Newtonian
“law” governing development in time rather than as an
actual historical form. Nonetheless, his integration of comparative
anatomy, paleontology, and even embryology into this framework set out
a sophisticated model of relationship that was later reinterpreted by
Darwin from the viewpoint of his theory of material derivation from
common historical ancestors.
On a more popular level, species transformism was broadly popularized
in pre-Darwinian Anglophone discussions by the appearance in 1844 of
the grand evolutionary cosmology put forth anonymously by the Scottish
publisher Robert Chambers (1802–71) in his immensely popular
Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation, a work which in
many respects prepared Victorian society in England, as well as
pre-Civil War America, for Darwin’s more restricted theory of
1859 (Secord 2000). More similar to Buffon’s Epochs of
Nature and to speculations of Herder than to the writings of
Lamarck, Chambers proposed an evolutionary schema that began with the
nebular beginnings of the cosmos and moved in a teleological direction
up to humanity, with a broad evolution of species up the chain of
being. In this grand schema he incorporated insights from French
zoology and geological progressionism, with all of this working under
the actions of one great unifying natural law. This vision was further
popularized by its incorporation into Alfred Lord Tennyson’s
epic poem In Memoriam (1850). In spite of the popularity of
Chamber’s work, which went through eleven editions by the end of
the nineteenth century and sold more copies than Darwin’s
Origin of Species, the British scientific community was
essentially unanimous in its rejection of Chamber’s
speculations. In many ways this opposition to the Vestiges by
leading members of the Victorian scientific establishment formed one
primary source of professional resistance to the later Darwinian
theory (see entry on
 Darwin: From the Origin of Species to the Descent of Man,
 Section 3).
A more philosophically influential developmental evolutionism was also
advocated in pre-Darwinian England by the British railway engineer and
public intellectual, Herbert Spencer (1820–1903). Influenced
both by the expositions of Lamarckianism by Charles Lyell in the
second volume of his Principles of Geology (1830–33),
by the writings of Karl Ernst von Baer on embryological development,
and also by Richard Owen’s Hunterian Lectures on the osteology
of the vertebrate skeleton, which Spencer attended in 1851 (Rupke
1994: 206), Spencer entered the British discussions of transformism in
1852 with his endorsement of the “development hypothesis”
(Spencer 1852). This initiated his broad reflections on the
law-governed evolution of society and humanity, developed in detail in
such works as First Principles, published in 1862 (Haines
1988). Prior to the use of the term by Darwin, Spencer spoke of the
“evolution” of life and the cosmos from material
beginnings, with species changing as a result of the operation of
natural forces. It was also from Spencer that Darwin borrowed the
designator “survival of the fittest” as a synonym for his
own “natural selection” in the fifth edition of the
Origin of Species in 1869. Although Spencer’s First
Principles appeared after the publication of Darwin’s
Origin, Spencer’s transformism was developed generally
independently of Darwin’s work and shows closest affinity with
the reflections of Lamarck, Chambers, and the historical
developmentalism of Owen.
Spencer, rather than Darwin, has often been seen as the primary
theoretician of “social” Darwinism in the late nineteenth
and early twentieth centuries (Hofstadter 1944 [1955]; see also the
entry on
 Herbert Spencer).
 Spencer’s world-wide influence even made his works a vehicle by
which Darwinism was first introduced into non-Western discussions (Jin
2019; Lightman (ed.) 2016; Elshakry 2013; Pusey 1983). This unusual
juxtapositioning of Spencer and Darwin is explored in the entry
 Darwin: From the Origin of Species to the Descent of Man
 (Section 3.1).
The long historical scenario summarized in the present entry has
sought to display the complexity of transformism in biology in the
period prior to the advent of Darwinism. It was against this complex
background that Darwin would develop his own theory on the origin and
diversification of forms. He would draw in many ways on these
pre-existing discussions in French and even German sources. Further
exploration of this will be made in the entry
 Darwin: From the Origin of Species to the Descent of Man.