Sartre’s existentialism drew its immediate inspiration from the
work of the German philosopher, Martin Heidegger. Heidegger’s
1927 Being and Time, an inquiry into the “being that we
ourselves are” (which he termed “Dasein,” a German
word for existence), introduced most of the motifs that would
characterize later existentialist thinking: the tension between the
individual and the “public”; an emphasis on the worldly or
“situated” character of human thought and reason; a
fascination with liminal experiences of anxiety, death, the
“nothing” and nihilism; the rejection of science (and
above all, causal explanation) as an adequate framework for
understanding human being; and the introduction of
“authenticity” as the norm of self-identity, tied to the
project of self-definition through freedom, choice, and commitment.
Though in 1946 Heidegger would repudiate the retrospective labelling
of his earlier work as existentialism, it is in that work that the
relevant concept of existence finds its first systematic
philosophical
 formulation.[3]
As Sartre and Merleau-Ponty would later do, Heidegger pursued these
issues with the somewhat unlikely resources of Edmund Husserl’s
phenomenological method. And while not all existential philosophers
were influenced by phenomenology (for instance Jaspers and Marcel),
the philosophical legacy of existentialism is largely tied to the form
it took as an existential version of phenomenology. Husserl’s
efforts in the first decades of the twentieth century had been
directed toward establishing a descriptive science of consciousness,
by which he understood not the object of the natural science of
psychology but the “transcendental” field of
intentionality, i.e., that whereby our experience is
meaningful, an experience of something as something.
The existentialists welcomed Husserl’s doctrine of
intentionality as a refutation of the Cartesian view according to
which consciousness relates immediately only to its own
representations, ideas, sensations. According to Husserl,
consciousness is our direct openness to the world, one that is
governed categorially (normatively) rather than causally; that is,
intentionality is not a property of the individual mind but the
categorial framework in which mind and world become
 intelligible.[4]
A phenomenology of consciousness, then, explores neither the
metaphysical composition nor the causal genesis of things, but the
“constitution” of their meaning. Husserl employed this
method to clarify our experience of nature, the socio-cultural world,
logic, and mathematics, but Heidegger argued that he had failed to
raise the most fundamental question, that of the “meaning of
being” as such. In turning phenomenology toward the question of
what it means to be, Heidegger insists that the question be raised
concretely: it is not at first some academic exercise but a
burning concern arising from life itself: the question of what it
means for me to be. Existential themes take on salience when
one sees that the general question of the meaning of being involves
first becoming clear about one’s own being as an inquirer.
According to Heidegger, the categories bequeathed by the philosophical
tradition for understanding a being who can question his or
her being are insufficient: traditional concepts of a substance decked
out with reason, or of a subject blessed with self-consciousness,
misconstrue our fundamental character, 
“being-in-the-world.” In his phenomenological pursuit of
the categories that govern being-in-the-world, Heidegger became the
reluctant father of existentialism because he drew inspiration from
two seminal, though in academic circles then relatively unknown,
nineteenth-century writers, Søren Kierkegaard and Friedrich
Nietzsche. One can find anticipations of existential thought in many
places (for instance, in Socratic irony, Augustine, Pascal, or the
late Schelling), but the roots of the problem of existence in its
contemporary significance lie in the work of Kierkegaard and
Nietzsche.
Kierkegaard developed this problem in the context of his radical
approach to Christian faith; Nietzsche did so in light of his thesis
of the death of God. Subsequent existential thought reflects this
difference: while some writers—such as Sartre and
Beauvoir—were resolutely atheist in outlook, others—such
as Heidegger, Jaspers, Marcel, and Buber—variously explored the
implications of the concept “authentic existence” for
religious consciousness. Though neither Nietzsche’s nor
Kierkegaard’s thought can be reduced to a single strand, both
took an interest in what Kierkegaard termed “the single
individual.” Both were convinced that this singularity, what is
most my own, “me,” could be meaningfully reflected upon
while yet, precisely because of its singularity, remain invisible to
traditional philosophy, with its emphasis either on what follows
unerring objective laws of nature or else conforms to the universal
standards of moral reason. A focus on existence thus led, in both, to
unique textual strategies quite alien to the philosophy of their
time.
In Kierkegaard, the singularity of existence comes to light at the
moment of conflict between ethics and religious faith. Suppose it is
my sense of doing God’s will that makes my life meaningful. How
does philosophy conceive this meaning? Drawing here on Hegel as
emblematic of the entire tradition, Kierkegaard, in his book Fear
and Trembling, argues that for philosophy my life becomes
meaningful when I “raise myself to the universal” by
bringing my immediate (natural) desires and inclinations under the
moral law, which represents my “telos” or what I
ought to be. In doing so I lose my singularity
(since the law holds for all) but my actions become meaningful in the
sense of understandable, governed by a norm. Now a person whose sense
of doing God’s will is what gives her life meaning will be
intelligible just to the extent that her action conforms to the
universal dictates of ethics. But what if, as in case of
Abraham’s sacrifice of his son, the action contradicts what
ethics demands?
 Kierkegaard[5]
 believes both that Abraham’s life is supremely
meaningful (it is not simply a matter of some immediate desire or
meaningless tic that overcomes Abraham’s ethical consciousness;
on the contrary, doing the moral thing is itself in this case
his tempting inclination) and that philosophy cannot
understand it, thus condemning it in the name of ethics. God’s
command here cannot be seen as a law that would pertain to all; it
addresses Abraham in his singularity. If Abraham’s life is
meaningful, it represents, from a philosophical point of view, the
“paradox” that through faith the “single individual
is higher than the universal.” Existence as a philosophical
problem appears at this point: if there is a dimension to my being
that is both meaningful and yet not governed by the rational standard
of morality, by what standard is it governed? For unless
there is some standard, it is idle to speak of
“meaning.”
To solve this problem there must be a norm inherent in singularity
itself, and, in his Concluding Unscientific Postscript,
Kierkegaard tries to express such a norm in his claim that
“subjectivity is the truth,” an idea that prefigures the
existential concept of authenticity. Abraham has no objective reason
to think that the command he hears comes from God; indeed, based on
the content of the command he has every reason, as Kant pointed out in
Religion Within the Limits of Reason Alone, to think that it
cannot come from God. His sole justification is what
Kierkegaard calls the passion of faith. Such faith is,
rationally speaking, absurd, a “leap,” so if there is to
be any talk of truth here, it is a standard that measures not the
content of Abraham’s act but the way in which he
accomplishes it. To perform the movement of faith
“subjectively” is to embrace the paradox as normative for
me, in spite of its absurdity, rather than to seek an escape from it by
means of objective textual exegesis, historical criticism, or some
other strategy for translating the singularity of my situation into
the universal. Because my reason cannot help here, the normative
appropriation is a function of my “inwardness” or passion.
In this way I “truly” become what I nominally already am.
To say that subjectivity is the truth is to highlight a way of being,
then, and not a mode of knowing; truth measures the attitude
(“passion”) with which I appropriate, or make my own, an
“objective uncertainty” (the voice of God) in a
“process of highest inwardness.”
In contrast to the singularity of this movement, for Kierkegaard,
stands the crowd: “the crowd is untruth.” The crowd is,
roughly, public opinion in the widest sense—the ideas that a
given age takes for granted; the ordinary and accepted way of doing
things; the complacent attitude that comes from the conformity
necessary for social life—and what condemns it to
“untruth” in Kierkegaard’s eyes is the way that it
insinuates itself into an individual’s own sense of who she is,
relieving her of the burden of being herself: if everyone is a
Christian, there is no need for me to “become” one. Since
it is a measure not of knowing but of being, one can see how
Kierkegaard answers those who object that his concept of subjectivity
as truth is based on an equivocation: the objective truths of science
and history, however well-established, are in themselves matters of
indifference; they belong to the crowd. It is not insofar as
truth can be established objectively that it takes on meaning, but
rather insofar as it is appropriated “passionately” in its
very uncertainty. To “exist” is always to be confronted
with this question of meaning. The truths that matter to who one is
cannot, like Descartes’ morale definitif, be something
to be attained only when objective science has completed its task.
For Kierkegaard, existence emerges as a philosophical problem in the
struggle to think the paradoxical presence of God; for Nietzsche it is
found in the reverberations of the phrase “God is dead,”
in the challenge of nihilism.
Responding in part to the cultural situation in nineteenth-century
Europe—historical scholarship continuing to erode fundamentalist
readings of the Bible, the growing cultural capital of the natural
sciences, and Darwinism in particular—and in part driven by his
own investigations into the psychology and history of moral concepts,
Nietzsche sought to draw the consequences of the death of God, the
collapse of any theistic support for morality. Like his contemporary,
Fyodor Dostoevsky, whose character, Ivan, in The Brothers
Karamazov, famously argues that if God does not exist then
everything is permitted, Nietzsche’s overriding concern is to
find a way to take the measure of human life in the modern world.
Unlike Dostoevsky, however, Nietzsche sees a complicity between
morality and the Christian God that perpetuates a life-denying, and so
ultimately nihilistic, stance. Nietzsche was not the first to
de-couple morality from its divine sanction; psychological theories of
the moral sentiments, developed since the eighteenth century, provided
a purely human account of moral normativity. But while these earlier
theories had been offered as justifications of the normative
force of morality, Nietzsche’s idea that behind moral
prescriptions lies nothing but “will to power” undermined
that authority. On the account given in On the Genealogy of
Morals, the Judeo-Christian moral order arose as an expression of
the ressentiment of the weak against the power exercised over
them by the strong. A tool used to thwart that power, it had over time
become internalized in the form of conscience, creating a
“sick” animal whose will is at war with its own vital
instincts. Thus Nietzsche arrived at Kierkegaard’s idea that
“the crowd is untruth”: the so-called autonomous,
self-legislating individual is nothing but a herd animal that has
trained itself to docility and unfreedom by conforming to the
“universal” standards of morality. The normative is
nothing but the normal.
Yet this is not the end of the story for Nietzsche, any more than it
was for Kierkegaard. If the autonomous individual has so far signified
nothing but herd mentality—if moral norms arose precisely to
produce such conformists—the individual nevertheless has the
potential to become something else; the sick animal is “pregnant
with a future.” Nietzsche saw that in the nineteenth century the
“highest values” had begun to “devalue
themselves.” For instance, the Christian value of truth-telling,
institutionalized in the form of science, had undermined the belief in
God, disenchanting the world and excluding from it any pre-given moral
meaning. In such a situation the individual is forced back upon
himself. On the one hand, if he is weakly constituted he may fall
victim to despair in the face of nihilism, the recognition that life
has no intrinsic meaning. On the other hand, for a
“strong” or creative individual nihilism presents a
liberating opportunity to take responsibility for meaning, to exercise
creativity by “transvaluing” her values, establishing a
new “order of rank.” Through his prophet, Zarathustra,
Nietzsche imagined such a person as the “overman”
(Übermensch), the one who teaches “the meaning of
the earth” and has no need of otherworldly supports for the
values he embodies. The overman represents a form of life, a mode of
existence, that is to blossom from the communalized, moralized
“last man” of the nineteenth century. He has understood
that nihilism is the ultimate meaning of the moral point of view, its
life-denying essence, and he reconfigures the moral idea of autonomy
so as to release the life-affirming potential within it.
Thus, for Nietzsche, existence emerges as a philosophical problem in
his distinction between moral autonomy (as obedience to the moral law)
and an autonomy “beyond good and evil.” But if one is to
speak of autonomy, meaning, and value at all, the mode of being beyond
good and evil cannot simply be a lawless state of arbitrary and
impulsive behavior. If such existence is to be thinkable there must be
a standard by which success or failure can be measured. Nietzsche
variously indicates such a standard in his references to
“health,” “strength,” and “the meaning
of the earth.” Perhaps his most instructive indication, however,
comes from aesthetics, since its concept of style, as
elaborated in The Gay Science, provides a norm appropriate to
the singularity of existence. To say that a work of art has style is
to invoke a standard for judging it, but one that cannot be specified
in the form of a general law of which the work would be a mere
instance. Rather, in a curious way, the norm is internal to the work.
For Nietzsche, existence falls under such an imperative of style: to
create meaning and value in a world from which all transcendent
supports have fallen away is to give unique shape to one’s
immediate inclinations, drives, and passions; to interpret, prune, and
enhance according to a unifying sensibility, a ruling instinct, that
brings everything into a whole that satisfies the non-conceptual,
aesthetic norm of what fits, what belongs, what is appropriate.
As did Kierkegaard, then, Nietzsche uncovers an aspect of my being
that can be understood neither in terms of immediate drives and
inclinations nor in terms of a universal law of behavior, an aspect
that is measured not in terms of an objective inventory of
what I am but in terms of my way of being it.
Neither Kierkegaard nor Nietzsche, however, developed this insight in
a fully systematic way. That would be left to their twentieth-century
heirs.
Sartre’s slogan—“existence precedes
essence”—may serve to introduce what is most distinctive
of existentialism, namely, the idea that no general, non-formal
account of what it means to be human can be given, since that meaning
is decided in and through existing itself. Existence is
“self-making-in-a-situation” (Fackenheim 1961: 37). Webber
(2018: 14) puts the point this way: “Classical existentialism is
... the theory that existence precedes essence,” that is,
“there is no such thing as human nature” in an
Aristotelian sense. A “person does not have an inbuilt set of
values that they are inherently structured to pursue. Rather, the
values that shape a person’s behavior result from the choices
they have made” (2018: 4). In contrast to other entities, whose
essential properties are fixed by the kind of entities they
are, what is essential to a human being—what makes her
who she is—is not fixed by her type but by what she
makes of herself, who she
 becomes.[6]
 The fundamental contribution of existential thought lies in the idea
that one’s identity is constituted neither by nature nor by
culture, since to “exist” is precisely to constitute such
an identity. It is in light of this idea that key existential notions
such as facticity, transcendence (project), alienation, and
authenticity must be understood.
At first, it seems hard to understand how one can say much about
existence as such. Traditionally, philosophers have connected the
concept of existence with that of essence in such a way that the
former signifies merely the instantiation of the latter. If
“essence” designates what a thing is and
“existence” that it is, it follows that what is
intelligible about any given thing, what can be thought about it, will
belong to its essence. It is from essence in this sense—say,
human being as rational animal or imago Dei—that
ancient philosophy drew its prescriptions for an individual’s
way of life, its estimation of the meaning and value of existence.
Having an essence meant that human beings could be placed within a
larger whole, a kosmos, that provided the standard for human
flourishing. Modern philosophy retained this framework even as it
abandoned the idea of a “natural place” for man in the
face of the scientific picture of an infinite, labyrinthine universe.
In what looks like a proto-existential move, Descartes rejected the
traditional essential definitions of man in favor of a radical,
first-person reflection on his own existence, the “I am.”
Nevertheless, he quickly reinstated the old model by characterizing
his existence as that of a substance determined by an essential
property, “thinking.” In contrast, Heidegger proposes that
“I” am “an entity whose what [essence] is precisely
to be and nothing but to be” (Heidegger 1925 [1985, 110]; 1927 [1962, 67]).
Such an entity’s existing cannot, therefore, be thought as the
instantiation of an essence, and consequently what it means to be such
an entity cannot be determined by appeal to pre-given frameworks or
systems—whether scientific, historical, or philosophical.
Of course, there is a sense in which human beings do instantiate
essences, as Heidegger’s phrase already
 admits.[7]
 But what matters for existential thought is the manner of
such instantiation, the way of existing. What this means can
be seen by contrasting human existence with the modes of being
Heidegger terms the “available” (or
“ready-to-hand,” zuhanden) and the
“occurrent” (or “present-at-hand,”
vorhanden). Entities of the first sort, exemplified by tools
as they present themselves in use, are defined by the social practices
in which they are employed, and their properties are established in
relation to the norms of those practices. A saw is sharp, for
instance, in relation to what counts as successful cutting. Entities
of the second sort, exemplified by objects of perceptual contemplation
or scientific investigation, are defined by the norms governing
perceptual givenness or scientific theory-construction. An available
or occurrent entity instantiates some property if that property is
truly predicated of it. Human beings can be considered in this way as
well. However, in contrast to the previous cases, the fact that
natural and social properties can truly be predicated of human beings
is not sufficient to determine what it is for me to be a
human being. This, the existentialists argue, is because such
properties are never merely brute determinations of who I am but are
always in question. Who I am depends on what I make of my
“properties”; they matter to me in a way that is
impossible for merely available and occurrent entities. As Heidegger
puts it, existence is “care” (Sorge): to exist is
not simply to be, but to be an issue for oneself. In
Sartre’s terms, while other entities exist “in
themselves” (en soi) and “are what they
are,” human reality is also “for itself” (pour
soi) and thus is not exhausted by any of its determinations. It
is what it is not and is not what it is (Sartre 1943 [1992, 112]). 
Human existence, then, cannot be thought through categories
appropriate to things: substance, event, process. There is something
of an internal distinction in existence that undermines such attempts,
a distinction that existential philosophers try to capture in the
categories of “facticity” and “transcendence.”
To be is to co-ordinate these opposed moments in some way, and who I
am, my essence, is nothing but my manner of co-ordinating
them. In this sense, human beings make themselves in situation: what I
am cannot be separated from what I take myself to be. In
Charles Taylor’s phrase, human beings are
“self-interpreting animals” (Taylor 1985: 45), where the
interpretation is constitutive of the interpreter. If such a view is
not to collapse into contradiction, the notions of facticity and
transcendence must be elucidated. Risking some oversimplification,
they can be approached as the correlates of the two attitudes I can
take toward myself: the attitude of third-person theoretical observer
and the attitude of first-person practical agent.
Facticity includes all those properties that third-person
investigation can establish about me: natural properties such as
weight, height, and skin color; social facts such as race, class, and
nationality; psychological properties such as my web of belief,
desires, and character traits; historical facts such as my past
actions, my family background, and my broader historical milieu; and
so
 on.[8]
 I am not originally aware of my facticity in this third-person way;
rather, it is manifest in my moods as a kind of burden, the weight of
“having to be.” However, I can adopt a
third-person or objectifying stance toward my own being, and then
these aspects of my facticity may appear precisely as that which
defines or determines who I am. From an existential point of view,
however, this would be an error—not because these
aspects of my being are not real or factual, but because the kind of
being that I am cannot be defined in factual, or
third-person,
 terms.[9]
 These elements of facticity cannot be said to belong to me in the way
that the color of an apple belongs to the apple, for as
belonging to me, as “determining” me, they have
always already been interpreted by me. Though third-person
observation can identify skin color, class, or ethnicity, the minute
it seeks to identify them as mine it must contend with the
distinctive character of the existence I possess. There is no sense in
which facticity is both mine and merely a matter of fact,
since my existence—the kind of being I am—is also defined
by the stance I take toward my facticity. The ability to take such a
stance is what existential philosophers call
“transcendence.”
Transcendence refers to that attitude toward myself characteristic of
my practical engagement in the world, the agent’s perspective.
An agent is oriented by the task at hand as something to be brought
about through its own will or agency. Such orientation does not take
itself as a theme but loses itself in what is to be done. Thereby,
things present themselves not as indifferent givens, facts, but as
meaningful: salient, expedient, obstructive, and so on. To speak of
“transcendence” here is to indicate that the agent
“goes beyond” what simply is toward what can be: the
factual—including the agent’s own properties—always
emerges in light of the possible, where the possible is not a function
of anonymous forces (third-person or logical possibility) but a
function of the agent’s choice and
 decision.[10]
 Just as this suddenly empty pen is either a nettlesome impediment to
my finishing this article, or a welcome occasion for doing something
else, depending on how I determine my behavior in relation to it, so
too my own factic properties—such as irrascibility, laziness, or
bourgeois workaholism—take on meaning, become motivating or
normative reasons, on the basis of how I endorse or disavow
them in the present action.
Existentialists tend to describe the perspective of engaged agency in
terms of “choice,” and they are sometimes criticized for
this. It may be—the argument runs—that I can be said to
choose a course of action at the conclusion of a process of
deliberation, but there seems to be no choice involved when, in the
heat of the moment, I toss the useless pen aside in frustration. Can
its being useless be traced back to my “choice” to be
frustrated? But the point in using such language is simply to insist
that in the first-person perspective of agency I cannot
conceive myself as determined by anything that is available
to me only in third-person terms. Behind the existentialist’s
insistence that facticity and transcendence remain irreducible aspects
of one and the same being is the insight that, for a being who can say
“I,” the third-person perspective on who one is has no
more authority than the first-person (agent’s)
 perspective.[11]
Because existence is co-constituted by facticity and transcendence,
the self cannot be conceived as a Cartesian ego but is embodied
being-in-the-world, a self-making in situation. It is through
transcendence—or what the existentialists also refer to as my
“projects”—that the world is revealed, takes on
meaning; but such projects are themselves factic or
“situated”—not the product of some antecedently
constituted “person” or intelligible character but
embedded in a world that is decidedly not my representation. Because
my projects are who I am in the mode of engaged agency
(unlike plans that I merely represent to myself in reflective
deliberation), the world in a certain sense reveals to me who I am.
For reasons to be explored in the next section, the meaning of my
choice is not always transparent to me. Nevertheless, because it
necessarily reveals the world in a certain way, that meaning, my own
“identity,” can be discovered by what Sartre calls
“existential psychoanalysis.” By understanding an
individual’s patterns of behavior—that is, by
reconstructing the meaningful world that such behavior
reveals—one can uncover the “fundamental project” or
basic choice of oneself that gives distinctive shape to an individual
life. Existential psychoanalysis represents a kind of compromise
between the first- and third-person perspectives: like the latter, it
objectifies the person and treats its open-ended practical horizons as
in a certain sense closed; like the former, however, it seeks to
understand the choices from the inside, to grasp the identity of the
individual as a matter of the first-person meaning that haunts him,
rather than as a function of inert psychic mechanisms with which the
individual has no
 acquaintance.[12]
The anti-Cartesian view of the self-in-situation yields the familiar
existential theme of the “alienated” self, the
estrangement of the self both from the world and from itself. In the
first place, while it is through my projects that the world takes on
meaning, the world itself is not brought into being through my
projects; it retains its otherness and thus can come forth as utterly
alien, as unheimlich. Sometimes translated as
“uncanny,” this Heideggerian word’s stem
(Heim, “home”) points to the strangeness of a
world in which I precisely do not feel “at home.”
(see the section on
 The Ideality of Values
 below). This experience, basic to existential thought, contrasts most
sharply with the ancient notion of a kosmos in which human
beings have a well-ordered place, and it connects existential thought
tightly to the modern experience of a meaningless universe.
In the second place, the world includes other people, and as a
consequence I am not merely the revealer of the world but something
revealed in the projects of those others. Thus, who I am is not merely
a function of my own projects but is also a matter of my
“being-for-others.” Sartre (1992: 340-58) brings out this
form of alienation in his famous analysis of “the Look.”
So long as I am engaged unreflectively in a certain practice, I am
nothing but that first-person perspective which constitutes things as
having a distinctive salience in light of what I am doing. I am
absorbed in the world and do not experience myself as having an
“outside”; that is, I do not understand my action through
some third-person description, as an instance of some general
behavior. However, when I become aware of being looked at (that is,
when my subjectivity is invaded by the subjectivity of another for
whom I am merely part of the world, an item for her projects ), I
become aware of having a “nature,” a
“character,” of being or doing something. I am
not merely looking through a keyhole; I am a voyeur. I cannot
originally experience myself as something—a voyeur, for
instance. Only the other can give rise to this mode of my being, a
mode that I acknowledge as mine (and not merely the
other’s opinion of me) in the shame in which I register
it. It is because there are others in the world that I can take a
third-person perspective on myself, but this reveals the extent to
which I am alienated from a dimension of my being: who I am
in an objective sense can be originally revealed only by the Other.
This has implications for existential social theory (see the section
on
 Sartre: Existentialism and Marxism
 below).
Finally, the self-understanding, or project, thanks to which the world
is there for me in a meaningful way, already belongs to that world,
derives from it, from the tradition or society in which I find myself.
Though it is “me,” it is not me “as my own.”
My very engagement in the world alienates me from my authentic
possibility. This theme is brought out most clearly by Heidegger: the
anti-Cartesian idea that the self is defined first of all by its
practical engagement entails that this self is not properly individual
but rather indisinguishable from anyone else (das Man) who
engages in such practices. Such a “they-self” does what
“one” does. The idea is something like this: Practices can
allow things to show up as meaningful—as hammers, dollar bills,
or artworks—because practices involve aims that carry with them
norms, satisfaction conditions, for what shows up in them. But norms
and rules, as Wittgenstein has shown, are essentially public, and that
means that when I engage in a practice I must be essentially
interchangeable with anyone else who does: I eat as one eats, I drive
as one drives, I even protest as one protests. To the extent that my
activity is to be an instance of such a practice, I must do it in the
normal way. Deviations can be recognized as (perhaps salutary)
deviations only against this norm, but if they deviate too much they
can’t be recognized at
 all.[13]
 Thus, if who I am is defined through existing, this “who”
is normally pre-defined by what is average, by the roles available to
me in my culture. The “I” that gets defined is thereby
“anonymous,” or “anyone”; self-making is
largely a function of not distinguishing myself from
others.
If there is nevertheless good sense in talk of the singularity of
my existence, it will not be as something with which one starts but as 
something that gets achieved in recovering oneself from
alienation or lostness in the “crowd.” If the normative is
first of all the normal, however, it might seem that talk about a norm
for the singularity of existence, a standard for thinking
about what is my ownmost just as I myself, would be
incoherent. It is here that the idea of “authenticity”
comes into focus.
By what standard are we to think our efforts “to be,” our
manner of being a self? If such standards traditionally derive from
the essence that a particular thing instantiates—this hammer is
a good one if it instantiates what a hammer is supposed to
be—and if there is nothing that a human being is, by its
essence, supposed to be, can the meaning of existence at all
be thought? Existentialism arises with the collapse of the idea that
philosophy can provide substantive norms for existing, ones that
specify particular ways of life. Nevertheless, there remains the
distinction between what I do “as” myself and as
“anyone,” so in this sense existing is something at which
I can succeed or fail. Authenticity—in German,
Eigentlichkeit—names that attitude in which I engage in
my projects as my own (eigen).
What this means can perhaps be brought out by considering moral
evaluations. In keeping my promise, I act in accord with duty; and if I
keep it because it is my duty, I also act morally (according
to Kant) because I am acting for the sake of duty. But
existentially there is still a further evaluation to be made. My moral
act is inauthentic if, in keeping my promise for the sake of
duty, I do so because that is what “one” does (what
“moral people” do). But I can do the same thing
authentically if, in keeping my promise for the sake of duty,
acting this way is something I choose as my own, something to
which, apart from its social sanction, I commit myself. Similarly,
doing the right thing from a fixed and stable character—which
virtue ethics considers a condition of the good—is not beyond
the reach of existential evaluation: such character may simply be a
product of my tendency to “do what one does,” including
feeling “the right way” about things and betaking myself
in appropriate ways as one is expected to do. But such character might
also be a reflection of my choice of myself, a
commitment I make to be a person of this sort. In both cases
I have succeeded in being good; only in the latter case, however, have
I succeeded in being
 myself.[14]
Thus the norm of authenticity refers to a kind of
“transparency” with regard to my situation, a recognition
that I am a being who can be responsible for who I am. In
choosing in light of this norm I can be said to recover myself from
alienation, from my absorption in the anonymous “one-self”
that characterizes me in my everyday engagement in the world.
Authenticity thus indicates a certain kind of integrity—not that
of a pre-given whole, an identity waiting to be discovered, but that
of a project to which I can either commit myself (and thus
“become” what it entails) or else simply occupy for a
time, inauthentically drifting in and out of various roles. Some
writers have taken this notion a step further, arguing that the
measure of an authentic life lies in the integrity of a
narrative, that to be a self is to constitute a story in
which a kind of wholeness prevails, to be the author of oneself as a
unique individual (Nehamas 1998; Ricoeur 1992). In contrast, the
inauthentic life would be one without such integrity, one in which I
allow my life-story to be dictated by the world. Be that as it may, it
is clear that one can commit oneself to a life of chameleon-like
variety, as does Don Juan in Kierkegaard’s version of the
legend. Even interpreted narratively, then, the norm of authenticity
remains a formal one. As with Kierkegaard’s Knight of Faith, one
cannot tell who is authentic by looking at the content of their
 lives.[15]
Authenticity defines a condition on self-making: do I succeed in
making myself, or will who I am merely be a function of the
roles I find myself in? Thus to be authentic can also be thought as a
way of being autonomous. In choosing
“resolutely”—that is, in commiting myself to a
certain course of action, a certain way of being in the world—I
have given myself the rule that belongs to the role I come to adopt.
The inauthentic person, in contrast, merely occupies such a
role, and may do so “irresolutely,” without commitment.
Being a father in an authentic way does not necessarily make me a
better father, but what it means to be a father has become
explicitly my concern. It is here that existentialism locates
the singularity of existence and identifies what is irreducible in the
first-person stance. At the same time, authenticity does not hold out
some specific way of life as a norm; that is, it does not distinguish
between the projects that I might choose. Instead, it governs the
manner in which I am engaged in such projects—either as
“my own” or as “what one does,” transparently
or opaquely.
Thus existentialism’s focus on authenticity leads to a
distinctive stance toward ethics and value-theory generally. The
possibility of authenticity is a mark of my freedom, and it
is through freedom that existentialism approaches questions of value,
leading to many of its most recognizable doctrines.
Existentialism did not develop much in the way of a normative ethics;
however, a certain approach to the theory of value and to moral
psychology, deriving from the idea of existence as self-making in
situation, is a distinctive mark of the existentialist
 tradition.[16]
 In value theory, existentialists tend to emphasize the
conventionality or groundlessness of values, their
“ideality,” the fact that they arise entirely through the
projects of human beings against the background of an otherwise
meaningless and indifferent world. Existential moral psychology
emphasizes human freedom and focuses on the sources of mendacity,
self-deception, and hypocrisy in moral consciousness. The familiar
existential themes of anxiety, nothingness, and the absurd must be
understood in this context. At the same time, there is deep concern to
foster an authentic stance toward human, groundless, values
without which no project is possible, a concern that gets expressed in
the notions of “engagement” and
 “commitment.”[17]
As a predicate of existence, the concept of freedom is not initially
established on the basis of arguments against determinism; nor is it
taken, in Kantian fashion, simply as a given of practical
self-consciousness. Rather, it is located in the breakdown of
direct practical activity. The “evidence” of freedom is a
matter neither of theoretical nor of practical consciousness but
arises from the self-understanding that accompanies a certain
mood into which I may fall, namely, anxiety (Angst,
angoisse). Both Heidegger and Sartre believe that
phenomenological analysis of the kind of intentionality that belongs
to moods does not merely register a passing modification of the psyche
but reveals fundamental aspects of the self. Fear, for instance,
reveals some region of the world as threatening, some element in it as
a threat, and myself as vulnerable. In anxiety, as in fear, I grasp
myself as threatened or as vulnerable; but unlike fear, anxiety has no
direct object, there is nothing in the world that is threatening. This
is because anxiety pulls me altogether out of the circuit of those
projects thanks to which things are there for me in meaningful ways; I
can no longer “gear into” the world. And with this
collapse of my practical immersion in roles and projects, I also lose
the basic sense of who I am that is provided by these roles. In thus
robbing me of the possibility of practical self-identification,
anxiety teaches me that I do not coincide with anything that I
factically am. Further, since the identity bound up with such roles
and practices is always typical and public, the collapse of this
identity reveals an ultimately first-personal aspect of myself that is
irreducible to das Man. As Heidegger puts it, anxiety
testifies to a kind of “existential solipsism.” It is this
reluctant, because disorienting and dispossessing, retreat into myself
in anxiety that yields the existential figure of the outsider, the
isolated one who “sees through” the phoniness of those
who, unaware of what the breakdown of anxiety portends, live their
lives complacently identifying with their roles as though these roles
thoroughly defined them. While this “outsider” stance may
be easy to ridicule as adolescent self-absorption, it is also solidly
supported by the phenomenology (or moral psychology) of first-person
experience.
The experience of anxiety also yields the existential theme of the
absurd, a version of what was previously introduced as
alienation from the world (see the section on
 Alienation
 above). So long as I am gearing into the world practically, in a
seamless and absorbed way, things present themselves as meaningfully
co-ordinated with the projects in which I am engaged; they show me the
face that is relevant to what I am doing. But the connection between
these meanings and my projects is not itself something that I
experience. Rather, the hammer’s usefulness, its value as a
hammer, appears simply to belong to it in the same way that its weight
or color does. So long as I am practically engaged, in short, all
things appear to have reasons for being, and I, correlatively,
experience myself as fully at home in the world. The world has an
order that is largely transparent to me (even its mysteries are
grasped simply as something for which there are reasons that are there
“for others,” for “experts,” merely beyond my
limited horizon). In the mood of anxiety, however, it is just this
character that fades from the world. Because I am no longer
practically engaged, the meaning that had previously inhabited the
thing as the density of its being now stares back at me as a mere
name, as something I “know” but which no longer
claims me. As when one repeats a word until it loses meaning, anxiety
undermines the taken-for-granted sense of things. They become
absurd. Things do not disappear, but all that remains of them
is the blank recognition that they are—an experience
that informs a central scene in Sartre’s novel Nausea.
As Roquentin sits in a park, the root of a tree loses its character of
familiarity until he is overcome by nausea at its utterly alien
character, its being en soi. While such an experience is no
more genuine than my practical, engaged experience of a world
of meaning, it is no less genuine either. An existential
account of meaning and value must recognize both
possibilities (and their intermediaries). To do so is to acknowledge a
certain absurdity to existence: though reason and value have a
foothold in the world (they are not, after all, my arbitrary
invention), they nevertheless lack any ultimate foundation. Values are
not intrinsic to being, and at some point reasons give
 out.[18]
Another term for the groundlessness of the world of meaning is
“nothingness.” Heidegger introduced this term to indicate
the kind of self- and world-understanding that emerges in anxiety:
because my practical identity is constituted by the practices I engage
in, when these collapse I “am” not anything. In a manner
of speaking I am thus brought face-to-face with my own finitude, my
“death,” as the possibility in which I am no longer able to
be anything. This experience of my own death, or
“nothingness,” in anxiety can act as a spur to
authenticity: I come to see that I “am” not anything but
must “make myself be” through my choice. In
commiting myself in the face of death—that is, aware of
the nothingness of my identity if not supported by me right up to the
end—the roles that I have hitherto thoughtlessly engaged in as
one does now become something that I myself own up to, become
responsible for. Heidegger termed this mode of
self-awareness—awareness of the ultimate nothingness of my
practical identity—“freedom,” and Sartre developed
this existential concept of freedom in rich detail. This is not to say
that Heidegger’s and Sartre’s views on freedom are
identical. Heidegger, for instance, will emphasize that freedom is
always “thrown” into an historical situation from which it
draws its possibilities, while Sartre (who is equally aware of the
“facticity” of our choices) will emphasize that such
“possibilities” nevertheless underdetermine choice. But
the theory of radical freedom that Sartre develops is nevertheless
directly rooted in Heidegger’s account of the nothingness of my
practical identity.
Sartre (1943 [1992, 70]) argues that anxiety provides a lucid experience of
that freedom which, though often concealed, characterizes human
existence as such. For him, freedom is the dislocation of
consciousness from its object, the fundamental
“nihilation” or negation by means of which consciousness
can grasp its object without losing itself in it: to be conscious of
something is to be conscious of not being it, a
“not” that arises in the very structure of consciousness
as being for-itself. Because “nothingness” (or nihilation)
is just what consciousness is, there can be no objects in
consciousness, but only objects for
 consciousness.[19]
 This means that consciousness is radically free, since its structure
precludes that it either contain or be acted on by
things. For instance, because it is not thing-like, consciousness is
free with regard to its own prior states. Motives, instincts, psychic
forces, and the like cannot be understood as inhabitants of
consciousness that might infect freedom from within, inducing one to
act in ways for which one is not responsible; rather, they can exist
only for consciousness as matters of choice. I must either
reject their claims or avow them. For Sartre, the ontological freedom
of existence entails that determinism is an excuse before it
is a theory: though through its structure of nihilation consciousness
escapes that which would define it—including its own past
choices and behavior—there are times when I may wish to deny my
freedom. Thus I may attempt to constitute these aspects of my being as
objective “forces” which hold sway over me in the manner
of relations between things. This is to adopt the third-person stance
in which what is originally structured in terms of freedom
appears as a causal property of myself. I can try to look upon myself
as the Other does, but as an excuse this flight from freedom is shown
to fail, according to Sartre, in the experience of
anguish.
For instance, Sartre writes of a gambler who, after losing all and
fearing for himself and his family, retreats to the reflective
behavior of resolving never to gamble again. This motive thus enters
into his facticity as a choice he has made; and, as long as he retains
his fear, his living sense of himself as being threatened, it may
appear to him that this resolve actually has causal force in keeping
him from gambling. However, one evening he confronts the gaming table
and is overcome with anguish at the recognition that his resolve,
while still “there,” retains none of its power: it is an
object for consciousness but is not (and never could have
been) something in consciousness that was determining his
actions. In order for it to influence his behavior he must avow it
afresh, but this is just what he cannot do; indeed, just this is what
he hoped the original resolve would spare him from having to do. He
will have to “remake” the self who was in the original
situation of fear and threat. At this point, perhaps, he will try to
relieve himself of the anguish of freedom by giving in to the urge to gamble and
chalking it up to “deeper” motives that overcame the
initial resolve, problems from his childhood perhaps. But anguish can
recur with regard to this strategy as well—for instance, if he
needs a loan to continue gambling and must convince someone that he is
“as good as his word.” The possibilities for
self-deception in such cases are
 endless.[20]
As Sartre points out in great detail, anguish, as the consciousness of
freedom, is not something that human beings welcome; rather, we seek
stability, identity, and adopt the language of freedom only when it
suits us: those acts are considered by me to be my free acts which
exactly match the self I want others to take me to be. We are
“condemned to be free,” which means that we can never
simply be who we are but are separated from ourselves by the
nothingness of having perpetually to re-choose, or re-commit,
ourselves to what we do. Characteristic of the existentialist outlook
is the idea that we spend much of lives devising strategies for
denying or evading the anguish of freedom. One of these strategies is
“bad faith.” Another is the appeal to values.
The idea that freedom is the origin of value—where freedom is
defined not in terms of acting rationally (Kant) but rather in
existential terms, as choice and transcendence—is the idea
perhaps most closely associated with existentialism. So influential
was this general outlook on value that Karl-Otto Apel (1973: 235) came
to speak of a kind of “official complementarity of
existentialism and scientism” in Western philosophy, according
to which what can be justified rationally falls under the
“value-free objectivism of science” while all other
validity claims become matters for an “existential subjectivism
of religious faith and ethical decisions.” Positivism attempted
to provide a theory of “cognitive meaning” based on what
it took to be the inner logic of scientific thought, and it relegated
questions of value to cognitive meaninglessness, reducing them to
issues of emotive response and subjective preference. While it does
not explain evaluative language solely as a function of affective
attitudes, existential thought, like positivism, denies that values
can be grounded in being—that is, that they can become the theme
of a scientific investigation capable of distinguishing true (or
valid) from false
 values.[21]
 In this regard Sartre speaks of the “ideality” of values,
by which he means not that they have some sort of timeless
validity but that they have no real authority and cannot be used to
underwrite or justify my behavior. For Sartre, “values derive
their meaning from an original projection of myself which stands as my
choice of myself in the world.” But if that is so, then I
cannot, without circularity, appeal to values in order to justify this
very choice: “I make my decision concerning them—without
justification and without excuse” (Sartre 1943 [1992, 78]). This
so-called “decisionism” has been a hotly contested legacy
of existentialism and deserves a closer look here.
How is it that values are supposed to be grounded in freedom? By
“value” Sartre means those aspects of my experience that
do not merely causally effectuate something but rather make a
claim on me: I do not just see the homeless person but
encounter him as “to be helped”; I do not just hear the
other’s voice but register “a question to be answered
honestly”; I do not simply happen to sit quietly in church but
“attend reverently”; I do not merely hear the alarm clock
but am “summoned to get up.” Values, then, as Sartre
writes, appear with the character of demands and as such they
“lay claim to a foundation” or justification (Sartre 1943 [1992,
76]). Why ought I help the homeless, answer honestly, sit
reverently, or get up? Sartre does not claim that there is no answer
to these questions but only that the answer depends, finally, on my
choice of “myself”, which cannot in turn be justfied by
appeal to a value. As he puts it, “value derives its being from
its exigency and not its exigency from its being.” The exigency
of value cannot be grounded in being itself, since it would thereby
lose its character as an ought; it would “cease even to be
value” since it would have the kind of exigency (contrary to
freedom) possessed by a mere cause. Thus, against
then-current value-theoretical intuitionism, Sartre denies that value
can “deliver itself to a contemplative intuition which would
apprehend it as being value and thereby would derive from it
its right over my freedom.” Instead, “it can be revealed
only to an active freedom which makes it exist as a value by
the sole fact of recognizing it as such” (Sartre 1943 [1992.
76]).
For instance, I do not grasp the exigency of the alarm clock (its
character as a demand) in a kind of disinterested perception but only
in the very act of responding to it, of getting up. If I fail to get
up the alarm has, to that very extent, lost its exigency. Why
must I get up? At this point I may attempt to justify its
demand by appeal to other elements of the situation with which the
alarm is bound up: I must get up because I must go to work. From this
point of view the alarm’s demand appears—and
is—justified, and such justification will often suffice
to get me going again. But the question of the foundation of value has
simply been displaced: now it is my job that, in my active engagement,
takes on the unquestioned exigency of a demand or value. But it too
derives its being as a value from its exigency—that is, from my
unreflective engagement in the overall practice of going to work.
Ought I go to work? Why not be “irresponsible”?
If a man’s got to eat, why not rather take up a life of crime?
If these questions have answers that are themselves exigent it can
only be because, at a still deeper level, I am engaged as having
chosen myself as a person of a certain sort: respectable, responsible.
From within that choice there is an answer about what I ought to
do, but outside that choice there is none—why should I be
respectable, law-abiding?—for it is only because some
choice has been made that anything at all can appear as compelling, as
making a claim on me. Only if I am at some level
engaged do values (and so justification in terms of them)
appear at all. The more I pull out of engagement toward reflection on,
and questioning of, my situation, the more I am threatened by ethical
anguish—“which is the recognition of the ideality of
values” (Sartre 1943 [1992, 76]). And, as with all anguish, I do not
escape this situation by discovering the true order of values but by
plunging back into action. If the idea that values are without
foundation in being can be understood as a form of nihilism, the
existential response to this condition of the modern world is to point
out that meaning, value, is not first of all a matter of contemplative
theory but a consequence of engagement and commitment.
Thus value judgments can be justified, but only relative to some
concrete and specific project. The “pattern of behavior”
of the typical bourgeois defines the meaning of
“respectability” (Sartre 1943 [1992, 77]), and so it is true of
some particular bit of behavior that it is either respectable or not.
For this reason I can be in error about what I ought to do. It may be
that something that appears exigent during the course of my
unreflective engagement in the world is something that I ought not to
give in to. If, thanks to my commitment to the Resistance, a given
official appears to me as to be shot, I might nevertheless be wrong to
shoot him—if, for instance, the official was not who I thought
he was, or if killing him would in fact prove counter-productive given
my longer-term goals. Sartre’s fictional works are full of
explorations of moral psychology of this sort. But I cannot extend
these “hypothetical” justifications to a point where some
purely theoretical consideration of my obligations—whether
derived from the will of God, from Reason, or from the situation
itself—could underwrite my freedom in such a way as to relieve
it of responsibility. For in order for such considerations to
count I would have to make myself the sort of person for whom
God’s will, abstract Reason, or the current situation is
decisive. For existentialists like Sartre, then, I am
“the one who finally makes values exist in order to determine
[my] actions by their
 demands.”[22]
Commitment—or “engagement”—is thus ultimately
the basis for an authentically meaningful life, that is, one that
answers to the existential condition of being human and does not flee
that condition by appeal to an abstract system of reason or divine
will. Yet though I alone can commit myself to some way of life, some
project, I am never alone when I do so; nor do I do so in a social,
historical, or political vacuum. If transcendence represents my
radical freedom to define myself, facticity—that other aspect of
my being—represents the situated character of this
self-making. Because freedom as transcendence undermines the idea of a
stable, timeless system of moral norms, it is little wonder that
existential philosophers (with the exception of Simone de Beauvoir)
devoted scant energy to questions of normative moral theory. However,
because this freedom is always socially (and thereby historically)
situated, it is equally unsurprising that their writings are greatly
concerned with how our choices and commitments are concretely
contextualized in terms of political struggles and historical
reality.
For the existentialists, engagement is the source of meaning and
value; in choosing myself I in a certain sense make my world. On the
other hand, I always choose myself in a context where there are others
doing the same thing, and in a world that has always already been
there. In short, my acting is situated, both socially and
historically. Thus, in choosing myself in the first-person singular, I
am also choosing in such a way that a first-person plural, a
“we,” is simultaneously constituted. Such choices make up
the domain of social reality; they fit into a pre-determined context
of roles and practices that go largely unquestioned and may be thought
of as a kind of collective identity. In social action my identity
takes shape against a background (the collective identity of the
social formation) that remains fixed. On the other hand, it can happen
that my choice puts this social formation or collective identity
itself into question, and so who I am to be is thus inseparable from the
question of who we are to be. Here the first-person plural is
itself the issue, and the action that results from such choices
constitutes the field of the political.
If authenticity is the category by which I am able to think about what
it means to “exist,” then the account of authenticity
cannot neglect the social, historical, and political aspects of that
existence. Thus it is not merely because twentieth-century
existentialism flourished at a time when European history appeared to
collapse and political affairs loomed especially large that
existential philosophers devoted much attention to these matters;
rather, the demand for an account of the “situation” stems
from the very character of existence itself, which, unlike the
classical “rational subject,” is what it is only in
relation to its “time.” This is not to say, however, that
existential philosophers are unanimous in their account of the
importance of historical factors or in their estimation of the
political in relation to other aspects of existence. Emmanuel Levinas,
for example, whose early phenomenological work belonged within the
orbit of existential philosophy, opposed to the
“horizontal” temporality of political history a
“vertical” or eschatological temporality that radically
challenged all historical meaning, while Sartre, in contrast, produced
a version of Marxist historical materialism in which existentialism
itself became a mere ideology. But we cannot stop to examine all such
differences here. Instead, we shall look at the positions of Heidegger
and Sartre, who provide opposing examples of how an authentic relation
to history and politics can be understood.
For Heidegger, to exist is to be historical. This does not mean that
one simply finds oneself at a particular moment in history, conceived
as a linear series of events. Rather, it means that selfhood has a
peculiar temporal structure that is the origin of that
“history” which subsequently comes to be narrated in terms
of a series of events. Existential temporality is not a sequence of
instants but instead a unified structure in which the
“future” (that is, the possibility aimed at in my project)
recollects the “past” (that is, what no longer needs to be
done, the completed) so as to give meaning to the
“present” (that is, the things that take on significance
in light of what currently needs doing). To act, therefore, is, in
Heidegger’s terms, to “historize”
(geschehen), to constitute something like a narrative unity,
with beginning, middle, and end, that does not so much take place
in time as provide the condition for linear time. To
exist “between birth and death,” then, is not merely to be
present in each of a discrete series of temporal instants but to
constitute oneself in the unity of a history, and an authentic
existence is one in which the projects that give shape to
existence are ones to which I commit myself in light of this history.
Though it belongs to, and defines, a “moment,” choice
cannot be simply “of the moment”; to be authentic I must
understand my choice in light of the potential wholeness of
my
 existence.
That this choice has a political dimension stems from the fact that
existence is always being-with-others. Though authenticity arises on
the basis of my being alienated, in anxiety, from the claims made by
norms belonging to the everyday life of das Man, any concrete
commitment that I make in the movement to recover myself will enlist
those norms in two ways. First, what I commit myself to will
always be derived from (though not reducible to) some
“possibility of Dasein that has been there” (Heidegger 1927
[1962, 438]): I cannot make my identity from whole cloth; I will always
understand myself in terms of some way of existing that has been
handed down within my
 tradition.[23]
 I “choose my hero” (Heidegger 1927 [1962, 437]) by, for
instance, committing myself to a philosophical life, which I
understand on the model of Socrates, or to a religious life, which I
understand on the model of St. Francis. The point is that I must
understand myself in terms of something, and these
possibilities for understanding come from the historical heritage and
the norms that belong to it. Heidegger thinks of this historical
dimension as a kind of “fate” (Schicksal): not
something inevitable that controls my choice but something that,
inherited from my historical situation, claims me, holds a
kind of authority for me.
The second way in which the everyday norms of das Man are
enlisted in authentic choice stems from the fact that when I commit
myself to my “fate” I do so “in and with my
‘generation’” (Heidegger 1927 [1962, 436]). The idea here
seems roughly to be this: To opt for a way of going on is to affirm
the norms that belong to it; and because of the nature of normativity,
it is not possible to affirm norms that would hold only for
me. There is a kind of publicity and scope in the normative
such that, when I choose, I exemplify a standard for others as well.
Similarly, Heidegger holds that the sociality of my historizing
restricts what can be a genuine “fate” or choice for me.
Acting is always with others—more specifically, with a
“community” or a “people”
(Volk)—and together this “co-historizing”
responds to a “destiny” (Geschick) which has
guided our fates in advance (Heidegger 1927 [1962, 436]). Not everything is
really possible for us, and an authentic choice must strive to respond
to the claim that history makes on the people with whom one belongs,
to seize its “destiny.” Along this communitarian axis,
then, existential historicality can open out onto the question of
politics: who are “we” to be?
Heidegger suggests that it was this concept of historicality that
underwrote his own political engagement during the period of National
Socialism in Germany. Disgusted with the political situation in Weimar
Germany and characterizing it as especially irresolute or inauthentic,
Heidegger looked upon Hitler’s movement as a way of recalling
the German people back to their “ownmost”
possibility—i.e., a way for Germany to constitute itself
authentically as an alternative to the political models of the Soviet
Union and the United States. Heidegger’s choice to intervene in
university politics at this time was thus both a choice of
himself—in which he chose his hero: Plato’s
“philosopher-king” (see Arendt 1978)—and a choice
for his “generation.” Much is controversial about
Heidegger’s engagement for National Socialism (not least whether
he drew the appropriate consequences from his own concept of
 authenticity),[24]
 but it provides a clear example of a kind of existential politics
that depends on an ability to “tell time”—that is,
to sense the imperatives of one’s factic historical situation.
Heidegger later became very suspicious of this sort of existential
politics. Indeed, for the idea of authenticity as resolute commitment
he substituted the idea of “releasement”
(Gelassenheit) and for engagement the stance of
“waiting.” He came to believe that the problems that face
us (notably, the dominance of technological ways of thinking) have
roots that lie deeper than can be addressed through politics directly.
He thus famously denied that democracy was sufficient to deal with the
political crisis posed by technology, asserting that “only a god
can save us” (Heidegger 1966 [1981, 55, 57]). But even here, in keeping
with the existential notion of historicity, Heidegger’s
recommendations turn on a reading of history, of the meaning of our
time.
A very different reading, and a very different recommendation, can be
found in the work of Sartre. The basis for Sartre’s reading of
history, and his politics, was laid in the section of Being and
Nothingness that describes the birth of the social in the
“Look”(le regard) of the other. In making me an
object for his projects, the other alienates me from myself, displaces
me from the subject position (the position from which the world is
defined in its meaning and value) and constitutes me as
something. Concretely, what I am constituted “as” is a
function of the other’s project and not something that I can
make myself be. I am constituted as a “Frenchman” in and
through the hostility emanating from that German; I am constituted as
a “man” in this woman’s resentment; I am constituted
as a “Jew” on the basis of the other’s
anti-semitism; and so on. This sets up a dimension of my being that I
can neither control nor disavow, and my only recourse is to wrench
myself away from the other in an attempt to restore myself to the
subject-position. For this reason, on Sartre’s model, social
reality is in perpetual conflict—an Hegelian dialectic in which,
for ontological reasons, no state of mutual recognition can ever be
achieved. The “we”—the political subject—is
always contested, conflicted, unstable.
But this instability does have a certain structure, one which Sartre,
steeped in the Marxism of inter-war French thought (Alexandre
Kojève, Jean Hyppolite), explored in terms of a certain
historical materialism. For social relations take place not only
between human beings but also within institutions that have developed
historically and that enshrine relations of power and domination. Thus
the struggle over who will take the subject position is not carried
out on equal terms. As Simone de Beauvoir demonstrated in detail in
her book, The Second Sex, the historical and institutional
place of women is defined in such a way that they are consigned to a
kind of permanent “object” status—they are the
“second” sex, since social norms are defined in male terms.
This being so, a woman’s struggle to develop self-defining
projects is constrained by a permanent institutional
“Look” that already defines her as “woman,”
whereas a man need not operate under constraints of gender; he feels
himself to be simply “human,” pure subjectivity. Employing
similar insights in reflection on the situations of racial and
economic oppression, Sartre sought a way to derive political
imperatives in the face of the groundlessness of moral values entailed
by his view of the ideality of values.
At first, Sartre argued that there was one value—namely freedom
itself—that did have a kind of universal authority. To
commit oneself to anything is also always to commit oneself to the
value of freedom. In “Existentialism is a Humanism” Sartre
tried to establish this by way of a kind of transcendental argument,
but he soon gave up that strategy and pursued the more modest one of
claiming that the writer must always engage “on the
side of freedom.” According to the theory of “engaged
literature” expounded in What is Literature?, in
creating a literary world the author is always acting either to
imagine paths toward overcoming concrete unfreedoms such as racism and
capitalist exploitation, or else closing them off. In the latter case,
he contradicts himself, since the very idea of writing
presupposes the freedom of the reader, and that means, in principle,
the whole of the reading public. Whatever the merits of this argument,
it does suggest the political value to which Sartre remained committed
throughout his life: the value of freedom as self-making.
This commitment finally led Sartre to hold that existentialism itself
was only an “ideological” moment within Marxism, which he
termed “the one philosophy of our time which we cannot go
beyond” (Sartre 1960 [1968, xxxiv]). As this statement suggests,
Sartre’s embrace of Marxism was a function of his sense of
history as the factic situation in which the project of self-making
takes place. Because existing is self-making (action),
philosophy—including existential philosophy—cannot be
understood as a disinterested theorizing about timeless essences but
is always a form of engagement, a diagnosis of the past and a
projection of norms appropriate to a different future in light of
which the present takes on significance. It therefore always arises
from the historical-political situation and is a way of intervening in
it. Marxism, like existentialism, makes this necessarily practical
orientation of philosophy explicit.
From the beginning existentialism saw itself in this activist way,
providing the basis for the most serious disagreements among French
existentialists such as Sartre, Merleau-Ponty, and Camus, many of
which were fought out in the pages of the journal founded by Sartre
and Merleau-Ponty, Les Temps 
Modernes).[25]
 But the later Sartre came to hold
that a philosophy of self-making could not content itself with
highlighting the situation of individual choice; an authentic
political identity could only emerge from a theory that
situated such choice in a practically oriented analysis of its
concrete situation. Thus it appeared to him that the “ideology
of existence” was itself merely an alienated form of the deeper
analysis of social and historical reality provided by Marx’s
dialectical approach. In focusing on the most important aspects of the
material condition in which the existential project of self-making
takes place—namely, economic relations under conditions of
scarcity—Marx’s critique of capital offered a set of
considerations that no “philosophy of freedom” could
ignore, considerations that would serve to orient political engagement
until such time as “there will exist for everyone a
margin of real freedom beyond the production of life”
(Sartre 1968: 34). Marxism is unsurpassable, therefore, because it is
the most lucid theory of our alienated situation of concrete
unfreedom, oriented toward the practical-political overcoming of that
unfreedom.
Sartre’s relation to orthodox Marxism was marked by tension,
however, since he held that existing Marxism had abandoned the promise
of its dialectical approach to social reality in favor of a dogmatic
“apriorism” that subsumed historical reality under a
blanket of lifeless abstractions. He thus undertook his Critique
of Dialectical Reason to restore the promise of Marxism by
reconceiving its concept of praxis in terms of the
existential notion of project. What had become a rigid
economic determinism would be restored to dialectical fluidity by
recalling the existential doctrine of self-making: it is true that man
is “made” by history, but at the same time he is making
that very history. This attempt to “reconquer man within
Marxism” (Sartre 1960 [1968, 83])—i.e., to develop a method which
would preserve the concrete details of human reality as lived
experience—was not well received by orthodox Marxists.
Sartre’s fascination with the details of Flaubert’s life,
or the life of Baudelaire, smacked too much of “bourgeois
idealism.” But we see here how Sartre’s politics, like
Heidegger’s, derived from his concept of history: there are no
iron-clad laws that make the overthrow of capitalism the inevitable
outcome of economic forces; there are only men in situation who make
history as they are made by it. Dialectical materialism is the
unsurpassable philosophy of those who choose, who commit themselves
to, the value of freedom. The political claim that Marxism has on us,
then, would rest upon the ideological enclave within it: authentic
existence as choice.
Authentic existence thus has an historical, political dimension; all
choice will be attentive to history in the sense of contextualizing
itself in some temporally narrative understanding of its place. But
even here it must be admitted that what makes existence authentic is
not the correctness of the narrative understanding it adopts.
Authenticity does not depend on some particular substantive
view of history, some particular theory or empirical story. From this
point of view, the substantive histories adopted by existential
thinkers as different as Heidegger and Sartre should perhaps be read
less as scientific accounts, defensible in third-person terms, than as
articulations of the historical situation from the perspective of what
that situation is taken to demand, given the engaged commitment of
their authors. They stand, in other words, less as
justifications for their authors’ existential and
political commitments than as themselves a form of politics:
invitations to others to see things as the author sees them, so that
the author’s commitment to going on in a certain way will come
to be shared.
As a cultural movement, existentialism belongs to the past. As a
philosophical inquiry that introduced a new norm, authenticity, for
understanding what it means to be human—a norm tied to a
distinctive, post-Cartesian concept of the self as practical,
embodied, being-in-the-world—existentialism has continued to
play an important role in contemporary thought in both the continental
and analytic traditions. The Society for Phenomenology and Existential
Philosophy and societies devoted to Heidegger, Sartre, Merleau-Ponty,
Jaspers, Beauvoir, and other existential philosophers, provide a forum
for ongoing work—both of a historical, scholarly nature and of
more systematic focus—that continues what Khawaja called the
“tradition” of existentialism, often bringing it into
confrontation with more recent movements such as structuralism,
deconstruction, hermeneutics, and feminism.
In the area of gender studies, Judith Butler (1990) draws importantly
on existential sources, as does Lewis Gordon (1995) in the area of
race theory (see also Bernasconi 2003). Matthew Ratcliffe (2008) and
Kevin Aho (2019) develop existential approaches to psychopathology.
Interest in a narrative conception of self-identity—for
instance, in the work of Charles Taylor (1999), Paul Ricoeur, David
Carr (1986), or Charles Guignon—has its roots in the existential
revision of Hegelian notions of temporality and its critique of
rationalism. Hubert Dreyfus (1979) developed an influential criticism
of the Artificial Intelligence program drawing essentially upon the
existentialist idea, found especially in Heidegger and Merleau-Ponty,
that the human world, the world of meaning, must be understood first
of all as a function of our embodied practices and cannot be
represented as a logically structured system of representations.
Calling for a “new existentialism,” John Haugeland (1998)
has explored the role of existential commitment in scientific
practices as truth-tracking practices. In metaphysics, Markus Gabriel
(2018) has adopted the term “neo-existentialism” to
describe a non-naturalistic view of mind in the “universe”
that does away with idealism’s “ontological
asymmetry” in favor of a view in which mind is defined as the
struggle to make sense of the fact that it is not simply part of the
universe, and that the familiar “worlds” it inhabits in
this struggle do not make up a whole. In a series of books, Michael
Gelven (e.g., 1990, 1997) has reflected upon the distinctions between
existential, moral, and epistemological or logical dimensions of
experience, showing how the standards appropriate to each intertwine,
without reducing to any single one. A revival of interest in moral
psychology finds many writers who are taking up the question of
self-identity and responsibility in ways that recall the existential
themes of self-making and choice—for instance, Christine
Korsgaard (1996) appeals crucially to notions of
“self-constitution” and “practical identity”;
Richard Moran (2001) emphasizes the connection between self-avowal and
the first-person perspective in a way that derives in part from
Sartre; and both Thomas Nagel and Bernard Williams pursued the
existentialist line that connects meaning to the finitude of our
existence. Even if such writers often proceed with more confidence in
the touchstone of rationality than did the classical existentialists,
their work cultivates the terrain first glimpsed by the latter. And
today, as we have noted, we can find fully-rounded arguments for an
existentialist ethics in writers like Webber and McMullin.
In addition, after years of being out of fashion in France,
existential motifs have once again become prominent in the work of
leading thinkers. Foucault’s embrace of a certain concept of
freedom, and his exploration of the “care of the self,”
recall debates within existentialism, as does Derrida’s work on
religion without God and his reflections on the concepts of death,
choice, and responsibility. In very different ways, the books by
Cooper (1999) and Alan Schrift (1995) suggest that a re-appraisal of
the legacy of existentialism is an important agenda item of
contemporary philosophy. There are, in fact, reasons to think that
such a re-evaluation is currently underway. Reynolds (2006), for
instance, concludes his introduction to existentialism with a
consideration of how post-structuralists such as Derrida, Deleuze, and
Foucault extend certain reflections found in Sartre, Camus, and
Heidegger, while Reynolds (2004) does the same, in more detail, for
Derrida and Merleau-Ponty. Several further publications take up the
challenge of bringing existential thought into dialogue with items on
the contemporary philosophical agenda. Edward Baring (2011) exhumes
the historical relation between Derrida and existentialism and finds a
kind of “‘Christian’ existentialism” in
Derrida’s work prior to 1952, traces of which are discernible in
his later thinking. The collection edited by Judaken and Bernasconi
(2012) explores the historical context of existentialist writings
informed by contemporary critiques of canonization. Feminist thought
has led to an explosion of work that re-evaluates the Beauvoir/Sartre
relationship and its significance for the origins of existentialism
itself, for instance Kruks (1990, 1912), Bergoffen (1997), Arp (2001),
Heinämaa (2003), Deutscher (2008) and Simons (2013). In 2011 The
Continuum Companion to Existentialism appeared (Joseph, Reynolds,
and Woodward 2011), followed by The Cambridge Companion to
Existentialism (Crowell 2012a). Articles in both volumes are
committed to showing the systematic relevance of existential concepts
and approaches for contemporary work in philosophy and other fields.
As Kevin Aho remarks, in areas as diverse as cognitive science,
psychiatry, health care, and environmental philosophy, “the
legacy of existentialism is alive and well” (2014: 140). If
existentialism’s very notoriety as a cultural movement may have
impeded its serious philosophical reception, it may be that what we
have most to learn from existentialism still lies before us.