Mathematics plays a central role in our scientific picture of the
world. How the connection between mathematics and the world is to be
accounted for remains one of the most challenging problems in
philosophy of science, philosophy of mathematics, and general
philosophy. A very important aspect of this problem is that of
accounting for the explanatory role mathematics seems to play in the
account of physical phenomena.
Consider the following example from evolutionary biology introduced in
Baker 2005 and discussed extensively in the philosophical
literature. It has to do with the life-cycle of the so-called
‘periodical’ cicada. It turns out that three species of
such cicadas:
Several questions have been raised about this specific type of life
cycle but one of them is why such periods are prime. One explanation
appeals to the biological claim that cicadas that minimize
intersection with other cicadas’ and predators’ life cycles have an
evolutionary advantage over those that do not. The mathematical
component of the explanation complements the biological claim by
pointing out that prime periods minimize intersection.
When we move to physics, it becomes even more difficult—given
the highly mathematized nature of the subject—to distinguish
between the mathematical and the physical components of an
explanation.  Consider the following example. Mark the faces of a
tennis racket with
R (for rough) and S (for smooth). Hold the tennis
racket horizontally by its handle with face S facing
up. Let y be the intermediate principal axis. This is the
vertical axis perpendicular to the handle and passing through the
center of mass of the racquet. Toss the racket attempting to make it
rotate about the y axis. Catch the racket by its handle after
one full rotation. The surprising observation is that the
R face will almost always be up (one would expect S
to be up). In other words, the racket makes a half twist about its
handle. An explanation of this phenomenon was given in Ashbaugh,
Chicone, & Cushman 1991.  They say: “In this paper we
explain the twist by analyzing the [differential] equations of motion
of the tennis racket in space…Our treatment of the twist is
divided into two parts. In the first part we prove two theorems which
show that the handle moves nearly in a plane and rotates nearly
uniformly…In the second part, we discuss how the twist and
rotation of the handle are related” (Ashbaugh & others 1991,
68). There is no question that we are explaining a physical regularity
but mathematics enters here both in the modeling of the phenomenon and
in the explanatory account by means of the classical dynamics of a
rotating tennis racket.
Another simple example, in which a geometrical fact seems to do much
of the explaining, has been offered by Peter Lipton:
While not everyone agrees as to the role of mathematics in the above
explanations, or whether they are explanations, it is clear that one
of the reasons why philosophers are especially interested in such
explanations is that they appear to be counterexamples to the claim
that all explanations in the natural sciences must be causal. The
dominant accounts of scientific explanation (see Salmon 1984,
Cartwright 1989, Woodward 2003, Strevens 2008, and Woodward 2014 for
an overview) in the natural sciences have been causal accounts: to
provide an explanation of a scientific fact is to provide its cause or
the mechanism yielding the fact (on mechanistic explanations see
Woodward 2013, Andersen 2014, and Craver and Tabery 2016).  The last
two decades has witnessed major contributions in the study of
non-causal explanations in the sciences (for a recent volume devoted
to the issue see Reutlinger & Saatsi 2018). And since many of the
non-causal explanations that have been discussed in the literature are
mathematical explanations, this area of philosophy of science is
fueled by concerns related to the nature of scientific
explanation. 
In addition to the examples given above and several others to be
mentioned below, other cases of explanation that have been extensively
discussed include the FitzGerald-Lorentz contraction of bodies in
special relativity (Colyvan 2001, 2002), the impossibility of crossing
all the Königsberg bridges passing only once on any single bridge
(Pincock 2007), the hexagonal shape of honeycomb cells (Lyon and
Colyvan 2008), Plateau’s soap films (Lyon 2012, Pincock 2015a), and
the location of the Kirkwood gaps (Colyvan 2010). 
Importantly related is the issue of mathematical modeling and of
whether an explanatory modeling of a scientific phenomenon needs to
provide a veridical representation of the salient causes (or of a
causal mechanism) in the target phenomenon. Many philosophers who
defend the causal theory of explanation also defend a (veridical)
causal conception of modeling but many challenges have been raised
against the latter conception. For instance, endorsing the conclusions
of Batterman’s work (see section 3) Rice claims:
The topic interacts also with the problem of characterizing the role
of idealization in science. As we shall see, alleged counterexamples
to the causal theory of explanation as well as to the causal theory of
modeling come from areas as diverse as mathematics, physics, biology,
and economics.
Having established that mathematics seems to play an important role
in giving explanations in the natural sciences, we now move to a few
historical remarks on how this problem has emerged in the history of
philosophy and science.
Does mathematics help explain the physical world or does it actually
hinder a grasp of the physical mechanisms that explain the how and why
of natural phenomena? It is not possible here to treat this topic in
its full complexity but a few remarks will help the reader appreciate
the historical importance of the question.
Aristotle describes his ideal of scientific knowledge in
“Posterior Analytics” in terms of, among other things,
knowledge of the cause:
The causes [aitia] in question are the four Aristotelian causes:
formal, material, efficient, and final. Nowadays, translators and
commentators of Aristotle prefer to translate aitia as
‘explanation’, so that the theory of the four causes
becomes an account of four types of explanations. For instance here is
Barnes’ translation of the passage quoted earlier: “We
think we understand a thing simpliciter (and not in the sophistic
fashion accidentally) whenever we think we are aware both that the
explanation because of which the object is is its explanation, and that
it is not possible for this to be otherwise.” (Aristotle CWA,
115, Post. An. I.1, 71b 5–10)
But how do we obtain scientific knowledge? Scientific knowledge is obtained through
demonstration. However, not all logically cogent proofs provide us with
the kind of demonstration that yields scientific knowledge. In a
scientific demonstration “the premisses must be true, primary,
immediate, better known and prior to the conclusion, which is further
related to them as effect to causes.” (BWA, 112, Post. An. I.1,
71b 20–25) In Barnes’ translation: “If, then, understanding
is as we posited, it is necessary for demonstrative understanding in
particular to depend on things which are true and primitive and
immediate and more familiar than and prior to and explanatory of the
conclusion” (Aristotle CWA, 115, Post. An. I.1, 71b 20–25).
Accordingly, in “Posterior Analytics” I.13, Aristotle
distinguished between demonstrations “of the fact” and
demonstrations “of the reasoned fact”. Although both are
logically cogent only the latter mirror the causal structure of the
phenomena under investigation, and thus provide us with knowledge. We
can call them, respectively, “non-explanatory” and
“explanatory” demonstrations.
In Aristotle’s system, physics was not mathematized although
causal reasonings were proper to it. However, Aristotle also discussed
extensively the so-called mixed sciences, such as optics, harmonics,
and mechanics, characterizing them as “the more physical of the
mathematical sciences”. There is a relation of subordination
between these mixed sciences and areas of pure mathematics. For
instance, harmonics is subordinated to arithmetic and optics to
geometry. Aristotle is in no doubt that there are mathematical
explanations of physical phenomena:
However, the topic of whether mathematics could give explanations of
natural phenomena was one on which there was disagreement. As the
domains to which mathematics could be applied grew, so also did the
resistance to it. One source of tension consisted in trying to
reconcile the Aristotelian conception of pure mathematics, as
abstracting from matter and motion, with the fact that both physics
(natural philosophy) and the mixed sciences are all conversant about
natural phenomena and thus dependent on matter and motion. For
instance, an important debate in the Renaissance, known as the Quaestio
de Certitudine Mathematicarum, focused in large part on whether
mathematics could play the explanatory role assigned to it by
Aristotle. Some argued that lacking causality, mathematics could not be
the ‘explanatory’ link in the explanation of natural
phenomena (see also section 5).
By the time we reach the seventeenth century and the Newtonian
revolution in physics, the problem reappears in the context of a change
of criteria of explanation and intelligibility. This has been
beautifully described in an article by Y. Gingras (2001). Gingras
argues that “the use of mathematics in dynamics (as distinct from
its use in kinematics) had the effect of transforming the very meaning
of the term ‘explanation’ as it was used by philosophers in
the seventeenth century” (385). What Gingras describes, among
other things, is how the mathematical treatment of force espoused by
Newton and his followers—a treatment that ignored the
mechanisms that could explain why and how this force
operated—became an accepted standard for explanation during the
eighteenth century. After referring to the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries’ discussions on the mechanical explanation of gravity, he
remarks:
Among those who resisted this confusion between “physical
explanations” and “mathematical explanations” was
the Jesuit Louis Castel. In “Vrai système de physique
générale de M. Isaac Newton” (Paris, 1734), he
discussed Principia’s proposition XIII of Book III (on Kepler’s law of
areas). He granted that the proposition connected mathematically the
inverse square law to the ellipticity of the course of the
planets. However, he objected that “the one is not the cause,
the reason of the other” (Castel 1734, 97) and that Newton had
not provided any physical explanation, only a mathematical one. Indeed
“physical reasons are necessary reasons of entailment, of
linkages, of mechanism. In Newton, there is none of this
kind.” (Castel 1734, 121)
It would be interesting to pursue these questions into the nineteenth
and the twentieth centuries but that is obviously not something that
can be done here (see however Dorato 2017 for a wide-ranging claim
concerning “explanatory switches” at crucial junctions in
the history of physics). Rather, the aim of the above was to prepare
the ground for showing how in contemporary discussions in philosophy
of science, to which we now turn, we are still confronted with such
issues.
There are two major areas in which the discussion of whether
mathematics can play an explanatory role in science makes itself felt.
The first concerns issues of modeling and idealization in science and
more generally, as pointed out in section 1, the nature of scientific
explanation. The second, concerns the nominalism-platonism debate. By
and large the former area is a major concern to philosophers of
science. The latter is the preoccupation of those philosophers of
mathematics primarily concerned with issues of existence of
mathematical entities. There are however non-trivial intersections
between the two areas. These are surveyed in the next two sub-sections.
A good starting point here is Morrison’s book “Unifying
Scientific Theories” (2000). One of the major theses of the book
is that unification and explanation often pull in different directions
and come apart (contrary to what is claimed by unification theories of
explanation). One of the examples discussed in her introduction reminds
us of Castel’s objections:
Using several case studies (Maxwell’s electromagnetism, the
electroweak unification, etc.), Morrison argues that the mathematical
structures involved in the unification “often supply little or no
theoretical explanation of the physical dynamics of the unified
theory” (Morrison 2000, 4). In short, the mathematical formalism
facilitates unification but does not help us explain the how and why of
physical phenomena.
 

By contrast, Batterman in “The Devil in the Details”
(2002), analyzes a wide class of explanations—asymptotic
explanations—which heavily rely on
mathematics. “Asymptotic reasoning—the taking of limits as
a means to simplify, and the study of the nature of these
limits—constitutes the main method of idealization in the
mathematician’s tool box” (Batterman 2002, 132). These methods
proceed by ignoring many details, even of a causal nature, about the
phenomenon being analyzed (one speaks of minimal models in this
connection). But despite this fact, nay, in virtue of it, one arrives
at correct explanations of the phenomena. In fact, the reason why
“asymptotic analyses so often provide physical insight is that
they illuminate structurally stable aspects of the phenomenon and its
governing equations.” (Batterman 2002, 59).
Batterman offers examples from, among other areas, statistical
mechanics, thermodynamics, optics, hydrodynamics, and quantum
mechanics. In addition to his book, he developed his position in
several articles (2005, 2009, 2010a, 2010b, 2011). See also Pincock
2011b for a detailed working out of the mathematical explanation of
the rainbow that extends this approach. 
Reactions to Batterman’s position include Redhead 2004, Belot 2005,
Norton 2012, Pincock 2011a and 2012, Strevens 2008, Wayne 2011, 2012,
and Bueno and French 2012. Objections range from claiming that
asymptotic idealization are not needed to explain the target
phenomenon to claiming that the “emergent qualitative
features” that Batterman claims are yielded by asymptotic
idealizations are not even genuine targets of explanation (this second
aspect is connected to more general debates on emergence in
physics). Strevens 2017 articulates, contra Norton 2012, what he takes
to be the novel features of Batterman’s asymptotic (infinitary)
idealizations that distinguish them from other non-infinitary
idealizations (frictionless planes and ideal gases). He does so by
appealing to cases from population genetics where one postulates
“infinite populations”.
We thus see that the problem of the explanatory role of mathematics in
science is intimately related to problems of modeling and idealization
in science (see Morrison 2015). In turn, understanding how modeling
and idealization work is an integral part of addressing the question
of how mathematics hooks on to reality, i.e. an account of the
applicability of mathematics to reality (see Shapiro 2000, 35 and
217). It would of course be impossible here to describe the major
accounts of mathematical applications on offer. However, the
discussion on mathematical explanation in the empirical sciences has
fruitfully interacted with some of the proposals on offer. One such
proposal is the mapping account of mathematical applications offered
by Pincock (2007, 2011c, 2012). The mapping account emphasizes the
centrality of the existence of a mapping between the mathematical
structures and the empirical reality that is the target of the
scientific modeling. Critics have claimed that while there are aspects
of the applications of mathematics that are correctly captured by the
mapping account, there are also aspects related to mathematical
idealization and explanation that it does not manage to capture. This
led to the inferential conception of applications of mathematics
defended by Bueno and Colyvan 2011 (which preserves some of the
mapping account defended by Pincock) and to refinements of Batterman’s
own position (see, for instance, Batterman 2010a). Pincock 2011a and
2012 replies to some of the criticisms and argues that his account can
be extended to handle mathematical idealizations and
explanations. More criticisms are raised in Rizza 2013 who argues that
examples from social choice theory cannot be handled by mapping
accounts such as those defended by Pincock and Bueno and Colyvan.
Pincock’s position is classified in Batterman and Rice 2014 as sharing
with many others (including those based on causal theories of
explanation and those based on mechanistic explanations cited in
section 1) a representational bias. Batterman and Rice offer instead
examples of explanations in which models can be explanatory even when
there are no “common features” (a mirroring relation of
sorts) between the model and the phenomena being explained. They claim
that one such case is the case of lattice gas automaton models of
fluid dynamics: these minimal models are said to account for the
universal behavior of some fluids while also failing to represent any
of the relevant microphysics of actual fluids. Batterman and Rice note
that these explanations can be understood using renormalization group
techniques. These minimal models are also extensively used in biology
(Fisher’s model of one-to-one sex ratios). Batterman and Rice
conclude:
One should point out that the terminology of minimal model is also
used in a different sense in the literature, for instance in Weisberg
2007 and Strevens 2008; in this second use, minimal models provide
essential causal details. Chirimuuta 2014 distinguishes B-minimal
models (of the Batterman type) and A-minimal models (of the
Weisberg-Strevens type). Chirimuuta herself defines a class of minimal
models (I-minimal models) that “figure prominently in
explanations of why a particular neural system exhibits a particular
empirically observed behaviour, by referring to its computational
function.” (2014, p. 144)
Rice 2015 (see also 2012) focuses on optimality models, which are
widely used in physics, biology and economics. He argues that these
models explain without tracking any genuine causal structure in the
target phenomenon. Such models give rise to “optimization
explanations”. Baron 2014 considers a case of mathematical
explanation in science concerning search patterns of fully-aquatic
marine predators and argues that mathematical explanations in science
are rather common on account of the widespread use of optimality
models of statistical nature (such as Lévy walks displayed in
the search patterns mentioned above). Baron 2016b also discusses the
example in connection to the role idealizations play in such
explanations (see also Potochnik 2007).
While Batterman and Rice claim that explanations that depend on
renormalization group techniques are not causal, Reutlinger 2014
insists that causal factors are still present. But Reutlinger also
admits that non-causal factors are crucial due to the role of
mathematical operations. He thus links these cases to Lange’s class of
distinctively mathematical explanations (Lange 2013c, see below). For
more on renormalization techniques and mathematical explanation see
Batterman 2010b, Reutlinger 2014, 2017a and 2017b, Povich 2016, and
Morrison 2018.
Minimal models are also discussed in Chirimuuta 2014, Lange 2015a, and
Povich 2016. Lange raises several objections to Batterman and Rice’s
account of how minimal models work and to why the “common
features” approach fails to account for such
explanations. Povich defends a “common features”
approach. Pincock and Batterman are criticized in Reutlinger and
Andersen 2016 on account of relying on the assumption that abstract
explanations, defined as those that leave out most of the
microphysical causal details of the target phenomenon to be explained,
have to be non-causal. They claim, by contrast, that a) abstract
explanations often do identify causes and b) that they often are
causally explanatory. Andersen 2106, which aims to provide a friendly
amendment to Lange 2013c, sees complementarity and not opposition
between causal and mathematical explanations.
Other examples of non-causal explanations include dimensional
explanations (Lange 2009, Pexton 2014), graph-theoretic explanations
of empirical facts (Pincock 2007, 2012, Lange 2013c), kinematic
explanations in physics (Saatsi 2018), explanations given in terms of
symmetry principles and conservation laws (Lange 2007, 2013a, 2017;
French and Saatsi 2018); multi-level explanations in biology (Clarke
2016); “efficient coding” explanations in computational
neuro-science (Chirimuuta 2014, 2017, 2018).
As it will be obvious from the previous discussion, the literature on
mathematical explanations in the sciences has now grown too large to
be described in detail. But here are some further foci of discussion
that should be mentioned, without any attempt at completeness. 
As we have seen, much attention has been devoted recently to
structural explanations in physics, namely explanations of specific
phenomena given in terms of mathematical properties of the systems in
which they occur. Bokulich 2011, generalizing notions of structural
explanation developed in Railton 1980, Hughes 1989, and Clifton 1998
(Other Internet Resources), speaks of structural model
explanation, “that is, one in which the explanandum can be seen
as a consequence of the structure of the theory or theories employed
in the model (in this case a particular blending of classical and
quantum mechanics), which limits what sorts of objects, properties,
states or behaviors are admissible within the framework of that
theory” (p. 40).
Dorato and Felline 2010b argue that contraction of rods and dilation
of clocks can be structurally explained by properties of Minkowski
space-time (but see also Smart 1990, Colyvan 2001 and 2002 and Lange
2013a) and Dorato and Felline 2010a claim that quantum entanglement is
structurally explained by the non-commutativity of certain operators
and the uncertainty principle by the properties of the limits of
Fourier transforms (see also Felline 2018 and Dorato 2017). 
In biology and medicine such structural explanations are found in
terms of “topological explanations”. Much of the interest
in this area has been the analysis of whether, and if so how, such
explanations differ from mechanistic explanations (see Huneman 2010,
Brigandt 2013, Woodward 2013, Jones 2014, Kostic 2016, Huneman 2018,
Darrason 2018 for case studies and further references). A
characteristic of such explanations is that one makes use of
graph-theoretic or topological properties of a system to explain
properties of the system such as stability under perturbations. 
A variety of responses (reductionism to causal accounts, pluralism,
monism) can be developed in reaction to the presence of non-causal
scientific explanations (see Reutlinger 2017c for a discussion of the
options). For instance, much work has been devoted to incorporating
non-causal explanations into counterfactual theories of explanation
(see Baron, Colyvan, and Ripley 2017; Bokulich 2008; Kistler 2013;
Saatsi and Pexton 2013; Pexton 2014; Pincock 2015a; Rice 2015;
Reutlinger 2016, 2018; Saatsi 2018; Jansson and Saatsi 2017; French
and Saatsi 2018; Woodward 2018). 
A pressing issue has become that of identifying what is distinctively
mathematical in mathematical explanations of scientific facts. Lange
(2013c, 2017, 2018) has recently put forward a modal theory of
explanation, according to which mathematical explanations of
scientific facts act as constraints which have modal necessity
stronger than causal necessity. As he puts it in Lange 2013c: “A
distinctively mathematical explanation works by showing the
explanandum to be more necessary (given the physical arrangement in
question) than ordinary causal laws could render it. Distinctively
mathematical explanations thus supply a kind of understanding that
causal explanations cannot.” He calls many of these
explanations “explanations by constraint” and
distinguishes them from causal explanations and from “really
statistical” explanations (for instance, but not exclusively,
explanations by regression toward the mean; for more on statistical
explanations see Lange 2013b). Craver and Povich 2017 argue that
Lange’s theory of explanation by constraint (and even his account of
“really statistical” explanations) is flawed, for it fails
to account for the directionality of the explanatory relation in
distinctively mathematical explanations. Pincock 2015a proposes to
account for mathematical explanations in science by appealing to a
notion of “abstract explanation” considered as one which
involves “an appeal to a more abstract entity than the state of
affairs being explained.” Pincock defends an ontic account of
explanation based on dependence relations that are different from
causal relations. Abstract explanations classify systems, as opposed
to emphasizing the modal character of the system’s properties (see
also Pincock 2018). Baron 2017 revamps the deductive-nomological model
to account for mathematical explanations of scientific facts by using
an informational account of relevance logic to capture the dependence
relation between mathematical facts and physics facts. 
Whereas the issues treated in section 3.1 affect mainly the
methodology of science, a different set of issues has emerged in
connection to the nominalism-platonism debate in philosophy of
mathematics. Colyvan 2010 (and the earlier Colyvan 2006) contrasts
hard road and easy road nominalism. While the hard road nominalist
offers non-mathematical versions of our best scientific theories, the
easy road nominalist simply retains the original, mathematical
versions of the theories, and qualifies our acceptance of them so as
to exclude a commitment to abstract entities. Colyvan argues that easy
road nominalists such as Azzouni, Melia and Yablo are unable to
account for the explanatory role of mathematics in science, for
example, the explanation of the absence of asteroids in the Kirkwood
gaps. He claims that any account of how such explanations are possible
that avoids mathematical commitments would require hard road
nominalism, that is, showing how one can eliminate reference to
mathematical entities. Replies include Bueno 2012, Yablo 2012, Leng
2012, and the rejoinder Colyvan 2012a. Bueno claims that the
mathematics used in scientific explanations only plays a descriptive
role and not an explanatory role. Yablo distinguishes three degrees of
mathematical involvement in physical explanation, the third of which
entails the existence of mathematical entities but, he claims, it is
hard to establish whether it ever obtains.  Leng defends the
possibility of accounting for mathematical explanations
nominalistically and emphasizes the importance of structural
explanations, which according to her do not commit us to mathematical
objects but only to physical objects that instantiate a mathematical
structure. Much of the discussion in this area, which addresses
whether the mathematics present in the formulation of scientific
theories or mathematical explanations offered in science is
eliminable, is deeply related to so-called indispensability
arguments. 
There is actually a variety of classical indispensability arguments
(see Colyvan 2001 and Panza and Sereni 2016) but the general structure
of the argument runs as follows. One begins with the premise that
mathematics is indispensable for our best science. But, second
premise, we ought to believe our best theories. Thus, we ought to be
committed to the kind of entities that our best theories quantify
over. In general this is an argument in favor of Platonism, as our
best science quantifies over mathematical entities.
There are many ways in which one can attempt to block the argument.
However, the key feature related to our discussion is the following.
Several versions of the indispensability argument rely on a holistic
conception of scientific theories according to which the ontological
commitments of the theory is determined by looking at all the
existential claims implied by the theory. However, no attention is paid
to how the different parts of the theory might be responsible for
different posits and to the different roles that the latter might play.
Baker 2005 offers a version of the indispensability argument that does
not depend on holism. Baker starts from a debate between Colyvan (2001,
2002) and Melia (2000, 2002) that saw both authors agreeing that the
prospects for a successful platonist use of the indispensability
argument rests on examples from scientific practice in which the
postulation of mathematical objects results in an increase of those
theoretical virtues which are provided by the postulation of
theoretical entities. Both authors agree that among such theoretical
virtues is explanatory power. Baker believes that such explanations
exist but also argues that the cases presented in Colyvan 2001 fail to
be genuine cases of mathematical explanations of physical phenomena.
Most of his article is devoted to the specific case study from
evolutionary biology concerning the life-cycle of the so-called
‘periodical’ cicada, which was described in section 1.
Recall that the question of interest was why the life cycle periods of
such cicadas are prime numbers and that the answer appealed to
evolutionary facts and mathematical properties of prime numbers. After
the reconstruction of the explanation, Baker concludes that:
Such explanations give a new twist to the indispensability argument.
The argument now runs as follows.
The argument has not gone unchallenged. Indeed, Leng 2005 tries to
resist the conclusion by blocking premise b). She accepts a) but
questions the claim that the role of mathematics in such explanations
commits us to the real existence (as opposed to a fictional one) of
the posits. This, she argues, will be granted when one realizes that
both Colyvan and Baker infer illegitimately from the existence of the
mathematical explanation that the statements grounding the explanation
are true. She claims that mathematical explanations need not have a
true explanans and consequently the objects posited by such
explanations need not exist (see now also Leng 2010, chapter 9).  By
focusing on inference to the best explanation, Saatsi 2007 also
resists the implication that scientific realism forces a commitment to
mathematical Platonism. Another challenge has been raised by Bangu
2008, who claims that mathematical language is essential to the
formulation of the question to be answered (“why is the life
cycle period prime?”) and thus that the argument begs the
question against the nominalist. The existence of numbers and
properties of numbers is already assumed in the acceptance of the
statement “the life cycle period is prime”. A similar
objection to any attempt to use mathematical explanations in physics
for inferring the existence of the mathematical entities involved in
the explanation had already been raised in 1978b by Steiner, who had
discarded such arguments with the observation that what needed
explanation could not even be described without use of the
mathematical language. Thus, the existence of mathematical
explanations of empirical phenomena could not be used to infer the
existence of mathematical entities, for this very existence was
presupposed in the description of the fact to be explained. Indeed, he
endorsed a line of argument originating from Quine and Goodman
according to which “we cannot say what the world would be like
without numbers, because describing any thinkable experience (except
for utter emptiness) presupposes their existence.” (1978b,
20)
Among the most recent contributions arising from Baker’s 2005 article
we have Daly and Langford 2009, Baker 2009a, 2015, 2016a, 2017a,
2017b, Baker and Colyvan 2011, Saatsi 2010, Rizza 2011, Pincock 2012,
Bangu 2013, Baron 2014, Marcus 2013, Tallant 2013, and Wakil and
Justus 2017. We can only provide here a very short summary of the main
positions. Daly and Langford side with Melia to claim that the role of
positing concrete unobservables in science allows the explanation of
the behavior of observable facts. By contrast, mathematics has no such
explanatory value: it merely ‘indexes’ physical
facts. Against Baker they argue that the appearance of primes in the
cicadas example is only due to the decision to measure those periods
in years but that a different choice of measure (say, seasons or
months) would give rise to non-prime numbers, thereby showing that
Melia’s indexing strategy can also apply to the cicadas example. Baker
and Colyvan 2011 reassert the claim on the existence of mathematical
explanations of scientific phenomena and argue that Daly and
Langford’s strategy is only plausible in extremely simple cases and
that the ‘index strategy’ does not square with the
complexities of mathematical and scientific practice. In particular,
they also make appeal to the existence of mathematical explanations of
mathematical facts, for which see below. Baker 2009a defends the
‘enhanced indispensability arguments’ against criticisms
by Daly and Langford, Bangu, Leng, and Saatsi. Saatsi 2010 emphasizes
the representational role of mathematics and criticizes the alleged
explanatory role of mathematics in the explanation of empirical
phenomena such as the honeycomb case (see below) and the cicadas
case. Rizza 2011 is also deflationary about the alleged ontological
consequence of the role of mathematics in the cicadas case; however he
does not deny the centrality of mathematical concepts in constructing
explanations. Finally, Pincock 2012, chapter 10, also rejects the
cogency of various formulations of the enhanced indispensability
argument. The objection is that inference to the best explanation for
novel abstract entities requires that those new entities are needed to
explain the phenomenon in question. But in the cases discussed in this
debate, there is no explanatory value to adding the natural numbers or
the real numbers to our theories, over and above nominalistically
acceptable surrogates (see Pincock 2012, 212).
Another reaction to Baker’s argument is provided by Tallant 2013
which, just as Rizza, 2011, defends a ‘piecemeal’ strategy
for nominalism, namely to deflate the challenge posed by the cicada
case through a nominalization of prime number talk using mereological
reformulations of the number-theoretic results. A challenge against
this strategy is offered by Baker 2017b who claims that the
entanglement of mathematics in scientific explanation is much deeper
than has been realized so far and it extends to mathematical
properties that, in addition to having empirical consequences, are
consequences of the mathematical theorems appealed to explicitly in
the explanations. The claims rely on an explanation of the periods of
magicicadas that improves on the original version given in Baker 2005.
Baker 2016, still relying on the periodical cicada explanation, argues
that mathematics can sometimes reduce the ontological commitment to
concrete entities and poses a challenge to nominalism, especially the
piecemeal nominalism described above, based on that
observation. Finally, Baker 2017a argues that the mathematical
component in the cicada case and similar cases, when properly
articulated, is ‘about’ general facts as opposed to
individual facts. 
Modified versions of the indispensability argument stressing the
importance of the indispensability of mathematics for explanations in
science were considered, before Baker, by the nominalist Field as a
challenge to the platonist use of such arguments. Field (1989,
14–20) accepts the cogency of this type of inference to the best
explanation but he argued (Field 1980) that platonist mathematics
could be replaced by a nominalistically acceptable theory that was
sufficient for the development of classical mechanics. In addition,
the nominalistic replacement would also have the virtue of providing
‘intrinsic’ explanations of the physical phenomena (for a
probing discussion of ‘intrinsic explanation’ see Marcus
2013). That led to much discussion as to how far Field’s program could
be pushed. Malament 1982 had objected that the obstacles to the
nominalization of phase-space theories in Hamiltonian mechanics seemed
insuperable. Lyon and Colyvan (2008) go beyond Malament’s claim by
arguing that even if a nominalistic reconstruction of phase-space
theories were available, the nominalist would still have to show that
such reconstruction can yield the explanations yielded by the
non-nominalistic version(s). They believe that the nominalist will
fail in this task and make a plausible case for their thesis by
providing a case study of a physical system known as the
Hénon-Heiles system (incidentally, this same case study is used
by Molinini 2011 to test the theories of mathematical explanation
offered by Steiner, Kitcher and van Fraassen). The system describes
the motion of a star around a galactic center. Their claim is that the
phase-space analysis of the system provides explanations that cannot
be provided by any nominalist reconstruction. At the end of their
article, Lyon and Colyvan also review a few possible moves the
nominalist can make in response. One such move would deny that
mathematical explanations have any bearing on physical explanations
and that some bridge principles linking the mathematics to the
physical system, are required. They reply:
Lyon and Colyvan grant that while in mathematical explanations of
empirical facts such bridge principles are required, they “do
not seem to do anything more than allow the transmission of the
mathematical explanations to the empirical domain” (p. 15).
Saatsi 2017 criticizes Lyon and Colyvan 2008 by questioning the
conclusiveness of the appeal to phase spaces in bringing about
explanations which would allow the deployment of an enhanced
indispensability argument. After proposing a strengthening of the
indispensability argument by appealing to attractors in dynamical
system theory, he concludes that understanding how explanations work
in dynamical system theory undermines the Platonist use of the
enhanced indispensability argument.
According to Lyon and Colyvan, a proper account of explanations in
science requires an analysis of mathematical explanations in pure
mathematics.  Indeed, this was also the major intuition behind
Steiner’s account of mathematical explanation in science offered in
1978b, whose central idea was that a mathematical explanation of a
physical fact is one in which a mathematical explanation of a
mathematical fact results when we remove the physics. Steiner used as
central example for his analysis Euler’s theorem on the existence of
an instantaneous axis of rotation in rigid body kinematics. Baker
2009a discusses briefly Steiner’s account and declares it
‘seriously flawed’(p. 623) but Molinini 2012 is more
enlightening as it subjects the Euler example used by Steiner to a
detailed scrutiny and compares alternative explanatory proofs of the
same result. Steiner’s theory, as we have mentioned, requires an
account of mathematical explanations of mathematical facts, which he
provided in Steiner 1978a. It is important to add that serious
objections have been raised to the idea that mathematical explanations
of scientific facts require a mathematical explanation of a
mathematical fact as part of the explanation. For instance, Baker 2015
argues against Steiner’s account by pointing out that in the cicada
case or in the honeycomb cell case only the mathematical results are
appealed to but not their proofs.
Lyon & Colyvan 2008 also contains a much discussed example from
evolutionary biology. Why do hive-bee honeycombs have a hexagonal
structure? The nature of the question is contrastive: why hexagonal as
opposed to, say, any other polygonal figure or combination thereof?
Part of the explanation depends on evolutionary facts. Bees that use
less wax and thus spend less energy have a better chance at evolving
via natural selection. The explanation is completed by pointing out
that ‘any partition of the plane into regions of equal area has
perimeter at least that of the regular hexagonal honeycomb
tiling’. Thus, the hexagonal tiling is optimal with respect to
dividing the plane into equal areas and minimizing the perimeter. This
fact, known as the ‘honeycomb conjecture’ was recently
proved in Hales 2001 (see also Hales 2000). The explanation of the
biological fact seems to depend essentially on a mathematical
fact. Just like the cicada example, this case has been extensively
discussed in the literature. 
Some have questioned whether the example is a case of genuine
explanation. For instance, Räz 2013 points out that the honeycomb
theorem is a two-dimensional theorem but that the real-life problem
must address the three-dimensional structure of the honeycomb
cells. In Räz 2017 several alternative scientific explanations of
the structure of the honeycomb cells are discussed and used to
evaluate the positions of Pincock (2012) and Baker (2015) on the kind
of optimization result that is needed to explain the structure of the
honeycomb cells (Pincock, contra Baker, claims that the optimality of
the hexagonal shape among regular polygons is sufficient and there is
no need to appeal to the general honeycomb conjecture). Wakil and
Justus (2017, 917) criticize both the cicada example as well as the
honeycomb example on the basis that both examples commit the
optimality fallacy, namely ‘assuming a trait exists because it
was selected for as a solution to a biological optimization
problem.’
Lyon 2012 sketches a more general theory of mathematical explanations
of scientific facts. Starting from the, by now, standard stock of
examples discussed in the literature on mathematical explanations of
scientific facts (the bees, the cicadas, the sunflower seeds, the
bridges of Königsberg, the Kirkwood gaps, the Plateau soap film,
etc.), Lyon thinks that they share important properties that can be
captured through a distinction already available in the literature on
explanation in general philosophy of science. The distinction is that
formulated by Jackson and Pettit (1990) between process explanations
and program explanations. Lyon’s observation is that in all the
standard examples of mathematical explanations listed above there are,
in addition to the mathematical explanations, alternative explanations
that are causal. Such alternative explanations work at a level of
granularity (indicating all the spatio-temporal coordinates, forces
acting on the bodies etc.) that is not present in the mathematical
explanations. Following the lead of Jackson and Pettit, Lyon calls the
former process explanations and the latter program explanation:
While Lyon does not claim that all mathematical explanations in
science are process program explanations, he argues that the cases
that have been at the center of attention in the discussion of
mathematical explanations of scientific phenomena are special cases of
program explanation, namely those in which the mathematics is
indispensable to the programming. Lyon also defends the thesis that
what characterizes mathematical explanations of scientific facts is a
certain modal stability (see also the discussion of Lange 2013c in the
previous subsection) which account for their being good explanations,
an explanation that does not have to be altered even when the causal
history for the occurrence of the event (say, the cracking of a glass
flask) had been different from the actual ones. Saatsi 2012 denies
that the cases analyzed by Lyon fit the Jackson-Pettit model of
program explanation and thus resists Lyon’s use of the examples to
buttress a realistic interpretation of the mathematics used in those
explanations. For further discussion of program and process
explanations applied to logical explanations of scientific facts see
Baron and Colyvan 2016.
One of the aspects of the enhanced indispensability argument that has
generated much attention is that the argument seems to presuppose a
form of inference to the best explanation. An inference to the best
explanation licenses, when one is presented with several alternative
explanations of the same phenomenon, the acceptance as true of the
best among such explanations. In addition to raising the crucial issue
of determining whether a certain argument is a mathematical
explanation of a scientific fact, we are also confronted with the
further issue of how to rank alternative explanations and of whether
the appeal to inference to the best explanation in arguing for
scientific realism carries over to an argument for mathematical
realism. Such inferences have been at the center of much discussion in
philosophy of science (see Lipton 2004). In the context of enhanced
indispensability arguments, they were also discussed, in addition to
several of the articles cited so far, in several articles contained in
the special issue of Synthese (2016, n. 193) edited by Molinini,
Pataut, and Sereni (see Molinini 2016, Sereni 2016, Busch and Morrison
2016, Hunt 2016, and Molinini, Pataut, and Sereni 2016 for a lucid
introduction). Molinini 2016 uses alternative mathematical
explanations of scientific facts in kinematics (using a case study
from Euler studied in Molinini 2012) and special relativity (using a
case study on the FitzGerald-Lorentz contraction studied in detail in
Friend and Molinini 2015) to put pressure on the inference to the best
explanation underlying the enhanced indispensability argument. The
existence of alternative mathematical explanations of the same
phenomenon, appealing to two different mathematical entities, speaks
against the indispensability of any of those entities for providing an
explanation of the phenomenon in question. He concludes: “the
notion of explanatory power of mathematics in science has no
ontological import and cannot be used in EIA [enhanced
indispensability argument]” (pp. 420-421). Sereni 2016, a reply
to Molinini 2016, offers some important reflections on the issue of
the equivalent explanations problem. The issue of compatible
mathematical explanations (positing the same physical ontology but
appealing to different mathematical entities) is also central to Hunt
2016 where Hunt argues that ‘in cases of compatible mathematical
explanations, IBE cannot establish ontological commitment to
mathematical entities’ (p. 452). Hunt’s article is a reply to
Busch and Morrison 2016 (see also Busch 2011), which focuses on the
parity of reasoning, or lack thereof, between scientific and
mathematical realists. Indeed, they claim that inference to the best
explanation is used differently in arguments for scientific realism
from the way it is used in arguments for mathematical realism (see
also Colyvan 2001, 2006) and that this undermines the use of the
enhanced indispensability argument as establishing Platonism. 
Connected to the evaluation of indispensability arguments in
philosophy of mathematics are also a set of articles comparing
indispensability arguments in moral theory and philosophy of
mathematics contained in the collection Leibowitz and Sinclair 2016
(see the introduction to the volume by the editors and contributions
by Miller, Liggins, Roberts, Leng, Baker, and Enoch).
Before concluding this section, let me mention a few additional
contributions. Bangu 2013 proposes a challenge for the nominalist by
offering a simple example in terms of games between two players and
claims that the nominalist, unlike the realist, is unable to account
for the common features of certain rearrangements that can only be
explained by reference to a common mathematical structure of the
rearrangements.  Marcus 2013 distinguishes epistemic and metaphysical
readings of the explanatory indispensability argument and claims that
once one disambiguates the two readings, the explanatory
indispensability argument is no improvement on the standard Quinean
indispensability argument. Baron 2015 argues for the validity of the
following conditional: “if there are extramathematical
explanations, then the core thesis of the access problem is
false” and claims that far-reaching conclusions follow for the
Platonist (a solution to the access problem) and the nominalist (who
can use the conditional to reject the existence of extramathematical
explanations). Baron 2016a is an exploratory investigation on the
nature of the ontological dependence relating mathematicand and
empirical facts in a genuine mathematical explanation of scientific
facts. The topic is also connected to the general issue of grounding
(see Raven 2015 for an overview on grounding and Liggins 2016 and
Plebani 2016 for further contributions on indispensability arguments
and grounding).
Friend and Molinini 2015 generalize the question of mathematical
explanations of scientific phenomena to two further questions: are
there wholly (as opposed to partial, as in the standard cases such as
the cicada case) mathematical explanations of scientific phenomena?
And: are there wholly mathematical explanations of scientific
theories? They answer in the affirmative using as a case study the
work on the axiomatization of relativity theory carried out by Hajnal
Andréka, Judit Madarász, István Németi and
Gergely Székely.
We now turn to mathematical explanations within mathematics.
Much mathematical activity is driven by factors other than
justificatory aims such as establishing the truth of a mathematical
fact. In many cases knowledge that something is the case will be
considered unsatisfactory and this will lead mathematicians to probe
the situation further to look for better explanations of the facts
(see Atiyah’s vivid account of an instance of this in Minio 1996, 17).
This might take the form of, just to give a few examples, providing
alternative proofs for known results, giving an account for surprising
analogies, or recasting an entire area of mathematics on a new basis
in the pursuit of a more satisfactory ‘explanatory’
account of the area. The phenomenology of the variety of such
explanatory activities has been partially investigated in Sandborg
(1997, ch. 1) and Hafner & Mancosu 2005 (see also Robinson 2000
for a cognitive analysis of proof emphasizing explanatory factors,
Lange 2017 for further examples, and Colyvan 2012b for a textbook
presentation).
Consider for instance the case of Gregory Brumfiel, a real algebraic
geometer. In his book “Partially ordered rings and
semi-algebraic geometry” (1979), Brumfiel contrasts different
methods for proving theorems about real closed fields. One of them
relies on a decision procedure for a particular axiomatization of the
theory of real closed fields. By this method one can find elementary
proofs of sentences formulated in the language of that theory—at
least in principle, since, as Brumfiel remarks, “it certainly
might be very tedious, if not physically impossible, to work out this
elementary proof.” (166)
Another method of proof consists in using a so-called transfer
principle which allows one to infer the truth of a sentence for all
real closed fields from its being true in one real closed field, say
the real numbers. Despite the fact that the transfer principle is a
very efficient tool, Brumfiel does not make any use of it, and he is
very clear about this.
Brumfiel prefers a third proof method which aims at giving
non-transcendental proofs of purely algebraic results. This does not
mean that he restricts himself to just elementary methods; he does use
stronger tools but it is crucial that they apply uniformly to all real
closed fields.
While one could easily provide myriads of evaluations by
mathematicians contrasting explanatory and non-explanatory proofs of
the same theorem, it is important to point out that explanations in
mathematics do not only come in the form of proofs (this has been also
emphasized by D’Alessandro 2018, who however unfortunately ignores
claims to this effect in the previous literature on mathematical
explanation). In some cases explanations are sought in a major
conceptual recasting of an entire discipline. In such situations the
major conceptual recasting will also produce new proofs but the
explanatoriness of the new proofs is derivative on the conceptual
recasting. This leads to a more global (or holistic picture) of
explanation than the one based on the focus on individual proofs.
Mancosu 2001 describes in detail such a global case of explanatory
activity from complex analysis; see also Kitcher 1984 and Tappenden
2005 for additional case studies.
Since contributions in analytic philosophy to the study of
mathematical explanations date back only to Steiner 1978a, one might
suspect that the topic was a byproduct of the Quinean conception of
scientific theories (see Resnik & Kushner, 1987, 154). Once
mathematics and natural science were placed on the same footing, it
became possible to apply a unified methodology to both areas. Thus, it
made sense to look for explanations in mathematics just as in natural
science. However, this historical reconstruction would be mistaken.
Mathematical explanations of mathematical facts have been part of
philosophical reflection since Aristotle. We have already seen the
distinction Aristotle drew between demonstrations “of the
fact” and demonstrations “of the reasoned fact”. Both
are logically rigorous but only the latter provide explanations for
their results. Aristotle had also claimed that demonstrations “of
the reasoned fact” occur in mathematics. On account of what we
said in section 2, these demonstrations can be called
“explanatory” demonstrations. Aristotle’s position on
explanatory proofs in mathematics was already challenged in ancient
times. Proclus, in his “Commentary on the first book of
Euclid’s Elements”, informs us on this point. He reports:
“Many persons have thought that geometry does not investigate the
cause, that is, does not ask the question
‘Why?’” (Proclus 1970, 158–159; for more on Proclus on
mathematical explanation see Harari 2008). Proclus himself singles out
certain propositions in Euclid’s “Elements”, such as
I.32, as not being demonstrations “of the reasoned fact”.
Euclid I.32 states that the sum of the internal angles of a triangle is
equal to two right angles. If the demonstration were given by a
scientific syllogism in the Aristotelean sense, the middle of the
syllogism would have to provide the ‘cause’ of the fact.
But Proclus argues that Euclid’s proof does not satisfy these
Aristotelian constraints, for the appeal to the auxiliary lines and
exterior angles is not ‘causal’:
In addition, Proclus also held that proofs by contradiction were not
demonstrations “of the reasoned fact”. The rediscovery of
Proclus in the Renaissance was to spark a far-reaching debate on the
causality of mathematical demonstrations referred to above as the
Quaestio de Certitudine Mathematicarum. The first shot was fired by
Alessandro Piccolomini in 1547. Piccolomini’s aim was to disarm a
traditional claim to the effect that mathematics derives its certainty
on account of its use of “scientific demonstrations” in
the Aristotelean sense (such proofs were known as
“potissimae” in the Renaissance). Since
“potissimae” demonstrations had to be causal, Piccolomini
attacked the argument by arguing that mathematical demonstrations are
not causal. This led to one of the most interesting epistemological
debates of the Renaissance and the seventeenth century. Those denying
the “causality” of mathematical demonstrations
(Piccolomini, Pereyra, Gassendi etc.)  argued by providing specific
examples of demonstrations from mathematical practice (usually from
Euclid’s Elements) which, they claimed, could not be reconstructed as
causal reasonings in the Aristotelian sense. By contrast, those hoping
to restore “causality” to mathematics aimed at showing
that the alleged counterexamples could easily be accommodated within
the realm of “causal” demonstrations (Clavius, Barrow,
etc.). The historical developments have been presented in detail in
Mancosu 1996 and Mancosu 2000. What is more important here is to
appreciate that the basic intuition—the contraposition between
explanatory and non-explanatory demonstrations—had a long and
successful history and influenced both mathematical and philosophical
developments well beyond the seventeenth century. For instance Mancosu
1999 shows that Bolzano and Cournot, two major philosophers of
mathematics in the nineteenth century, construe the central problem of
philosophy of mathematics as that of accounting for the distinction
between between explanatory and non-explanatory demonstrations. In the
case of Bolzano this takes the form of a theory of Grund (ground) and
Folge (consequence). Kitcher 1975 was the first to read Bolzano as
propounding a theory of mathematical explanations (see Betti 2010 and
Roski 2017 for recent contributions). In the case of Cournot this is
spelled out in terms of the opposition between “ordre
logique” and “ordre rationnel” (see Cournot
1851). In Bolzano’s case, the aim of providing a reconstruction of
parts of analysis and geometry, so that the exposition would use only
“explanatory” proofs, also led to major mathematical
results, such as his purely analytic proof of the intermediate value
theorem.
In conclusion to this section, we should also point out that there is
another tradition of thinking of explanation in mathematics that
includes Mill, Lakatos, Russell and Gödel. These authors are
motivated by a conception of mathematics (and/or its foundations) as
hypothetico-deductive in nature and this leads them to construe
mathematical activity in analogy with how explanatory hypotheses occur
in science (see Mancosu 2001 for more details). Related to inductivism
are Cellucci 2008 and 2017, which emphasize the connection between mathematical
explanation and discovery. 
In section 4 it was pointed out that two major forms of the search for
explanations in mathematical practice occur at the level of comparison
between different proofs of the same result and in the conceptual
recasting of major areas. These two types of explanatory activity lead
to two different conceptions of explanation. These conceptions could
be characterized as local and global. The point is that in the former
case explanatoriness is primarily a (local) property of proofs whereas
in the latter it is a (global) property of the whole theory or
framework and the proofs are judged explanatory on account of their
being part of the framework. While these two types of explanatory
activity do not exhaust the varieties of mathematical explanations
that occur in practice, the contraposition between local and global
captures well the major difference between the two major classical
accounts of mathematical explanation, those of Steiner and Kitcher
(more recent accounts will be discussed in section 7). While we shall
emphasize the local/global dichotomy, it is important to add that there are
other ways to conceptualize the major alternatives in the theory of
mathematical explanation. For instance, Kim 1994 uses the
contraposition between ‘explanatory internalism’ and
‘explanatory externalism’ to give a taxonomy of the
different accounts of scientific explanation. Whereas for
‘explanatory internalism’ explanations are activities
internal to an epistemic corpus (a theory or set of beliefs), an
‘explanatory externalist’ will look for some ontic
relations that ground the explanatory relations reflected in
linguistic ascriptions of explanatoriness. This taxonomy is orthogonal
to the local/global taxonomy and we only mention here that the
spirit of Kitcher’s theory of explanation is ‘internalist’
whereas that of Steiner is ‘externalist’.
Before discussing them, it should also be pointed out that other
models of scientific explanation can be thought to extend to
mathematical explanation. They will be discussed in section 7.
Steiner proposed his model of mathematical explanation in 1978a. In
developing his own account of explanatory proof in mathematics he
discusses—and rejects—a number of initially plausible
criteria for explanation, e.g. the (greater degree of) abstractness or
generality of a proof, its visualizability, and its genetic aspect that
would give rise to the discovery of the result. In contrast, Steiner
takes up the idea “that to explain the behaviour of an entity,
one deduces the behavior from the essence or nature of the
entity” (Steiner 1978a, 143). In order to avoid the notorious
difficulties in defining the concepts of essence and essential (or
necessary) property, which, moreover, do not seem to be useful in
mathematical contexts anyway since all mathematical truths are regarded
as necessary, Steiner introduces the concept of characterizing
property. (Let me mention as an aside that Kit Fine distinguishes
between essential and necessary properties and that perhaps the
distinction could be exploited in this context). By characterizing
property Steiner means “a property unique to a given entity or
structure within a family or domain of such entities or
structures”, where the notion of family is taken as undefined.
Hence what distinguishes an explanatory proof from a non-explanatory
one is that only the former involves such a characterizing property. In
Steiner’s words: “an explanatory proof makes reference to a
characterizing property of an entity or structure mentioned in the
theorem, such that from the proof it is evident that the result depends
on the property”. Furthermore, an explanatory proof is
generalizable in the following sense. Varying the relevant feature (and
hence a certain characterizing property) in such a proof gives rise to
an array of corresponding theorems, which are proved—and
explained—by an array of “deformations” of the
original proof. Thus Steiner arrives at two criteria for explanatory
proofs, i.e. dependence on a characterizing property and
generalizability through varying of that property (Steiner 1978a, 144,
147).
Steiner’s model was criticized by Resnik & Kushner 1987 who
questioned the absolute distinction between explanatory and
non-explanatory proofs and argued that such a distinction can only be
context-dependent. They also provided counterexamples to the criteria
defended by Steiner. In Hafner & Mancosu 2005 it is argued that
Resnik and Kushner’s criticisms are insufficient as a challenge to
Steiner for they rely on ascribing explanatoriness to specific proofs
based not on evaluations given by practicing mathematicians but rather
relying on the intuitions of the authors. By contrast, Hafner and
Mancosu build their case against Steiner using a case of explanation
from real analysis, recognized as such in mathematical practice, which
concerns the proof of Kummer’s convergence criterion. They argue that
the explanatoriness of the proof of the result in question cannot be
accounted for in Steiner’s model and this criticism is instrumental in
giving a careful and detailed scrutiny of various conceptual
components of the model. In addition, further discussion of Steiner’s
account is provided in Weber &
Verhoeven 2002, Pincock 2015b, Salverda 2017, and Gijsbers 2017.
Kitcher is a well known defender of an account of scientific
explanation as theoretical unification. Kitcher sees one of the virtues
of his viewpoint to be that it can also be applied to explanation in
mathematics, unlike other theories of scientific explanation whose
central concepts, say causality or laws of nature, do not seem relevant
to mathematics. Kitcher has not devoted any single article to
mathematical explanation and thus his position can only be gathered
from what he says about mathematics in his major articles on scientific
explanation. In Kitcher 1989, he uses
unification as the overarching model for explanation both in science
and mathematics:
Kitcher claims that behind the account of explanation given by
Hempel’s covering law model—the official model of explanation
for logical positivism—there was an unofficial model which saw
explanation as unification. What should one expect from an account of
explanation? Kitcher in 1981 points out two things. First, a theory of
explanation should account for how science advances our understanding
of the world. Secondly, it should help us in evaluating or arbitrating
disputes in science. He claims that the covering law model fails on
both counts and he proposes that his unification account fares much
better.
Kitcher found inspiration in Friedman 1974 where Friedman put
forward the idea that understanding of the world is achieved by science
by reducing the number of facts we take as brute:
Friedman tried to make this intuition more precise by substituting
linguistic descriptions in place of an appeal to phenomena and
laws. Kitcher disagrees with the specific details of Friedman’s
proposal but thinks that the general intuition is correct. He modifies
Friedman’s proposal by emphasizing that what lies behind unification
is the reduction of the number of argument patterns used in providing
explanations while being as comprehensive as possible in the number of
phenomena explained:
Let us make this a little bit more formal. Let us start with a
set K of beliefs assumed to be consistent and deductively
closed (informally one can think of this as a set of statements
endorsed by an ideal scientific community at a specific moment in
time; Kitcher 1981, p.75).  A systematization of K is any set
of arguments that derive some sentences in K from other
sentences of K. The explanatory store over K,
E(K), is the best systematization of K
(Kitcher here makes an idealization by claiming
that E(K) is unique). Corresponding to different
systematizations we have different degrees of unification.  The
highest degree of unification is that given
by E(K). But according to what criteria can a
systematization be judged to be the best? There are three factors: the
number of patterns, the stringency of the patterns and the set of
consequences derivable from the unification.
We cannot enter here into the technicalities of Kitcher’s
model. Unlike Steiner’s model of mathematical explanation,
Kitcher’s account of mathematical explanation has not been
extensively discussed (in contrast to the extensive discussion of his
model in the context of general philosophy of science). A general
discussion is found in Tappenden 2005 but not a detailed analysis. The
only exception is Hafner & Mancosu 2008, where Kitcher’s
model is tested in light of Brumfiel’s case from real algebraic
geometry, described in section 4. The authors argue that
Kitcher’s model makes predictions about explanatoriness that go
against specific cases in mathematical practice (see also Pincock 2015b).
The developments of the last decade take on board the suggestion (see
Mancosu 2008b) to follow a “bottom up” approach to
mathematical explanation, investigating cases considered explanatory
in mathematical practice and resisting the temptation to argue
“top down” by proposing encompassing approaches to
mathematical explanation without a previous extensive analysis of
individual case studies. However, interest in the “top
down” approaches is still lively and informs the discussion of
many particular case studies. Apart from a single dissenting voice
(Zelcer 2013, see also the reply Weber and Frans 2017), contributors
in this area all accept mathematical explanation of mathematical facts
as a datum about mathematical practice that philosophers of
mathematics have to investigate. 
Marc Lange (2009a) has argued that a whole class of
arguments fail to be explanatory, namely arguments by mathematical
induction. Letting A(x) be a property, mathematical
induction licenses the conclusion that for
all n, A(n), from the premises A(1) and
for all n, (if A(n)
then A(n′)). Lange’s argument rests on contrasting
ordinary mathematical induction with a form of upward and downward
induction from a fixed number k (k≠1; say, 5), which is
deductively equivalent to ordinary induction. He then claims that if
proofs by ordinary mathematical induction are explanatory so are
proofs by upward and downward induction from a fixed number
k≠1. But if so, one ends up, so the argument concludes, with
P(1) part of the explanation for P(k)
and P(k) part of the explanation for P(1) and
this contradicts the non-circularity of mathematical explanations
(which is one of the premises about mathematical explanations defended
by Lange). By reductio, the original proof by ordinary mathematical
induction is not explanatory. Baker 2009b rejects the claim that the
proof by ordinary mathematical induction and the proof by upward and
downward induction from k are equally explanatory. He points
out that the latter type of induction is more
‘disjunctive’ than the former and contains elements that
are irrelevant to the explanation.  Cariani 2011 (see Other Internet
Resources) also focuses on the explanatory asymmetry between the two
types of induction but with considerations different from those of
Baker. He insists on ‘simplicity’ as the explanatory
tie-breaker between proofs of the same theorem by appeal to the two
different types of induction and concludes with considerations leading
one to suspect that there is no global answer to the question of
whether proofs by mathematical induction are explanatory.
Lange’s argument has been also contested in several recent articles
such as Hoeltje et al. 2013, Baldwin 2016, and Dougherty 2017. Hoeltje
et al. reject what they see as an unacknowledged assumption in Lange’s
argument, namely that a universal sentence explains its
instances. Baldwin offers positive considerations as to why inductive
arguments are explanatory and he also focuses his criticisms of
Lange’s argument on the latter’s assumption that an instance of a
universal generalization cannot help explain the universal
generalization. Dougherty’s line of attack is based on Lange’s need to
presuppose a problematic notion of identity of proofs, which he
questions using an alternative criterion of identity spelled out using
two equivalent characterizations (the first appealing to the language
of homotopy type theory and the second using algebraic representatives
to proofs).
Lange 2017 (section 3, chapters 7 to 9) brings together several
investigations on mathematical explanation by the same author (see
Lange 2010a, 2010b, 2014, 2015b, 2015c; in what follows, we mainly
reference the book of 2017). Lange’s investigations are characterized
by a rich and varied choice of examples, which lead him to argue that
although mathematical explanations do not fall under a general
pattern, there are interesting classes of explanations. In chapter 7
of Lange 2017, Lange emphasizes the importance of symmetry and
simplicity in mathematical explanations. The idea is that faced with a
result that displays a salient symmetry, the explanation will be the
one that will be able to account for the symmetry of the result by
exploiting a symmetry in the set-up of the problem. Lange gives many
examples (drawn from probability, real analysis, number theory,
complex numbers, geometry etc.) including one concerning d’Alembert’s
theorem (an example of explanation by subsumption under a theorem) to
the effect that in a polynomial equation of n-th degree in the
variable x and having only real coefficients, the nonreal roots
will always come in pairs (both a non-real root and its complex
conjugate will satisfy the equation). What explains this symmetry? A
non-explanatory proof can be given by algebraic manipulations but this
does not reveal the reason for the result which, according to Lange,
is the fact that the axioms of complex arithmetic are invariant under
substitution of i for -i. Lange offers similar
considerations, using further case studies from geometry and
combinatorics, for simplicity: if the statement strikes us as simple
then an and explanatory proof should be able to account for it using
simple features of the set up.
In chapter 8 of his book, Lange discusses the notion of mathematical
coincidence (see also Lange 2010a, Baker 2009c). Consider the
following array of “calculator” numbers:
Consider the numbers generated by juxtaposing each row, column, or
main diagonal with its reverse image. For instance, 123321 or
159951. Every such number (there are sixteen in total) is divisible by
37. Is this a coincidence? Notice that you can check each of the sixteen
numbers and prove that 37 is a factor. But this provides no
explanation. It turns out there is an explanation which is connected
to the fact that each such number can be expressed in terms of
arithmetic progressions of the
form a, a+d, a+2d (and their
reverse). A theorem by Nummela (1987) shows that divisibility by 37 follows
from a common feature of the sixteen numbers (i.e. they can all be
expressed in the same form). Appealing to this and other examples,
Lange analyzes at length what distinguishes coincidences from
non-coincidences and argues that non-coincidences admit of an
explanatory proof. The analysis brings into play several interesting
features, such as unification, saliency, natural properties in
mathematics, fruitfulness etc.  In the process, Lange also argues for
the claim that mathematical explanations are context-dependent since
‘in different contexts different features might be
salient’ (p. 299). Among the claims defended in chapter 8 is
that there are some clear cases that show that purity and explanation
come apart. The topics of purity, fruitfulness, coincidence,
unification, natural properties etc. come together in chapter 9, which
is devoted to Desargues’ plane theorem in projective geometry. Lange
discusses and contrasts proofs of the theorem given in the context of
synthetic geometry, analytic geometry and projective (synthetic)
geometry. He argues that the projective proof, which obtains the
result by projective means from a spatial version of the same result,
provides the required explanation which eludes all the other
proofs. Noteworthy are the connections Lange establishes between
explanation, natural properties, and fruitfulness (see also Tappenden
2008a and 2008b).
Another rich discussion of an example of explanation from mathematical
practice has been offered in Pincock 2015b. Pincock focuses on the
proof of the impossibility of solving a quintic equation by
radicals. Several proofs are looked at and the proof given in terms of
Galois theory is singled out as explanatory. Pincock is especially
interested in the abstract nature of the explanation, which in his
account functions by appeal to an entity that is more abstract than
the subject matter of the theorem itself. The proof of the result
given in terms of Galois theory, according to Pincock, ‘is an
explanatory proof because it invokes a special sort of ontological
dependence between distinct mathematical domains.’ (p. 3) As
often with accounts that end up appealing to grounding of various
sorts, Pincock also does not think that the dependence in question can
be explicated in simpler terms.
Another interesting case study is found in Colyvan et al. 2018. There
the main example is the theorem to the effect that, given any
set X, there exists a free group over X (The Free Group
Theorem). The authors analyze and contrast a constructive proof of the
result and a more abstract but non-constructive proof. They compare
and contrast the two proofs with known models of scientific
explanation and find that the first proof has features in common with
the reductive account of explanation while the second is more in line
with unificationist accounts. They conclude that both proofs have
explanatory virtues. The discussion ends up highlighting the problem
of how to compare and rank the explanatoriness of proofs and claims
that explanatory virtues come in degrees. An additional case study
concerning compactness is provided in Paseau 2010. 
In addition to the unification model, other models of scientific
explanation have been tested with an eye to mathematical
explanation. For instance, Sandborg (1997, 1998) tests van Fraassen’s
account of explanation as answers to why-questions by using cases of
mathematical explanation. Molinini 2014 subjects Hempel’s D-N model to
a probing analysis with respect to how it deals with mathematical
explanations (both of scientific facts and of mathematical
facts). Frans and Weber 2014 propose to apply mechanistic accounts to
mathematical explanations where talk of capacities in the former
account is rendered in terms of dependencies in the latter account
(the approach is discussed also in Baracco 2017). Reutlinger 2016 and
Gijsbers 2017 modify Woodward’s counterfactual theory (by eliminating
the appeal to interventions) so as to apply it to mathematical
explanation.
A number of fruitful conceptual intersections have been investigated
in the recent literature, such as explanation and beauty, explanation
and purity, explanation and depth, explanation and inter-theoretic
reduction, and explanation and style. It is not my intent here to
provide an encompassing overview of the literature on mathematical
beauty, purity of methods, understanding in mathematics, mathematical
style, and mathematical depth. We simply refer to one or two such
background studies and encourage the reader to explore the
bibliography of the studies referred to.
Interest in mathematical beauty, and especially the beauty of
mathematical proofs has received much emphasis of late (see Cellucci
2014, Raman-Sundström et al. 2016, Inglis and Aberdein 2015,
Thomas 2017). The most extensive studies connecting mathematical
beauty and explanation are Giaquinto 2016, Lange 2016, and Dutilh
Novaes, 2018. Giaquinto argues against what might be a prima facie
persuasive claim, namely that explanatory proofs and beautiful proofs
tend to be the same. He claims that there are reasons to doubt that
explanatory proofs tend to be beautiful and insufficient evidence for
establishing the converse implication. Lange also compares virtues of
mathematical proofs such as beauty and explanatoriness and concludes
that ‘the features of a proof that would contribute to its
explanatory power would also contribute to its beauty, but that these
two virtues are not the same; a beautiful proof need not be
explanatory.’ By contrast, Dutilh Novaes develops an account of
mathematical beauty in terms of explanatoriness within the conceptual
framework of a dialogical theory of proofs and exploiting the concept
of ‘functional beauty’. She claims that ‘when
mathematicians attribute aesthetic properties to proofs, they are by
and large (though not entirely) tracking the epistemic property of
explanatoriness.’
The notion of purity of method has long been of interest to
mathematicians and philosophers (for recent contributions see
Detlefsen and Arana 2011 and Arana and Mancosu 2012). Informally, the
notion can be explained s follows. Given a statement of a certain area
of mathematics, one would like a proof of the statement, if provable,
to make use of conceptual resources that are not ‘foreign’
to the content of the statement. For instance, given a statement of
elementary number theory one would like its proof to make use of
resources that belong to elementary number theory. Proofs of an
elementary number theoretic statements that appeal to complex analysis
or topological dynamics would seem to appeal to concepts that are
‘foreign’ to the subject matter. This is one way to draw
the pure/impure distinction in mathematics. The relation between
explanatoriness and purity has been emphasized in Skow 2015 and Lange
2014. Skow, using a proof of the Pythagorean theorem that relies on
physical principles, argues that there are explanations of
mathematical results that rely on physical principles and are thus not
pure. As mentioned above, using the case of Desargues’ theorem, Lange
claims that the proof of Desargues’ plane theorem that uses properties
of projective space is explanatory but impure. 
We have already seen when discussing Kitcher and Friedman that the
notion of understanding is tied to that of explanation. There has been
recent work on mathematical and scientific understanding (see, for
instance, Avigad 2008, de Regt and Dieks 2005, de Regt, Leonelli, and
Eigner 2013, de Regt 2017). In connection to mathematical explanation,
understanding has been discussed in Molinini 2011, Cellucci 2014,
Delariviére et al. 2017.
Mathematical depth was the subject of a special issue
of Philosophia Mathematica published in 2015. For connections
between mathematical depth and explanation in mathematics see Lange
2015c. 
The connection between inter-theoretic reduction and explanation is
familiar from philosophy of science. Rantala 1992 and D’Alessandro
2017 provide two contributions in the case of mathematics. In
particular, D’Alessandro claims that the standard reduction of
arithmetic to set theory is non-explanatory but does not exclude that
other reductions between mathematical theories can be.
Finally, theorists of style in mathematics and science have emphasized
the importance of explanatory arguments for characterizing style. See
Mancosu 2017 for an overview. 
The last two decades have witnessed a significant increase of
attention to mathematical explanation, both in science and
mathematics. This has led to novel joint work between philosophers of
science and philosophers of mathematics. While much has been achieved,
we need more detailed case studies in order to understand better the
variety of explanatory uses of mathematics in empirical contexts. But
already at this stage, the philosophical pay-offs are coming from at
least three different directions. 
First, we have a better understanding of the applicability of
mathematics to the world. Indeed, understanding the
‘unreasonable effectiveness’ of mathematics in discovering
and accounting for the laws of the physical world (Wigner 1967,
Steiner 1998 and 2005, Pincock 2012, Bangu 2012) can only be resolved
if we understand how mathematics helps in scientific
explanation. Second, the study of mathematical explanations of
scientific facts is extensively being used as a test for theories of
scientific explanation, in particular those that assume that
explanation in natural science is causal explanation. Third, while the
debate is still at a standstill, philosophical benefits have also
emerged in the metaphysical arena by improved exploitation of various
forms of the indispensability argument. Whether any such argument is
going to be successful remains to be seen but the discussion is
yielding philosophical benefits in forcing, for instance, the
nominalist to take a stand on how he can account for the
explanatoriness of mathematics in the empirical sciences. In addition,
mathematical explanation plays a role in theorizing about mathematical
coincidences (Lange 2010b, Baker 2009c), an interesting area of
metaphysical investigation that had already been developed in the
context of causal phenomena (see Owens 1992). One should also expect
future developments emerging from the interaction of the analysis of
grounding and mathematical explanation.  
Also in the case of mathematical explanation of mathematical facts, we
need to carefully analyze more case studies in order to get a better
grasp of the varieties of mathematical explanations. The philosophical
pay-offs of the work on mathematical explanation are coming from the
following areas. First, mathematical explanation are being used to
test models of scientific explanation.  Theories of scientific
explanations aim at capturing ‘scientific’ explanations in
any area of knowledge, not just explanations in the natural
sciences. If they cannot accommodate mathematical explanations, this
will show important limitations of the theories in question. On the
other hand, if no such theory will be able to encompass mathematical
explanations and explanations in natural science under a single model,
this might indicate important differences between science and
mathematics. Secondly, accounting for mathematical explanations of
scientific facts might be related in interesting ways to an account of
mathematical explanations of mathematical facts. Third,
‘explanatoriness’ is only one virtue among those that an
epistemology of mathematics that does not limit itself to traditional
debates about justifying axioms can fruitfully investigate. Indeed, it
is clear that ‘explanation’ is closely connected to other
notions such as ‘generality’,
‘visualizability’, ‘mathematical
understanding’, ‘purity of methods’,
‘conceptual fruitfulness’, ‘depth’ etc. The
epistemological analysis of these important notions informing
mathematical practice, and the connection among them, has only
recently been taken up in earnest (for recent collection in this
direction see the volumes Mancosu & others 2005 and Mancosu
2008a). In conclusion, let me also mention that the topic of
mathematical explanation has important connections to issues of
concern to historians of mathematics and mathematics education (see
Hanna, Jahnke, and Pulte 2010 for a recent volume).