While philosophical reflection on faith of the kind exemplified in
religious faith might ideally hope to yield an agreed definition in
terms of sufficient and necessary conditions that articulate the
nature of faith, the present discussion proceeds by identifying key
components that recur in different accounts of religious faith. It
also aims to identify a focal range of issues on which different
stances are taken by different accounts. There is a plurality of
existing philosophical understandings or models of faith of the
religious kind. This discussion therefore aims to set out
dialectically an organisation of this plurality, while also giving
indications of the reasons there may be for preferring particular
models over others. Since ‘religion’ itself may well be a
‘family resemblance’ universal, essentialism about faith
of the religious kind might be misplaced. Nevertheless, the concept of
faith as found in the Abrahamic, theist, religious traditions is
widely regarded as unified enough for an inquiry into its nature to
make sense, even if a successful real definition is too much to expect
(this kind of faith might conceivably be a conceptual primitive, for
example).
Note that some philosophers approach the target of religious faith by
first classifying and analysing ordinary language uses of the term
‘faith’ and locutions in which that term occurs. See, for
recent examples, Audi 2011 (Chapter 3, Section I), who identifies
seven different kinds of faith, and Howard-Snyder (2013b), who
attempts a general analysis of ‘propositional’
faith— i.e., faith that p is true, where p is a relevant
proposition. The present discussion, however, deals directly with the
target notion of the kind of faith exemplified in religious
faith, assuming the background of a working grasp of the notion
as deployed in religious forms of life, and specifically in those
belonging to the theist traditions. Insights from the analysis of
faith understood more broadly may, nevertheless, be important in
constructing models of faith of the religious kind, as will emerge
below in the discussion of religious faith as a kind of trust (Section
6).
The notion of religious faith as the possession of a whole people is
familiar, and arguably theologically primary in the theist traditions.
Philosophical accounts of theistic faith typically focus, however, on
what it is for an individual person to ‘have faith’ or be
‘a person of faith’. An initial broad distinction is
between thinking of faith just as a person’s state and
thinking of it as also involving a person’s act, action or
activity. Faith may be a state one is in, or comes to be in; it
may also essentially involve something one does. An adequate account
of faith, perhaps, needs to encompass both. In the Christian context
faith is understood both as a gift of God and also as requiring a
human response of assent and trust, so that their faith is something
with respect to which people are both receptive and active.
There is, however, some tension in understanding faith both as a gift
to be received and as essentially involving a venture to be willed and
enacted. A philosophical account of faith may be expected to
illuminate this apparent paradox. One principle for classifying models
of faith is according to the extent to which they recognise an active
component in faith itself, and the way they identify that active
component and its relation to faith’s other components. It is helpful
to consider the components of faith (variously recognised and
emphasised in different models of faith) as falling into three broad
categories: the affective, the cognitive and the
practical. There are also evaluative components in
faith—these may appear as implicated in the affective and/or the
cognitive components, according to one’s preferred meta-theory of
value.
One component of faith is a certain kind of affective psychological
state—namely, a state of feeling confident and trusting. Some
philosophers hold that faith is to be identified simply with such a
state: see, for example, Clegg (1979, 229) who suggests that this may
have been Wittgenstein’s understanding. Faith in this sense—as
one’s overall ‘default’ attitude on life—provides a
valuable foundation for flourishing: its loss is recognised as the
psychic calamity of ‘losing one’s faith’. But if
foundational existential confidence is to feature in a model of faith
of the kind exemplified by theists, more needs to be added about the
kind of confidence involved. Theistic faith is essentially faith
in God. In general, faith of the kind exemplified by theistic
faith must have some intentional object. It may thus be
argued that an adequate model of this kind of faith cannot reduce to
something purely affective: some broadly cognitive
component is also required.
What kind of cognitive component belongs to faith, then? One model
identifies faith as knowledge of specific truths, revealed by
God. Such a model has received prominent recent defence in the work of
Alvin Plantinga, who proposes a model of faith which he takes to
follow in the tradition of the reformers, principally John Calvin (see
Plantinga 2000, 168-86). Calvin defines faith thus: ‘a firm and
certain knowledge of God’s benevolence towards us, founded upon the
truth of the freely given promise in Christ, both revealed to our
minds and sealed upon our hearts through the Holy Spirit’ (John
Calvin, Institutes III, ii, 7, 551, quoted by Plantinga
(2000, 244)).
Appeal to a special cognitive faculty
‘Reformed’ epistemologists have appealed to an externalist
epistemology in order to maintain that theistic belief may be
justified even though its truth is no more than basically
evident to the believer—that is, its truth is not rationally
inferable from other, more basic, beliefs, but is found to be
immediately evident in the believer’s experience (see Plantinga and
Wolterstorff 1983, Alston 1991, Plantinga 2000). On Plantinga’s
version, theistic beliefs count as knowledge because they are produced
by the operation of a special cognitive faculty whose functional
design fits it for the purpose of generating true beliefs about God.
Plantinga calls this the sensus divinitatis, using a term of
Calvin’s. (For discussion of the extent to which Plantinga’s use
of this term conforms to Calvin’s own usage see Jeffreys 1997
and Helm 1998.) This quasi-perceptual faculty meets functional
criteria as a mechanism that confers ‘warrant’ (where
warrant is whatever must be added to true belief to yield knowledge)
and, granted theism’s truth, it yields knowledge because God designs
it just for that purpose. In defence of specifically Christian belief,
Plantinga argues that the same warrant-conferring status belongs to
the operation of the Holy Spirit in making the great truths of the
Gospel directly known to the believer.
The welcome certainty of faith
This appeal to a God-given ‘higher’ cognitive faculty is
found (in the early 12th Century) in al-Ghazâlî’s
Deliverance from Error, where it provides the key to the
‘Sufi’ resolution of his religious crisis and his
sceptical doubts about the deliverances of sense perception and
unassisted human reason. Faith is thus understood as a kind of
knowledge attended by a certainty that excludes doubt. But faith will
not be exclusively cognitive, if, as in Calvin’s definition,
faith-knowledge is not only ‘revealed to our minds’ but
also ‘sealed upon our hearts’. For, on this model faith
will also have an affective/evaluative component that includes a
welcoming of the knowledge received.
Practical aspects of faith on the‘special knowledge’
model
This model of faith as special knowledge, certain and welcome,
exhibits faith as essentially something to be received. Nevertheless,
the model may admit a practical component, since an active response is
required for reception of the divine gift. Such a practical component
is implied by the real possibility that faith may be resisted: indeed,
Christians may hold that in our sinful state we will inevitably offer
a resistance to faith that may be overcome only by God’s grace. It is,
however, a further step for persons of faith to put their revealed
knowledge into practice by trusting their lives to God and seeking to
obey his will. On this ‘special knowledge’ model of faith,
however, this activity counts as ‘acting out’ one’s faith
rather than as a part of faith itself. Persons of faith thus act
‘in’, ‘through’ or ‘by’ faith:
but, on this model, their faith itself is the welcomed revealed
knowledge on which they act.
Faith seems to involve some kind of venture, even if talk of
a ‘leap of faith’ may not be wholly apt. It is thus widely
held that faith goes beyond what is ordinarily reasonable, in
the sense that it involves accepting what cannot be established as
true through the proper exercise of our naturally endowed human
cognitive faculties—and this may be held to be an essential
feature of faith. As Kant famously reports, in the Preface to the
Second Edition of his Critique of Pure Reason: ‘I have
… found it necessary to deny knowledge, in order to
make room for faith’ (Kant 1787/1933, 29). As well,
however, theist philosophers typically desire to show that faith is
not ‘contrary to reason’. On models of faith that take a
cognitive component as central, and construe faith’s object as
propositional, reasonable faith arguably needs to conform to an
evidentialist principle, generally thought essential to
rationality, requiring belief commitments to accord with the extent of
the support for their truth given by one’s total available evidence.
Faith’s venturesomeness is thus in tension with its reasonableness,
and models of faith differ in the way they negotiate this tension by
taking a particular stance on ‘faith and reason’. Another
classificatory principle, then, is in terms of the type of
epistemology of faith each particular model generates.
The epistemology of the ‘special knowledge’
model
The ‘special knowledge’ model of faith generates an
epistemology under which, although ordinary cognitive faculties and
sources of evidence do not yield certain knowledge of theistic truths,
there is a ‘higher’ cognitive faculty that neatly makes up
the deficit. This model seems thus to secure the rationality of faith:
if faith consists in beliefs that have the status of knowledge, surely
faith cannot fail to be rational. And, once the deliverances of the
special cognitive faculty are included amongst the believer’s basic
experiential evidence, the evidential requirement on reasonable belief
is surely satisfied. (Note that Plantinga originally expressed his
defence of ‘properly basic’ theistic belief in terms of
the rationality of believing in God ‘without any evidence or
argument at all’ (Plantinga 1983, 17). He does respect the
evidential requirement, however, holding that this requirement may be
fully met through what is basically, non-inferentially, evident in the
believer’s experience. Hence Plantinga’s insistence that
his Reformed epistemology is not fideistic (Plantinga 2000, 263).)
Reflective faith and the question of entitlement
The above considerations may aspire to win the high ground in the
‘faith and reason’ debate for the ‘special
knowledge’ model. It is not clear, however, that this aspiration
can finally be met. From the perspective of reflective persons of
faith (or would-be faith), the question of entitlement
arises: are they rationally, epistemically—even,
morally—entitled to adopt or continue in their faith? This
question will be existentially important, since faith will not count
as of the kind exemplified by religious faith unless its commitments
make a significant difference to how one lives one’s life. Reflective
believers who are aware of the many options for faith, and the
possibility of misguided and even harmful faith-commitments, will wish
to be satisfied that they are justified in their faith. The
theist traditions hold a deep fear of idolatry—of giving one’s
‘ultimate concern’ (Tillich 1957/2001) to an object
unworthy of it. The desire to be assured of entitlement to faith is
thus not merely externally imposed by commitment to philosophical
critical values: it is a demand internal to the integrity of theistic
faith itself. Arguably, believers must even take seriously the
possibility that the God they have been worshipping is not, after all,
the true God (Johnston 2009). But, for this concern to be met, there
will need to be conditions sufficient for justified faith that are
‘internalist’—that is, conditions whose obtaining
is, at least indirectly if not directly, accessible to believers
themselves. Those conditions are widely assumed to include an
evidentialist requirement that faith is justified only if the truth of
its cognitive content is adequately supported by the available
evidence.
The ‘knowledge’ model as leaving the question of
entitlement unanswered
It may be argued, however, that, if the ‘special
knowledge’ model is correct, those who seek to meet an
evidentialist requirement will be unable to satisfy themselves of
their entitlement to their faith. Theistic truths may be directly
revealed, and experienced as immediately evident, yet, on reflection,
one may doubt whether such experiences are genuinely revelatory since
competing ‘naturalist’ interpretations of those
experiences seem available. It may be true, as Plantinga’s Reformed
epistemology maintains, that if God exists such experiences
meet externalist criteria for conveying knowledge, even though the
truth of the beliefs concerned remains open to reflective
‘internalist’ doubt. On an externalist account, that is,
one might lack independent evidence sufficient to confirm that one has
knowledge that God exists while in fact possessing that very
knowledge. And one might thus refute an objector who claims that
without adequate evidence one cannot genuinely know. But this
consideration is still insufficient to secure entitlement to theistic
faith—if, as may be argued, that entitlement requires that
one has evidence adequate to justify commitment to the truth
that God exists. For, one has such evidence only conditionally on
God’s existence—but it is precisely entitlement to believe
that God exists that is at issue (Kenny 1992, 71; Bishop and Aijaz
2004). For a wider discussion of the possibility of religious
knowledge that, inter alia, endorses the present point, see
Zagzebski 2010.
If faith is not ‘a firm and certain knowledge’ of
theistic truths, then a model of faith as having a propositional
object may be retained by identifying faith with a certain kind of
belief. The relevant kind will be belief with theological
content—that God exists, is benevolent towards us, has a plan of
salvation, etc.—where this belief is also held with sufficient
firmness and conviction. Richard Swinburne labels this the
‘Thomist view’ of faith, and expresses it thus: ‘The
person of religious faith is the person who has the theoretical
conviction that there is a God.’ (Swinburne 2005, 138).
(Aquinas’s own understanding of faith is more complex than this
formulation suggests, however, as will be noted shortly.)
The rationality of faith on this model will rest on the rationality of
the firmly held theological beliefs in which it consists. As Swinburne
notes, if such beliefs are founded on evidence that renders their
truth sufficiently more probable than not, then the beliefs concerned
may amount to knowledge on a contemporary ‘justified true
belief’ fallibilist epistemology, even though they fall short of
knowledge on Aquinas’s own criteria, which require that what is known
be ‘seen’ (i.e., fully and directly comprehended)
(Summa Theologiae 2a2ae 1, 4 & 5 (O’Brien 1974, 27)). In
any case, the reasonableness of faith on this model of faith as belief
depends on the beliefs concerned being adequately evidentially
justified.
Some argue that the truth of theism is ‘evidentially
ambiguous’—that is, that our total available evidence is
equally viably interpreted from both a theist and a naturalist/atheist
perspective (Hick 1966 and 1989; Davis 1978; Penelhum 1995; McKim
2001). This thesis of evidential ambiguity may be supported as the
best explanation of the diversity of belief on religious matters,
and/or of the persistence of the debate about theism, with
philosophers of equal acumen and integrity engaged on either side. Or
the ambiguity may be considered systematic—for example, on the
grounds that both natural theological and natural atheological
arguments fail because they are deeply circular, resting on implicit
assumptions acceptable only to those already thinking within the
relevant perspective. (In relation to Swinburne’s Bayesian natural
theology, in particular, this objection surfaces in criticism of
assumptions about how to set the prior probabilities implicated in
calculations of, for example, theism’s probability on the evidence of
the ‘fine-tuning’ of the Universe’s basic physical
constants, or of the probability, on all our evidence, of the truth of
the Resurrection.) If the ambiguity thesis is correct,
then—assuming evidentialism—firmly held theistic belief
will fail to be reasonable.
On this model of faith as belief, all that characterises faith apart
from its theological content is the firmness or conviction with which
faith-propositions are held true. Firm belief in the truth of a
scientific proposition, for example, fails to count as faith
only through lacking the right kind of content. This model
therefore shares with the ‘special knowledge’ model in
taking its theological content as essential to what makes theistic
faith faith, and so rejects the suggestion that faith of the
same sort as found in the theist religious traditions might also be
found elsewhere.
Furthermore, in taking faith to consist in belief that theological
propositions are true, this model invites the assumption that
theological convictions belong in the same category of factual claims
as scientific theoretical hypotheses with which they accordingly
compete. That assumption will lead those who think that theological
claims are not reasonably accepted on the evidence to regard
faith as worthless and intellectually dishonourable—at best,
‘a degenerating research programme’ (Lakatos 1970). (On
this negative assessment of faith’s evidential support, persons of
faith come perilously close to the schoolboy’s definition mentioned by
William James: ‘Faith is when you believe something that you
know ain’t true’ (James 1896/1956, 29). Or, if believers readily
abandon theological explanations whenever competing scientific ones
succeed, their God gets reduced to ‘the God of the gaps’.)
These misgivings about the model of faith as firmly held factual
theological belief dissolve, of course, if success attends the project
of showing that particular theological claims count as factual
hypotheses well supported by the total available evidence. Those who
doubt that this condition is or can be met may, however, look towards
a model of faith that understands faith’s cognitive content as playing
some other role than that of an explanatory hypothesis of the same
kind as a scientific explanatory hypothesis.
Aquinas’s account of faith
Though firmly held theological belief is central to it, Aquinas’s
understanding of faith is more complicated and nuanced than the view
that faith is ‘the theoretical conviction that God
exists’. Aquinas holds that faith is ‘midway between
knowledge and opinion’ (Summa Theologiae 2a2ae 1, 2
(O’Brien 1974, 11)). Faith resembles knowledge, Aquinas thinks, in so
far as faith carries conviction. But that conviction is not well
described as ‘theoretical’, if that description suggests
that faith has a solely propositional object. For Aquinas,
faith denotes the believer’s fundamental orientation towards the
divine. So ‘from the perspective of the reality believed
in’, Aquinas says, ‘the object of faith is something
non-composite’ (non-propositional)—namely God
himself. Nevertheless, grasping the truth of propositions is
essential to faith, because ‘from the perspective of the one
believing … the object of faith is something composite in
the form of a proposition’ (Summa Theologiae, 2a2ae, 1,
2 (O’Brien 1974, 11 & 13), my emphases).
A further problem with describing as Thomist a model of faith simply
as firm belief in the truth of theological propositions is that
Aquinas takes as central an act of ‘inner assent’
(Summa Theologiae, 2a2ae, 2, 1 (O’Brien 1974, 59–65)).
This is problematic because, (i) in its dominant contemporary
technical usage belief is taken to be a mental (intentional)
state—a propositional attitude, namely, the attitude
towards the relevant proposition that it is true; (ii) belief in this
contemporary sense is widely agreed not to be under volitional
control—not directly, anyway; yet (iii) Aquinas holds that the
assent given in faith is under the control of the will. Aquinas need
not, however, be construed as accepting ‘believing at
will’, provided we allow that inner assent may be an act without
being an intentional action. Assent may be construed as something that
has to be elicited yet terminates a process that is subject to the
will—a process of inquiry, deliberation or pondering that does
involve mental actions, or, in the case of faith, a process of divine
grace that can proceed only if it is not blocked by the will.
Most importantly, however, Aquinas says that assent is given to the
propositional articles of faith because their truth is revealed by
God, and on the authority of the putative source of this
revelation. Terence Penelhum puts it like this: ‘Thomas tells us
that although what one assents to in faith includes many items not
ostensibly about God himself, one assents to them, in faith, because
they are revealed by God … It is because they come from him and
because they lead to him that the will disposes the intellect to
accept them’ (Penelhum 1989, 122: see Summa Theologiae,
2a2ae, 1, 1 & 2 (O’Brien 1974, 5–15)). So Aquinas’s model of
faith is of believing (assenting to) propositional truth-claims on
the basis of testimony carrying divine authority. John Locke
follows the same model: ‘Faith … is the assent to any
proposition … upon the credit of the proposer, as coming from
God, in some extraordinary way of communication’ (Locke
1698/1924, 355; compare also Alston 1996, 15).
The unanswered question of entitlement—again
Faith as assent to truths on the basis of an authoritative source of
divine revelation is possible, though, only for those who already
believe that God exists and is revealed through the relevant
sources. Might such faith, then, have to rest on a prior
faith—faith that God exists and that this is his
messenger or vehicle of communication? Those foundational claims, it
might be maintained, are held true on the grounds of adequately
supporting evidence, such as putatively provided by arguments of
natural theology and the claimed evidence for miraculous endorsement
of a prophet’s authority. Faith might then have a purely rational
foundation. But this could hardly be so for every person of
faith, since not everyone who believes will have access to the
relevant evidence or be able to assess it properly. Besides, and more
importantly, although Aquinas allows that rational assessment of the
available evidence may lead a person to faith, he does not think that
such an assessment could ever elicit assent itself—only
demonstration could achieve that and so high a level of proof is not
here available (see O’Brien, 1974, footnote 2b, 58–9). Aquinas’s
view is thus that all believers stand in need of God’s grace:
‘the assent of faith, which is its principal act … has as
its cause God, moving us inwardly through grace’ ((Summa
Theologiae, 2a2ae 6, 1 (O’Brien 1974, 167)). It follows, then,
that, on Aquinas’s view, believing that God exists and is revealed in
specific ways is itself a matter of faith, and not a purely
rationally evidentially secured prolegomenon to it.
Aquinas’s model of faith thus shares with the ‘special
knowledge’ model the problem that it leaves unanswered the
reflective believer’s concern about entitlement. Attempting to settle
that concern by meeting the evidential requirement leads to
circularity: believers are to accept theological truths on divine
authority, yet the truth that there is such an
authority (historically mediated as the relevant tradition
maintains) is amongst those very truths that are to be accepted on
divine authority—indeed, it is the crucial one. As Descartes
puts it in the Dedication to his Meditations, ‘although
it is absolutely true that we must believe there is a God, because we
are so taught in the Holy Scriptures, and, on the other hand, that we
must believe the Holy Scriptures because they come from God …,
we nevertheless could not place this argument before infidels, who
might accuse us of reasoning in a circle’ (Haldane and Ross
1967, 133). Thus, although they differ on the question whether the
firm beliefs of faith count as knowledge, both Aquinas and Calvin
understand faith as essentially involving accepting the truth of
propositions as revealed through willingly receiving God’s
gracious gift of that very revelation. The question remains how
accepting this gift could be epistemically rational. The externalist
account of how Christian beliefs may have epistemic worth proposed in
Plantinga’s model of faith (named ‘the A/C’ model
because its sources are supposedly found in Aquinas as well as Calvin)
offers some help with the required explanation, but (as noted in the
final paragraph of Section 4 above) may arguably not by itself be
sufficient. 
Revelation—and its philosophical critique
The justifiability of belief that God exists is a typically focal
issue in the Philosophy of Religion. Yet the theist traditions always
make a foundational claim about an authoritative source, or sources,
of revealed truth. What is salient is not just believing that God
exists; it is believing that God exists and is revealed thus
and so (in great historical acts, in prophets, in scriptures, in
wisdom handed down, etc.). The reasonableness of theism is therefore
as much a matter of the reasonableness of an epistemology of
revelation as it is of a metaphysics of perfect being. The question of
how God may be expected to make himself known has gained prominence
through recent discussion of the argument for atheism from
‘divine hiddenness’ (Schellenberg 1993; Howard-Snyder and
Moser 2002). That argument holds that a loving God would make his
existence clear to the non-resistant—but this claim is open to
question. Perhaps God provides only ‘secret’ evidence of
his existence, purposely overturning the expectations of our
‘cognitive idolatry’ in order to transform our egocentric
self-reliance (Moser 2008); besides, there may be significant
constraints logically inherent in the very possibility of unambiguous
divine revelation to finite minds (King 2008).
Similarly, accounts of theistic faith will be open to critique when
they make assumptions about the mechanisms of revelation. In
particular, the model of faith as assent to propositions as revealed
holds that, since God’s grace is required for that assent, when grace
is effective the whole ‘package deal’ of propositional
revealed truth is accepted. This yields the notion of
‘the Faith’, as the body of theological truths to
be accepted by ‘the faithful’, and it becomes a sign of
resistance to divine grace to ‘pick and choose’ only some
truths, as heretics do (Greek: hairesis, choice; see
Summa Theologiae 2a2ae 5, 3 (O’Brien 1974, 157–61)).
For heresy to be judged, however, some human authority must assume it
possesses the full doctrinal revelation, with God’s grace operating
without resistance in its own case. Whether that assumption can ever
be sufficiently well founded to justify condemning and purging others
is an important question, whose neglect may be seriously harmful, as
we are reminded by the fact that the phrase for ‘act of
faith’ in Portuguese—auto-da-fé—came
to mean the public burning of a heretic.
But the deeper assumption made by this model of faith as belief (as,
too, by the ‘special knowledge’ model) is that God’s
self-revelation is primarily the revelation of the truth of
propositions articulated in human language (compare Swinburne 1992).
Alternative understandings of revelation are available, however. In
particular, it may be held that it is primarily the divine
presence itself that is revealed—the reality, not merely a
representation of it. Propositional articulations of what is revealed
may still be essential, but they need to be accepted as at a remove
from the object of revelation itself, and therefore as limited. The
development of propositional articulations expressing the nature and
will of the self-revealing God—the doctrines of ‘the
Faith’—will, of course, be understood as a process under
providential grace. It is often assumed that that process can achieve
‘closure’ in a completed set of infallibly known creedal
propositions. But this assumption about how divine inspiration
operates may be contested, both on the theological grounds that it
reflects the all-too-human desire to gain control over God’s
self-revelation (to ‘pin God down once and for all’), and
on the wider epistemological grounds that any attempt to grasp
independent reality in human language will be in principle fallible
and subject to revision in the light of future experience.
Not all models of faith however, identify it as primarily a matter of
knowing or believing a proposition or a set of them. What is most
central to theistic faith may seem better expressed as believing
in God, rather than as believing that God exists.
The Christian creeds begin ‘Credo in unum Deum
…’—and it is arguable that in this context
‘belief in’ is neither merely an idiomatic variant on, nor
reducible to, ‘belief that’ (Price 1965). It may thus be
held that theists’ acceptance of propositional truths as divinely
revealed rests on believing in God—and it is this
‘believing in’, or ‘having faith in’, which
is, fundamentally, the nature of faith. Noting that, while faith is
held to be a virtue, believing as such is not, Wilfred Cantwell Smith
argues that ‘faith is not belief’, ‘but something of
a quite different order’ (Smith 1979, 128), requiring
‘assent’ ‘in the dynamic and personal sense of
rallying to [what one takes to be the truth] with delight and
engagement’ (142). Our considerations now shift, then, from
‘propositional’-attitude-focussed models of faith to
‘operational’ models, to borrow terminology from
J.L.Schellenberg (2005, 126).
What does ‘operational’ ‘faith in’
God amount to? What is it to believe in, or have faith in, God beyond,
or even independently of, believing that God exists? To have faith in
God is to make a practical commitment—the kind involved
in trusting God, or, trusting in God. (The root
meaning of the Greek pistis, ‘faith’, is
‘trust’.) This, then, is a fiducial model
—a model of faith as trust, understood not simply as an
affective state of confidence, but as an action. On a
fiducial model, faith’s active, practical, component takes central
place, though a cognitive component may be presupposed by it. The
fiducial model is widely identified as characteristically Protestant.
Swinburne, for example, calls it the ‘Lutheran’ model, and
defines it thus: ‘the person of faith does not merely believe
that there is a God (and believe certain propositions about
him)—he trusts Him and commits himself to Him’ (2005,
142). Yet, as noted earlier, Aquinas too takes the ultimate object of
faith to be God, ‘the first reality’, and, furthermore,
understands ‘formed’ faith as trusting commitment to God,
motivated by, and directed towards, love of God as one’s true end (see
Summa Theologiae 2a2ae, 4, 3; O’Brien 1974, 123–7). It
is true that Aquinas allows that the devils have faith in a certain
sense—but this ‘faith’ amounts only to their belief
that what the Church teaches is the truth, arrived at not by grace but
‘forced from them’ reluctantly by ‘the acumen of
their natural intelligence’ (Summa Theologiae 2a2ae, 5,
2; O’Brien 1974, 155 & 157). Aquinas’s account of
‘saving’ faith is thus also a fiducial model.
The venture of trust
As noted at the outset, there is a usage of ‘faith’ for
which ‘having/placing faith in’ is (near enough)
synonymous with ‘trusting’ or ‘trusting in’.
If, moreover, faith of the religious kind is itself a type of trust,
then we may expect our understanding of religious faith to profit from
an analysis of trust in general. It is therefore worth considering
what follows about the nature of faith of the sort exemplified in
theistic faith from holding it to be a kind of trust.
Conceptually fundamental to trust is the notion of a person (or
persons)—the truster—trusting in some agent or
agency—the trustee—for some (assumedly)
favourable outcome (though what the trustee is trusted for is often
only implicit in the context). Trust involves a venture; so
too—it is widely agreed—does faith. So, if faith is trust,
the venture of faith might be presumed to be the type of venture
implicated in trust. A venture is an action that places the agent and
outcomes of concern to the agent significantly beyond the agent’s own
control. Trust implies venture. When we trust we commit ourselves to
another’s control, accepting—and, when necessary, co-operating
as ‘patient’—with the decisions of the trustee.
Venturing in trust is usually assumed to be essentially
risky, making oneself vulnerable to adverse outcomes or betrayal.
(Swinburne makes the point this way: ‘To trust someone is to act
on the assumption that she will do for you what she knows that you
want or need, when the evidence gives some reason for supposing that
she may not and where there will be bad consequences if the assumption
is false’ (2005, 143). Annette Baier makes no requirement for
evidence that the trustee may prove untrustworthy, but nevertheless
takes trust to involve ‘accepted vulnerability to another’s
possible but not expected ill will (or lack of good will)
toward one’ (Baier 1986, 235, my emphasis).) Accordingly, it
seems sensible to hold that one should trust only with good reason.
But if, as is plausible, good reason to trust requires sufficient
evidence of the trustee’s trustworthiness, reasonable trust appears
both to have its venturesomeness diminished and, at the same time, to
become more difficult to achieve than we normally suppose. For we
often lack adequate—or even, any—evidence of a trustee’s
trustworthiness in advance of our venture, yet in many such cases we
suppose that our trust is reasonable. But, if adequate evidence of
trustworthiness is not required for reasonable trust, how is
reasonable trust different from ‘blind’ trust?
This problem might be avoided by arguing that the question of when one
may rationally trust another may be resolved by a decision theoretic
calculation, factoring in the extent to which one’s evidence supports
the potential trustee’s trustworthiness and the utilities or
disutilities of the possible outcomes. It may thus on occasion be
practically rational to trust a person whose likelihood of
trustworthiness is low, if a sufficiently valuable outcome may be
achieved only by so doing. (An unlikely rescuer may rationally be
trusted if the only one available.) But this approach misses something
important in social intercourse, where we generally count it a virtue
to be ready to trust others without such prior calculation. Such
openness may still be broadly rational, however, given our
long shared experience that willingness to trust others usually does
elicit trustworthy behaviour: accordingly, though I may have little or
no direct evidence that this particular fellow citizen of
mine will prove trustworthy if I turn to her in a sudden predicament,
I may have good evidence for the general reliability of
others in my community.
Nevertheless, it can sometimes be reasonable to act decisively on the
assumption that people will be worthy of trust in quite particular
respects without having evidence for their trustworthiness sufficient
to justify such decisiveness (see, for example, Adams 1987). And this
seems to be because, in such cases, (i) what has to be decided is
all or nothing—whether to trust or
not—so that tentatively committing oneself in practice to
the trustworthiness of the trustee only to the partial degree
supported by one’s evidence is not a separate option; and (ii) at the
point where the decision has to be made it is impossible that
there should be evidence that justifies more than modest partial
belief—impossible that evidence should justify decisive
commitment to the trustee’s trustworthiness. Such cases provide a
particularly interesting class of exceptions to the general
evidentialist requirement to commit in practice to the truth of a
proposition only as justified by one’s evidence. They are interesting
because they do not involve non-epistemic considerations overriding
epistemic ones, as is the case with some readily recognisable types of
exception to trust-evidentialism—for example, cases where being
in an established relationship with someone obliges one to trust
contrary to the weight of one’s evidence; or cases of
‘educative’ or ‘therapeutic’ trust, where
others are trusted in order to develop or restore their
trustworthiness. In the target cases, the epistemic concern to grasp
truth and avoid falsehood is not overridden: they are cases
where one may benefit from acting on the truth that a person is
trustworthy only if one first commits oneself to the person’s
trustworthiness beyond the possible support of
evidence—though once the venture is made conclusive evidence of
trustworthiness may happily soon accumulate.
On a model that takes religious faith to consist fundamentally in an
act of trust, the analogy with the venture of interpersonal trust is
suggestive. When one person trusts another there seems typically to be
both a doxastic and a fiducial aspect—there is the
person’s belief as to the other’s trustworthiness and also
an active commitment or ‘entrusting’ to the other. Paul
Helm proposes that religious faith similarly has importantly distinct
doxastic and fiducial aspects: in addition to belief about God’s
existence and trustworthiness for salvation held with a degree of
strength proportional to the believer’s evidence, persons of
faith must also entrust themselves to the one on whom they rely (Helm
2000).
Yet there are also significant differences between the trusting
involved in theistic faith and that involved in interpersonal trust.
For one thing, venturing in trust would seem not to carry real risk if
God really is the trustee. ‘A mother’s tender care’
may cease ‘toward the child she bare’:
she may be forgetful, ‘yet will I remember
thee, for mine is an unchanging love’, as the William Cowper
hymn has the Lord declare (see Isaiah 49:15). Given the existence of
the God of unchanging love, one trusts in ultimately perfect safety.
But the venture of actually entrusting oneself to God seems to begin
with the challenge of being able to accept that, indeed, there is such
a God. While some affirm that many people have sufficient evidence to
justify this claim, others, as already noted, hold that everyone has
to confront the evidential ambiguity of foundational theistic claims.
For those who think that God’s existence as the one who saves
cannot be settled intellectually on the basis of the available
evidence, the venture involved in trusting in God (if such there be)
may seem to include a doxastic venture: the one who trusts
already ventures, somehow beyond or independently of the available
evidence, in his or her very believing that God exists and
may be relied on for salvation. Trusting in God seems to
presuppose, in other words, taking it on trust that God
exists. But, if so, the question whether, and under what conditions,
one may be entitled to such an evidence-transcending venture becomes
pressing.
Theological non-realism
One way to relieve this pressure is to offer a non-realist
analysis of theological claims. Trusting God will then not entail any
commitment to reality’s being a certain way. Rather, on
arguably the most sophisticated kind of non-realist view, theological
beliefs arise because living ‘trustingly’ comes to be
expressed and reinforced through a culturally constructed fiction
about God and his great saving acts. This existential confidence may
then be described, using the language of the fiction, as
‘trusting God’ (Cupitt 1980, Geering 1994). On such a
non-realist account, the model of faith as trust brackets the
cognitive component of faith, and risks becoming, in effect, a model
of faith as purely a certain kind of affective state. But, in any
case, non-realist models will be rejected by those who take faith to
have a cognitive component that functions as a grasping—or
would-be grasping—of how things really are.
Defending doxastic venture by analogy with interpersonal
trust?
Even if faith does involve (under realist assumptions) a venture in
belief itself, the justifiability of such a venture might yet be
thought defensible by analogy with interpersonal situations where it
is justifiable decisively to trust another beyond one’s evidence.
Reflecting on that proposal discloses further points of disanalogy,
however. In cases of interpersonal trust a venture is often needed in
initially taking the trustee to be trustworthy, but evidence
will inevitably later emerge which will either confirm or disconfirm
the truth of that claim—and trust may, and rationally should, be
withdrawn if the news is bad. Furthermore, interpersonal trust does
not require actually believing that the trustee is worthy of
trust, only that one decisively takes this to be true (i.e., acts on
the assumption of its truth) when one comes to act. People of theistic
faith, however, typically do believe that God exists and may
be trusted for salvation, and, if—as we are here
assuming—acting on this belief ventures beyond evidential
support, then it is a venture that persists and is not confined to
initial commitment only. Psychologically, no doubt, continuing to
journey in theistic faith may reinforce one’s commitment. These
reinforcing experiences, which often involve faith renewed in the face
of apparent failures of divine love, do not, however, possess
the uncontroversial status of evidence that independently and
inter-subjectively confirms the initial venture.
Doxastic venture without doxastic voluntarism
Many dismiss the idea that one may venture in one’s very believing
that God exists as committing a category error: ventures are
voluntary, but propositional belief is not directly under voluntary
control. Trusting God, however, entails practical commitment to
the truth of theological faith-propositions—and commitment
to the truth of a proposition in one’s practical reasoning may
be under direct voluntary control.
It is one thing to be in the mental state of holding that the
proposition that p is true; it is another to take it to be true
that p in one’s practical reasoning (although these typically
go together, since to hold that p is true is to be
disposed to take it to be true that p in practical
reasoning whenever the question whether p becomes salient).
Practical commitment to a faith-proposition’s truth therefore
could be a venture: there is no category error in allowing
this possibility. Doxastic venturing —venturing in
believing— is thus not a matter of willing oneself to believe
without adequate evidential support; rather it is a matter of taking
an already held belief to be true in one’s practical
reasoning even though (as one may oneself recognise) its truth lacks
such support.
The psychological possibility of doxastic venture
Some philosophers have argued, however, that one cannot (in full
reflective awareness, anyway) believe that p while accepting
that one has insufficient evidence for p’s truth (Adler 2002).
The counterclaim that this is possible is defended by William James,
in his controversial 1896 lecture, ‘The Will to Believe’
(James 1896/1956). James agrees that belief cannot be directly willed
and must be otherwise causally evoked (he later came to wish that he
has used ‘The Right to Believe’ as his lecture’s title).
James observes, however, that many beliefs have causes that do not
constitute or imply an evidential grounding of their truth. James
labels such causes ‘passional’—again, a potentially
misleading term, since its intended referents include much more than
emotional causes of belief. In particular, beliefs may be caused by
‘the circumpressure of one’s caste or set’, of which one’s
inherited religious tradition is a paradigm case (James 1896/1956, 9).
James is thus able to explain the psychological possibility of
doxastic venture: one already has a ‘passionally’ caused
belief, which one then takes to be true in practical reasoning despite
its lack of adequate evidential grounding (compare Creel 1994, who
similarly describes ‘faith’ as a ‘non-evidential
doxastic passion’).
Note that a doxastic venture model of theistic faith reconciles faith
as gift with faith’s active components: the action is taking a
faith-proposition to be true in practical reasoning; the gift provides
the motivational resources for so doing, namely a firm belief in the
truth of the faith-proposition, despite its lack of adequate
evidential support. (In the next section, the possibility is
considered that the gift of these motivational resources might not
amount to actual belief.) It is also worth noting that those who find
the focus on the individual something of a deficiency in analytical
accounts of faith (Eklund 2015) may perceive in James’s account
some acknowledgment of the social aspect of faith. Arguably, the
standard ‘passional’ or ‘non-evidential’ cause
of religious belief is cultural immersion within an historical
faith-tradition. The motivational resources for faith-commitment may
thus be an essentially social possession.
Examples of doxastic venture models
On the doxastic venture model, faith involves full practical
commitment to a faith’s proposition’s truth, despite the recognition
that this is not ‘objectively’ justified on the evidence.
Kierkegaard’s Concluding Unscientific Postcript definition of
faith as ‘an objective uncertainty held fast in an appropriation
process of the most passionate inwardness’ (Kierkegaard
1846/1968, 180) is an example of a doxastic venture model. So too is
Paul Tillich’s account of faith as ‘the state of being
ultimately concerned’, since the claim of the object of one’s
ultimate concern to ‘promise total fulfilment even if all other
claims have to be subjected to it or rejected in its name’
cannot in principle be established on the basis of the evidence.
(Tillich, 1957/2001, 1 and 21).
Aquinas’s model of faith, though widely thought of as conforming to an
evidential requirement on belief, may arguably be open to
interpretation as a doxastic venture model. As noted in Section 5,
Aquinas holds that the available evidence, though it supports the
truth of foundational faith-propositions, does not provide what
Aquinas counts as sufficient (i.e., demonstrative) support to justify
inner assent (in addition to references to the Summa
Theologiae given previously, see 2a2ae. 2, 1 (O’Brien 1974, 63);
and compare also Penelhum 1989, 120). Now, whether practical
commitment to the truth of a given faith-proposition does or does not
venture beyond adequate evidential support will be relative to
assumptions about (a) where the level of evidential support required
for ‘adequacy’ should be set, and (b) just how firm and
decisive propositional faith-commitment needs to be. On some such
assumptions, for example those made by Bayesians, the support provided
by the evidence Aquinas adduces—or, by a suitable contemporary
upgrading of that evidence, such as that provided in the works of
Richard Swinburne—may be considered enough to make reasonable a
sufficiently high degree of belief (or credence) in the truth of
theistic faith-propositions so that believers need not venture beyond
the support of their evidence. Interpreting Aquinas’s model of faith
as conforming to evidentialism may thus be viable. Nevertheless,
Aquinas’s own assumptions on these matters may leave him closer to
Kierkegaard and Tillich than is commonly thought (consider Summa
Theologiae 2a2ae 4, 1 and, once again, 2a2ae 6, 1 (O’Brien 1974,
117–9 & 167)).
The special role of faith-propositions
Bayesians might argue that there is no occasion for faith as doxastic
venture since, once practical commitment to the truth of propositions
is recognised as a matter of degree, whatever the state of the
available evidence relating to a given proposition, there will always
(given initial credences) be a rational credence properly associated
with that evidence, and hence there are no possible circumstances
where ‘the evidence does not decide’. Note, however, Lara
Buchak’s (2012) discussion of ways in which Bayesians might
understand faith as going beyond the evidence, and her own proposal
that faith-ventures essentially include an additional
practical commitment, which may be rational under certain conditions,
not to inquire further into evidence relevant to the truth of the
propositions concerned.
If the domain of faith is, as Stephen Evans puts it, ‘the
assumptions, convictions and attitudes which the believer brings
to the evidence for and against religious truth’ (Evans
1985, 178), and faith’s cognitive component offers a ‘total
interpretation’ of the world of our experience (Hick 1966, 154),
then (foundational) faith-propositions function as
‘highest-order framing principles’ which
necessarily cannot have their truth settled by appeal to the
force of a body of independent evidence (Bishop 2007a, 139–44).
Taking such a faith-proposition to be true, then, is not something
that comes in degrees: either one ‘buys into’ the overall
worldview a (foundational) faith-proposition proposes, or one does
not. Such a choice is existentially important, and settling it raises
anxiety about exercising a responsibility that cannot—without
‘bad faith’—be transferred onto the relatively
impersonal function of one’s reason, since a venture beyond any
rational certification is required. The doxastic venture model may
thus be regarded as capturing the spiritual challenge of faith more
satisfactorily than do models that understand faith as conforming to
evidentialism. This is because, on the doxastic venture model, faith
involves a deeper surrender of self-reliant control, not only in
trusting God, but in accepting at the level of practical commitment
that there is a God—indeed, this God—who is to be
trusted.
Doxastic venture models of faith and epistemic concern
Doxastic venture in relation to faith-propositions can be justifiable,
of course, only if there are legitimate exceptions to the
evidentialist requirement to take a proposition to be true just to the
extent of its evidential support—and only if the legitimate
exceptions include the kind of case involved in religious, theistic,
faith-commitment.
A possible view of theistic faith-commitment is that it is wholly
independent of the epistemic concern that cares about evidential
support. On this view, faith reveals its authenticity most clearly
when it takes faith-propositions to be true contrary to the
weight of the evidence. This view is widely described as
‘fideist’, but ought more fairly to be called
arational fideism, or, where commitment contrary to the
evidence is positively favoured, irrational or
counter-rational fideism. Despite its popular attribution
both to the church father Tertullian and to ‘the father of
existentialism’, Kierkegaard, counter-rational fideism does not
seem to have been espoused by any significant theist philosophers
(passages in Tertullian and Kierkegaard that appear to endorse this
position may be interpreted as emphasising that Christian faith
requires accepting, not logical contradiction, but
‘contradiction’ of our ‘natural’ expectations,
wholly overturned in the revelation that the power of divine love is
triumphant in the Crucified One).
Serious philosophical defence of a doxastic venture model of faith
thus implies a supra-rational fideism, for which epistemic
concern is not overridden and for which, therefore, it is a constraint
on faith-commitment that it not accept what is known, or
justifiably believed on the evidence, to be false. Rather, faith
commits itself only beyond, and not against, the
evidence—and it does so out of epistemic concern to
grasp truth on matters of vital existential importance. The thought
that one may be entitled to commit to an existentially momentous
truth-claim in principle undecidable on the evidence when forced to
decide either to do so or not is what motivates William James’s
‘justification of faith’ in ‘The Will to
Believe’ (James 1896/1956). If such faith is to be justified,
its cognitive content will (on realist assumptions) have to cohere
with our best evidence-based theories about the real world. Faith may
extend our scientific grasp of the real, but may not counter it.
Whether the desire to grasp more truth about the real than science can
supply is a noble aspiration or a dangerous delusion is at the heart
of the debate about entitlement to faith on this supra-rational
fideist doxastic venture model.
A discussion of the debate between the moderate, Jamesian,
supra-rational fideist and the evidentialist is beyond this entry’s
scope. Still, it is worth remarking that those who think that faith
understood as doxastic venture may be justified face the challenge of
providing the tools for weeding out intuitively distorted and
unjustifiable forms of faith. On the other side, those evidentialists
who reject doxastic venture as impermissible have to consider whether
taking a stance on the nature of reality beyond anything science can
even in principle confirm may not, in the end, be unavoidable, and
potentially implicated in the commitments required for science itself
(see Bishop 2007a, Chapters 8 and 9). For a useful recent collection
of articles on the wider theme of the relation of religious faith to
intellectual virtue, see Callahan and O’Connor 2014.
Some accounts allow that faith centrally involves practical commitment
venturing beyond evidential support, yet do not require (or, even,
permit) that the venturer actually believes the
faith-proposition assumed to be true. Such accounts may be described
as proposing a ‘sub-’ or ‘non-doxastic
venture’ model of faith. F.R.Tennant holds a view of this kind:
he takes faith to be the adoption of a line of conduct not warranted
by present facts, that involves experimenting with the possible or
ideal, venturing into the unknown and taking the risk of
disappointment and defeat. Faith is not an attempt to will something
into existence but rather treating hoped for and unseen things as
if they were real and then acting accordingly (Tennant 1943/1989
p.104). Swinburne refers to this as the ‘pragmatist’ model
of faith (Swinburne 2005, 147–8; Swinburne 2001, 211; compare
also Golding 1990, 2003).
William Alston (1996) suggests that faith may involve an active
‘acceptance’ rather than purely receptive belief. A
clearly sub-doxastic venture model results if acceptance is understood
on Jonathan Cohen’s account under which to accept that p
is ‘to have or adopt a policy of deeming, positing, or
postulating that p—i.e. of including that proposition
… among one’s premisses for deciding what to do or think in a
particular context, whether or not one feels it to be true that
p’ (Cohen 1992, 4, my emphasis). The firmness of
faith-commitment is then just the firmness of one’s
‘resolve to use [faith-claims] as a basis for one’s
thought, attitude and behaviour’ (Alston 1996, 17): there is no
firm assurance of their truth. Decisive commitment in the
absence of such assurance may nevertheless be possible, motivated (as
Swinburne suggested in the first edition of his Faith and
Reason) by the evaluative belief that ‘unless
[faith-propositions are true], that which is most worthwhile is not to
be had’ (Swinburne, 1981, 117). (A faith venture that lacks
belief in the faith-proposition to which commitment is made need not,
and probably could not, lack doxastic components altogether, as this
suggestion of Swinburne’s indicates.)
Andrei Buckareff (2005) and J.L.Schellenberg (2005, 138-9) propose
non-doxastic venture models of propositional faith, with Schellenberg
emphasising the positive evaluation that persons of faith make of the
truth-claim to which they commit themselves. In response to Daniel
Howard-Snyder (2013) Schellenberg allows that faith may in some
instances involve belief while still maintaining that
‘non-doxastic religious faith … will turn out to be a
particularly important way of having religious faith as we head into
the future’ (2013, 262). Bishop (2005), in response to
Buckareff, also agrees that authentic faith need not always be a
specifically doxastic venture. There may, then, be an emerging
consensus amongst proponents of venture models that faith, at its
core, consists in suitably motivated persistent practical commitment
‘beyond the evidence’ to the positively evaluated truth of
foundational faith-claims which may, but need not, actually be
believed to be true.
Robert Audi (2011) has also defended a non-doxastic account of faith,
contrasting ‘fiducial faith’ and ‘doxastic
faith’, and arguing that authentic religious faith need only
amount to the former. Audi’s account is not strictly a
‘venture’ model, however, since he does not take
commitment beyond the support of adequate evidence to be essential.
Audi’s account suggests that religious faith is sui
generis, but capable of being understood through its relations
with other psychological states and actions, such as beliefs,
evaluations and practical commitments. Rational assessment of
religious faith, Audi thinks, must avoid treating it as implying
belief, while recognising that greater confidence attaches to it than
to religious hope. For another version of a non-doxastic account of
faith, as a person’s ‘affective orientation or
stance’, see Jonathan Kvanvig (2013).
Some philosophers have suggested that the epistemological challenges
faced by accounts of faith as involving belief beyond the evidence may
be avoided by construing theist commitment as hope. Theist hope seems
not to be mere tenacity (‘clinging to one’s hopes’)
(Taylor 1961), but a more complex attitude. James Muyskens suggests,
for example, that one who hopes ‘keep[s] his life open or fluid
with respect to [a faith-proposition] p—where (a) neither
p nor not-p is certain for him, (b) he wants p
and (c) he sees p as constructively connected with his own
well-being and/or concept of himself as a person’ (1979, 35).
Muyskens contrasts hope with faith (understood as belief), arguing
that a religion of hope is both epistemically and religiously superior
to a religion of faith. But faith is not generally understood as
competing with hope (Creel 1993), and some philosophers
identify faith with hoping that the claims of faith are true
(Pojman 1986; 2003). Hope as such is an attitude rather than an active
commitment, and, as Audi observes, it contrasts with the attitude of
faith at least in this respect, namely, that surprise makes little
sense as a response to discovering that the object of one’s
faith is indeed the case, whereas there need be nothing inappropriate
in surprise at the fulfilment of one’s hopes (see Audi 2011,
74).
A more adequate model of faith as hope, then, may rather take faith to
be acting in, or from, hope. Such a model then comes close to
a sub-doxastic venture model of faith, differing only in so far as
acting from hope that God exists differs from taking this claim to be
true (albeit without belief) in one’s practical reasoning—but
this difference may be undetectable at the level of behavioural
outcomes. A model of faith as acting in hope also shares with the
doxastic and sub-doxastic venture models in leaving out the affective
certitude that is widely thought to characterise faith (Tennant
1943/1989, 112).
All these three models, then —doxastic venture, sub-doxastic
venture and venture in hope— fit the view that faith is
consistent with doubt, and, indeed, impossible without doubt of some
kind, though they allow that persons of faith may give firm and
sustained commitment to the truth of faith-propositions in practice.
The ‘certainty’ of faith on these models seems more a
matter of the certainty that persons of faith find themselves
conferring on the foundational claims of their faith, rather
than a matter of discovering in themselves a certain knowledge or
intellectual conviction of the truth of these claims. It is possible,
then, on these accounts of faith, to be a committed person of faith
and also an ‘agnostic’ in Thomas Huxley’s original
sense of someone who does not claim as knowledge what he or she
nevertheless commits to as a foundational practical orientation to
reality.
Faith is traditionally regarded as one of the
‘theological’ virtues. If a virtue is a ‘disposition
of character which instantiates or promotes responsiveness to one or
more basic goods’, then theistic faith qualifies since it is
‘a responsiveness to practical hope and truth’, provided
theistic faith-claims are indeed true (Chappell 1996, 27). Faith will
not, however, be a virtue as such, if it is accepted that
faith can be misplaced or, even, ‘demonic’, directed upon
a ‘false ultimate’ (Tillich 1957/2001, 21). To be
virtuous, faith must be faith in a worthy object: it is faith in
God that is the theological virtue. More generally, faith is
virtuous only when it is faith to which one is entitled. An account of
the conditions under which faith is permissible is thus the key to an
ethics of faith.
On models of faith as a (special) kind of knowledge, or as firmly held
belief, it may seem puzzling how faith could be a virtue—unless
some implicit practical component emerges when such models are further
explicated, or, alternatively, a case may be made for the claim that
what is involuntary may nevertheless be praiseworthy, with theistic
faith as a case in point (Adams 1987). Furthermore, as already
suggested (Sections 4 & 5 above), models of faith as knowledge or
belief fail to provide non-circular conditions sufficient for
entitlement, unless the truth of faith-propositions is established by
independent argument and evidence. Fiducial models of faith seem more
attuned to exhibiting faith as a virtue, though a defence of the
trustworthiness of the one who is trusted for salvation may be
required. Doxastic (and sub-doxastic) venture models of faith can
vindicate faith as a virtue, provided they provide robust entitlement
conditions, to ensure that not just any ‘leap of faith’ is
permissible. The Jamesian account already mentioned (Section 7) aims
to meet this need. James’s own view of what suffices to justify a
faith-venture arguably needs an ethical supplement: both the
non-evidential motivation for the venture and its content must be
morally acceptable (Bishop 2007a, 163–6).
If faith of the religious kind is to count as virtuous, it seems there
must be a suitable degree of persistence and steadfastness in the
commitment made. Persons of religious faith are faithful to the object
of their commitment, though the salient kind of faithfulness may be a
matter of the continual renewal of faith rather than of maintaining it
unchanged. (See Audi 2014 for a discussion of faith and faithfulness
in relation to virtue. Audi defends faithfulness as, like courage, an
‘adjunctive’ virtue, and argues that being ‘a person
of faith’ counts as a ‘virtue of personality’.)
Faith is only one of the Christian theological virtues, of course, the
others being hope and charity (or love, agape): and St Paul
famously affirms that the greatest of these is love (I Cor. 13:13).
The question thus arises how these three virtues are related. One
suggestion is that faith is taking it to be true that there are
grounds for the hope that love is supreme—not simply in the
sense that love constitutes the ideal of the supreme good, but in the
sense that living in accordance with this ideal constitutes an
ultimate salvation, fulfilment or consummation that is, in reality,
victorious over all that may undermine it (in a word, over evil). The
supremacy of love is linked to the supremacy of the divine itself,
since love is the essential nature of the divine. What is hoped for,
and what faith assures us is properly hoped for, is a sharing
in the divine itself, loving as God loves (see Brian Davies on
Aquinas, 2002). On this understanding, reducing faith to a kind of
hope (Section 9 above) would eradicate an important relation between
the two—namely that people of faith take reality to be such that
their hope (for salvation, the triumph of the good) is well founded,
and not merely an attractive fantasy or inspiring ideal.
What is the potential scope of faith? On some models, the kind of
faith exemplified by theistic faith is found only there. On both the
‘special knowledge’ and the ‘belief’ models,
faith is intrinsically linked to theological content—indeed to
orthodox Christian theological content, specifiable as one
unified set of doctrines conveyed to receptive human minds by the
operation of divine grace. Both the doxastic and sub-doxastic venture
models, however, allow for the possibility that authentic faith may be
variously realised, and be directed upon different, and mutually
incompatible, intentional objects. This pluralism is an important
feature of accounts of faith in the American pragmatist tradition.
John Dewey strongly rejected the notion of faith as a special kind of
knowledge (Dewey 1934, 20), as did William James, whose
‘justification of faith’ rests on a
permissibility thesis, under which varied and conflicting
faith-commitments may equally have a place in the ‘intellectual
republic’ (James 1896/1956, 30).
Both Dewey and James defend models of faith with a view to advancing
the idea that authentic religious faith may be found outside what is
generally supposed to be theological orthodoxy. Furthermore, they
suggest that ‘un-orthodox’ faith may be more
authentic than ‘orthodox’ faith. ‘The faith that is
religious’, says Dewey, ‘[I should describe as] the
unification of the self through allegiance to inclusive ideal ends,
which imagination presents to us and to which the human will responds
as worthy of controlling our desires and choices’ (1934, 33).
And James: ‘Religion says essentially two things: First, she
says that the best things are the more eternal things, the overlapping
things, the things in the universe that throw the last stone, so to
speak, and say the final word…. [and] the second affirmation of
religion is that we are better off now if we believe her first
affirmation to be true’ (James 1896/1956, 25–6). While
some of what Dewey and James say about justifiable faith may appear
non-realist, in fact they both preserve the idea that religious faith
aspires to grasp, beyond the evidence, vital truth about reality.
Dewey holds that religious belief grounds hope because it takes
something to be true about the real world ‘which carr[ies] one
through periods of darkness and despair to such an extent that they
lose their usual depressive character’ (1934, 14–5).
A general—i.e., non-theologically specific—account of the
religious kind of faith may have potential as a tool for criticising
philosophical formulations of the specific content of religious faith.
The conditions for permissible faith-venture may exclude
faith in God under certain inadequate conceptions of who or what God
is. Arguably, the ‘personal omniGod’ of much contemporary
philosophy of religion is just such an inadequate conception (Bishop
2007b). An understanding of what faith is, then, may motivate radical
explorations into the concept of God as held in the theistic
traditions (Bishop 1998; Johnston 2009; Bishop and Perszyk 2014).
Can there be faith without adherence to any theistic tradition? Those
who agree with F.R.Tennant that ‘faith is an outcome of the
inborn propensity to self-conservation and self-betterment which is a
part of human nature, and is no more a miraculously superadded
endowment than is sensation or understanding’ (1943/1989, 111)
will consider that this must be a possibility. Tennant himself
suggests that ‘much of the belief which underlies
knowledge’—and he has scientific knowledge in mind—
‘is the outcome of faith which ventures beyond the apprehension
and treatment of data to supposition, imagination and creation of
ideal objects, and justifies its audacity and irrationality (in
accounting them to be also real) by practical actualization’
(1943/1989, 100). Faith in this sense, however, may not seem quite on
a par with faith of the religious kind. True, scientists must act
as if their ‘ideal objects’ are real in putting
their theories to the empirical test; but they will ‘account
them to be also real’ only when these tests do provide
confirmation in accordance with the applicable inter-subjective
norms.
If faith is understood as commitment beyond independent objective
certification to the truth of some overall interpretation of
experience and reality, then all who commit themselves (with
sufficient steadfastness) to such a Weltanschauung or
worldview will be people of faith. Faith of this kind may be
religious, and it may be religious without being theistic, of course,
as in classical Buddhism or Taoism. Some have argued that faith is a
human universal: Cantwell Smith, for example, describes it as ‘a
planetary human characteristic [involving the] capacity to perceive,
to symbolize, and live loyally and richly in terms of, a transcendent
dimension to [human] life’ (1979, 140-141). There may also,
arguably, be non-religious faith: for example ‘scientific
atheists’, or ‘naturalists’, may be making a
faith-venture when they take there to be no more to reality than is in
principle discoverable by the natural sciences. The suggestion that
atheism rests on a faith-venture will, however, be resisted by those
who maintain ‘the presumption of atheism’ (Flew, 1976): it
takes no leap to hold the default position.
An atheist’s faith-venture may, in any case, seem oddly so described
on the grounds that it provides no basis for practical hope or trust.
Providing such a basis may plausibly be thought necessary for
faith— the truth to which the venturer commits must be
existentially important in this way. (Note James’s requirement that
faith-commitment is permissible only for resolving a ‘genuine
option’, where a genuine option has inter alia to be
‘momentous’, that is, existentially significant and
pressing (James 1896/1956, 3–4).) Some hold that the truth
accepted by faith must be a ‘saving’ truth—a
solution to a deep problems about the human situation. Their view is
thus that faith is essentially religious, and they
accordingly enter into argument as to which religion offers the best
solution to the human problem (see, for example, Yandell 1990, 1999).
J.L.Schellenberg (2009) argues that the only kind of religious faith
that could be justified (if any is) is a sceptical
‘ultimism’, in which one ‘assents’ to and
treats as real an imaginatively grasped conception of a
metaphysically, axiologically and soteriologically ultimate
reality.
Some may nevertheless argue that an existentially vital faith that
grounds hope can belong within a wholly secular context—that is,
without counting in any recognisable sense as ‘religious’.
Cantwell Smith claims, for example, that ‘the Graeco-Roman
heritage .. and its fecundating role in Western life [can] be seen as
one of the major spiritual traditions of our world’ (1979, 139).
Annette Baier suggests that ‘the secular equivalent of faith in
God, which we need in morality as well as in science or knowledge
acquisition, is faith in the human community and its evolving
procedures—in the prospects for many-handed cognitive ambitions
and moral hopes’ (Baier 1980, 133). More broadly, some maintain
that a meaningful spirituality is consistent with a non-religious
atheist naturalism, and include something akin to faith as essential
to spirituality. For example, Robert Solomon takes spirituality to
mean ‘the grand and thoughtful passions of life’, and
holds that ‘a life lived in accordance with those
passions’ entails choosing to see the world as ‘benign and
life [as] meaningful’, with the tragic not to be denied but
accepted (Solomon 2002, 6 & 51).