The classic argument for fatalism occurs in Aristotle (384–322 B.C.E.),
De Interpretatione, chapter 9. He addresses the question of
whether in relation to all questions it is necessary that the
affirmation or the negation is true or false.
What he says could be presented as an argument along the following
lines.
Suppose that (i) p is true or p is false and (ii)
not-p is true or not-p is false.
Then p is true or not-p is true.
Now suppose that in 1900 one person says that a sea-battle will take
place on 1/1/2100, and another says that a sea-battle will not take
place on 1/1/2100.
Then either what the first person says is true or what the second
person says is true.
But, in that case, either it is necessary in 1900 that a sea-battle
takes place on 1/1/2100, or it is necessary in 1900 that one does not
take place.
But the date of the predictions is irrelevant, and it is irrelevant
whether any prediction is actually made at all.
So it is necessary at all times that a sea-battle takes place on
1/1/2100, or that a sea-battle does not take place on 1/1/2100.
But the argument can evidently be generalised.
So, everything that happens, happens of necessity.
First of all we need to be clear about what is meant by “necessity”
here. What is at issue here is not logical necessity. It is rather
inevitability. When the occurrence of a sea-battle on 1/1/2100 is said
to be necessary at a certain date, what is meant is that at that date
nothing can prevent a sea-battle from taking place on 1/1/2100. In
particular, no one has the power to prevent it. Now Aristotle accepts
that “What is, necessarily is, when it is; and what is not, necessarily
is not, when it is not.” So, he accepts that, if a sea-battle is
actually taking place on 1/1/2100, then on 1/1/2100 it is (in this
sense) taking place of necessity. Nothing can then stop it happening,
because it is happening. What this argument appears to establish,
however, is that, if a sea-battle takes place on 1/1/2100, not only is
it necessary then that a sea-battle takes place on 1/1/2100, but it was
always necessary. No one could ever have prevented it. And the same
applies to everything that can happen. So, in particular, no one ever
has the power to do anything other that what they actually do.
So, is there anything wrong with the argument?
Well certainly there is a move which seems to require some
explanation: the move from truth to necessity. Why should it follow
from the fact that it was true in 1900 that a sea-battle would take
place on 1/1/2100, that it was necessary that it should? This looks,
indeed, suspiciously like a fallacious move from “Of necessity, if it
is true that a sea-battle takes place on 1/1/2100, a sea-battle takes
place on 1/1/2100” to “If it is true that a sea-battle takes place on
1/1/2100, a sea-battle takes place of necessity on 1/1/2100”. But such
suspicions are probably ill-founded. It is more likely that the move
invokes a certain form of the correspondence theory of truth: if what
someone says at a certain time is true, then the state of the world at
that time must be such as to make it true. But since what is,
necessarily is when it is, the state of the world will be necessary.
So, anything that is true is necessarily true.
However, even if this crucial move does not rest on a simple
fallacy, the idea that the truth of what someone says is determined by
the state of the world at the time is questionable. We shall return to
this point.
First we should notice Aristotle’s solution. Aristotle is in no doubt
that not everything that happens, happens of necessity. He accepts
indeed (19a23–5) that “What is, necessarily is, when it is; and what
is not, necessarily is not, when it is not.” But he goes on to say,
“But not everything that is, necessarily is; and not everything that
is not, necessarily is not.” So what is his solution? Here it must be
said that there is more than one view. (Aristotle,
Categories and De Interpretatione, 137–42). On one
view he rejects the move from truth to necessity. That may indeed be
the right move to make, but in what follows I shall take it that
Aristotle actually offers a different solution, which, rightly or
wrongly, I shall refer to as “the Aristotelian solution”. On this
view his solution is to deny that it is necessary that the
affirmation or the negation is true or false when this relates to
things that do not happen of necessity. That is to say, his solution
is that neither what the first person said in 1900 (“There will be a
sea-battle on 1/1/2100.”) nor what the second person said (“There
will not be a sea-battle on 1/1/2100.”) was true. What each person
said was in fact neither true nor false. So we may represent the
Aristotelian solution as one which rejects the law of bivalence:
It is to be rejected in particular in relation to such propositions
as, “there will be a sea-battle on 1/1/2100”; that is, in relation to
propositions about future contingents, about what is neither necessary
nor impossible. (For the view that Aristotle does not reject the law
of bivalence see Whitaker 1996.)
Though Aristotle does not explicitly say so, it seems that he would
also accept that if a sea-battle takes place on 1/1/2100, then what the
first person said would then be true, and if it does not, what the
second person said would then be true. So we may represent the
Aristotelian solution as holding the following:
Are there any objections to this solution?
One objection is that the solution appears to require the rejection
of the law of the excluded middle in addition to the law of bivalence.
Now it is true that it involves the rejection of one form of the
law:
But another form of the law is:
Does it involve the rejection of this? One might think it does, on the
grounds that “p” is equivalent to
“p is true”. So LEM1 and LEM2 stand or fall
together. Or one might think like this: “p
or q” can be true only if either p is true
or q is true (or both are). But, where p is a
proposition about a future contingent it is not true, whether the
contingent state of affairs comes about or not; neither is its
negation true; so the disjunction, “p or
not-p” is not true.
As a matter of fact, though, this is not what Aristotle seems to
have thought. He says (19a28–32):
So, on the assumption that he would have accepted that “there will or
will not be a sea-battle tomorrow” is equivalent to “there will be a
sea-battle tomorrow or there will not be a sea-battle tomorrow”, he
would, it seems, have accepted LEM2. How could this be? Well, what
stops its being true that there will be a sea-battle tomorrow is that
there is nothing yet to determine that it is true. But there is
something to determine that there will be or will not be a sea-battle
tomorrow; in the nature of things one or the other must occur. So it
is now true that there will be a sea-battle tomorrow or there will
not be a sea-battle tomorrow.
This suggests adopting the following rule for determining the
truth-value of complex propositions some of whose constituents are
neither true nor false. One considers in turn each of the possible ways
in which things may turn out, and works out what truth-value the
complex proposition would then have. If it turns out to be true in
every case, it is true; if it turns out to be false in every case, it
is false; otherwise it is neither true nor false. (van Fraassen
1966)
Of course this is not a wholly cost free line to take. Apart from the
fact that it means that “p” and “p
is true” are not in general interchangeable, it also creates
problems for truth-functionality. We normally think of
“or”, “and” and “not” as being
truth-functional. That is to say, we think that the truth-values of
“p or q”, “p
and q” and “not-p” are determined
by the truth-values of “p” and
“q”. But if we adopt the Aristotelian solution,
and accept the way outlined just now of determining the truth-value of
a complex proposition, “or”, for instance, will not be
truth functional. In some case “p or q”
will be true when neither p nor q is true (when, for
instance, “q” is “not-p”),
and in some case it will not be (if, say, “p” is
“there will be a sea-battle tomorrow” and
“q” is “there will be a football match
tomorrow”). (If one thinks in terms of there being a third
truth-value, indeterminacy, say, in addition to truth and falsity, the
position will be that, when p and
q are both indeterminate, sometimes “p or q”
is true, and sometimes it is indeterminate.). Similarly “p and
q” will be false in the one case and indeterminate in the
other.
However, this objection might not seem very pressing compared with the
threat of fatalism. If accepting a lack of equivalence between
“p” and “p is true” and a
failure of truth-functionality for “or” and
“and” were the only alternative to accepting fatalism,
most people would find it easier to accept these theoretical oddities,
if oddities they are.
But there is another objection to the Aristotelian solution which
makes it harder to accept — the way we treat bare predictions. If
someone had said in 1972, “Red Rum will win the Grand National next
year”, surely, we would think, he was right. Not right in 1973, but
right in 1972. That is to say, surely what he said was true, when he
said it; not just later. Of course, we would not have known in 1972
that what he said was true; nor, presumably did he. Nor, of course
would we have supposed that there was anything inevitable about the
victory; these things, we naturally suppose, are a matter of chance.
But, of course, this objection to the Aristotelian solution is also an
objection to the argument for fatalism which was based on the
assumption of bivalence. We are, effectively, rejecting the idea that
if what someone says at a time is true at that time, then the state of
the world at the time must determine that it is true. What we seem to
be quite prepared to accept instead is the idea that for what is said
to be true at a time it is sufficient if the state of the world
will sometime be such as to determine that it is true.
There is another problem about the theory of truth which the
Aristotelian argument seems to be invoking. If the theory really is
that the truth of what is said depends on the state of the world at the
time of the saying, does not that raise a problem for statements about
the past? Suppose someone says that a dinosaur stood on this spot
millions of years ago. For this to be true, must the present state of
the world be such as to determine that it is? Some people have indeed
thought this; and they have thought that, just as some propositions
that were not true come to be true, so also some that were true cease
to be true. (Łukasiewicz 1967) But this is even further from what we
are naturally inclined to say. A more attractive alternative, if we
wished to retain something like this theory of truth, would be to say
that what happened in the past counts as part of the present state of
the world, because the past, like the present, is necessary. But it is
not clear why that should be enough to make it part of the present
state of the world. Perhaps it would be better to take the view simply
that something is true at a time only if it is necessary at that time.
But then we would need some argument for this position which went
beyond the simple thought that what is said is made true by the way the
world is at the time it is said.
It is worth noticing some other solutions which are closely related
to the Aristotelian solution, but avoid some of the problems.
1. (Prior 1967). One could agree with Aristotle that “there will
be a sea-battle tomorrow” is not true, even if it turns out that
there is a sea battle; but instead of saying that it is neither true
nor false, one could say that it is false. What is more, one could say
that the negation, “there will not be a sea-battle
tomorrow” is true. Then we could retain the law of bivalence,
and the equivalence between “p” and
“p is true”. Effectively we would be treating
“p” as equivalent to “it is necessary
that p”. And we would, no doubt, distinguish between
“there will not be a sea-battle tomorrow”, where this is
the negation of “there will be a sea-battle tomorrow” and
“there will be no sea-battle tomorrow” which, like
“there will be a sea-battle tomorrow”, is false. One might
even say that “there will not be a sea-battle tomorrow” is
ambiguous; it could be equivalent to “it is not necessary that
there will be sea-battle tomorrow” or it could be equivalent to
“it is necessary that there will be no sea-battle
tomorrow”. Certainly it is in favour of this view that one would
retain the law of bivalence and also the truth-functionality of
“or” and “and”. But there would be a heavy
price to pay. Now we should have to say what the person said about Red
Rum was false.
2. (Lucas 1986) One could make use of Reichenbach’s distinction
between the time of the utterance of a proposition, the time of the
reference point and the time of the event. (Reichenbach 1947) One
could then say that the truth of what is said depends not on the state
of the world at the time of the utterance, but on the state of the
world at the time of the reference point. One may then say that the
reference point of the utterance in 1972 of “Red Rum will win
the Grand National next year” is 1973, not 1972. So, it was
true. (Whereas, if someone had said “Red Rum is going to win the
Grand National next year”, the use of “is going to”
rather than “will” might perhaps have meant that the
reference point was the time of the utterance, rather than the time of
next year’s Grand National. So what was said would not have been
true.)
3. (Tooley 1997) One could distinguish between truth at a time,
which depends on the state of the world at the time, and truth
simpliciter, which does not. One could then allow that the
prediction about Red Rum was true, as long as we are talking about
truth simpliciter. Also, where truth simpliciter was
at issue, we could retain the law of bivalence and the equivalence
between “p” and “p is
true”.
But finally we should not forget that, even if we wish to retain a
correspondence theory of truth, we can reject the idea that truth
depends on the state of the world at the time of the utterance of a
proposition or even the state of the world at the time of the
reference point. We can say that it depends on the state of the world
at the time of the event spoken of; or, more generally, that it
depends on the state of the world at the times spoken of, if any
(Westphal 2006). The solution we prefer is, however, likely to be
related to the view we take about the nature of time.
On a B-theory of time an event’s being past, present or future is
simply a relational matter; it is simply a matter of its occurring at
a time which is earlier than, or simultaneous with, or later than some
time which is taken as the reference point – the time at which I
am having this thought, say. On an A-theory, on the other hand, that
this time (or this event) is now is an absolute (if temporary) fact
about it. But, in addition, a B-theory will typically hold that all
times are equally real, whereas, typically, an A-theory will
hold either that only the present and the past are real (type 1), or
that only the present is real (type 2). So, on a B-theory, there can
be future facts to make propositions about the future true; but, on an
A-theory of type 1, a proposition about the future can be made true
only by present and past facts together with timeless facts; and, on
an A-theory of type 2, propositions both about the future and about
the past, can be made true only by present facts together with
timeless facts. And, evidently, on either type of A-theory a
proposition may be true at one time, but not true at another,
depending on what facts exist at the time.  (For a fuller 
description of the A-theory and B-theory, see the Section 
5 of the entry on 
 time.)
Aristotle’s problem seemed to have arisen as a result of a theory of
truth according to which, if a statement is true at a time, there has
to be a state of the world at that time which makes it true. However,
it has been argued that, if every meaningful statement is either true
or false (once and for all), that alone implies fatalism; the very
fact that a statement is true is enough to make what it describes
unavoidable (Taylor 1983, Chapter 6). Suppose, for example, that John
shaved one morning. Then the statement, “John shaved that morning”, is
true. But, it is argued, that means that John did not have the power
not to shave; because to have that power would be to have the power to
render a true statement false. But no one has such a power; no one has
ever succeeded in making a true statement false.
Now the final claim is certainly true, on the assumption that
meaningful statements have just one truth-value. No one has ever
brought about a situation in which a statement which was true is
false; that is, a situation in which (a) there is a statement which
was true and (b) that statement is now false. However, to have the
power to render a true statement false, one does need to have the
power to bring about such a situation. It is enough that (a) there
should be a statement which is true, and that one has the power merely
to bring about a situation in which (b) that statement is (and always
was) false instead. So for John to have had the power to
render false the true statement, “John shaved that morning”, it is
enough that he should have had the power not to shave instead of
shaving. Of course, he did not exercise that power; but, in the
absence of some other argument to the contrary, presumably he could
have done; in which case he would have made the statement, “John
shaved that morning” false instead of true. So, it seems that there is
no simple move from truth to fatalism.
Diodorus Cronus (late 4th – early 3rd centuries B.C.E.) had an argument
for fatalism, known as “The Master Argument”. Its conclusion was,
“the possible is that which either is or will be”. We know the
premisses but, unfortunately we do not know the intermediate
steps. The premisses were (1) “Everything that is past and true is
necessary”, (2) “The impossible does not follow from the
possible”. (Kneale and Kneale 1962, 119)
I shall not try to reconstruct the way the argument actually went,
but consider an argument to it which might have been akin, which
argues for fatalism on the basis of the necessity of the past. The
argument goes:
What is true of the past is necessary.
Suppose that there is a sea-battle on 1/1/2100.
Then it was true in 1900 that there would be a sea-battle on
1/1/2100.
Then it was true of the past that there would be a sea-battle on
1/1/2100.
So it is necessary that there will be a sea-battle on 1/1/2100.
Therefore, if there is a sea-battle on 1/1/2100, it is necessary
that there will be a sea-battle on 1/1/2100 (and impossible that there
should not be).
Is anything wrong with this argument?
We could certainly make an Aristotelian objection to the argument.
We could deny that if a sea-battle takes place on 1/1/2100, it was true
in 1900 that a sea-battle would take place.
We could also question either the first premiss or the application
of it.
Is what is true of the past necessary? Well certainly pretty well
everyone thinks that what happened in the past cannot be undone. The
past cannot now be altered. For if one were to undo the past, that
would mean that something which did happen did not happen; or, at the
very least, that it was true that something happened and then later was
not true that it happened. Most people (but not such a large majority)
also think that something else is impossible, namely affecting what
happened in the past or causing something to have happened in the past.
(This is not the same thing, of course, as altering the past. If one
caused something to have happened, one would not thereby bring it about
that something that did not happen did happen.) But it is one thing to
think that one cannot make it true that there was a sea-battle
yesterday, and quite another thing to think that one cannot make it
true yesterday that there will be a sea-battle tomorrow.
This might be called the Ockhamist solution to the problem. What
Ockham (c1285–1347) says is:
In the spirit of this we may say that some propositions about the
past are really (at any rate in part) about the future. And in these
cases they are not necessary. And we may then apply this to “it was
true in 1900 that there would be a sea-battle on 1/1/2100.” This, we
may say, is (in part) really about 1/1/2100.
Propositions which are in this way verbally about one time,
t, but are really (in part) about a later time, are often said
to express “soft facts” about t. Unfortunately it is not at
all clear quite how the notion of a soft fact should be made precise.
One might, for instance, say that if a proposition about t
logically entails a proposition about a later time, it expresses a soft
fact about t. But if that is the correct account, it seems
that many propositions expressing soft facts about the past will be
necessary, even when they are partly about the future. For instance, a
proposition which conjoins some plausibly necessary proposition about
the past with a law of nature to the effect that in these circumstances
something in the future will ensue would seem to entail something
about the future; but since it is a conjunction of two plausibly
necessary propositions, it seems to be necessary itself.
However it seems there is one variety of proposition which
presumably expresses a soft fact about the past, but is very plausibly
not necessary, namely a proposition which is equivalent to a
conjunction where one of the conjuncts is plausibly wholly about the
future, and where the other conjunct does not entail it. And, if the
Aristotelian solution is wrong, our example seems to fit this bill. The
proposition, “it was true in 1900 that there would be a sea-battle on
1/1/2100” is plausibly equivalent to “there was such a time as 1900 and
there will be a sea-battle on 1/1/2100.” And this proposition will not
be necessary, if it is not necessary that there will be a sea-battle on
1/1/2100.
Notice that this does not show that the fatalist is wrong. It could
still be that the proposition that there will be a sea-battle on
1/1/2100 is necessary. But it does seem to show that this
argument does not show that fatalism is correct. The position seems to
be that, either the argument does not work, because the Aristotelian
solution is correct, or the argument does not work because, in the
absence of an independent reason to suppose that the proposition that
there will be a sea-battle on 1/1/2100 is necessary, we have no reason
to suppose that the proposition, “it was true in 1900 that there would
be a sea-battle on 1/1/2100” is a necessary proposition.
Richard Taylor argues that certain commonly accepted presuppositions
yield a proof of fatalism. (Taylor 1962) The presuppositions are:
1. Any proposition whatever is either true, or if not true,
false.
2. If any state of affairs is sufficient for, though logically
unrelated to, the occurrence of some further condition at the same time
or any other time, then the former cannot occur without the latter
occurring also.
3. If the occurrence of any condition is necessary for, though
logically unrelated to, the occurrence of some other condition at the
same time, or any other time, then the latter cannot occur without the
former occurring also.
4. If one condition or set of conditions is sufficient for (ensures)
another, then the other is necessary (essential) for it, and
conversely, if one condition or set of conditions is necessary
(essential) for another, then that other is sufficient for (ensures)
it.
5. No agent can perform any given act if there is lacking, at the
same time or any other time, some condition necessary for the
occurrence of that act.
6. Time is not by itself “efficacious”; that is, the mere passage of
time does not augment or diminish the capacities of anything and, in
particular, it does not enhance or decrease an agent’s powers or
abilities.
He then produces an argument to show (what most of us believe) that
either it is not in my power to read a headline saying that there was
a sea-battle yesterday or it is not in my power to read a headline
saying that there was no sea-battle yesterday, at any rate if we make
some obvious assumptions about the relation between the headlines and
what took place. Letting S be the act of reading a headline
that there was a sea-battle, and S′ be the act of
reading a headline that there was no sea-battle; and letting
P and P′ be the propositions that there was
and was not such a battle, the argument goes:
 But if P′ is true, then it is not in my power to do
S (for a similar reason).
 But either P is true or P′ is true
 So, either it is not in my power to do S or it is not in my power to
do S′.
The argument, he claims is sound, given the six presuppositions.
But suppose, his argument continues, we let O and
O′ be the act of ordering a sea-battle and the act of
ordering no sea-battle, and Q and Q′ be the
propositions that there will and will not be such a battle; and we
substitute O and O′ for S and
S′, and Q and Q′ for P
and P′, and “tomorrow” for
“yesterday” in the argument above, then (if we make some
obvious assumptions about the relation between what we order and what
happens) we have a parallel argument which goes:
 But if Q′ is true, then it is not in my power to do
O (for a similar reason).
 But either Q is true or Q′ is true
 So, either it is not in my power to do O or it is not in my power to
do O′.
 
And this argument seems equally sound. And evidently it can be
generalised to yield the fatalist conclusion that it is never in our
power to do anything other than what we actually do.
Are there any objections to his argument?
Well, one might certainly object to presupposition 6, on the grounds
that it does indeed seem to be the passage of time which makes a
difference to my power to bring about or prevent a sea-battle on a
certain day. Till the day is over, I may have the power, but after the
day, I have not. However, presupposition 6 does not in fact seem to
play a significant role in the parallel arguments. So that cannot be
the whole story.
The objection that Taylor himself suggests is the Aristotelian one:
we reject presupposition 1 (and also, presupposition 6, since we
embrace the idea that a proposition may fail to be either true or false
at one time and come to be true or false later, as a result of the mere
passage of time). We would also, presumably, need to amend
presupposition 5, so that it was not the lack of a necessary condition
for an act which was problematical, but the existence of a condition
which was sufficient for the non-performance of the act.
Is that the only objection? Must we accept the Aristotelian solution
if we wish to escape the fatalistic conclusion?
It seems that there is an alternative to the Aristotelian solution,
because Taylor’s presupposition 5 seems dubious. A symptom of this is
that it seems to yield the fatalist conclusion a bit too easily. For
supposing that I do not perform act S (whatever it is), then
it follows immediately that there is lacking a necessary condition for
my performing S, namely the occurrence of S. So, if
presupposition 5 is right, it follows immediately that I never have
the power to perform any act which I do not actually perform. Of
course, that does not show that this conclusion is wrong; but it
enough to make one question the presupposition which entails it. And
one might suggest that not only is this presupposition false, but that
it seems true because it is easily confused with another much more
plausible proposition (equivalent to Hasker’s PEP5; see Hasker 1989,
115):
And if we substitute that for Taylor’s presupposition 5, the
parallel argument is no longer sound.
It is possible, it seems, to reply to the arguments for fatalism which
we have considered so far, without appealing to the Aristotelian
solution. We can reject the theory of truth which is crucial to
Aristotle’s argument; we can reject the idea that all statements which
are about the past are necessary; we can reject Taylor’s account of
the conditions of power. And we can do this without questioning the
idea that we cannot affect the past, except, at any rate, in the
rather ill-defined collection of cases to which Ockham draws our
attention.  However, it is open to the fatalist to argue that we have
no good reason for making the distinction we do between affecting the
past and affecting the future. So, if we accept that we cannot affect
the past, we ought also to accept that we cannot affect the future. Of
course, this cuts both ways. We might equally come to the conclusion,
in the absence of a good reason for making the distinction, that since
we can affect the future we can also affect the past; or, if that
seems outrageous, we could affect the past if natural laws did not
prevent our doing so.
This objection by the fatalist is surely right about one thing.
If we cannot affect the past, it would be good to know
why we cannot.  One possible answer would be that which an
A-theorist of time might give, namely that there is a fundamental
ontological difference between the future on the one hand and the
present and past on the other, which consists in the fact that the
present and past are real or actual, while the future is not. And it
is this fact, that the future is not real or actual, which means that
it is open, can be affected by what happens now; and it is the fact
that the present and past are real or actual which means that they
cannot be affected by what happens now.  (Lucas 1989a, Tooley
1997).
Such accounts, as we have noted above, seem to support the
Aristotelian solution. But they are not the only accounts. On some
accounts there is no such fundamental ontological difference between
the future and the present and past; the impossibility of affecting
the past lies not in the fact that the passage of time puts a
constraint on what can be caused, but rather in the fact that it is
the direction of causation which determines the direction of
time. (Swinburne 1994, Mellor 1981 and 1998) On yet other accounts the
impossibility is simply a fundamental metaphysical fact which is not
open to further analysis or explanation.
It is, of course, possible that the fatalist challenge about the
difference between the future and the present and past cannot be
successfully met. For instance, it could be argued (a) that the only
successful answer would be one which appealed to a fundamental
ontological distinction between the future and the present and past,
but that (b) there is in fact no such distinction. (Shanks 1994;
discussed in Oaklander 1998) But, as we have noted, even if this
challenge cannot be met, it does not show that the fatalist is
correct. The possibility remains that we can, in principle, affect the
past.
A problem which has been much discussed by philosophers, at least
since the time of Augustine (354–430), is whether divine omniscience is
compatible with free will, and in particular with our having the power
to do other than we do.
One way of arguing for this incompatibility is due to Pike. (Pike
1965)
Let us suppose that being omniscient involves being infallible, and
believing that p if and only if it is true that
p.
Let us also suppose that God existed in 1900, and that omniscience
is part of his essence.
Now, suppose that Jones mowed his lawn on 1/1/2000.
Then God believed in 1900 that Jones would mow his lawn on
1/1/2000.
Did Jones have the power to refrain from mowing his lawn?
No. Because that would mean either (1) that he had the power to do
something which would have brought it about that God had a false belief
in 1900, or (2) that he had the power to do something which would have
brought it about that God did not believe in 1900 that Jones would mow
his lawn on 1/1/2000, or (3) that he had the power to do something
which would have brought it about that God did not exist in 1900. And
each of these alternatives is impossible.
Are there any objections to this argument?
Naturally it would be possible to object to some of the suppositions
about the existence and nature of God. I will return to them.
First we should notice that the argument depends on a certain
principle about power which is very similar to the plausible amended
version of Taylor’s presupposition 5:
This seems plausible. One might, though, prefer to avoid all mention
of bringing about, and to rephrase the argument in
terms of counterfactuals. So, one would say instead, “…that would
mean either (1) that he had the power so to act that God would have had
a false belief in 1900, or …” (Fischer 1989, 8–11) However, the
argument seems at least as plausible when rephrased in this way.
One might object to the conclusion that God believed in 1900 that Jones
would mow his lawn on 1/1/2000, on the grounds that propositions about
future contingents are not true. So if God is omniscient in the way
assumed, he would not hold this belief.
Ockham’s answer to the problem of divine foreknowledge was to invoke
the difference between propositions which are really about the past
(those that express “hard” facts about the past) and those
which are verbally about the past but which are really in part about
the future (those that express “soft” facts about the
past). The crucial point was that, even if someone lacked the power to
do something inconsistent with a hard fact about the past, one might
have the power to do something inconsistent with a soft fact about the
past. To make such a solution work in the case of the problem posed by
Pike’s argument, it would be necessary to show, or at any rate to make
it plausible, that one of the alternatives mentioned above was in fact
open to Jones, because what he would be bringing about would be
inconsistent with a soft fact about the past, not a hard fact. The
difficulty for this strategy, though, is to give an account of soft
facts about the past, or at least a species of soft facts about the
past, which meets two conditions: (1) it makes it true that in one of
the cases what Jones would be bringing about would be inconsistent
with a soft fact of the right sort, and also (2) it is such that it is
plausible (at any rate in advance of any fatalist proofs to the
contrary) that in the case of soft facts of that sort it is in
principle possible at a later date to bring things about which are
inconsistent with them. (The Introduction to Fischer 1989, and many of
the articles in it are relevant to these issues.)
It is easy enough to give an account of soft facts which fails,
apparently, to meet the second condition. For instance we might say that a
proposition expresses a soft fact about a time if it entails a
proposition about another time. By that criterion “God infallibly
believes in 1900 that Jones will mow the lawn on 1/1/2100” expresses a
soft fact, because it entails that Jones will mow the lawn on 1/1/2100.
But we can hardly go on to say that for that reason there is no problem
about Jones’s having the power to refrain from mowing the lawn, since
refraining is inconsistent with a merely soft fact. To say that the
proposition about God entails that Jones will mow the lawn is to state
the problem. It can hardly in itself constitute the solution. If it did
we could solve the argument for fatalism which is based on causal
determinism simply by pointing out that, if determinism is true, the
fact that Jones will mow the lawn is entailed by a proposition about
initial conditions and laws of nature, so that the latter is merely a
soft fact.
It is also, as we have seen in connexion with logical fatalism, easy
enough to delineate a species of soft facts about the past which do
meet the second condition. An example would be a proposition which is
equivalent to one conjoining “Jones will mow the lawn on 1/1/2000”
with any proposition about the past
which does not entail it. But it is difficult to see how this
species of soft facts could fulfil the first condition.
Of course, the prospects of providing a solution would be satisfying 
if it could be made plausible that in some cases it is
in people’s powers to do things which are inconsistent with
hard facts about the past, not just soft facts. But to take
that approach is, in effect, to abandon the idea of an Ockhamist
solution, and to move on to the next solution.
One possible solution is to suggest that Pike’s second alternative is
possible, without any appeal to softness of facts. According to this
solution, in some cases people have the power do things which are
inconsistent with the actual facts about the past, even though they are
hard facts. That is to say, in some cases people have the power to
affect the past. In particular the suggestion is that Jones had the
power to do something which would have brought it about that God did
not believe in 1900 that he would mow the lawn. (Anglin 1986) The
plausibility of such a solution will depend largely on the strength of
the arguments for the impossibility of affecting the past.
Now some such arguments seek merely to demonstrate this
impossibility without offering any further explanation for it. And it
may be contended that most of the arguments of this sort which are at
all compelling involve appealing to the obvious impossibility that an
event might prevent its own occurrence, and to the slightly less
obvious impossibility that an event might bring about its own
occurrence. But, in reply to such arguments, it may be claimed that
these impossibilities are not sufficient to rule out the possibility
that one event might bring about an earlier event, as long as the world
is so organised as to avoid these impossible outcomes. If so, it is not
clear why God should not have so organised it. And in particular it is
not clear why God should not have so organised things that it is
possible for us to do things which affect what beliefs he holds.
However, as we have seen, other arguments for the impossibility of
affecting the past go further, and incorporate an explanation for the
impossibility. A successful defence against theological fatalism which
appealed to the possibility of affecting the past would have to deal
with these further issues.
Boethius (c480–524) offered a solution to the problem which in effect
denied the supposition that God existed in 1900 or believed anything
in 1900.  (Boethius, The Consolation of Philosophy, Book V)
God is, on this view, outside time; he is timelessly eternal. Thomas
Aquinas (1225–74) also offered this solution. (Aquinas, Summa
Theologica, Article 13) The idea behind the solution is, of
course, that if God’s knowledge is not temporal there is no reason
why Jones should not have the power to bring it about that God knows
that he refrains from mowing the lawn on 1/1/2000 instead of knowing
that he mows the lawn then, since possessing that power would not
require having the power to affect the past.
There may be a number of problems about whether a personal God could
be timeless, and how, if at all, he could relate to a temporal world,
but it is worth noting one particular problem. The problem is that,
although this solution does not appeal to the possibility of affecting
the past, it may be vulnerable to some of the considerations which
would tell against that possibility. For suppose that we are unable to
affect the past, and that the explanation for this inability is that,
whereas the future is not real, not actual, the past and present are
real and actual. Then it would seem that we would not be able to affect
a timeless God’s beliefs because, not being future, they would be as
real as any past beliefs. (Adams 1987, 1135; Zagzebski 1991, 61) Or
suppose instead that the explanation for our inability to affect the
past is that, if our action brings anything about, that in itself would
constitute our action’s being earlier than the thing brought about.
Then it might seem that the idea that we could bring about a timeless
belief would have to be dismissed; the very fact that a belief was
brought about would make it later than whatever brought it about, and
so not timeless. (Though there would be some logical space, perhaps,
for a view that, whereas it was true of temporal events that,
if they were brought about, they must be later than what brought them
about, this was not true of events in general.)
Of course, such considerations need not be fatal to the Boethian
solution, because the view that the future is unreal, and the view that
the temporal order is determined by the causal order are both
controversial. What it does seem to mean, though, is that there is less
room than one might have supposed for the success of the solution if it
is impossible to affect the past.(Rice 2006)
It is worth noticing a further potential awkwardness for the Boethian
solution. If it is really impossible to affect the past, then, even if
the Boethian solution would mean that God could know that Jones would
mow the lawn on 1/1/2000 without compromising Jones’s power to
refrain, he could not, on the basis of this knowledge, bring about
events in the world before 1/1/2000, which he would not have brought
about if Jones had refrained; for if he did, this would mean that
Jones had the power so to act that things would have been different
before 1/1/2000; that is, he would have had the power to affect the
past.
Pike’s argument rests on the supposition that God’s omniscience involves
having beliefs. But this may be questioned. (Alston 1986) Instead his
knowledge, in particular of our actions, may be thought as Russellian
acquaintance knowledge; that is, as consisting of a simple cognitive
relation between the knower and what is known. (Russell 1912, Chapter
5) The idea would be that, although in humans acquaintance knowledge
gives rise to beliefs, God has just the cognitive relation to what he
knows, without any consequent beliefs. This seems to have been the way
Boethius and Aquinas thought of it.  (Boethius, The Consolation of
Philosophy, Book V, Prose 6; Aquinas, Summa Theologica,
Article 13)
How would this view about God’s knowledge affect the question of
whether divine omniscience entails fatalism? 
Both Boethius and Aquinas thought of God as outside time, but this
view about God’s knowledge could also be combined with the view that
he is inside time. In that case it seems that it would be be possible
to adopt an Ockhamist account of how his knowledge in 1900 might be
dependent on what Jones does on 1/1/2000. Certainly it looks as if
“God was aware in 1900 of Jones’s mowing the lawn on 1/1/2000” is
partly about 1/1/2000.  And, given that this awareness is supposed to
be a simple relation, there is no question of producing an analysis of
the proposition which represents it as a conjunction of propositions
each of which seem to express facts which do not depend on anything
Jones can do. We should notice, however, the same awkwardness could
arise in connection with God’s use of his knowledge as arose
for the Boethian solution. If it is impossible to affect the
past, then God could not make use of his knowledge that Jones would
mow the lawn on 1/1/2000 to bring something about before that date, if
Jones had the power to refrain from mowing.
There is no reason, of course, why this account of the nature of God’s
knowledge should not be combined with the view that the future is
unreal. In that case God would not come to know of Jones’s mowing of
the lawn before 1/1/2000, because there would as yet be no fact for
him to be aware of. But this would not compromise his omniscience,
since, presumably, on this account of knowledge, omniscience would be
a matter of knowing all the facts.
For that matter, the account could also be combined with both the view
that God is outside time and the view that the future is unreal
— as long as these two views themselves are indeed
compatible. In that case it would not be true before 1/1/2000 that God
timelessly knows the Jones mows the lawn, but would be true on
1/1/2000 and thereafter. Of course, a timeless being cannot change,
but this would not involve a change in God, but merely a change in
what he is related to. (The number 10 does not change when I refer to
it.)
Of course the threat of fatalism, when it arises from God’s existence,
could be averted by denying that God exists. But it could also be
averted by denying that God needs to be thought of as omniscient
— at any rate if omniscience involves infallible knowledge of
all facts. It could be argued that God’s perfection does not require
the infallible knowledge of all facts, but at most such knowledge of
all facts that could possibly be known infallibly. So, if it is
logically impossible for someone to have infallible knowledge that
Jones will mow the lawn and for Jones to have the power to refrain, it
is no imperfection in God if he lacks such knowledge. (Swinburne 1977,
172–8). It could also be argued that there is no need to attribute
infallible knowledge to God at all. (Lucas 1986 and 1989b)
Some philosophers, notably Luis de Molina (1535–1600) and Alvin
Plantinga, have held that God knows not only what actual people will
freely do in the future, but what each possible free creature would
have freely done in each set of possible circumstances, if fully
specific; and that he had this knowledge at the creation. (An action
is free in the required sense if not causally determined and not
predetermined by God.)  Propositions about what a creature would do in
a set of circumstances (possible as well as actual) are commonly
called “counterfactuals of freedom”, and God’s knowledge
of them is called “middle knowledge”. (Molina, On
Divine Foreknowledge (Part IV of the Concordia); Plantinga 1974,
IX))
If God’s knowledge of actual future actions would constitute a
fatalistic threat, his middle knowledge could not be less threatening,
since, given middle knowledge, he would have knowledge of actual
actions on the basis of his knowledge of the circumstances. In fact it
seems that it is more threatening.
Of course, one way of avoiding the threat would be to deny that
there are in general any facts about what people would have freely done
in circumstances that have not actually arisen; there may be facts
about what they might have done, or what they would very probably have
done; but not what they would have done. (Adams 1977; Hasker
1989, 20–9) Indeed this seems to be quite plausible if we really think
of people’s actions as undetermined. It may help us to see this if we
consider the tossing of a coin. Let us suppose that a coin is tossed on
some occasion, and it comes down heads; and suppose we then ask if it
would have come down heads again if we had tossed it again in exactly
the same circumstances. It seems plausible, if we think that how it
landed was undetermined, that the right answer is that it might have
come down heads and it might have come down tails, but that it is not
the case that it would have come down heads, nor the case that it would
have come down tails.
So one solution to the fatalistic threat posed by middle knowledge is
akin to the Aristotelian solution. Since there are no facts of the
relevant sort, God cannot have knowledge of them. But, because there
are no such facts, God’s lack of knowledge of how free creatures would
freely act is no bar to his omniscience.
Are there any other solutions?
It is difficult to see how there could be. In the case of actual
actions, the solutions depended on suggesting ways in which it might
have been possible for Jones to do something which would bring it about
that some fact about God was different; that is to say that they
depended on showing how some fact about God might be dependent on what
Jones did. Now in the case of middle knowledge we know how such a
dependence would have to operate; it would have to operate by way of
God’s knowledge of counterfactuals of freedom. So, could the truth of
counterfactuals of freedom related to Jones be dependent on Jones’s
actions? It seems that they could not be, because the facts that make
them true were available to God at the creation, before he had decided
to create anything, let alone Jones. So the facts, like God’s decision,
must have been ontologically prior, it seems, to any act of Jones’s. So
it seems that it could not be in Jones’s power so to act that any
actually true counterfactual of freedom relating to him would not have
been true. (Hasker 1989, 39–52; see Hasker et al. 2000 for a collection
of writings on middle knowledge.)
Aristotle mentions, as a corollary of the conclusion that everything
that happens, happens of necessity, that “there would be no need to
deliberate or to take trouble (thinking that if we do this, this will
happen, but if we do not, it will not).” (Aristotle, De
Interpretatione, 18b31–3)
This thought was spelt out in what was known as “the Idle
Argument” (Bobzien 1998, Section 5). It went like this:
If it is fated that you will recover from this illness, then,
regardless of whether you consult a doctor or you do not consult a
doctor you will recover.
 But also, if it is fated that you will not recover from this
illness, then, regardless of whether you consult a doctor or you do not
consult a doctor you will not recover.
 But either it is fated that you will recover from this illness or it is fated that
you will not recover.
 Therefore it is futile to consult a doctor.
The thought, presumably, is that it is futile, because what you do
will have no effect. If so, the reply given by Chrysippus (c280-c206
B.C.E.) to this argument seems exactly right. (Bobzien 1998, 5.2) The
conclusion does not follow, because it may have been fated that you
will recover as a result of seeing the doctor. The corresponding reply
would be equally apt if we substituted “necessary” for
“fated”.
Some versions of the argument omit “it is fated that”. (Bobzien
1998, 189). It goes without saying that the corresponding version of
Chrysippus’s reply would deal with those versions of the argument.
This is not to say that fatalism does not pose any problem at all
for the rationality of deliberation. It is just to say that the Idle
Argument does not show that it poses a problem.
There are a number of arguments for fatalism, and it seems that one
way of countering all of them would be to adopt the Aristotelian
solution, or something akin to it. It would be neat if it could be made
out that this was the only solution, so that the fate of fatalism was
inextricably linked to the fate of the Aristotelian solution. But it
does not seem that this is so, except possibly, on the assumption that
an omniscient God exists, in relation to middle knowledge. But even
then, the solution is only a poor relation to the Aristotelian
solution.
So it is possible that both fatalism and the Aristotelian solution
are wrong. And it is, of course, always possible, for all that has been
said, that fatalism is correct.