Much valuable scholarship explicates the central terms
‘federalism’, ‘federation’ and ‘federal
systems’ (cf. Wheare 1964, King 1982, Elazar 1987, Elazar 1987a,
Riker 1993, Watts 1998).
A federal political order is here taken to be “the
genus of political organization that is marked by the combination of
shared rule and self-rule” (Watts 1998,
120). Federalism is the theory or advocacy of such an order,
including principles for dividing final authority between member units
and the common institutions. 
A federation is one species of such a federal order; other
species are unions, confederations, leagues and decentralised
unions—and hybrids such as the present European Union (Elazar
1987, Watts 1998). A federation in this sense involves
a territorial division of power between constituent
units—sometimes called ‘provinces’,
‘cantons’, possibly ‘cities’, or confusingly ‘states’—and a
common government. This division of power is typically entrenched in a
constitution which neither a member unit nor the common government can
alter unilaterally. The member unit and the common government both
have direct effect on the citizenry—the common government
operates “on the individual citizens composing the nation”
(Federalist Paper 39)—and the authorities of both are directly
elected (Watts 1998, 121). In comparison, decentralized authority in
unitary states can typically be revoked by the central legislature at
will. Many multilevel forms of governance may also be revised by units at one level without consent by bodies at other levels. Such entrenchments notwithstanding, some centralization often occurs owing to the constitutional interpretations by a federal level
court in charge of settling conflicts regarding the scopes of final
legislative and/or judicial authority.
In contrast, ‘confederation’ has come to mean a political order
with a weaker center than a federation, often dependent on the
constituent units (Watts 1998, 121). Typically, in a confederation a)
member units may legally exit, b) the center only exercises authority
delegated by member units, c) the center is subject to member unit
veto on many issues, d) center decisions bind member units but not
citizens directly, e) the center lacks an independent fiscal or
electoral base, and/or f) the member units do not cede
authority permanently to the center.  Confederations are often based
on agreements for specific tasks, and the common government may be
completely exercised by delegates of the member unit governments. Thus
many would count as confederations the North American states during
1776–1787, Switzerland 1291–1847, and the present European
Union—though it has several elements typical of
federations.
In symmetric (con)federations the member
units have the same bundles of powers, while in asymmetric
(con)federations such as Russia, Canada, the
European Union, Spain, or India the bundles may be different among
member units; some member units may for instance have special rights
regarding language or culture. Some asymmetric arrangements involve
one smaller state and a larger, where the smaller partakes in
governing the larger while retaining sovereignty on some issues
(Elazar 1987, Watts 1998). 
If the decisions made centrally do not involve member units at all, we
may speak of separate (split or compact)
federalism. The USA is often given as example, since the two Senators
from each state are not representing or selected by member unit (i.e. State)
authorities but by electors voted directly by citizens—though
this is by member unit decision (U.S. Constitution Art. II Section 1;
cf. Dahl 2001). Federations can involve member units in central
decision-making in at least two different ways in various forms of
interlocking (or cooperative) federalism. Member
unit representatives can participate within central bodies—in
cabinets or legislatures—(collective agency
compositional arrangement); in addition they often constitute one
central body that interacts with other such bodies, for instance where
member unit government representatives form an Upper House with power
to veto or postpone decisions by majority or qualified majority vote
(divided agency/relational arrangements).
Several authors identify two quite distinct processes that lead to a federal political order (Friedrich 1968, Buchanan 1995, Stepan 1999 and
others).  Independent states may aggregate by ceding or pooling
sovereign powers in certain domains for the sake of goods otherwise
unattainable, such as security or economic prosperity. Such coming
together federal political orders are typically arranged to
constrain the center and prevent majorities from overriding a member
unit.  Examples include the present USA, Canada, Switzerland, and
Australia. Holding together federal political orders develop
from unitary states, as governments devolve authority to alleviate
threats of unrest or secession by territorially clustered
minorities. Such federal political orders often grant some member
units particular domains of sovereignty e.g. over language and
cultural rights in an asymmetric federation, while
maintaining broad scope of action for the central government and
majorities. Examples include India, Belgium and Spain.
In addition to territorially organized federal political orders, other
interesting alternatives to unitary states occur
when non-territorial member units are constituted by groups
sharing ethnic, religious or other characteristics. These systems are
sometimes referred to as ‘non-territorial’
federations. Karl Renner and Otto Bauer explored such arrangements for
geographically dispersed cultural minorities, allowing them some
cultural and “personal” autonomy without territorial self
rule (Bauer 1903; Renner 1907; Bottomore and Goode 1978; cf. Tamir
1993 and Nimni 2005). Consociations consist of somewhat insulated groups in
member units who in addition are represented in central institutions
often governing by unanimity rather than by majority (Lijphart 1977).
A wide-spread interest among political philosophers in topics
concerning the centralised nation state have fuelled attention to
historical contributions on unitary sovereignty. However, we can also
identify a steady stream of contributions to the philosophy of
federalism, also by those more well known for their arguments
concerning centralised power (cf. Karmis and Norman 2005 for such
readings).
Several of the early contributors to federalist thought explored the
rationale and weaknesses of centralised states as they emerged and
developed in the 17th and 18th century. Johannes Althusius
(1557–1630) is often regarded as the father of modern federalist
thought. He argued in Politica Methodice Digesta (Althusius
1603) for autonomy of his city Emden, both against its Lutheran
provincial Lord and against the Catholic Emperor.  Althusius was
strongly influenced by French Huguenots and Calvinism. As a permanent
minority in several states, Calvinists developed a doctrine of
resistance as the right and duty of “natural leaders” to
resist tyranny. Orthodox Calvinists insisted on sovereignty in the
social circles subordinate only to God's laws. The French Protestant
Huguenots developed a theory of legitimacy further, presented 1579 by
an author with the telling pseudonym “Junius Brutus”
in Vindiciae Contra Tyrannos. The people, regarded as a
corporate body in territorial hierarchical communities, has a
God-granted right to resist rulers without rightful claim. Rejecting
theocracy, Althusius developed a non-sectarian, non-religious
contractualist political theory of federations that prohibited state
intervention even for purposes of promoting the right
faith. Accommodation of dissent and diversity prevailed over any
interest in subordinating political powers to religion or vice
versa.
Since humans are fundamentally dependent on others for the reliable
provision of requirements of a comfortable and holy life, we require
communities and associations that are both instrumentally and
intrinsically important for supporting [subsidia] our
needs. Families, guilds, cities, provinces, states and other
associations owe their legitimacy and claims to political power to
their various roles in enabling a holy life, rather than to
individuals' interest in autonomy.  Each association claims autonomy
within its own sphere against intervention by other
associations. Borrowing a term originally used for the alliance
between God and men, Althusius holds that associations enter into
secular agreements—pactum foederis—to live
together in mutual benevolence.
Several early contributors explored what we may now regard as various
species of federal political orders, partly with an eye to resolving
inter-state conflicts.
Ludolph Hugo (ca. 1630–1704) was the first to distinguish
confederations based on alliances, decentralized unitary states such
as the Roman Empire, and federations, characterized by ‘double
governments’ with territorial division of powers, in De
Statu Regionum Germanie (1661) (cf. Elazar 1998; Riley 1976).
In The Spirit of Laws (1748) Charles de Secondat, Baron de
Montesquieu (1689–1755) argued for confederal arrangements as
combining the best of small and large political units, without the
disadvantages of either. On the one hand they could provide the
advantages of small states such as republican participation and
liberty understood as non-domination—that is, security against
abuse of power. At the same time confederal orders secure the benefits
of larger states such as military security, without the risks of small
and large states. A ‘confederate republic’ with separation
of powers allows sufficient homogeneity and identification within
sufficiently small member units. The member units in turn pool powers
sufficient to secure external security, reserving the right to secede
(Book 9, 1). Member units serve as checks on each other, since other
member units may intervene to quell insurrection and power abuse in
one member unit. These themes reoccur in later contributions, up to
and including discussions concerning the European Union (cf. Levy
2004, 2005, 2007).
David Hume (1711–1776) disagreed with Montesquieu that smaller
size is better. Instead, “in a large democracy … there is
compass and room enough to refine the democracy.” In “Idea
of a Perfect Commonwealth” (Hume 1752) Hume recommended a
federal arrangement for deliberation of laws involving both member
unit and central legislatures. Member units enjoy several powers and
partake in central decisions, but their laws and court judgments can
always be overruled by the central bodies, hence it seems that
Hume’s model is not federal as the term is used here.  He held
that such a numerous and geographically large system would do better
than small cities in preventing decisions based on “intrigue,
prejudice or passion” against the public interest.
Several 18th century peace plans for Europe recommended confederal
arrangements. The 1713 Peace Plan of Abbé Charles de
Saint-Pierre (1658–1743) would allow intervention in member
units to quell rebellion and wars on non-members to force them to join
an established confederation, and required unanimity for changes to
the agreement.
Jean-Jacques Rousseau (1712–1778) presented and critiqued
Saint-Pierre’s proposal, listing several conditions including
that all major powers must be members, that the joint legislation must be
binding, that the joint forces must be stronger than any single state,
and that secession must be illegal. Again, unanimity was required for
changes to the agreement.
Immanuel Kant (1724–1804) defended a confederation for peace in
On Perpetual Peace (1796). His Second Definite Article of a
Perpetual Peace holds that the right of nations shall be based on a
pacific federation among free states rather than a peace treaty or an
international state: “This federation does not aim to acquire any power
like that of a state, but merely to preserve and secure the freedom of
each state in itself, along with that of the other confederated states,
although this does not mean that they need to submit to public laws and
to a coercive power which enforces them, as do men in a state of
nature.”
The discussions surrounding the U.S. Constitutional Convention of 1787
marks a clear development in federal thought. A central feature is
that federations were seen as uniting not only member units as in
confederations, but also the citizenry directly. 
The Articles of Confederation of 1781 among the 13 American states
fighting British rule had established a center too weak for law
enforcement, defense and for securing interstate commerce. What has
become known as the U.S. Constitutional Convention met May
25–September 17, 1787. It was explicitly restricted to revise the
Articles, but ended up recommending more fundamental changes. The
proposed constitution prompted widespread debate and arguments
addressing the benefits and risks of federalism versus confederal
arrangements, leading eventually to the Constitution that took effect
in 1789.
The “Anti-federalists” were fearful of undue
centralization. They worried that the powers of central authorities
were not sufficiently constrained e.g., by a bill of rights (John
DeWitt 1787, Richard Henry Lee) that was eventually ratified
in 1791. They also feared that the center might gradually usurp the
member units’ powers. Citing Montesquieu, another pseudonymous
‘Brutus’ doubted whether a republic of such geographical
size with so many inhabitants with conflicting interests could avoid
tyranny and would allow common deliberation and decision based on
local knowledge (Brutus (Robert Yates?) 1787).
In The Federalist Papers, James
Madison (1751–1836), Alexander Hamilton (1755–1804) and John Jay
(1745–1829) argued vigorously for the suggested model of interlocking
federal arrangements (Federalist 10, 45, 51, 62). Madison and Hamilton
agreed with Hume that the risk of tyranny by passionate majorities was
reduced in larger republics where member units of shared interest could
and would check each other: “A rage for paper money, for an abolition
of debts, for an equal division of property, or for any improper or
wicked project, will be less likely to pervade the whole body of the
Union than a particular member of it.” (Federalist 10). Splitting
sovereignty between member unit and center would also protect
individuals’ rights against abuse by authorities at either level,
or so believed Hamilton, quoting Montesquieu at length to this effect
(Federalist 9).
Noting the problems of allocating powers correctly, Madison
supported placing some authority with member units since they would be
best fit to address “local circumstances and lesser
interests” otherwise neglected by the center (Federalist 37).
Madison and Hamilton urged centralized powers of defense and
interstate commerce (Federalist 11, 23), and argued for the need to
solve coordination and assurance problems of partial compliance,
through two new means: Centralized enforcement and direct applicability
of central decisions to individuals (Federalist 16, also noted by
Tocqueville 1835–40). They were wary of granting member units veto power
typical of confederal arrangements, since that would render the center
weak and cause “tedious delays; continual negotiation and
intrigue; contemptible compromises of the public good.” (Madison
and Hamilton, Federalist 22; and cf. 20).
They were particularly concerned to address worries of undue
centralization, arguing that such worries should be addressed not by
constraining the extent of power in the relevant fields, such as
defense, but instead by the composition of the central authority
(Federalist 31). They also claimed that the people would maintain
stronger “affection, esteem, and reverence” towards the member unit
government owing to its public visibility in the day-to-day
administration of criminal and civil justice (Federalist 17).
John Stuart Mill (1806–1873), in chapter 17 of Considerations on
Representative Government (1861), recommended federations among
“portions of mankind” not disposed to live under a common government,
to prevent wars among themselves and protect against aggression. He
would also allow the center sufficient powers so as to ensure all
benefits of union—including powers to prevent frontier duties
to facilitate commerce. He listed three necessary conditions for a
federation: sufficient mutual sympathy “of race, language, religion,
and, above all, of political institutions, as conducing most to a
feeling of identity of political interest”; no member unit so powerful as
to not require union for defense nor tempt unduly to secession; and
rough equality of strength among member units to prevent internal
domination by one or two. Mill also claimed among the benefits of
federations that they reduce the number of weak states hence reduce
temptation to aggression, ending wars and restrictions on commence
among member units; and that federations are less aggressive, only using
their power defensively. Further benefits from federations—and from decentralized authority in general—might include learning from ‘experiments in living'. 
Pierre-Joseph Proudhon (1809–1865), in Du Principe
fédératif (1863) defended federalism as the best way
to retain individual liberty within ‘natural’ communities
such as families and guilds who enter pacts among themselves for
necessary and specific purposes. The state is only one of several
non-sovereign agents in charge of coordinating, without final
authority.
While Proudhon was wary of centralisation, authors such as Harold
Laski warned of ‘The Obsolesence of Federalism’
(1939). The important problems, such as those wrought by ‘giant
capitalism,’ require more centralised responses than federal
arrangements can muster. 
Philosophical reflections on federalism were invigorated during and
after the Second World War, for several reasons.  Altiero Spinelli and
Ernesto Rossi called for a European federal state in the Ventotene
Manifesto, published 1944. They condemned totalitarian,
centralised states and the never ending conflicts among them. Instead
there should be enough shared control over military and economic
power, yet “each State will retain the autonomy it needs for a
plastic articulation and development of political life according to
the particular characteristics of the various peoples.” Many
explain and justify the European Union along precisely these lines,
while others are more critical.
Hannah Arendt (1906–1975) traced both totalitarianism and
industrialized mass murder to flaws in the sovereign nation-state
model. Skeptical both of liberal internationalism and political
realism, she instead urged a Republican federal model or ideal type
wherein “the federated units mutually check and control their
powers” (Arendt 1972).
The exit of colonial
powers also left multi-ethnic states that required creative solutions to
combine self rule and shared rule (Karmis and Norman 2005). In
addition, globalisation has prompted not only integration and
harmonisation, but also—partly in response—explorations of ways to
still maintain some local self rule (Watts 1998).
Developments of the European Union and backlash against its particular forms of political and legal integration is one major cause of renewed attention to the philosophy of federalism. Recent philosophical discussions have addressed
several issues, including centrally the reasons for federalism, and
attention to the sources of stability and instability; the legitimate
division of power between member unit and center; distributive
justice, challenges to received democratic theory, and concerns about
the politics of recognition.
Many arguments for federalism have traditionally been put in terms
of promoting various forms of liberty in the form of non-domination,
immunity or enhanced opportunity sets (Elazar 1987a). When considering
reasons offered in the literature for federal political orders, many
appear to be in favor of decentralization without requiring
constitutional entrenchment of split authority. Two sets of arguments
can be distinguished: Arguments favoring federal orders compared with
secession and completely independent sovereign states; and arguments
supporting federal arrangements rather than a (further) centralized
unitary state. They occur in different forms and from different
starting points, in defense of ‘coming together’
federalism, and in favor of ‘holding together’
federalism.
There are several suggested reasons for a federal order rather than
separate states or secession.
Federations may foster peace, in the senses of preventing wars
and preventing fears of war, in several ways. States can join a
(con)federation to become jointly powerful enough to dissuade external
aggressors, and/or to prevent aggressive and preemptive wars among
themselves. The European federalists Altieri Spinelli, Ernesto Rossi
and Eugenio Colorni argued the latter in the 1941 Ventotene Manifesto:
Only a European federation could prevent war between totalitarian,
aggressive states. Such arguments assume, of course, that the
(con)federation will not become more aggressive than each state
separately, a point Mill argued.
Federations can promote economic prosperity by removing
internal barriers to trade, through economies of scale, by establishing
and maintaining inter-member unit trade agreements, or by becoming a
sufficiently large global player to affect international trade regimes
(for the latter regarding the EU, cf. Keohane and Nye 2001, 260).
Federal arrangements may protect individuals against political
authorities by constraining state sovereignty, placing some powers with
the center. By entrusting the center with authority to intervene in
member units, the federal arrangements can protect minorities’ human
rights against member unit authorities (Federalist, Watts 1999). Such
arguments assume, of course, that abuse by the center is less
likely.
Federations can facilitate some objectives of sovereign states,
such as credible commitments,certain kinds of coordination, and
control over externalities, by transferring some powers to a common
body. Since cooperation in some areas can ‘spill over’ and
create demands for further coordination in other sectors, federations
often exhibit creeping centralization.
Federal arrangements may enhance the political
influence of formerly sovereign governments, both by facilitating
coordination, and—particularly for small states—by giving
these member units influence or even veto over policy making, rather
than remaining mere policy takers.
Federal political orders can be preferred as the appropriate form
of nested organizations, for instance in ‘organic’
conceptions of the political and social order. The federation may
promote cooperation, justice or other values among and within member units
as well as among and within their constituent units, for instance by
monitoring, legislating, enforcing or funding agreements, human rights,
immunity from interference, or development. Starting with the family,
each larger unit responsible for facilitating the flourishing of
member units and securing common goods beyond their reach 
without a common authority. Such arguments have been offered by such
otherwise divergent authors as Althusius, the Catholic traditions of
subsidiarity as expressed by popes Leo XIII (1891) and Pius XI (1931),
and Proudhon.
There are several reasons for preferring federal orders over a
unitary state:
Federal arrangements may protect against central authorities by
securing immunity and non-domination for minority groups or
nations. Constitutional allocation of powers to a member unit protects
individuals from the center, while interlocking arrangements provide
influence on central decisions via member unit bodies (Madison, Hume,
Goodin 1996). Member units may thus check central authorities and
prevent undue action contrary to the will of minorities: “A great
democracy must either sacrifice self-government to unity or preserve
it by federalism. The coexistence of several nations under the same
State is a test, as well as the best security of its freedom … The
combination of different nations in one State is as necessary a
condition of civilized life as the combination of men in society”
(Acton 1907, 277).
More specifically, federal arrangements can accommodate
minority nations who aspire to self determination and the preservation
of their culture, language or religion. Such autonomy and immunity
arrangements are clearly preferable to the political conflicts that
might result from such groups' attempts at secession. Central
authorities may respond with human rights abuses, civil wars or ethnic
cleansing to prevent such secessionist movements. 
Federal orders may increase the opportunities for citizen
participation in public decision-making; through deliberation and
offices in both member unit and central bodies that ensures character
formation through political participation among more citizens (Mill
1861, ch. 15).
Federal orders may facilitate learning by fostering alternative solutions to similar problems and sharing lessons from such a laboratory of ‘experiments in living' (Rose-Ackerman 1980).
Federations may facilitate efficient preference maximization
more generally, as formalized in the literature on economic and fiscal
federalism—though many such arguments support decentralization
rather than federalism proper. Research on ‘fiscal
federalism’ addresses the optimal allocation of authority,
typically recommending central redistribution but local provision of
public goods. Federal arrangements may allow more optimal matching of
the authority to create public goods to specific affected subsets of
the populations. If individuals' preferences vary systematically by
territory according to external or internal parameters such as
geography or shared tastes and values, federal—or
decentralized—arrangements that allow local variation may be
well suited for several reasons. Local decisions prevent overload of
centralised decision-making, and local decision-makers may also have a
better grasp of affected preferences and alternatives, making for
better service than would be provided by a central government that
tends to ignore local preference variations (Smith 1776,
680). Granting powers to population subsets that share preferences
regarding public services may also increase efficiency by allowing
these subsets to create such ‘internalities’ and
‘club goods’ at costs borne only by them (Musgrave 1959,
179–80, Olson 1969, Oates’ 1972 ‘Decentralization
Theorem’). 
Federal arrangements can also shelter territorially based
groups with preferences that diverge from the majority population,
such as ethnic or cultural minorities, so that they are not subject to
majority decisions severely or systematically contrary to their
preferences. Non-unitary arrangements may thus minimize coercion and
be responsive to as many citizens as possible (Mill 1861 ch. 15,
Elazar 1968; Lijphart 1999). Such considerations of economic
efficiency and majority decisions may favor federal solutions, with
“only indivisibilities, economies of scale, externalities, and
strategic requirements … acceptable as efficiency arguments in
favor of allocating powers to higher levels of government”
(Padou-Schioppa 1995, 155).
Federal arrangements may not only protect existing clusters of
individuals with shared values or preferences, but may also promote
mobility and hence territorial clustering of individuals with similar
preferences. Member unit autonomy to experiment may foster competition
for individuals who are free to move where their preferences are best
met. Such mobility towards member units with like-minded individuals
may add to the benefits of local autonomy over the provision of public
services—absent economies of scale and externalities (Tiebout
1956, Buchanan 2001)—though the result may be that those with
costly needs and who are less mobile are left worse off.
Much recent attention has focused on philosophical issues arising from
empirical findings concerning federalism, and has been spurred by
quite different dilemmas facing—inter alia—Canada,
Australia, Nepal, several European states and the European Union.
Federal political orders require attention to several constitutional
and other institutional issues, some of which raise peculiar and
intriguing issues of normative political theory (Watts 1998; Norman
2006).
Composition: How to determine the boundaries of the member
units, e.g., along geographical, ethnic or cultural lines; whether
establishment of new member units from old should require
constitutional changes, whether to allow secession and if so how,
etc.
Distribution of Power: The allocation of legislative,
executive, judicial and constitution-amending power between
the member units and the central institutions. In asymmetric
arrangements some of these may differ among member units.
Power Sharing: The form of influence by member units in central
decision-making bodies within the interlocking political
systems.
These tasks must be resolved taking due account of several important
considerations noted below.
As political orders go, federal political arrangements pose
peculiar problems concerning stability and trust. Federations tend to drift
toward disintegration in the form of secession, or toward
centralization in the direction of a unitary state. 
Such instability should come as no surprise given the tensions
typically giving rise to federal political orders in the first place,
such as tensions between majority and minority national communities
in multinational federations. Federal political orders are therefore
often marked by a high level of ‘constitutional
politics’. The details of their constitutions and other
institutions may affect these conflicts and their outcomes in drastic
ways. Political parties often disagree on constitutional issues
regarding the appropriate areas of member unit autonomy, the forms of
cooperation and how to prevent fragmentation. Such sampling bias among
states that federalize to hold together makes it difficult to assess
claims that federal responses perpetuate cleavages and fuel rather
than quell secessionist movements.  Some nevertheless argue that
democratic, interlocking federations alleviate such tendencies (Simeon
1998, Simeon and Conway 2001, Linz 1997; cf. McKay 2001, Filippov,
Ordeshook and Shvetsova 2004).
Many authors note that the challenges of stability must be addressed
not only by institutional design, but also by ensuring that citizens
have an ‘overarching loyalty’ to the federation as whole in
addition to loyalty toward their own member unit (Franck 1968, Linz 1997).
The legitimate bases, content and division of such a public dual
allegiance are central topics of political philosophies of federalism
(Norman 1995a, Choudhry 2001). Some accept (limited) appeals to
considerations such as shared history, practices, culture, or ethnicity
for delineating member units and placing certain powers with them, even if
such ‘communitarian’ features are regarded as more
problematic bases for (unitary) political orders (Kymlicka 1995,
Habermas 1996, 500). The appropriate consideration that voters and
their member unit politicians should give to the interests of others in
the federation in interlocking arrangements must be clarified if the
notion of citizen of two commonwealths is to be coherent and
durable.
Another and related central philosophical topic is the critical
assessment of alleged grounds for federal arrangements in general, and
the division of power between member units and central bodies in
particular, indicated in the preceding sections. Recent contributions
include Knop et al. 1995, Kymlicka 2001, Kymlicka and Norman 2000,
Nicolaidis and Howse 2001, Norman 2006. Among the important issues,
especially due to the risks of instability, are:
How the powers should be allocated, given that they should be
used—but may be abused—by political entrepreneurs at
several levels to affect their claims. The concerns about stability
require careful attention to the impact of these powers on the ability
to create and maintain ‘dual loyalties’ among the
citizenry.
How to ensure that neither member units nor the central
authorities overstep their jurisdiction. As Mill noted, “the
power to decide between them in any case of dispute should not reside
in either of the governments, or in any functionary subject to it, but
in an umpire independent of both.” (1861) Such a court must be
sufficiently independent, yet not utterly unaccountable. Many scholars
seem to detect a centralising tendency among such courts (Watts
1998).
How to maintain sufficient democratic control over central
bodies when these are composed by representatives of the executive
branch of member units? The chains of accountability may be too long
for adequate responsiveness. This is part of the core concerns about a
‘democratic deficit’ in the European Union (Watts 1998,
Føllesdal and Hix 2006).
Who shall have the authority to revise the constitutionally
embedded division of power? Some hold that a significant shift in
national sovereignty occurs when such changes may occur without the
unanimity characteristic of treaties.
The “Principle of Subsidiarity” has often been used to
guide the decisions about allocation of power. This principle has
recently received attention owing to its inclusion in European Union
treaties. It holds that authority should rest with the member units
unless allocating them to a central unit would ensure higher
comparative efficiency or effectiveness in achieving certain
goals. This principle can be specified in several ways, for instance
concerning which units are included, which goals are to be achieved,
and who has the authority to apply it. The principle has multiple
pedigrees, and came to recent political prominence largely through its
role in quelling fears of centralization in Europe—a contested
role which the principle has not quite filled (Fleiner and Schmitt
1996, Burgess and Gagnon 1993, Føllesdal 1998).
Regarding distributive justice, federal political orders must manage
tensions between ensuring member unit autonomy and securing the
requisite redistribution within and among the member units. Indeed,
the Federalists regarded federal arrangements as an important
safeguard against “the equal division of property”
(Federalist 10). The political scientists Linz and Stepan may be seen
as finding support for the Federalists’ hypothesis: Compared to
unitary states in the OECD, the ‘coming together’
federations tend to have higher child poverty rate in solo mother
households and a higher percentage of population over-sixty living in
poverty. Linz and Stepan explain this inequality as stemming from the
‘demos constraining’ arrangements of these federations,
seeking to protect individuals and member units from central
authorities, combined with a weak party system. By comparison, the
Constitution of Germany (not a ‘coming together’
federation) explicitly requires equalization of living conditions
among the member units (Art. 72.2) Normative arguments may also
support some distributive significance of federal arrangements, for
instance owing to trade-offs between member unit autonomy
and redistributive claims among member units (Follesdal 2001), or the relevance of a shared ‘identity‘ (Grégoire and Jewkes 2015, de Schutter 2011). A
central normative issue is to what extent a shared culture and bonds
among citizens within a historically sovereign state reduce the claims
on redistribution among the member units.
Federalism raises several challenges to democratic theory, especially
as developed for unitary states. Federal arrangements are often more
complex, thereby challenging standards of transparency, accountability and public deliberation (Habermas 2001). The restricted political agendas of each center of
authority also require defense (Dahl 1983; Braybrooke 1983). One of
several particular issues concern the standing of member units (for
further issues, cf., Norman 2006, 144–150).
The power that member units wield in federations often restricts or
violates majority rule, in ways that merit careful
scrutiny. Democratic theory has long been concerned with how to
prevent domination of minorities, and many federal political orders do
so by granting member units some influence over common
decisions. Federal political orders typically influence
individuals' political influence by skewing their voting weight
in favor of citizens of small member units, or by granting member unit
representatives veto rights on central decisions. Minorities thus
exercise control in apparent violation of principles of political
equality and one-person-one-vote—more so when member units are
of different size. These features raises fundamental normative
questions concerning why member units should matter for the allocation
of political power among individuals who live in different member
units.
Many federal political orders accommodate minority groups in two
ways discussed above: both through a division of power, and by
granting them influence over common decisions. These measures
of
 identity politics
 can be valuable ways to give public acknowledgment
and recognition to groups and their members, sometimes on the very
basis of previous domination. But identity politics also create
challenges (Gutman 1994), especially in federal arrangements that face
greater risks of instability and must maintain citizens' dual
political loyalties. Self-government arrangements may threaten the
federal political order: “demands for self-government reflect a
desire to weaken the bonds with the larger community and, indeed,
question its very nature, authority and permanence” (Kymlicka
and Norman 1994, 375). The emphasis on “recognition and
institutionalization of difference could undermine the conditions that
make a sense of common identification and thus mutuality
possible” (Carens 2000, 193).
Federations are often thought to be sui generis,
one-of-a-kind deviations from the ideal-type unitary sovereign state
familiar from the Westphalian world order. Indeed, every federation
may well be federal in its very own way, and not easy to summarize and
assess as an ideal-type political order. Yet the phenomenon of
non-unitary sovereignty is not new, and federal accommodation of
differences may well be better than the alternatives. When and why
this is so has long been the subject of philosophical, theoretical and
normative analysis and reflection. Such public arguments may
themselves contribute to develop the overarching loyalty required
among citizens of stable, legitimate federations, who must understand
themselves as members of two commonwealths.