Current feminist political philosophy is indebted to the work of
earlier generations of feminist scholarship and activism, including the
first wave of feminism in the English-speaking world, which took place
from the 1840s to the 1920s and focused on improving the political,
educational, and economic system primarily for middle-class women. Its
greatest achievements were to develop a language of equal rights for
women and to garner women the right to vote. It is also indebted to the
second wave of feminism, which, beginning in the 1960s, drew on the
language of the civil rights movements (e.g., the language of
liberation) and on a new feminist consciousness that emerged through
women’s solidarity movements and new forms of reflection that
uncovered sexist attitudes and impediments throughout the whole of
society. By 1970, feminism had expanded from activism to scholarship with
the publication of Shulamith Firestone’s The Dialectic of
Sex (Firestone 1971); Kate Millett’s Sexual
Politics (Millett 1970); and Robin Morgan’s
Sisterhood is Powerful (Morgan 1970).
One of the first theoretical advances of second wave feminism was to
separate out biological conceptions of women’s identity from
socially-constructed ones in order to disprove the notion that biology
was destiny and hence that women’s main role was as mothers and
caregivers. Drawing on the social sciences and psychoanalytic theory,
anthropologist Gayle Rubin developed an account of a “sex/gender
system” (Rubin 1975; Dietz 2003, 401; and the entry on 
 feminist perspectives on sex and gender). 
The sex/gender distinction pointed to “a set of arrangements by which
the biological raw material of human sex and procreation is shaped by
human, social intervention” (Rubin 1975, 165). While biological sex
was fixed, in Rubin’s view, gender was a social construction that
served to divide the sexes and privilege men. Because gender was
mutable, the sex/gender distinction gave feminists a powerful tool to
look for ways to address women’s oppression.
With this socially-constructed notion of gender, early second-wave
theorists sought out an understanding of woman as a universal subject
and agent of feminist politics. 

A major set of fault lines in feminist thought since the 1990s is over
the questions of the subject of “woman.” According to Mary
Dietz’s 2003 article laying out the field, there are two large groups
here.  One champions the category of woman (in the singular and
universal), arguing that the specificity of women’s identity, their
sexual difference from men, should be appreciated and revalued. (The
other, discussed below, takes up women’s diversity.) This “difference
feminism” includes two distinct groups: (i) those who look at
how gendered sexual difference is socially constituted and (ii) those
who look at how sexual difference is constructed symbolically and
psychoanalytically. The first, social difference feminism, includes
theories that revalue mothering and caring and has been developed
largely in the Anglo-American context. (See for example Tronto 1993
and Held 1995.) The second, symbolic difference feminism, is that of
what are often referred to as the French Feminists, including
Irigaray, Cixous, and Kristeva. They belong in this group to the
extent that they value and distinguish women’s specific sexual
difference from men’s. Irigaray’s focus on sexual difference is
emblematic of this. Social-difference and symbolic-difference
feminisms have very little to do with each other but, Dietz argues,
they share the notion that a feminist politics requires a
category woman that has a determinate meaning (Dietz 2003,
403; Nicholson 1994, 100).
Just as Marxist theory sought out a
universal subject in the person of the worker, feminists theorists
sought it out in a shared and common condition that afflicted women
across cultures. But this notion of a universal womanhood was
interrupted by other thinkers, such as bell hooks, saying that it
excluded non-white and non-middle-class women’s experience and
concerns. Hooks’ 1981 book titled Ain’t I a Woman? exposed
mainstream feminism as a movement of a small group of middle- and
upper-class white women whose experience was very particular, hardly
universal. The work of hooks and later Cherrie Moraga, Gloria
Anzaldúa, Maria Lugones, Elizabeth Spelman, and others
foregrounded the need to account for women’s multiple and complex
identities and experiences. By the 1990s the debates about whether
there was a coherent concept of woman that could underlie feminist
politics was further challenged by non-Western women challenging the
Western women’s movement as caught up in Eurocentric ideals that led
to the colonization and domination of “Third World”
people. What is now known as postcolonial theory further heightened
the debate between feminists who wanted to identify a universal feminist
subject of woman (e.g. Okin, Nussbaum, and Ackerly) and those who call
for recognizing multiplicity, diversity, and intersectionality (e.g.,
Spivak, Narayan, Mahmood, and Jaggar).
The effects of this diversity movement would be felt more in the 1990s
and beyond. In the meantime, in the 1970s and 1980s feminist theory
began to develop in the various areas of the social sciences and
humanities, and in philosophy it began to arise in what were already
the different traditions and areas of research. As a branch of
political philosophy, feminist political philosophy has often mirrored
the various divisions at work in political philosophy more
broadly. Prior to the fall of the Berlin Wall and the end of the Cold
War, political philosophy was usually divided into categories such as
liberal, conservative, socialist, and Marxist.  Except for
conservatism, for each category there were often feminists working and
critiquing alongside it. Hence, as Alison Jaggar’s classic
text, Feminist Politics and Human Nature, spelled out, each
ideological approach drew feminist scholars who would both take their
cue from and borrow the language of a particular ideology (Jaggar
1983). Jaggar’s text grouped feminist political philosophy into four
camps: liberal feminism, socialist feminism, Marxist feminism, and
radical feminism. The first three groups followed the lines of Cold
War global political divisions: American liberalism, European
socialism, and a revolutionary communism (though few in the west would
embrace Soviet-style communism). Radical feminism was the most
indigenous of the feminist philosophies, developing its own political
vocabulary with its roots in the deep criticisms of patriarchy that
feminist consciousness had produced in its first and second
waves. Otherwise, feminist political philosophy largely followed the
lines of traditional political philosophy. But this has never been an
uncritical following.  As a field bent on changing the world, even
liberal feminist theorists tended to criticize liberalism as much or
more than they embraced it, and to embrace socialism and other more
radical points of view more than to reject them. Still, on the whole,
these theorists generally operated within the language and framework
of their chosen approach to political philosophy.
Political philosophy began to change enormously in the late 1980s, just
before the end of the Cold War, with a new invocation of an old Hegelian
category: civil society, an arena of political life intermediate
between the state and the household. This was the arena of
associations, churches, labor unions, book clubs, choral societies and
manifold other nongovernmental yet still public organizations. In the
1980s political theorists began to turn their focus from the state to
this intermediate realm, which suddenly took center stage in Eastern
Europe in organizations that challenged the power of the state and
ultimately led to the downfall of communist regimes.
After the end of the Cold War, political philosophy along with
political life radically realigned. New attention focused on civil
society and the public sphere, especially with the timely translation
of Jürgen Habermas’s early work, the Structural Transformation
of the Public Sphere (Habermas 1989). Volumes soon appeared on
civil society and the public sphere, focusing on the ways in which
people organized themselves and developed public power rather than on
the ways that the state garnered and exerted its power. In fact, there
arose a sense that the public sphere ultimately might exert more power
than the state, at least in the fundamental way in which public will is
formed and serves to legitimate—or not—state
power. In the latter respect, John Rawls’s work was
influential by developing a theory of justice that tied the legitimacy
of institutions to the normative judgments that a reflective and
deliberative people might make (Rawls 1971). By the early 1990s,
Marxists seemed to have disappeared or at least become very circumspect
(though the downfall of communist regimes needn’t have had any effect
on Marxist analysis proper, which never subscribed to Leninist or
Maoist thought). Socialists also retreated or transformed themselves
into “radical democrats” (Mouffe 1992, 1993, 2000).
Now the old schema of liberal, radical, socialist, and Marxist
feminisms were much less relevant. There were fewer debates about what
kind of state organization and economic structure would be better for
women and more debates about the value of the private sphere of
the household and the nongovernmental space of associations. Along
with political philosophy more broadly, more feminist political
philosophers began to turn to the meaning and interpretation of civil
society, the public sphere, and democracy itself.
Feminist theorists have also done substantial work in rescuing from obscurity feminist political philosophers who were excluded from the canon and rethinking the canon itself. See the entry on Feminist History of Philosophy.
Now in the second decade of the twenty-first century, feminist
theorists are doing an extraordinary variety of work on matters
political and democratic, including global ethics, human rights,
disabilities studies, bioethics, climate change, and international
development. Some
of the tensions that came to the fore in previous decades are played
out in any of these areas.
 

For example, in global ethics there is a debate over whether there are
universal values of justice and freedom that should be intentionally
cultivated for women in the developing world or whether cultural
diversity should be prized. Feminist theorists have sought to answer
this question in a number of different and compelling ways. (For some
examples see Ackerly 2000, Ackerly & Okin 1999, Benhabib 2002 and
2008, Butler 2000, Gould 2004, and Zerilli 2009.)
Likewise new philosophical work on disabilities, as the entry on
 feminist perspectives on disability
 explains, is
informed by a great deal of feminist theory, from standpoint
philosophy to feminist phenomenology, as well as political
philosophical questions of identity, difference, and diversity. (See
also Carlson & Kittay, 2010.)
Ultimately, the number of approaches that can be taken on any of these
issues is as high as the number of philosophers there are working on
them. Nonetheless there are some general family resemblances to be
found in certain groupings, not altogether unlike Jaggar’s 1983
classification. The remainder of this entry will identify how the
previous schema has changed and what new constellations have
emerged.
Of Jaggar’s categories,
 liberal feminism 
remains a strong current in feminist political
thought. Following liberalism’s focus on freedom and equality, liberal feminism’s primary concern is to protect and enhance women’s
personal and political autonomy, the first being the freedom to live
one’s life as one wants and the second being the freedom to help
decide the direction of the political community. This approach was
invigorated with the publication of John Rawls’s A Theory of
Justice (Rawls 1971) and subsequently his Political
Liberalism (Rawls 1993).  Susan Moller Okin (Okin 1989, 1979;
Okin et al. 1999) and Eva Kittay (Kittay 1999) have used Rawls’s work
productively to extend his theory to attend to women’s concerns.
From a more critical perspective, several feminist theorists have argued
that some of the central categories of liberalism occlude women’s
lived concerns; for example, the central liberal private/public
distinction sequesters the private sphere, and any harm that may occur
there to women, away from political scrutiny (Pateman 1983). Perhaps
more than any other approach, liberal feminist theory parallels
developments in liberal feminist activism. While feminist activists
have waged legal and political battles to criminalize, as just one
example, violence against women (which previously, in marital
relations, hadn’t been considered a crime), feminist political
philosophers who have engaged the liberal lexicon have shown how the
distinction between private and public realms has served to uphold
male domination of women by rendering power relations within the
household as “natural” and immune from political
regulation. Such political philosophy uncovers how seemingly innocuous
and “commonsensical” categories have covert power
agendas. For example, old conceptions of the sanctity of the private
space of the household and the role of women primarily as
child-bearers and caregivers served to protect male domination of
women in the household from public scrutiny. Feminist critiques of the
public/private split supported legal advances that finally led in the
1980s to the criminalization in the United States of spousal rape
(Hagan and Sussman 1988).
Other feminist critics note that liberalism continues to treat unproblematically
many of the concepts that theorists in the 1990s and since have
problematized, such as “woman” as a stable and
identifiable category and the unity of the self underlying self-rule
or autonomy. Critics (such as Zerilli 2009) have argued that the
universal values that liberals such as Okin invoked were really
expanded particulars, with liberal theorists mistaking their
ethnocentrically derived values as universal ones. At the same time,
however, some feminist critics are showing how many of the values of
liberalism could be performatively reconstituted. (See section
2.7) 
Nonetheless there is very important work going on in this field. For
example, Carole Pateman and Charles Mills have been working within the
liberal tradition to show the limits and faults of social contract
theory for women and people of color. Their jointly authored book, Contract
& Domination, levels a devastating critique against systems
of sexual and racial domination. This work engages and
critiques some of the most dominant strains of political philosophy.
 Beyond liberal feminism, contemporary feminist philosophers have
led the way in theorizing and critiquing what is known as
neoliberalism, especially the ways that neoliberal social and economic
forces impact the lives of women. On Wendy Brown’s account (2015),
neoliberalism refers to a set of relations between state, society, and
subjects that mimics and reinforces radical free-market ideals in the
economy. These forces, Brown argues, undermine liberal democratic
citizenship, public institutions, and popular sovereignty. Nancy
Fraser (2013), Jodi Dean (2009), and Judith Butler (2015) join Brown
in asking whether democracy—or “the demos”—can
be sustained under neoliberal conditions of rapidly increasing
economic precariousness and diminishing social and political resources
for resistance. 
While feminist liberalism continues to flourish, the historical
developments and emerging debates described in the previous sections
have eclipsed or deeply transformed Jaggar’s other three categories of
radical, Marxist, and socialist feminism (Jaggar 1983). Also, the
“grand narratives” that underlay these views, especially
the latter two, have fallen out of favor (Snyder 2008).
Those who work in radical feminism continue to take issue with many of
the central tenets of liberal feminism, especially its focus on the
individual and the supposedly free choices that individuals can
make. Where the liberal sees the potential for freedom, the radical
feminist sees structures of domination that are bigger than any
individual. Patriarchy itself, according to this view, dominates women
by positioning them as objects of men’s desire (Welch 2015). Radical
feminists remain committed to getting at the root of male domination
by understanding the source of power differentials, which some radical
feminists, including Catharine MacKinnon, trace back to male sexuality
and the notion that heterosexual intercourse enacts male domination
over women.  “Women and men are divided by gender, made into the
sexes as we know them, by the requirements of its dominant form,
heterosexuality, which institutionalizes male sexual dominance and
female sexual submission. If this is true, sexuality is the linchpin
of gender inequality” (MacKinnon 1989,113). Radical feminists of
the 1980s tended to see power as running one-way, from those with
power over those who are being oppressed. As Amy Allen puts it,
“Unlike liberal feminists, who view power as a positive social
resource that ought to be fairly distributed, and feminist
phenomenologists, who understand domination in terms of a tension
between transcendence and immanence, radical feminists tend to
understand power in terms of dyadic relations of
dominance/subordination, often understood on analogy with the
relationship between master and slave.” (See the section on 
radical feminist approaches
 in the entry on feminist perspectives on power.)
Unlike the more reformist politics of liberal feminism, radical
feminists of the 1980s largely sought to reject the prevailing order
altogether, sometimes advocating separatism (Daly 1985, 1990).
A new generation of radical feminist theorists are renewing the
tradition, showing how it has respected concerns such as
intersectionality (Whisnant 2016) and shares some of the commitments
of the postmodern feminists discussed below, e.g., skepticism about
any fixed gender identity or gender binaries and a more fluid and
performative approach to sexuality and politics (Snyder 2008), as well
as the ways that power and privilege continue to hold women back
(Chambers in Garry et al 2017, 656).
Through much of the twentieth century, many political theorists in
Europe, the United States, and Latin America drew on socialist and
Marxist texts to develop theories of social change attentive to issues
of class relations and exploitation in modern capitalist
economies. After learning of the horrors of Stalinism, most Western
Marxists and socialists were extremely critical of the communist
systems in the Soviet Union and later in China. Western, mostly
anti-communist, Marxist thought flourished in Italy (with Antonio
Gramsci’s work), England (with Stuart Hall and Raymond Williams’
work), France (with the Socialisme ou Barbarie group), and
the United States (but less so there after McCarthyism, yet renewed
somewhat in the 1960s with the New Left). Jaggar’s 1983 book summed up
well the way feminists were using socialist and Marxist ideas to
understand the way women were exploited and their laboring and
reproductive work devalued and unpaid though necessary for capitalism
to function. In the entry on
 feminist perspectives on class and work,
the authors point to much of the work that was going on in this field
up through the mid-1990s.
 But since then, the authors note, various postmodern,
postcolonial, poststructuralist, and deconstructive theories have
criticized the bases for socialist and Marxist thought, including the
“grand narrative” of economic determinism and the
reduction of everything to economic and material relations. At the
same time, Marxist analyses are important parts of other contemporary
feminist philosophers’ work.  (See Dean 2009, Fraser 2009, Spivak
1988.) So while the categories of socialist and Marxist feminisms are
less relevant today, many feminist philosophers still take seriously
the need to attend to the material conditions of life and engage in
the hermeneutics of suspicion that Marxist analysis calls for. This is
espcially evident in new feminist work in critical theory (See for
example Fraser 2009, Allen 2007, McAfee 2008, and Young 2000.)
 

Where liberal feminists prefer to focus on equality, not just between
people but between the sexes more generally, radical feminists tend to
see sexual difference as something instituted by power. So in a
curious way, neither approach, however at odds with each other, takes
sexual difference seriously. Rather, they see it as an effect of
power, not something real in its own right. In contrast, the variety
of theories addressed in this and the next section take seriously the
category of woman and want to develop an ethics and politics upon
it. The views considered in this section, largely developed from in
the Anglo-American context, take their cue from the material and lived
conditions of women, both as mothers and as subjects, and the politics
that these experiences give rise to. 
A prime example is care ethics,
which, originally developed as an alternative to mainstream ethical
theory, has been harnessed to counter liberal political theory
(Gilligan 1982; Held 1995). (See the discussion in the entry
on feminist ethics.)  Drawing on
feminist research in moral psychology (Gilligan 1982; Held 1995), this
field explores the ways in which the virtues that society and
mothering cultivate in women can provide an alternative to the
traditional emphases in moral and political philosophy on
universality, reason, and justice. Some care ethicists have sought to
take the virtues that had long been relegated to the private realm,
such as paying particular attention to those who are vulnerable or
taking into consideration circumstances and not just abstract
principles, and use them as well in the public realm. This approach
has led to intense debates between liberals who advocated universal
ideals of justice and care ethicists who advocated attention to the
particular, to relationships, to care. By the 1990s, however, many care
ethicists had revised their views. Rather than seeing care and justice
as mutually exclusive alternatives, they began to recognize that
attention to care should be accompanied by attention to fairness
(justice) in order to attend to the plight of those with whom we have
no immediate relation (Koggel 1998).
The care ethics approach raises the question of whether and, if so,
how women-as-care-givers have distinct virtues. Feminists as a whole have long
distanced themselves from the idea that women have any particular essence,
choosing instead to see femininity and its accompanying virtues as
social constructs, dispositions that result from culture and
conditioning, certainly not biological givens. So for care ethicists to
champion the virtues that have inculcated femininity seems also to
champion a patriarchal system that relegates one gender to the role of
caretaker. The care ethicists’ answer to this problem has largely been to flip the
hierarchy, to claim that the work of the household is more meaningful
and sustaining than the work of the polis. But critics, such as
Drucilla Cornell, Mary Dietz, and Chantal Mouffe, argue that such a
revaluation keeps intact the dichotomy between the private and the
public and the old association of women’s work with childcare.
(Butler and Scott 1992; Phillips and NetLibrary Inc 1998, pp.
386–389)
Disregard for the role of emotion in political life has long been
a policy in the history of philosophy, in particular because
emotionality—like care—is frequently associated with women
and racialized others. However, women philosophers have insisted on
the importance of this intersection (for example Hall 2005, Krause
2008, and Nussbaum 2015). Building on the contributions of feminist
care ethicists and difference feminists who worked to show the
significance of positive affects typically associated with
femininity—such as love, interest, and care—in ethical
encounters (see Held 1995, Tronto 1993), other thinkers worried that
this appraisal merely reified a false (gendered) dichotomy between
reason and emotion, mind and body. Instead, early work by Alison
Jaggar (1990), Elizabeth Spelman (1989 and 1991), Genevieve Lloyd
(1993), Elizabeth Grosz (1994), and others argued that reason is both
embodied and emotion-laden, and that emotion is an important resource
for epistemology in particular. Building on this work, feminist
political theorists have argued that understanding the role of emotion
and affect is crucial for understanding a number of important
political phenomena: motivation for action (Krause 2008), collective
action and community formation (Beltrán 2009 and 2010, Butler
2004 and 2015), solidarity and patriotism (Nussbaum 2005 and 2015), as
well as vulnerability (Fineman 2013), racism and xenophobia (Ahmed
2015, Anker 2014, Ioanide 2015). Meanwhile, others examine the
political significance of specific emotions, for instance: shame
(Ahmed 2015), precarity and grief (Butler 2004), anger (Spelman 1989,
Lorde 1984), fear (Anker 2015), and love (Nussbaum 2015). 
 More recently, many feminist critics have turned their attention
to how neoliberalism demands resiliency in the face of increasing
precarity. Some borrow from Michel Foucault’s late work on
biopolitics, examining how neoliberal demands for autonomy,
self-sufficiency, delf-discipline, and self-investment impact
individuals on the level of subjectivity, making both life and the
possibility of political action to transform the conditions of life
increasingly untenable. Individuals, they argue, are met with
increasing vulnerability to economic forces and fewer resources to
overcome vulnerability due to social isolation and limited access to
social services (Butler 2015, Povinelli 2011). Some feminists study
how subjectivity, affect, and morality accommodate these neoliberal
trends. For instance, this shows up in how the demand to
“overcome vulnerability” via the contemporary emphasis on
individual “resilience” attempts to transform vulnerable
persons, especially women, into productive neoliberal subjects (James
2015), how productive emotions like “happiness” are
encouraged and unruly ones like “willfulness” are
discouraged (Berland 2011, Ahmed 2014), or how the targeted discourse
around “self-care” can contribute to individualist
consumer culture that diminishes women’s capacities for collective
action (Ahmed 2017). Instead, many feminist critiques challenge
neoliberal individualism by reasserting that agency need not be
synonymous with autonomy, and propose nonsovereign or relational
accounts of the agentic subject instead. 
 Another group of feminist political theorists who take sexual
difference seriously are those who work in the continental traditions,
especially poststructuralism, and attend to the ways in which language
and meaning-systems structure experience. Notable among them are the
so-called French Feminists, namely Cixous, Kristeva, and Irigaray. Of
them all, Irigaray may have the most developed political philosophy,
including several books on the rights that should be afforded to girls
and women. Irigaray’s early work (1985a and 1985b) made the case that
in the history of philosophy women have been denied their own essence
or identity. Rather, they have been positioned as men’s mirror
negation.  So that to be a man is to not be a woman, and hence that
woman equals only not-man. Her strategy in response to this is to
speak back from the margins to which women have been relegated and to
claim some kind of “essence” for women, and along with
that a set of rights that are specifically for girls and women
(Irigaray 1994 and 1996). Criticisms of her views have been heated,
including among feminists themselves, especially those who are wary of
any kind of essentialist and biological conflation of women’s
identity. To the extent that Irigaray is an essentialist, her view
would indeed be relegated to the approach outlined here as symbolic
difference feminism, as Dietz 2003 does. But there are compelling
arguments that Irigaray is wielding essentialism strategically or
metaphorically, that she isn’t claiming that women really do have some
kind of irreducible essence that the history of metaphysics has denied
them (Fuss 1989). This other reading would put Irigaray more in the
performative group described below.  The same kind of argument could
be made for the work of Julia Kristeva, that her metaphors of the
female chora, for example, are describing the western imaginary, not
any kind of womanly reality. So whether French feminist thought should
be grouped as difference feminism or performative feminism is still
very much open to debate.
To the extent that the above two types of feminist theory are
pinpointing some kind of specific difference between the sexes,
they raise concerns about essentialism or
identifying distinct values that women have as women. Such concerns
are part of a larger set of criticisms that have run through feminist
theorizing since the 1970s, with non-white, non-middle-class, and
non-western women questioning the very category of
“woman” and the notion that this title could be a
boundary-spanning category that could unite women of various walks of
life. (See the entries on
 identity politics and
 feminist perspectives on sex and gender.)
 Criticisms of a unitary identity of
“woman” have been motivated by worries that much feminist
theory has originated from the standpoint of a particular class of
women who mistake their own particular standpoint for a universal
one. In her 1981 book, Ain’t I a Woman?: Black women and
feminism, bell hooks notes that the feminist movement pretends to
speak for all women but was made up of primarily white, middle class
women who, because of their narrow perspective, did not represent the
needs of poor women and women of color and ended up reinforcing class
stereotypes (hooks 1981). What is so damning about this kind of
critique is that it mirrors the one that feminists have leveled
against mainstream political theorists who have taken the particular
category of men to be a universal category of mankind, a schema that
does not in fact include women under the category of mankind but marks
them as other (Lloyd 1993).
Hence, one of the most vexing issues facing feminist theory in
general and feminist political philosophy in particular is the matter
of identity (see the entry on
  identity politics).
Identity politics, itself a politically vexed term, refers to political practices of
mobilizing for change on the basis of a political identity (women,
Black, Chicana, etc.). The philosophical debate is whether such
identities are based on some real difference or history of oppression,
and also whether people should embrace identities that have
historically been used to oppress them. Identity politics in feminist
practice is fraught along at least two axes: whether there is any real
essence or identity of woman in general and even if so whether the
category of woman could be used to represent all women. People at the
intersection of multiple marginalized identities (e.g, Black women) have raised
questions about which identity is foremost or whether either identity
is apt. Such questions play out with the question of 
 political representation—what 
aspects of identity are politically salient and truly
representative, whether race, class, or gender (Phillips 1995; Young
1997, 2000). The ontological question of women’s identity
gets played out on the political stage when it comes to matters of
political representation, group rights, and affirmative action. The
2008 U.S. Democratic Party primary battle between Senators Barack Obama
and Hillary Clinton turned this philosophical question into a very real
and heated one from Black women throughout the United States. Was a
Black woman who supported Clinton a traitor to her race, or a Black
woman who supported Obama a traitor to her sex? Or did it make
any sense to talk about identity in a way that would lead to charges of
treason? Of the approaches discussed above, radical and maternal
feminism seem particularly wedded to feminist identity politics.
The other large group of contemporary feminist philosophers that Dietz
(2003) describes disagrees entirely with the idea that there is or
needs to be a single and universal category of “woman.”
Dietz refers to this group as diversity feminism, which began with
what we described earlier: women of color and others pointing out that
the presuppositions of mainstream feminism were based on their very
particular race and class.  In the 1980s and 1990s philosophy along
with the rest of Western culture started grappling with demands for
multicultural perspectives. Shortly thereafter postcolonial theory
raised the need to become aware of multiple global perspectives. As
Sharon Krause describes it, “this development involved the
‘world diversification’ of feminism to a more global,
comparative, and differentiated body of work” (Krause 2011,
106). This diversification, Krause notes, is also due to new
literature on intersectionality, that is, the ways in which
the intersections of our multiple identities (race, gender, orientation, ethnicity, etc.)
all need to be attended to in talking about political change (Krause
2011, 107). Intersectionality also links up with discussions of
“hybridity” in postcolonial literature, of religion and
globalization, and of the experiences of LGBTQ people. “The
result is an explosion of knowledge about the lived experience of
differently placed and multiply-positioned women” (Krause 2011,
107).
Decolonial feminists overlap in many areas with other women of color
feminists, but they bring several unique concerns specific to the
colonial and post-colonial experience. In contemporary decolonial
theory, these concerns are largely framed within the discourse of
“coloniality,” first theorized in terms of “coloniality of power” by
Anibal Quijano (Quijano 2003). Here, “coloniality” refers to how
relations between colonizer and colonized are racialized, for instance
how labor, subjectivity, and authority are racialized around the
colonial system of capitalist exploitation. (For more on
“coloniality,” see Lugones 2010, Mignolo 2000, Maldonado Torres 2008,
Wynter 2003.) For feminist thinkers like María Lugones (2007, 2010),
gender is another axis around which the global capitalist system of
power classifies and dehumanizes people. For Lugones and others,
including Oyeronke Oyewumi (1997), gender is a colonial imposition in
tension with non-modern cosmologies, economies, and modes of
kinship. Lugones calls this the “coloniality of gender,” noting that
de-colonizing gender is part of a wider project of decolonial
resistance opposed to the categorial, dichotomous, and hierarchical
logics of capitalist modernity that are rooted in the colonization of
the Americas. 
In feminist decolonial literature, resistance is often discussed in
terms of the coloniality of gender (Lugones 2003, 2007, 2010; Oyewumi
1997, 2004); language (Spivak 2010); identity and subjectivity – for
instance, accounts of hybridity, multiplicity, and mestizaje
(Anzaldúa 1987, Ortega 2016, Moraga and Anzaldúa 2015); and
“world-traveling” (Lugones 1995, Ortega 2016). Many of these same
thinkers argue that feminism itself must be decolonized, critiquing
feminist universalisms that claim to account for the complex
intersections of sexuality, race, gender, and class (see Mohanty 2003,
Lugones 2010).
 Instersectionality, which is in part a theory of power, grew out
of groundbreaking works by Black feminist theorists such as
Kimberlé Crenshaw’s “Demarginalizing the Intersection of
Race and Sex: A Black Feminist Critique of Antidiscrimination
Doctrine, Feminist Theory and Antiracist Practice” (Crenshaw
1989), Patricia Hill Collins’s book Black Feminist Thought:
Knowledge, Consciousness and the Politics of Empowerment (Collins
1990), Angela Davis’s Women, Race, and Class (Davis 1981),
and Patricia Williams’s The Alchemy of Race and Rights
(Williams 1992). The impact of this work was felt strongly where it
originated in feminist legal theory (see
 feminist philosophy of law), and has
continued to be an important concept for theories of power and
oppression in and out of feminist political philosophy. (See also the
section on intersectionality in
the  entry on
 discrimination.) 
If the diversity feminists, from multiculuturalists to postcolonial
and intersectional thinkers, are right, then there is no reliable
category of woman on which to base feminist politics.  By the end of
the 1990s some saw this as a radical danger of relativism, and the
field seemed to be at an impasse. But then another approach began to
emerge. As Mary Dietz writes in her 2003 essay on current
controversies in feminist theory,
Following up on what has happened in feminist political theory since
Dietz’s article, Sharon Krause writes that this work is
“contesting the old assumption that agency equals
autonomy” and makes room “within agency for forms of
subjectivity and action that are nonsovereign but nevertheless
potent” (Krause 2011, citing Allen 2007,
Beltrán 2010, Butler 2004, Hirschman 2002, and Zerilli 2005.)
“For some theorists,” Krause writes, “this shift
involves thinking of agency and freedom in more collective ways, which
emphasize solidarity, relationality, and constitutive
intersubjectivity” (Krause 2011, 108, citing Butler 2004,
Cornell 2007, Mohanty 2003, and Nedelsky 2005).
This constellation of thinkers could be working in what we could call
performative political philosophy, performative in several senses: in
theorizing how agency is constituted, how political judgments can be
made in the absence of known rules (Honig 2009, 309), how new
universals can be created and new communities constituted.
Performative feminist politics doesn’t worry about whether it is
possible to come up with a single definition of “woman” or
any other political identity; it sees identity as something that is
performatively created. “How we assume these identitites,”
Drucilla Cornell writes, “is never something ‘out
there’ that effectively determines who we can be as men and
women—gay, lesbian, straight, queer, transsexual, transgender,
or otherwise” (Cornell 2003, 144). It is something that is
shaped as we live and externalize identities. From a performative
feminist perspective, feminism is a project of anticipating and
creating better political futures in the absence of foundations. As
Linda Zerilli writes, “politics is about making claims and
judgments—and having the courage to do so—in the absence
of the objective criteria or rules that could provide certain
knowledge and the guarantee that speaking in women’s name will be
accepted or taken up by others” (Zerilli 2005, 179). Drawing
largely on Arendt and Butler, Zerilli calls for a
“freedom-centered feminism” that “would strive to
bring about transformation in normative conceptions of gender without
returning to the classical notion of freedom as sovereignty”
that feminists have long criticized but found difficult to resist
(ibid.).
In its feminist incarnations, this view also takes its cue from
Judith Butler’s performative account of gender as well as Hannah
Arendt’s observation that human rights are created politically, as well
as other thinkers’ ideas, to describe an anticipatory ideal of
politics. Linda Zerilli describes this kind of feminist politics as
“the contingently based public practice of soliciting the
agreement of others to what each of us claims to be
universal” (Zerilli 2005, p. 173). From a performatve
perspective, normative political claims appeal to other people, not to
supposed truths or foundations.
This view recuperates many of the ideals of the
Enlightenment—such as freedom, autonomy, and justice—but in
a way that drops the Enlightenment’s metaphysical assumptions
about reason, progress, and human nature. Instead of seeing these
ideals as grounded in some metaphysical facts, this new view sees them
as ideals that people hold and try to instantiate through practice and
imagination. Where many ancient and modern ideals of politics were
based on suppositions about the nature of reality or of human beings,
contemporary political philosophies generally operate without
supposing that there are any universal or eternal truths. Some might
see this situation as ripe for nihilism, arbitrariness, or the exercise
of brute power. The performative alternative is to imagine and try to
create a better world by anticipating, claiming, and appealing to
others that it should be so. Even if there is no metaphysical
truth that human beings have dignity and infinite worth, people can act
as if it were true in order to create a world in which it is seen to be
so.
Peformative feminist political philosophy shares liberal feminism’s
appreciation for Enlightenment ideals but in a way that is skeptical
about foundations. Just as Zerilli performatively reconstitutes the
concept of freedom, Drucilla Cornell recuperates ideas of autonomy,
dignity, and personhood, in a new performative capacity, as ideals
that people aspire to rather than as moral facts waiting to be
discovered, applied, or realized.
Despite the shared post-foundational theorizing among performative
feminists, when it comes to thinking about democratic politics, there
are sharp divergences, namely on the question of “what it means
to actualize public spaces and enact democratic politics” (Dietz
2003, 419). On this questions, theorists tend to diverge into two
groups: associational and agonistic.  Associational theorists (e.g.,
Benhabib 1992, 1996; Benhabib and Cornell 1987; Fraser 1989; Young
1990, 1997, 2000) gravitate more toward deliberative democratic
theory, while agonistic theorists (e.g., Mouffe 1992, 1993, 1999,
2000; Honig 1995; Ziarek 2001) worry that democratic theories that
focus on consensus can silence debate and thus they focus more on
plurality, dissensus, and the ceaseless contestation within
politics.
The differences spring from, or perhaps lead to, different readings of
the philosopher who has most inspired performative political theory:
Hannah Arendt, namely Arendt’s ideas of speech and action in the
public sphere, of the meaning of plurality, of the ways in which human
beings can distinguish themselves. As Bonnie Honig, a champion of the
agonistic model writes,
Associational theorists tend to look for ways, amidst all the
differences and questions about the lack of foundations, it is
possible to come to agreement on matters of common concern. This is
seen in feminist democratic theory, perhaps best known through the
works of Seyla Benhabib (Benhabib 1992, 1996), greatly inspired by her
non-agonistic reading of Arendt and of the work of the German critical
theorist, Jürgen Habermas. Benhabib’s work engages democratic
theorists quite broadly, not just feminist theorists. This passage of
hers helps to clarify what she takes to be the best aim of a political
philosophy: a state of affairs to which all affected would assent. As
she writes,
Following Habermas, Benhabib contends that certain conditions need to
be in place in order for members of a political community to arrive at
democratic outcomes, namely the proceedings need to be
deliberative. Some take deliberation to be a matter of reasoned
argumentation; others see it as less about reason or argumentation but
more about an open process of working through choices. (McAfee
2004.)
Not all theorists who tend toward the associational model embrace
deliberative theory so readily. Iris Young’s pioneering
book, Justice and the Politics of Difference and several of
her subsequent works have been very influential and have led to a good
deal of hesitance in feminist theoretical communities about the claims
of deliberative theory. Where Benhabib is confident that conditions
can be such that all who are affected can have a voice in
deliberations, Young points out that those who have been historically
silenced have a difficult time having their views heard or
heeded. Young is skeptical of the claims of mainstream democratic
theory that democratic deliberative processes could lead to outcomes
that would be acceptable to all (Young 1990, 1997). Young, along with
Nancy Fraser (Fraser 1989) and others, worried that in the process of
trying to reach consensus, the untrained voices of women and others
who have been marginalized would be left out of the final
tally. Young’s criticisms were very persuasive, leading a
generation of feminist political philosophers to be wary of
deliberative democratic theory. Instead of deliberative democracy, in
the mid 1990s Young proposed a theory of communicative democracy,
hoping to make way for a deliberative conception that was open to
means of expression beyond the rational expression of mainstream
deliberative democratic theory. Young worried that deliberation as
defined by Habermas is too reason-based and leaves out forms of
communication that women and people of color tend to use, including,
as she puts it, “greeting, rhetoric, and
storytelling”. Young argued that these alternative modes of
communication could provide the basis of a more democratic,
communicative theory. In her last major book, Inclusion and
Democracy (Young 2000), Young had clearly moved to
embrace deliberative theory itself, seeing the ways in which it could
be constructed to give voice to those who had been otherwise
marginalized. More recent feminist democratic theory has engaged
deliberative theory more positively. (See McAfee and Snyder 2007.)
Where liberal feminists inspired by John Rawls and democratic feminists
inspired by 
 Jürgen Habermas
and/or 
 John Dewey

hold out the hope that democratic deliberations might lead to
democratic agreements, agonistic feminists are wary of consensus as
inherently undemocratic. Agonistic feminist political philosophy comes
out of poststructural continental feminist and philosophical
traditions. It takes from Marxism the hope for a more radically
egalitarian society. It takes from contemporary continental philosophy
notions of subjectivity and solidarity as malleable and
constructed. Along with postmodern thought, it repudiates any notion
of pre-existing moral or political truths or foundations (Ziarek
2001). Its central claim is that feminist struggle, like other
struggles for social justice, is engaged in politics as ceaseless
contestation. Agonistic views see the nature of politics as inherently
conflictual, with battles over power and hegemony being the central
tasks of democratic struggle.  Advocates of agonistic politics worry
that the kind of consensus sought by democratic theorists (discussed
above) will lead to some kind of oppression or injustice by silencing
new struggles. As Chantal Mouffe puts it, “We have to accept
that every consensus exists as a temporary result of a provisional
hegemony, as a stabilization of power, and that it always entails some
form of exclusion” (Mouffe 2000, 104).
Where associational theorists seek out ways that people can overcome
systematically distorted communication and deliberation, Dietz notes
that agonists eschew this project because they understand politics as
“essentially a practice of creation, reproduction,
transformation and articulation.... Simply put, associational
feminists scrutinize the conditions of exclusion in order to theorize
the emancipation of the subject in the public sphere of communicative
interaction; agonistic feminists deconstruct emancipatory procedures
to disclose how the subject is both produced through political
exclusions and positioned against them” (Dietz 2003, 422).
New work in democratic theory and new readings of Arendt’s philosophy
offer hope of moving beyond the associational/agonistic divide in
performative feminist politics (Barker et al. 2012). Benhabib’s
proceduralism is being surpassed with more affect-laden accounts of
deliberation (Krause 2008; Howard 2017). Instead of the rational back-and-forth of
reasoned argumentation, theorists are beginning to see deliberative
talk as forms of constituting the subject, judging without pre-conceived truths,
and performatively creating new political projects.
In sum, feminist political philosophy is a still evolving field of
thought that has much to offer mainstream political philosophy. In the
past two decades it has come to exert a stronger influence over
mainstream political theorizing, raising objections that mainstream
philosophers have had to address, though not always very convincingly.
And in its newest developments it promises to go even further.