As this entry describes, feminism is both an intellectual commitment
and a political movement that seeks justice for women and the end of
sexism in all forms. Motivated by the quest for social justice,
feminist inquiry provides a wide range of perspectives on social,
cultural, economic, and political phenomena. Yet despite many overall
shared commitments, there are numerous differences among feminist
philosophers regarding philosophical orientation (whether, for
example, Continental or analytic), ontological commitments (such as
the category of woman), and what kind of political and moral remedies
should be sought.
Contemporary feminist philosophical scholarship emerged in the 1970s
as more women began careers in higher education, including philosophy.
As they did so, they also began taking up matters from their own
experience for philosophical scrutiny. These scholars were influenced
both by feminist movements in their midst as well as by their
philosophical training, which was anything but feminist. Until
recently one could not go to graduate school to study “feminist
philosophy”. While students and scholars could turn to the
writings of Simone de Beauvoir or look back historically to the
writings of “first wave” feminists like Mary
Wollstonecraft, most of the philosophers writing in the first decades
of the emergence of feminist philosophy brought their particular
training and expertise to bear on analyzing issues raised by the
women’s liberation movement of the 1960s and 1970s, such as
abortion, affirmative action, equal opportunity, the institutions of
marriage, sexuality, and love. Additionally, feminist philosophical
scholarship increasingly focused on the very same types of issues
philosophers had been and were dealing with.
Feminist philosophical scholarship begins with attention to women, to
their roles and locations. What are women doing? What social/political
locations are they part of or excluded from? How do their activities
compare to those of men? Are the activities or exclusions of some
groups of women different from those of other groups and why? What do
the various roles and locations of women allow or preclude? How have
their roles been valued or devalued? How do the complexities of a
woman’s situatedness, including her class, race, ability, and
sexuality impact her locations? To this we add attention to the
experiences and concerns of women. Have any of women’s
experiences or problems been ignored or undervalued? How might
attention to these transform our current methods or values? And from
here we move to the realm of the symbolic. How is the feminine
instantiated and constructed within the texts of philosophy? What role
does the feminine play in forming, either through its absence or its
presence, the central concepts of philosophy? And so on.
Feminist philosophers brought their philosophical tools to bear on
these questions. And since these feminist philosophers employed the
philosophical tools they knew best and found most promising, feminist
philosophy began to emerge from all the traditions of Western
philosophy prevalent at the end of the twentieth century including
analytic, Continental, and classical American philosophy. It should
come as no surprise then that the thematic focus of their work was
often influenced by the topics and questions highlighted by these
traditions. Hence, as a result, a given question can be taken up and
addressed from an array of views, sometimes, as discussed below, with
quite contradictory answers.
Hence feminist philosophical scholarship is not homogeneous either in
methods or in conclusions. Indeed, there has been significant debate
within feminist philosophical circles concerning the effectiveness of
particular methods within philosophy for feminist goals. Some, for
example, have found the methods of analytic philosophy to provide
clarity of both form and argumentation not found in some schools of
Continental philosophy, while others have argued that such alleged
clarity comes at the expense of rhetorical styles and methodological
approaches that provide insights into affective, psychic, or embodied
components of human experience. Other feminists find approaches within
American pragmatism to provide the clarity of form and argumentation
sometimes missing in Continental approaches and the connection to real
world concerns sometimes missing in analytic approaches.
Founded in 1982 as a venue for feminist philosophical scholarship,
Hypatia: A Journal of Feminist Philosophy has embraced a
diversity of methodological approaches in feminist philosophy,
publishing work from all three traditions. Feminist scholarship in
each of these traditions is also advanced and supported though
scholarly exchange at various professional societies, including the
Society for Women in Philosophy, founded in the United States in 1972.
Additionally, the Society for Analytical Feminism, founded in 1991,
promotes the study of issues in feminism by methods broadly construed
as analytic, to examine the use of analytic methods as applied to
feminist issues, and to provide a means by which those interested in
analytical feminist can meet and exchange ideas. philoSOPHIA was
established in 2005 to promote Continental feminist scholarly and
pedagogical development. The Society for the Study of Women
Philosophers was established in 1987 to promote the study of the
contributions of women to the history of philosophy. Similar
organizations and journals on many continents continue to advance
scholarship in feminist philosophy. 
Many of the ways in which feminist philosophy is not monolithic will
be discussed below. Nevertheless, it is worth noting here at the start
that although feminist philosophers have intended that their
work—unlike the traditional philosophy they criticize—be
applicable to all women and reflect the diverse experiences of women,
in practice it has not always been the case. One important limitation
that feminist philosophers are trying to overcome is their
insufficient attention to the many interacting ways that human beings
are oppressed, for example, along lines of race, sexuality, ability,
class, religion, and nationality. Feminist philosophy strives for
inclusivity and pluralism, even if it falls short.
The term “feminism” has many different uses and its
meanings are often contested. For example, some writers use the term
“feminism” to refer to a historically specific political
movement in the United States and Europe; other writers use it to
refer to the belief that there are injustices against women, though
there is no consensus on the exact list of these injustices. Although
the term “feminism” has a history in English linked with
women’s activism from the late nineteenth century to the
present, it is useful to distinguish feminist ideas or beliefs from
feminist political movements, for even in periods where there has been
no significant political activism around women’s subordination,
individuals have been concerned with and theorized about justice for
women. So, for example, it makes sense to ask whether Plato was a
feminist, given his view that some women should be trained to rule
(Republic, Book V), even though he was an exception in his
historical context (see, e.g., Tuana 1994).
Our goal here is not to survey the history of feminism—as a set
of ideas or as a series of political movements—but rather to
sketch some of the central uses of the term that are most relevant to
those interested in contemporary feminist philosophy. The references
we provide below are only a small sample of the work available on the
topics in question; more complete bibliographies are available at the
specific topical entries and also at the end of this entry.
In the mid-1800s the term “feminism” was used to refer to
“the qualities of females”, and it was not until after the
First International Women’s Conference in Paris in 1892 that the
term, following the French term féministe, was used
regularly in English for a belief in and advocacy of equal rights for
women based on the idea of the equality of the sexes. Although the
term “feminism” in English is rooted in the mobilization
for woman suffrage in Europe and the United States during the late
nineteenth and early twentieth century, of course efforts to obtain
justice for women did not begin or end with this period of activism.
So some have found it useful, if controversial, to think of the
women’s movement in the United States as occurring in
“waves”. On the wave model, the struggle to achieve basic
political rights during the period from the mid-nineteenth century
until the passage of the Nineteenth Amendment in 1920 counts as
“First Wave” feminism. Feminism waned between the two
world wars, to be “revived” in the late 1960s and early
1970s as “Second Wave” feminism. In this second wave,
feminists pushed beyond the early quest for political rights to fight
for greater equality across the board, e.g., in education, the
workplace, and at home. More recent transformations of feminism have
resulted in a “Third Wave”. Third Wave feminists often
critique Second Wave feminism for its lack of attention to the
differences among women due to race, ethnicity, class, nationality,
religion (see
 Section 2.3
 below; also Breines 2002; Spring 2002), and emphasize
“identity” as a site of gender struggle. (For more
information on the “wave” model and each of the
“waves”, see
 Other Internet Resources.)
 
However, some feminist scholars object to identifying feminism with
these particular moments of political activism, on the grounds that
doing so eclipses the fact that there has been resistance to male
domination that should be considered “feminist” throughout
history and across cultures: i.e., feminism is not confined to a few
(White) women in the West over the past century or so. Moreover, even
considering only relatively recent efforts to resist male domination
in Europe and the United States, the emphasis on “First”
and “Second” Wave feminism ignores the ongoing resistance
to male domination between the 1920s and 1960s and the resistance
outside mainstream politics, particularly by women of color and
working class women (Cott 1987).
One strategy for solving these problems would be to identify feminism
in terms of a set of ideas or beliefs rather than participation in any
particular political movement. As we saw above, this also has the
advantage of allowing us to locate isolated feminists whose work was
not understood or appreciated during their time. But how should we go
about identifying a core set of feminist beliefs? Some would suggest
that we should focus on the political ideas that the term was
apparently coined to capture, viz., the commitment to women’s
equal rights. This acknowledges that commitment to and advocacy for
women’s rights has not been confined to the Women’s
Liberation Movement in the West. But this too raises controversy, for
it frames feminism within a broadly liberal approach to political and
economic life. Although most feminists would probably agree that there
is some sense of rights on which achieving equal rights for women is a
necessary condition for feminism to succeed, most would also argue
that this would not be sufficient. This is because women’s
oppression under male domination rarely if ever consists solely in
depriving women of political and legal rights, but also extends into
the structure of our society and the content of our culture, the
workings of languages and how they shape perceptions and permeate our
consciousness (e.g., Bartky 1988, Postl 2017).
Is there any point, then, to asking what feminism is? Given the
controversies over the term and the politics of circumscribing the
boundaries of a social movement, it is sometimes tempting to think
that the best we can do is to articulate a set of disjuncts that
capture a range of feminist beliefs. However, at the same time it can
be both intellectually and politically valuable to have a schematic
framework that enables us to map at least some of our points of
agreement and disagreement. We’ll begin here by considering some
of the basic elements of feminism as a political position or set of
beliefs.
In many of its forms, feminism seems to involve at least two groups of
claims, one normative and the other descriptive. The normative claims
concern how women ought (or ought not) to be viewed and treated and
draw on a background conception of justice or broad moral position;
the descriptive claims concern how women are, as a matter of fact,
viewed and treated, alleging that they are not being treated in
accordance with the standards of justice or morality invoked in the
normative claims. Together the normative and descriptive claims
provide reasons for working to change the way things are; hence,
feminism is not just an intellectual but also a political
movement.
So, for example, a liberal approach of the kind already mentioned
might define feminism (rather simplistically here) in terms of two
claims:
On this account, that women and men ought to have equal rights and
respect is the normative claim; and that women are denied equal rights
and respect functions here as the descriptive claim. Admittedly, the
claim that women are disadvantaged with respect to rights and respect
is not a “purely descriptive” claim since it plausibly
involves an evaluative component. However, our point here is simply
that claims of this sort concern what is the case not what ought to be
the case. Moreover, as indicated by the ellipsis above, the
descriptive component of a substantive feminist view will not be
articulable in a single claim, but will involve an account of the
specific social mechanisms that deprive women of, e.g., rights and
respect. For example, is the primary source of women’s
subordination her role in the family? (Engels 1845; Okin 1989). Or is
it her role in the labor market? (Bergmann 2002). Is the problem
males’ tendencies to sexual violence (and what is the source of
these tendencies?)? (Brownmiller 1975; MacKinnon 1987). Or is it
simply women’s biological role in reproduction? (Firestone
1970).
Disagreements within feminism can occur with respect to
either the descriptive or normative claims, e.g., feminists differ on
what would count as justice or injustice for women (what counts as
“equality”, “oppression”,
“disadvantage”, what rights should everyone be accorded?)
, and what sorts of injustice women in fact suffer (what aspects of
women’s current situation are harmful or unjust?). Disagreements
may also lie in the explanations of the injustice: two feminists may
agree that women are unjustly being denied proper rights and respect
and yet substantively differ in their accounts of how or why the
injustice occurs and what is required to end it (Jaggar 1994).
Disagreements between feminists and non-feminists can occur with
respect to both the normative and descriptive claims as well, e.g.,
some non-feminists agree with feminists on the ways women ought to be
viewed and treated, but don’t see any problem with the way
things currently are. Others disagree about the background moral or
political views.
In an effort to suggest a schematic account of feminism, Susan James
characterizes feminism as follows:
Feminism is grounded on the belief that women are oppressed or
disadvantaged by comparison with men, and that their oppression is in
some way illegitimate or unjustified. Under the umbrella of this
general characterization there are, however, many interpretations of
women and their oppression, so that it is a mistake to think of
feminism as a single philosophical doctrine, or as implying an agreed
political program. (James 1998: 576)
James seems here to be using the notions of “oppression”
and “disadvantage” as placeholders for more substantive
accounts of injustice (both normative and descriptive) over which
feminists disagree.
Some might prefer to define feminism in terms of a normative claim
alone: feminists are those who believe that women are entitled to
equal rights, or equal respect, or…(fill in the blank with
one’s preferred account of injustice), and one is not required
to believe that women are currently being treated unjustly. However,
if we were to adopt this terminological convention, it would be harder
to identify some of the interesting sources of disagreement both with
and within feminism, and the term “feminism” would lose
much of its potential to unite those whose concerns and commitments
extend beyond their moral beliefs to their social interpretations and
political affiliations. Feminists are not simply those who are
committed in principle to justice for women; feminists take themselves
to have reasons to bring about social change on women’s
behalf.
Taking “feminism” to entail both normative and empirical
commitments also helps make sense of some uses of the term
“feminism” in recent popular discourse. In everyday
conversation it is not uncommon to find both men and women prefixing a
comment they might make about women with the caveat, “I’m
not a feminist, but…”. Of course this qualification might
be (and is) used for various purposes, but one persistent usage seems
to follow the qualification with some claim that is hard to
distinguish from claims that feminists are wont to make. For example,
I’m not a feminist but I believe that women should earn equal
pay for equal work; or I’m not a feminist but I’m
delighted that first-rate women basketball players are finally getting
some recognition in the WNBA. If we see the identification
“feminist” as implicitly committing one to both a
normative stance about how things should be and an interpretation of
current conditions, it is easy to imagine someone being in the
position of wanting to cancel his or her endorsement of either the
normative or the descriptive claim. So, e.g., one might be willing to
acknowledge that there are cases where women have been disadvantaged
without wanting to buy any broad moral theory that takes a stance on
such things (especially where it is unclear what that broad theory
is). Or one might be willing to acknowledge in a very general way that
equality for women is a good thing, without being committed to
interpreting particular everyday situations as unjust (especially if
is unclear how far these interpretations would have to extend).
Feminists, however, at least according to popular discourse, are ready
to both adopt a broad account of what justice for women would require
and interpret everyday situations as unjust by the standards of that
account. Those who explicitly cancel their commitment to feminism may
then be happy to endorse some part of the view but are unwilling to
endorse what they find to be a problematic package.
As mentioned above, there is considerable debate within feminism
concerning the normative question: what would count as (full) justice
for women? What is the nature of the wrong that feminism seeks to
address? For example, is the wrong that women have been deprived equal
rights? Is it that women have been denied equal respect for their
differences? Is it that women’s experiences have been ignored
and devalued? Is it all of the above and more? What framework should
we employ to identify and address the issues? (see, e.g., Jaggar 1983;
Young 1985; Tuana & Tong 1995). Feminist philosophers in
particular have asked: Do the standard philosophical accounts of
justice and morality provide us adequate resources to theorize male
domination, or do we need distinctively feminist accounts? (e.g., Okin
1979; Hoagland 1989; Okin 1989; Ruddick 1989; Benhabib 1992; Hampton
1993; Held 1993; Tong 1993; Baier 1994; Moody-Adams 1997; M. Walker
1998; Kittay 1999; Robinson 1999; Young 2011; O’Connor
2008).
Note, however, that by phrasing the task as one of identifying the
wrongs women suffer (and have suffered), there is an implicit
suggestion that women as a group can be usefully compared against men
as a group with respect to their standing or position in society; and
this seems to suggest that women as a group are treated in the same
way, or that they all suffer the same injustices, and men as a group
all reap the same advantages. But of course this is not the case, or
at least not straightforwardly so. As bell hooks so vividly pointed
out, in 1963 when Betty Friedan urged women to reconsider the role of
housewife and demanded greater opportunities for women to enter the
workforce (Friedan 1963), Friedan was not speaking for working class
women or most women of color (hooks 1984: 1–4). Neither was she
speaking for lesbians. Women as a group experience many different
forms of injustice, and the sexism they encounter interacts in complex
ways with other systems of oppression. In contemporary terms, this is
known as the problem of intersectionality (Crenshaw 1991, Botts 2017).
This critique has led some theorists to resist the label
“feminism” and to adopt a different name for their view.
Earlier, during the 1860s–80s, the term “womanism”
had sometimes been used for such intellectual and political
commitments; in 1990, Alice Walker proposed that
“womanism” provides a contemporary alternative to
“feminism” that better addresses the needs of Black women
and women of color more generally. But given more recent work on
 trans issues
 such a gender-specific term would today raise many more problems than
it would solve.
To consider some of the different strategies for responding to the
phenomenon of intersectionality, let’s return to the schematic
claims that women are oppressed and this oppression is wrong or
unjust. Very broadly, then, one might characterize the goal of
feminism to be ending the oppression of women. But if we also
acknowledge that women are oppressed not just by sexism, but in many
ways, e.g., by classism, homophobia, racism, ageism, ableism, etc.,
then it might seem that the goal of feminism is to end all oppression
that affects women. And some feminists have adopted this
interpretation (e.g., Ware 1970, quoted in Crow 2000: 1).
Note, however, that not all agree with such an expansive definition of
feminism. One might agree that feminists ought to work to end all
forms of oppression—oppression is unjust and feminists, like
everyone else, have a moral obligation to fight
injustice—without maintaining that it is the mission of feminism
to end all oppression. One might even believe that in order to
accomplish feminism’s goals it is necessary to combat racism and
economic exploitation, but also think that there is a narrower set of
specifically feminist objectives. In other words, opposing oppression
in its many forms may be instrumental to, even a necessary means to,
feminism, but not intrinsic to it. For example, bell hooks argues:
Feminism, as liberation struggle, must exist apart from and as a part
of the larger struggle to eradicate domination in all its forms. We
must understand that patriarchal domination shares an ideological
foundation with racism and other forms of group oppression, and that
there is no hope that it can be eradicated while these systems remain
intact. This knowledge should consistently inform the direction of
feminist theory and practice. (hooks 1989: 22)
On hooks’ account, the defining characteristic that
distinguishes feminism from other liberation struggles is its concern
with sexism:
Unlike many feminist comrades, I believe women and men must share a
common understanding—a basic knowledge of what feminism
is—if it is ever to be a powerful mass-based political movement.
In Feminist Theory: From Margin to Center, I suggest that
defining feminism broadly as “a movement to end sexism and
sexist oppression” would enable us to have a common political
goal…Sharing a common goal does not imply that women and men
will not have radically divergent perspectives on how that goal might
be reached. (hooks 1989: 23)
hooks’ approach depends on the claim that sexism is a particular
form of oppression that can be distinguished from other forms, e.g.,
racism and homophobia, even though it is currently (and virtually
always) interlocked with other forms of oppression. Feminism’s
objective is to end sexism, though because of its relation to other
forms of oppression, this will require efforts to end other forms of
oppression as well. For example, feminists who themselves remain
racists will not be able to fully appreciate the broad impact of
sexism on the lives of women of color—nor the interconnections
between racism and sexism. Furthermore because sexist institutions are
also, e.g., racist, classist, and homophobic, dismantling sexist
institutions will require that we dismantle the other forms of
domination intertwined with them (Heldke & O’Connor 2004).
Following hooks’ lead, we might characterize feminism
schematically (allowing the schema to be filled in differently by
different accounts) as the view that women are subject to sexist
oppression and that this is wrong. This move shifts the burden of our
inquiry from a characterization of what feminism is to a
characterization of what sexism, or sexist oppression, is.
As mentioned above, there are a variety of
interpretations—feminist and otherwise—of what exactly
oppression consists in, but the leading idea is that oppression
consists in “an enclosing structure of forces and barriers which
tends to the immobilization and reduction of a group or category of
people” (Frye 1983: 10–11). Not just any “enclosing
structure” is oppressive, however, for plausibly any process of
socialization will create a structure that both limits and enables all
individuals who live within it. In the case of oppression, however,
the “enclosing structures” in question are part of a
broader system that asymmetrically and unjustly disadvantages one
group and benefits another. So, for example, although sexism restricts
the opportunities available to—and so unquestionably
harms—both men and women (and considering some pairwise
comparisons may even have a greater negative impact on a man than a
woman), overall, women as a group unjustly suffer the greater harm. It
is a crucial feature of contemporary accounts, however, that one
cannot assume that members of the privileged group have intentionally
designed or maintained the system for their benefit. The oppressive
structure may be the result of an historical process whose originators
are long gone, or it may be the unintended result of complex
cooperative strategies gone wrong.
Leaving aside (at least for the moment) further details in the account
of oppression, the question remains: What makes a particular form of
oppression sexist? If we just say that a form of oppression counts as
sexist oppression if it harms women, or even primarily harms women,
this is not enough to distinguish it from other forms of oppression.
Virtually all forms of oppression harm women, and arguably some
besides sexism harm women primarily (though not exclusively), e.g.,
body size oppression, age oppression. Besides, as we’ve noted
before, sexism is not only harmful to women, but is harmful to all of
us.
What makes a particular form of oppression sexist seems to be not just
that it harms women, but that someone is subject to this form of
oppression specifically because she is (or at least appears to be) a
woman. Racial oppression harms women, but racial oppression (by
itself) doesn’t harm them because they are women, it harms them
because they are (or appear to be) members of a particular race. The
suggestion that sexist oppression consists in oppression to which one
is subject by virtue of being or appearing to be a woman provides us
at least the beginnings of an analytical tool for distinguishing
subordinating structures that happen to affect some or even all women
from those that are more specifically sexist (Haslanger 2004). But
problems and unclarities remain.
First, we need to explicate further what it means to be oppressed
“because you are a woman”. For example, is the idea that
there is a particular form of oppression that is specific to women? Is
to be oppressed “as a woman” to be oppressed in a
particular way? Or can we be pluralists about what sexist oppression
consists in without fragmenting the notion beyond usefulness?
Two strategies for explicating sexist oppression have proven to be
problematic. The first is to maintain that there is a form of
oppression common to all women. For example, one might interpret
Catharine MacKinnon’s work as claiming that to be oppressed as a
woman is to be viewed and treated as sexually subordinate, where this
claim is grounded in the (alleged) universal fact of the eroticization
of male dominance and female submission (MacKinnon 1987, 1989).
Although MacKinnon allows that sexual subordination can happen in a
myriad of ways, her account is monistic in its attempt to unite the
different forms of sexist oppression around a single core account that
makes sexual objectification the focus. Although MacKinnon’s
work provides a powerful resource for analyzing women’s
subordination, many have argued that it is too narrow, e.g., in some
contexts (especially in developing countries) sexist oppression seems
to concern more the local division of labor and economic exploitation.
Although certainly sexual subordination is a factor in sexist
oppression, it requires us to fabricate implausible explanations of
social life to suppose that all divisions of labor that exploit women
(as women) stem from the “eroticization of dominance and
submission”. Moreover, it isn’t obvious that in order to
make sense of sexist oppression we need to seek a single form of
oppression common to all women.
A second problematic strategy has been to consider as paradigms those
who are oppressed only as women, with the thought that complex cases
bringing in additional forms of oppression will obscure what is
distinctive of sexist oppression. This strategy would have us focus in
the United States on white, wealthy, young, beautiful, able-bodied,
heterosexual women to determine what oppression, if any, they suffer,
with the hope of finding sexism in its “purest” form,
unmixed with racism or homophobia, etc. (see Spelman 1988:
52–54). This approach is not only flawed in its exclusion of all
but the most elite women in its paradigm, but it assumes that
privilege in other areas does not affect the phenomenon under
consideration. As Elizabeth Spelman makes the point:
…no woman is subject to any form of oppression simply because
she is a woman; which forms of oppression she is subject to depend on
what “kind” of woman she is. In a world in which a woman
might be subject to racism, classism, homophobia, anti-Semitism, if
she is not so subject it is because of her race, class, religion,
sexual orientation. So it can never be the case that the treatment of
a woman has only to do with her gender and nothing to do with her
class or race. (Spelman 1988: 52–3)
Other accounts of oppression are designed to allow that oppression
takes many forms, and refuse to identify one form as more basic or
fundamental than the rest. For example, Iris Young describes five
“faces” of oppression: exploitation, marginalization,
powerlessness, cultural imperialism, and systematic violence (Young
1980 [1990a: ch. 2]). Plausibly others should be added to the list.
Sexist or racist oppression, for example, will manifest itself in
different ways in different contexts, e.g., in some contexts through
systematic violence, in other contexts through economic exploitation.
Acknowledging this does not go quite far enough, however, for monistic
theorists such as MacKinnon could grant this much. Pluralist accounts
of sexist oppression must also allow that there isn’t an
over-arching explanation of sexist oppression that applies to all its
forms: in some cases it may be that women’s oppression as women
is due to the eroticization of male dominance, but in other cases it
may be better explained by women’s reproductive value in
establishing kinship structures (Rubin 1975), or by the shifting
demands of globalization within an ethnically stratified workplace. In
other words, pluralists resist the temptation to “grand social
theory”, “overarching metanarratives”,
“monocausal explanations”, to allow that the explanation
of sexism in a particular historical context will rely on economic,
political, legal, and cultural factors that are specific to that
context which would prevent the account from being generalized to all
instances of sexism (Fraser & Nicholson 1990). It is still
compatible with pluralist methods to seek out patterns in
women’s social positions and structural explanations within and
across social contexts, but in doing so we must be highly sensitive to
historical and cultural variation.
However, if we pursue a pluralist strategy in understanding sexist
oppression, what unifies all the instances as instances of sexism?
After all, we cannot assume that the oppression in question takes the
same form in different contexts, and we cannot assume that there is an
underlying explanation of the different ways it manifests itself. So
can we even speak of there being a unified set of
cases—something we can call “sexist
oppression”—at all?
Some feminists would urge us to recognize that there isn’t a
systematic way to unify the different instances of sexism, and
correspondingly, there is no systematic unity in what counts as
feminism: instead we should see the basis for feminist unity in
coalition building (Reagon 1983). Different groups work to combat
different forms of oppression; some groups take oppression against
women (as women) as a primary concern. If there is a basis for
cooperation between some subset of these groups in a given context,
then finding that basis is an accomplishment, but should not be taken
for granted.
An alternative, however, would be to grant that in practice unity
among feminists cannot be taken for granted, but to begin with a
theoretical common ground among feminist views that does not assume
that sexism appears in the same form or for the same reasons in all
contexts. We saw above that one promising strategy for distinguishing
sexism from racism, classism, and other forms of injustice is to focus
on the idea that if an individual is suffering sexist oppression, then
an important part of the explanation why she is subject to the
injustice is that she is or appears to be a woman. This includes cases
in which women as a group are explicitly targeted by a policy or a
practice, but also includes cases where the policy or practice affects
women due to a history of sexism, even if they are not explicitly
targeted. For example, in a scenario in which women are
children’s primary caregivers and cannot travel for work as
easily as men, then employment practices that reward those who can
travel can be deemed sexist because the differential is due to sexist
practices. The commonality among the cases is to be found in the role
of gender in the explanation of the injustice rather than the specific
form the injustice takes. Building on this we could unify a broad
range of feminist views by seeing them as committed to the (very
abstract) claims that:
We have so far been using the term “oppression” loosely to
cover whatever form of wrong or injustice is at issue. Continuing with
this intentional openness in the exact nature of the wrong, the
question still remains what it means to say that women are subjected
to injustice because they are women. To address this question, it may
help to consider a familiar ambiguity in the notion
“because”: are we concerned here with causal explanations
or justifications? On one hand, the claim that someone is oppressed
because she is a woman suggests that the best (causal) explanation of
the subordination in question will make reference to her sex: e.g.,
Paula is subject to sexist oppression on the job because the best
explanation of why she makes $10.00 less an hour for doing comparable
work as Paul makes reference to her sex (possibly coupled with her
race or other social classifications). On the other hand, the claim
that someone is oppressed because she is a woman suggests that the
rationale or basis for the oppressive structures requires that one be
sensitive to someone’s sex in determining how they should be
viewed and treated, i.e., that the justification for someone’s
being subject to the structures in question depends on a
representation of them as sexed male or female. For example, Paula is
subject to sexist oppression on the job because the pay scale for her
job classification is justified within a framework that distinguishes
and devalues women’s work compared with men’s.
Note, however, that in both sorts of cases the fact that one is or
appears to be a woman need not be the only factor relevant in
explaining the injustice. It might be, for example, that one stands
out in a group because of one’s race, or one’s class, or
one’s sexuality, and because one stands out one becomes a target
for injustice. But if the injustice takes a form that, e.g., is
regarded as especially apt for a woman, then the injustice should be
understood intersectionally, i.e., as a response to an intersectional
category. For example, the practice of raping Bosnian women was an
intersectional injustice: it targeted them both because they were
Bosnian and because they were women.
Of course, these two understandings of being oppressed because you are
a woman are not incompatible; in fact they typically support one
another. Because human actions are often best explained by the
framework employed for justifying them, one’s sex may play a
large role in determining how one is treated because the background
understandings for what’s appropriate treatment draw invidious
distinctions between the sexes. In other words, the causal mechanism
for sexism often passes through problematic representations of women
and gender roles.
In each of the cases of being oppressed as a woman mentioned above,
Paula suffers injustice, but a crucial factor in explaining the
injustice is that Paula is a member of a particular group, viz.,
women. This, we think, is crucial in understanding why sexism (and
racism, and other -isms) are most often understood as kinds of
oppression. Oppression is injustice that, first and foremost, concerns
groups; individuals are oppressed just in case they are subjected to
injustice because of their group membership. On this view, to claim
that women as women suffer injustice is to claim that women are
oppressed.
Where does this leave us? “Feminism” is an umbrella term
for a range of views about injustices against women. There are
disagreements among feminists about the nature of justice in general
and the nature of sexism, in particular, the specific kinds of
injustice or wrong women suffer; and the group who should be the
primary focus of feminist efforts. Nonetheless, feminists are
committed to bringing about social change to end injustice against
women, in particular, injustice against women as women.
Feminism brings many things to philosophy including not only a variety
of particular moral and political claims, but ways of asking and
answering questions, constructive and critical dialogue with
mainstream philosophical views and methods, and new topics of inquiry.
Feminist philosophers work within all the major traditions of
philosophical scholarship including analytic philosophy, American
pragmatist philosophy, and Continental philosophy. Entries in this
Encyclopedia appearing under the heading “feminism,
approaches” discuss the impact of these traditions on feminist
scholarship and examine the possibility and desirability of work that
makes links between two traditions. Feminist contributions to and
interventions in mainstream philosophical debates are covered in
entries in this encyclopedia under “feminism,
interventions”. Entries covered under the rubric
“feminism, topics” concern philosophical issues that arise
as feminists articulate accounts of sexism, critique sexist social and
cultural practices, and develop alternative visions of a just world.
In short, they are philosophical topics that arise within
feminism.
Approaches to feminist philosophy are almost as varied as approaches
to philosophy itself, reflecting a variety of beliefs about what kinds
of philosophy are both fruitful and meaningful. To spell out such
differences, this section of the SEP provides overviews of the
following dominant (at least in more developed societies) approaches
to feminist philosophy. The following are links to essays in this
section:
All these approaches share a set of feminist commitments and an
overarching criticism of institutions, presuppositions, and practices
that have historically favored men over women. They also share a
general critique of claims to universality and objectivity that ignore
male-dominated theories’ own particularity and specificity.
Feminist philosophies of most any philosophical orientation will be
much more perspectival, historical, contextual, and focused on lived
experience than their non-feminist counterparts. Unlike mainstream
philosophers who can seriously consider the philosophical conundrums
of brains in a vat, feminist philosophers always start by seeing
people as embodied. Feminists have also argued for the reconfiguration
of accepted structures and problematics of philosophy. For example,
feminists have not only rejected the privileging of epistemological
concerns over moral and political concerns common to much of
philosophy, they have argued that these two areas of concern are
inextricably intertwined. Part 2 of the entry on
 analytic feminism
 lays out other areas of commonality across these various approaches.
For one, feminist philosophers generally agree that philosophy is a
powerful tool for understanding 
ourselves and our relations to each other, to our communities, and to
the state; to appreciate the extent to which we are counted as knowers
and moral agents; [and] to uncover the assumptions and methods of
various bodies of knowledge. 
For another, feminist philosophers all generally are keenly attuned to
male biases at work in the history of philosophy, such as those
regarding “the nature of woman” and supposed value
neutrality, which on inspection is hardly neutral at all. Claims to
universality, feminist philosophers have found, are usually made from
a very specific and particular point of view, contrary to their
manifest claims. Another orientation that feminist philosophers
generally share is a commitment to normativity and social change; they
are never content to analyze things just as they are but are instead
looking for ways to overcome sexist practices and institutions.
Such questioning of the problematic of mainstream approaches to
philosophy has often led to feminists using methods and approaches
from more than one philosophical tradition. As Ann Garry notes in part
three of the entry on
 Analytic Feminism
 (2017), it is not uncommon to find analytic feminists drawing on
non-analytic figures such as Beauvoir, Foucault, or Butler; and
because of their motivation to communicate with other feminists, they
are more motivated than other philosophers “to search for
methodological cross-fertilization”.
Even with their common and overlapping orientations, the differences
between the various philosophical approaches to feminism are
significant, especially in terms of styles of writing, influences, and
overall expectations about what philosophy can and should achieve.
Analytic feminist philosophy tends to value analysis and
argumentation, Continental feminist theory values interpretation and
deconstruction, and pragmatist feminism values lived experience and
exploration. Coming out of a post-Hegelian tradition, both Continental
and pragmatist philosophers usually suspect that “truth”,
whatever that is, emerges and develops historically. They tend to
share with Nietzsche the view that truth claims often mask power
plays. Yet where Continental and pragmatist are generally wary about
notions of truth, analytic feminists tend to argue that the way to
counter sexism and androcentrism is through forming a clear conception
of and pursuing truth, logical consistency, objectivity, rationality,
justice, and the good. (Cudd 1996: 20).
These differences and intersections play out in the ways that various
feminists engage topics of common concern. One key area of
intersection noted by Georgia Warnke is the appropriation of
psychoanalytic theory, with Anglo-American feminists generally
adopting object-relations theories and Continental feminists drawing
more on Lacan and contemporary French psychoanalytic theory, though
this is already beginning to change (entry on
 intersections between analytic and continental feminism).
 The importance of psychoanalytic approaches is also underscored in
Shannon Sullivan’s essay
 Intersections Between Pragmatist and Continental Feminism.
 Given the importance of
 psychoanalytic feminism
 for all three traditions, a separate essay on this approach to
feminist theory is included in this section.
No topic is more central to feminist philosophy than sex and gender,
but even here many variations on the theme flourish. Where analytic
feminism, with its critique of essentialism, holds the sex/gender
distinction practically as an article of faith (see the entry on
 feminist perspectives on sex and gender
 and Chanter 2009), Continental feminists tend to suspect either (1)
that even the supposedly purely biological category of sex is itself
socially constituted (Butler 1990 and 1993 or (2) that sexual difference itself needs to be valued and theorized (see especially Cixous 1976 and Irigaray 1974.
Despite the variety of different approaches, styles, societies, and
orientations, feminist philosophers’ commonalities are greater
than their differences. Many will borrow freely from each other and
find that other orientations contribute to their own work. Even the
differences over sex and gender add to a larger conversation about the
impact of culture and society on bodies, experience, and pathways for
change.
Philosophers who are feminists have, in their work in traditional
fields of study, begun to change those very fields. The
Encyclopedia includes a range of entries on how feminist
philosophies have intervened in conventional areas of philosophical
research, areas in which philosophers often tend to argue that they
are operating from a neutral, universal point of view (notable
exceptions are pragmatism, poststructuralism, and some phenomenology).
Historically, philosophy has claimed that the norm is universal and
the feminine is abnormal, that universality is not gendered, but that
all things feminine are not universal. Not surprisingly, feminists
have pointed out how in fact these supposed neutral enterprises are in
fact quite gendered, namely, male gendered. For example, feminists
working on environmental philosophy have uncovered how practices
disproportionately affect women, children, and people of color.
Liberal feminism has shown how supposed universal truths of liberalism
are in fact quite biased and particular. Feminist epistemologists have
called out “epistemologies of ignorance” that traffic in
not knowing. Across the board, in fact, feminist philosophers are
uncovering male biases and also pointing to the value of
particularity, in general rejecting universality as a norm or
goal.
Entries under the heading of feminist interventions include the
following:
Feminist critical attention to philosophical practices has revealed
the inadequacy of dominant philosophical tropes. For example,
feminists working from the perspective of women’s lives have
been influential in bringing philosophical attention to the phenomenon
of care and care-giving (Ruddick 1989; Held 1995, 2007; Hamington
2006), dependency (Kittay 1999), disability (Wilkerson 2002; Carlson
2009) women’s labor (Waring 1999; Delphy 1984; Harley 2007), and
scientific bias and objectivity (Longino 1990), and have revealed
weaknesses in existing ethical, political, and epistemological
theories. More generally, feminists have called for inquiry into what
are typically considered “private” practices and personal
concerns, such as the family, sexuality, and the body, in order to
balance what has seemed to be a masculine pre-occupation with
“public” and impersonal matters. Philosophy presupposes
interpretive tools for understanding our everyday lives; feminist work
in articulating additional dimensions of experience and aspects of our
practices is invaluable in demonstrating the bias in existing tools,
and in the search for better ones.
Feminist explanations of sexism and accounts of sexist practices also
raise issues that are within the domain of traditional philosophical
inquiry. For example, in thinking about care, feminists have asked
questions about the nature of the self; in thinking about gender,
feminists have asked what the relationship is between the natural and
the social; in thinking about sexism in science, feminists have asked
what should count as knowledge. In some such cases mainstream
philosophical accounts provide useful tools; in other cases,
alternative proposals have seemed more promising.
In the sub-entries included under “feminism (topics)” in
the
 Table of Contents
 to this Encyclopedia, authors survey some of the recent
feminist work on a topic, highlighting the issues that are of
particular relevance to philosophy. These entries are:
See also the entries in the
 Related Entries section
 below.