Immanuel Kant’s views on sexual objectification have been particularly
influential for contemporary feminist discussions on this topic. Kant
thought that sexuality is extremely problematic when exercised outside
the context of monogamous marriage, arguing that in such instances it
leads to objectification. He characteristically writes in
the Lectures on Ethics that “sexual love makes of the
loved person an Object of appetite; as soon as that appetite has been
stilled, the person is cast aside as one casts away a lemon which has
been sucked dry. … as soon as a person becomes an Object of
appetite for another, all motives of moral relationship cease to
function, because as an Object of appetite for another a person
becomes a thing and can be treated and used as such by every
one” (Kant Lectures on Ethics, 163).
Objectification, for Kant, involves the lowering of a person, a being
with humanity, to the status of an object. Humanity, for
Kant, is an individual’s rational nature and capacity for rational
choice. The characteristic feature of humanity is an individual’s
capacity for rationally setting and pursuing her own ends. A being
with humanity is capable of deciding what is valuable, and of finding
ways to realise and promote this value. Humanity is what is special
about human beings. It distinguishes them from animals and inanimate
objects. Because human beings are special in this sense they,
unlike animals and objects, have a dignity (an ‘inner
worth’, as opposed to a ‘relative worth’) (Kant
1785, 42). It is crucial, for Kant, that each person respects humanity
in others, as well as humanity in their own person. Humanity must
never be treated merely as a means, but always at the same time as an
end (Kant 1797, 209).
Kant is worried that when people exercise their sexuality outside the
context of monogamous marriage, they treat humanity merely as a means
for their sexual purposes. In the Lectures on Ethics Kant
often speaks about ‘degradation’,
‘subordination’, and ‘dishonouring’ of
humanity when exercise of sexuality is involved. He goes so far as to
say that sexual activity can lead to the loss or
‘sacrifice’ of humanity (Kant Lectures on Ethics,
163–4). The loved person loses what is special to her as a human
being, her humanity, and is reduced to a thing, a mere sexual
instrument. Kant’s notion of objectification, therefore, focuses
largely on instrumentality: the treatment of a person as a mere tool
for the lover’s purposes. Objectification, for Kant, involves
regarding someone “as an object, something for use”
(Herman 1993, 57). According to Alan Soble, for Kant, “both the
body and the compliant actions of the other person are tools (a means)
that one uses for one’s sexual pleasure, and to that extent the other
person is a fungible, functional thing” (Soble 2002a, 226). The
idea that within sexual relationships people are reduced to objects,
that they lose their rational nature, is an extreme one. Halwani
rightly points out that this reduction to the status of an object
rarely happens in sexual objectification. He explains that
“Outside rape, it is rare to treat our sexual partners as
objects: not only are we aware of their humanity; we are also mindful
of it.” (Halwani 2010, 193) Halwani offers a more sensible
reading of Kant’s claim here, in admitting that there is truth to the
idea that “Sexual desire is powerful enough to make reason its
own tool; it can subvert our rational capacity to set ends”
(Halwani 2010, 209). In this way, people can “endanger their
dignity by undermining their reason” (Halwani 2010,
209). Therefore, even though the view that humanity is completely
destroyed when people exercise their sexuality is an unappealing one,
it is not unreasonable to think that, in some cases, sexual desire and
exercise of sexuality can undermine our rationality.
Kant thought that in theory both men and women can be objectified,
but he was well aware that in practice women are the most common
victims of objectification. This is obvious in Kant’s discussions
of prostitution and concubinage. Exercise of sexuality within these
morally problematic sexual contexts leads to the reduction of women
(prostitutes and concubines) to men’s objects of appetite.
Kant defines prostitution as the offer for profit of one’s
person for another’s sexual gratification. A person, Kant holds,
cannot allow others to use her body sexually in exchange for money
without losing her humanity and becoming an object. He explains that
“… a man is not at his own disposal. He is not entitled
to sell a limb, not even one of his teeth. But to allow one’s person
for profit to be used for the satisfaction of sexual desire, to make
of oneself an Object of demand, is to dispose over oneself as over a
thing” (Kant Lectures on Ethics, 165). The prostitute’s
commodification necessarily leads to her objectification; she is
reduced to “a thing on which another satisfies his
appetite” (Kant Lectures on Ethics, 165). Kant states
that “human beings are … not entitled to offer
themselves, for profit, as things for the use of others in the
satisfaction of their sexual inclinations. In so doing, they would run
the risk of having their person used by all and sundry as an
instrument for the satisfaction of inclination”
(Kant Lectures on Ethics, 165). Kant blames the prostitute
for her objectification. He takes her to be responsible for
sacrificing her humanity, in offering herself as an object for the
satisfaction of the clients’ sexual desires.
The other relationship in which objectification is, for Kant, clearly
present is concubinage. According to Kant, concubinage is the
non-commodified sexual relationship between a man and more than one
woman (the concubines). Kant takes concubinage to be a purely sexual
relationship in which all parties aim at the satisfaction of their
sexual desires (Kant Lectures on Ethics, 166). The inequality
that is involved in this relationship makes it problematic. Kant
explains that “the woman surrenders her sex completely to the
man, but the man does not completely surrender his sex to the
woman” (Kant Lectures on Ethics, 169). Since body and
self are for Kant inseparable and together they constitute the person,
in surrendering her body (her sex) exclusively to her male partner,
the woman surrenders her whole person to the man, allowing him to
possess it. The man, by contrast, who has more than one sexual
partner, does not exclusively surrender himself to the woman, and so
he does not allow her to possess his person. In allowing her male
partner to possess her person, without herself being able to similarly
possess his person, Kant believes that eventually the concubine (and
this also applies to the woman in any other polygamous relationship,
including polygamous marriage) loses her person and is made
‘into a thing’ (Kant Lectures on Ethics,
166).
The only relationship in which two people can exercise their
sexuality without the fear of reducing themselves to objects is
monogamous marriage. Monogamy is required to ensure
that there is equality and reciprocity in the surrender and ownership
of the two spouses’ persons. The spouses exclusively surrender their
persons to one another, so neither of them is in danger of losing his
or her person and becoming an object. This perfect equality and
reciprocity between the spouses is described by Kant as follows:
“… if I yield myself completely to another and obtain the
person of the other in return, I win myself back; I have given myself
up as the property of another, but in turn I take that other as my
property, and so win myself back again in winning the person whose
property I have become. In this way, the two persons become a unity of
will” (Kant Lectures on Ethics, 167). Furthermore, this
mutual exchange of the two spouses’ persons must, for Kant,
be legally enforced. Kant explains that marriage is
“sexual union in accordance with law” (Kant 1797, 62). He
wants something external, namely, the law, to guarantee this lifelong
ownership of the two parties’ persons in marriage. He argues that this
legal obligation to surrender one’s person to one’s spouses makes
marriage different from a monogamous relationship between two
unmarried partners.
Like Kant, anti-pornography feminists Catharine MacKinnon and Andrea
Dworkin take inequality to be tightly linked to objectification. In
the eyes of both these feminists and Kant, there is the powerful
objectifier on the one hand, and on the other hand there exists his
powerless victim. Due to their unequal power, the former objectifies
the latter.
Kant is concerned with inequality taking place within polygamous
relationships. MacKinnon and Dworkin, on the other hand, believe that
inequality is a much more widespread and pervasive phenomenon. It
covers all aspects of our society. MacKinnon and Dworkin emphasise that
we live in a world of gender inequality. A person’s
gender is, for MacKinnon, clearly distinguished from a
person’s sex. Gender, being a man or a woman, is socially
constructed, whereas sex, being male or female, is biologically
defined. Within our patriarchal societies, men and women have clearly
defined roles: women (all women, women as a group) are objectified,
whereas men (all men, men as a group) are their objectifiers
(MacKinnon 1987, 6, 32–45, 50; MacKinnon 1989a, 113–4, 128,
137–40; Haslanger 1993, 98–101) (For more on sex and
gender, see also the entries
 feminist perspectives on sex and gender
 and
  feminist perspectives on power.)
Even though MacKinnon does acknowledge that a female (sex) individual can
be an objectifier and a male (sex) individual can be objectified, she
takes it that the former is a man and the latter is a woman, since in
her view a man (gender) is by definition the objectifier and a woman
(gender) is by definition the objectified.
This situation of gender inequality which troubles our societies and
is so tightly linked to the objectification of women is, MacKinnon and
Dworkin believe, created and sustained by men’s consumption of
pornography. MacKinnon defines pornography as “the graphic
sexually explicit subordination of women through pictures or words that
also includes women dehumanised as sexual objects, things, or
commodities; enjoying pain or humiliation or rape; being tied up, cut
up, mutilated, bruised, or physically hurt; in postures of sexual
submission or servility or display; reduced to body parts, penetrated
by objects or animals, or presented in scenarios of degradation,
injury, torture; shown as filthy or inferior; bleeding, bruised, or
hurt in a context that makes these conditions sexual” (MacKinnon
1987, 176).
In our society, MacKinnon holds, pornography defines women’s
role as sexual objects available for men’s consumption:
“Pornography defines women by how we look according to how we can
be sexually used. … Pornography participates in its
audience’s eroticism through creating an accessible sexual
object, the possession and consumption of which is male
sexuality, as socially constructed; to be consumed and possessed as
which, is female sexuality, as socially constructed”
(MacKinnon 1987, 173). According to MacKinnon, pornography is
responsible for both men’s and women’s conception of women
as objects available for men’s consumption.
MacKinnon’s and Dworkin’s understanding of objectification is
similar to Kant’s. For both of them, as for Kant,
objectification involves treating a person, someone with humanity, as
an object of merely instrumental worth, and consequently reducing this
person to the status of an object for use. The objectified individual
is made into a tool for others’ sexual purposes. Objectification,
therefore, constitutes a serious harm to a person’s humanity.
Dworkin uses Kantian language to describe the phenomenon of sexual
objectification: “Objectification occurs when a human being,
through social means, is made less than human, turned into a thing or
commodity, bought and sold. When objectification occurs, a person is
depersonalised, so that no individuality or integrity is available
socially or in what is an extremely circumscribed privacy.
Objectification is an injury right at the heart of discrimination:
those who can be used as if they are not fully human are no longer
fully human in social terms; their humanity is hurt by being
diminished” (Dworkin 2000, 30–1). When a person is
treated as less than human, as merely an object for another’s use, she
becomes, according to Dworkin, less than human. In this way, her
humanity is harmed by being diminished.
MacKinnon too describes objectification in similar terms. She writes:
“… A sex object is defined on the basis of its looks, in
terms of its usability for sexual pleasure, such that both the
looking—the quality of gaze, including its points of
view—and the definition according to use become eroticised as
part of the sex itself. This is what the feminist concept of
‘sex object’ means” (MacKinnon 1987, 173). She
furthermore holds: “A person, in one Kantian view, is a free and
rational agent whose existence is an end in itself, as opposed to
instrumental.  In pornography women exist to the end of male
pleasure” (MacKinnon 1987, 173). Insofar as an individual has
only instrumental value, she is clearly not regarded as an end in
herself.
MacKinnon and Dworkin have argued that, even if women consent to their
being used as mere means for men’s sexual purposes, this is not
sufficient to make such use permissible. For instance, these feminists
claim that women in the pornographic industry consent to be used as
objects simply out of lack of options available to them within our
patriarchal society. Women’s consent, therefore, is not true
consent. MacKinnon writes: “The sex is not chosen for the sex.
Money is the medium of force and provides the cover of consent”
(MacKinnon 1993, 28). This does not only hold for women in
pornography. For MacKinnon and Dworkin, all women’s consent to be
sexually used by men cannot be true consent under the existing
conditions of gender inequality. They hold that women are not truly
blameworthy for their reduction to things of merely instrumental
value.  Women’s objectification is demanded and inflicted by men in
our societies. It is men who want, and also, Dworkin claims, need to
use women as objects, and demand them to be object-like (Dworkin 1997,
142–3).
Kant compares the objectified individual to a lemon, used and
discarded afterwards, and elsewhere to a steak consumed by people for
the satisfaction of their hunger (Kant Lectures on Ethics,
163 and 165). In a similar manner, MacKinnon blames pornography for
teaching its consumers that women exist to be used by men. A woman,
according to MacKinnon, becomes comparable to a cup (a thing), and as
such she is valued only for how she looks and how she can be used
(MacKinnon 1987, 138). Similarly, Dworkin talks about men being the
only “human centre” of the world, surrounded by objects
for use, including women. A man experiences his power, according to
Dworkin, in using objects, both inanimate objects and “persons
who are not adult men” (Dworkin 1989, 104).
Kant took exercise of sexuality to be inherently problematic. For
Dworkin and MacKinnon, on the other hand, what is problematic is not
sexuality per se, but rather sexuality as constructed through
pornography. These feminists believe that objectification is a
consequence of gender inequality and it is created and sustained by
pornography’s existence and consumption. Pornography, according to
MacKinnon, makes women’s sexuality into “something any man who
wants to can buy and hold in his hands… She becomes something
to be used by him, specifically, an object of his sexual use”
(MacKinnon 1987, 138). MacKinnon fears that use can easily be followed
by violence and abuse. Since women are things (as opposed to human
beings), it seems to men that there is nothing problematic with
abusing them. The object status of women, then, is the cause of men
seeing nothing problematic with violent behaviour towards women.
Moreover, MacKinnon notes, women in pornography are presented as
enjoying how they are being used and violated by men: “In
pornography, women desire disposition and cruelty. Men … create
scenes in which women desperately want to be bound, battered,
tortured, humiliated, and killed. Or merely taken and used. Women are
there to be violated and possessed, men to violate and possess
us…” (MacKinnon 1987, 148). Dworkin similarly writes:
“Men do not believe that rape and battery are violations of
female will in part because men … have consumed pornography in
the private world of men for centuries. … The most enduring
sexual truth in pornography is that sexual violence is desired by the
normal female, needed by her, suggested or demanded by her”
(Dworkin 1989, 166). Pornography, then, teaches its consumers that,
not only is it permissible to treat women in these ways, but also that
women themselves enjoy being used, violated and abused by men. Watson
furthermore argues that use of pornography restricts the sexual
autonomy of boys and men, due to pornography’s pervasiveness as
a tool of sex education. Pornography consumption powerfully shapes its
users’ beliefs, attitudes, preferences and desires. Pornography,
she argues, distorts these and in this way undermines people’s sexual
autonomy and restricts the development of authentic sexuality for both
women and men (Altman and Watson 284, 287–8).
The idea that pornography causes men to treat women as
objects to be used and abused has been defended by a number of
feminists. Alison Assiter argues that what is wrong with pornography
is that it reinforces desires on the part of men to treat women as
objects (as mere means to achieve their purposes) (Assiter 1988,
68). Rae Langton also discusses the possibility of such a causal
connection between men’s consumption of pornography and women’s
objectification. She writes: “As a matter of human psychology,
when men sexually use objects, pornographic artifacts, as women, they
tend to use real woman as objects. One weaker variant of this causal
claim might be restricted to a subset of pornography… As a
matter of human psychology, when men sexually use objects as women,
and those objects are pornographic artifacts, whose content is
violent or misogynistic, then they will tend to use real women as
objects” (Langton 1995, 178).)
MacKinnon, however, holds that the connection between men’s
use of pornography and women’s objectification is not simply a
causal one. She has famously claimed that pornography involves
“sex between people and things, human beings and pieces of paper,
real men and unreal women”. And, as a result for MacKinnon,
“the human [women, in particular] becomes a thing”
(MacKinnon 1993, 109 and 25). Men’s consumption of pornography,
then, is (constitutes) women’s objectification.
(This is admittedly a puzzling claim, but one which I will not delve
into further here. Detailed defenses of the claim have been
offered by Melinda Vadas (Vadas 2005) and Rae Langton (Langton 1995),
and a criticism has been put forward by Jennifer Saul (Saul 2006).)
Kant thought that the solution to sexual objectification is
marriage. This is because he conceived this relationship as one of
perfect equality and reciprocity between the spouses. Each of them
surrenders his or her person to the other and receives the person of
the other in return. This way, Kant believed, neither of them is
objectified by losing his or her person. (For a detailed discussion of
Kantian marriage see Herman 1993 and Papadaki 2010b.) For Dworkin and
MacKinnon, however, Kant’s suggested solution is
inappropriate. Objectification, according to these feminists, is
present within all heterosexual relationships in our society and harms
women’s humanity. Marriage, or any other heterosexual relationship for
that matter, is clearly not regarded as an exception by
them. According to MacKinnon and Dworkin, the way to fight
objectification is to fight gender inequality, which is created and
sustained by men’s consumption of pornography. They take it that
pornography has power and authority over its audience (men and
boys). This view is also defended by Langton, who argues that it does
not matter that the speech of pornographers is not generally held in
high esteem. What matters, rather, is that men and boys learn about
sex primarily through pornography. Pornography passes the message to
its audience that women are objects readily available for men’s
consumption (Langton 1993, 312).
The view that pornography has this amount of influence over men and
plays such a central role in women’s objectification has received
criticism. Deborah Cameron and Elizabeth Frazer question the idea that
men are conditioned to behave in certain ways as a consequence of
pornography consumption. What is problematic with this idea, according
to them, is that men are presented as incapable of critically
interpreting pornographic materials, and as simply imitating what they
see in pornography (Cameron & Frazer 2000, 248–251). In a similar spirit, Altman argues that pornography consumption cannot alter a person’s preferences and desires, sexual or otherwise. He claims that men find women’s subordination arousing, not as a result of their having consumed pornography. Rather, they enjoy pornography, which includes the subordination of women, because they already find this subordination arousing. Thus, pornography does not make anything sexy but it deals with what its consumers already find sexy (Altman and Watson, 68–9). 
Even assuming that pornography does indeed pass the message that
women are object-like to its consumers, however, it has been suggested
that pornography is not special with respect to sustaining gender
inequality and women’s objectification. Leslie Green explains
that the idea that women are mere objects/tools is reinforced through
parental pressure, television, popular novels, music videos, and
fashion. What we need to do, Green says, is change our society, in a
way that women’s subjectivity will be acknowledged (Green 2000,
43–52). Nussbaum too argues that we should not see pornography as the
primary cause of women’s objectification. Sexual objectification
is, according to Nussbaum, often caused by social inequality, but there
is no reason to believe that pornography is the core of such inequality
(Nussbaum 1995, 286, 290).
A similar view has been put forward by Ronald Dworkin, according to
whom: “It might be odd that feminists have devoted such energy
to that campaign [the campaign for outlawing pornography]… No
doubt mass culture is in various ways an obstacle to sexual equality,
but the most popular forms of that culture—the view of women
presented in soap operas and commercials, for example—are much
greater obstacles to that equality than the dirty films watched by a
small minority” (R. Dworkin 1993, 36). (For further discussions
about pornography, see also the entries on
 feminist perspectives on sex markets
 and on 
 pornography and censorship.)
It has been pointed out by some feminist thinkers that women in our
society are more identified and associated with their bodies than are
men, and, to a greater extent than men, they are valued for how they
look (Bartky 1990; Bordo 1993, 143). In order to gain social
acceptability, women are under constant pressure to
correct their bodies and appearance more generally, and to
make them conform to the ideals of feminine appearance of their time,
the so-called ‘norms of feminine appearance’ (the standards
of appearance women feel they should be living up to) (Saul
2003, 144). Some feminists have argued that, in being preoccupied with
their looks, women treat themselves as things to be decorated and gazed
upon.
In her book Femininity and Domination, Sandra Bartky uses
Marx’s theory of alienation to explain the objectification that
results from women’s preoccupation with their appearance. A
feature of Marx’s theory of alienation is the
fragmentation of the human person, this “splintering of
human nature into a number of misbegotten parts”. For Marx,
labour is the most distinctively human activity, and the product of
labour is the exteriorisation of the worker’s being. Under capitalism,
however, workers are alienated from the products of their labour, and
consequently their person is fragmented (Bartky 1990,
128–9).
Bartky believes that women in patriarchal societies also undergo a
kind of fragmentation “by being too closely identified with
[their body]… [their] entire being is identified with the body,
a thing which… has been regarded as less inherently human than
the mind or personality” (Bartky 1990, 130). All the focus is
placed on a woman’s body, in a way that her mind or personality are
not adequately acknowledged. A woman’s person, then, is
fragmented. Bartky believes that through this fragmentation a woman is
objectified, since her body is separated from her person and is
thought as representing the woman (Bartky 1990, 130).
Bartky explains that, typically, objectification involves two
persons, one who objectifies and one who is objectified. (This is also
the idea of objectification put forward by Kant as well as by MacKinnon
and Dworkin.) However, as Bartky points out, objectifier and
objectified can be one and the same person. Women in patriarchal
societies feel constantly watched by men, much like the prisoners of
the Panopticon (model prison proposed by Bentham), and they feel the
need to look sensually pleasing to men (Bartky 1990, 65). According to
Bartky: “In the regime of institutionalised heterosexuality woman
must make herself ‘object and prey’ for the man. …
Woman lives her body as seen by another, by an anonymous patriarchal
Other” (Bartky 1990, 73). This leads women to objectify their
own persons. Bartky argues that the woman “[takes] toward her own
person the attitude of the man. She will then take erotic satisfaction
in her physical self, revelling in her body as a beautiful object to be
gazed at and decorated”. Such an attitude is called
‘narcissism’, which is defined by Bartky as the infatuation
with one’s bodily being (Bartky 1990, 131–2).
In being infatuated with their bodily beings, Bartky argues that
women learn to see and treat themselves as objects to be gazed at and
decorated, they learn to see themselves as though from the outside.
Narcissism, as Simone de Beauvoir also points out, “consists in
the setting up of the ego as a double ‘stranger’”
(Beauvoir 1961, 375). The adolescent girl “becomes an object and
she sees herself as an object; she discovers this new aspect of her
being with surprise: it seems to her that she has been doubled; instead
of coinciding exactly with herself, she now begins to exist
outside” (Beauvoir 1961, 316) (See the entry on
 Simone de Beauvoir.) However, this
‘stranger’ who inhabits women’s consciousness, Bartky
writes, is hardly a stranger; it is, rather, the woman’s own self
(Bartky 1993, 134).
As Nancy Bauer holds, drawing on Beauvoir, women will always have
reasons to succumb to the temptation of objectifying themselves. Bauer
mentions the widespread recent phenomenon of female college students
who claim that they gain pleasure in performing unilateral oral sex on
male students. A woman who turns herself into an “object of the
helpless desire of a boy”in this way, Bauer explains,
experiences a sense of power and pleasure, which, however, are not
unadulterated (Bauer 2011, 124). A great theme of The Second
Sex, Bauer concludes, is that, in order to achieve full
personhood, it is necessary not only that men stop objectifying women,
but also that “women care about abjuring the temptation to
objectify themselves” (Bauer 2011, 128).
Bartky talks about the disciplinary practices that produce a feminine
body and are the practices through which women learn to see themselves
as objects. First of all, according to her, there are those practices
that aim to produce a body of a certain size and shape: women must
conform to the body ideal of their time (i.e. a slim body with large
breasts), which, Bartky holds, requires women to subject their bodies
to the ‘tyranny of slenderness’ (put themselves through
constant dieting and exercise) (Bartky 1990, 65–7). Susan Bordo
also emphasises the fact that women are more obsessed with dieting
than are men. This is linked to serious diseases such as anorexia and
bulimia. Ninety percent of all anorexics, Bordo points out, are women (Bordo
1993, 143, 154). Furthermore, a large number of women have plastic
surgery, most commonly liposuction and breast enlargement, in order to
make their bodies conform to what is considered to be the ideal
body.
According to Bartky, the second category of these disciplinary
practices that produce a feminine body are those that aim to control
the body’s gestures, postures, and movements. Women, she holds,
are more restricted than men in the way they move, and they try to take
up very little space as opposed to men, who tend to expand to the space
available. Women’s movements are also restrained by their
uncomfortable clothes and shoes (Bartky 1990, 68–9). The final
category of the disciplinary practices, Bartky holds, are those that are
directed towards the display of a woman’s body as an
‘ornamented surface’: women must take care of their skin
and make it soft, smooth, hairless and wrinkle-free, they must apply
make-up to disguise their skin’s imperfections. Our culture
demands the ‘infantilisation’ of women’s bodies and
faces (Bartky 1990, 71–2).
According to Bartky: “… whatever else she [a
woman] may become, she is importantly a body designed to please or to
excite” (Bartky 1990, 80). Iris Marion Young adds that
women’s preoccupation with their appearance suppresses the body
potential of women: “Developing a sense of our bodies as
beautiful objects to be gazed at and decorated requires suppressing a
sense of our bodies as strong, active subjects…” (Young,
1979).
Who is responsible for women’s situation? According to Bartky:
“The disciplinary power that inscribes femininity in the female
body is everywhere and it is nowhere; the disciplinarian is everyone
and yet no one in particular” (Bartky 1990, 74). The message
that women should look more feminine is everywhere: it is reinforced by
parents, teachers, male partners, and it is expressed in various ways
throughout the media. Men, then, are not the only ones to blame for
women’s situation. Because of the pervasiveness of this
disciplinary power that inscribes femininity,
women’s constant preoccupation with appearance has come to be
regarded as something natural and voluntary; it is something that women
have internalised. Therefore, it is far from easy for women, in
Bartky’s view, to free themselves from their objectification.
Not all feminists, however, share the concern about the inevitability
of objectification involved in women’s appearance-related
pursuits. Janet Richards takes women’s preoccupation with their looks
to be a matter of personal preference, and not a feminist matter. She
claims that there is nothing inherently degrading or objectifying about
women trying to be sensually pleasing (Richards 1980,
184–204). Natasha Walter too takes it that women’s preoccupation
with their appearance is not necessarily objectifying. She also points
to the fact that men in our society engage in self-decoration and
seek to be admired by women (Walter 1998, 86–102).
Bordo herself acknowledges the fact that men have increasingly started
to spend more time, money and effort on their appearance (Bordo
1999). She emphasises the fact that men’s magazines today, like
women’s, are full of articles and advice on how men should look: how
to be more muscular, what clothes to wear, what creams and other
cosmetics to use, etc. Men feel the need to make their looks conform
to the prevailing ideals of masculinity. Bordo believes that it is
consumer capitalism that drives men to be increasingly concerned with
their appearance: “Why should [the cosmetics, diet, exercise,
and surgery industries] restrict themselves to female markets, if they
can convince men that their looks need constant improvement
too?,” she asks (Bordo 1999, 220).
The fact that men too face pressure to look a certain way, and
engage in constant efforts to improve their appearance, however, is not
on its own sufficient to show that women’s (and men’s)
preoccupation with appearance is not objectifying. According to Saul,
“The increasing pressure on men to conform to unattainable
standards of beauty is far from a sign of progress: it is, instead, a
sign that the problem has grown” (Saul 2003, 168).
MacKinnon introduces the idea that there are important connections
between objectivity and objectification. MacKinnon writes: “The
stance of the ‘knower’ … is … the neutral
posture, which I will be calling objectivity—that is the
nonsituated distanced standpoint… [This] is the male standpoint
socially … [The] relationship between objectivity as the stance
from which the world is known and the world that is apprehended in
this way is the relationship of objectification. Objectivity is the
epistemological stance of which objectification is the social process,
of which male dominance is the politics, the acted out social
practice. That is, to look at the world objectively is to objectify
it” (MacKinnon 1987, 50). Her claim has become the focus of
recent feminist investigation. Drawing on MacKinnon’s work, Rae
Langton and Sally Haslanger have explored the idea that
objectification is often hidden, and ‘masked’ as
objectivity.
According to Haslanger, in trying to be objective about our world and
function within it, we go about trying to discover things’ natures. An
object’s nature is essential to it, and any change to it will
inevitably destroy it. An object cannot exist without those properties
that constitute its nature. Discovering an object’s nature enables us
to explain the behaviour of that object under normal
circumstances. This means that in practical decision-making, we must
be attentive to objects’ natures (Haslanger 1993, 103, 105). She
writes: “It won’t do to try to fry an egg on a paper plate;
there is no point in trying to teach a rock how to read. Because the
world is not infinitely malleable to our wants or needs, reasonable
decision making will accommodate ‘how things are’, where
this is understood as accommodating the natures of things, the
background conditions constraining our actions” (Haslanger 1993,
105).
A plausible strategy for discovering a thing’s nature is to look for
observed regularities. This is because natures are responsible for the
regular behaviour of things under normal circumstances. For example, I
observe that my ferns die if deprived of water. I therefore come to
believe that the nature of ferns is such that they cannot survive
without water. I adjust my decision-making in accordance with this
observed regularity, and so water my ferns to prevent them from
dying. In observing the regularity that ferns die when depraved of
water, I have concluded that this is due to ferns’ nature. Haslanger
points out that this procedure of drawing on observed regularities to
set constraints on our practical decision making seems to be “a
paradigm of ‘neutral,’ ‘objective,’ or
‘reasonable’ procedure” (Haslanger 1993, 105).
The above procedure, however, can be problematic. This becomes
obvious when moving to the social world. For example, aiming to
discover women’s nature following the above procedure in
patriarchal societies (like ours, according to MacKinnon) is highly
problematic. MacKinnon believes that it is an observed regularity in
our societies that women are submissive and object-like (and men are
women’s objectifiers). This means that one might be led to the
belief that women are by their nature submissive and
object-like. (It should be noted here that MacKinnon, and also
Haslanger and Langton following her, use ‘men’ and
‘women’ to refer to gender categories, which are socially
(not biologically) defined: one is a woman or a man by virtue of
one’s social position; see the entry on 
feminist perspectives on sex and gender.)
 However, the
belief that women are naturally submissive and object-like is false,
since women have been made to be like that.
Women’s object-like status is not a natural fact, but rather a
consequence of gender inequality. In structuring our world in such a
way as to accommodate this allegedly natural fact about women, we
sustain the existing situation of gender inequality. As MacKinnon
vividly puts it: “if [we] look neutrally on the reality of
gender so produced, the harm that has been done will not be
perceptible as harm. It becomes just the way things are”
(MacKinnon 1987, 59). Haslanger adds: “Once we have cast women
as submissive and deferential ‘by nature’, then efforts to
change this role appear unmotivated, even pointless. … These
reflections suggest that what appeared to be a ‘neutral’
or ‘objective’ ideal, namely, the procedure of drawing on
observed regularities to set constraints on practical decision
making—is one which will, under conditions of gender hierarchy
reinforce the social arrangements on which such hierarchy depends”
(Haslanger 1993, 106).
Drawing on MacKinnon, Haslanger suggests that there are four
conditions that are necessary in order for person A to
objectify person B:
When it comes to women’s sexual objectification by men, the
above conditions go as following:
According to Haslanger, in order for an objectifier to
‘mask’ his power and believe that the observed differences
between men and women are consequences of their natures, he must resort
to a norm of aperspectivity; he must believe that his
observations are not conditioned by his own social position, and that
he has no impact on the circumstances under observation. Haslanger
discusses a norm, which is often used by objectifiers, the norm of
Assumed Objectivity, which consists of the following four
sub-norms:
Haslanger argues that, under conditions of social hierarchy, the
Norm of Assumed Objectivity would perpetuate the existing patterns of
women’s objectification. Therefore, our efforts at social change
would become unmotivated. The norm in question should be rejected in
this case because it has bad practical consequences for women, while
serving the interests of men (it is pragmatically bad).
Furthermore, Haslanger argues that the norm of Assumed Objectivity
should be rejected because it yields false beliefs, like the belief
that women are submissive and object-like by their nature (it is
epistemically bad) (Haslanger 1993, 108–115).
Langton agrees with Haslanger that, under conditions of social
hierarchy, the norm of Assumed Objectivity is problematic and therefore
should be rejected. Her reasons are twofold: First of all, (as
Haslanger also noted) because it yields false beliefs; beliefs which do
not fit the world at all, like the belief that women are object-like by
nature. Secondly, because it yields true but unjustified
beliefs, beliefs that are true “for the wrong reasons”
(Langton 1993, 383); for example, the belief that women are actually
submissive and object-like. The belief is unjustified, according to
Langton, because of its direction of fit. In this case, Langton
explains, instead of men arranging their belief to fit the world, the
world arranges itself to fit the belief of men. Those people who occupy
a position of power and pursue the norm of Assumed Objectivity will
make the world conform to their belief (Langton 1993, 383).
Langton explains that objectivity is about the ways in
which the mind conforms to the world (the way in which our beliefs
arrange themselves to fit the world). When someone is objective, his or
her beliefs have the right direction of fit: the beliefs are arranged
in order to fit the way the world is. Objectification, on the
other hand, is about the ways in which the world conforms to mind
(conforms to our beliefs). An objectifier’s beliefs have the
wrong direction of fit: the objectifier arranges the world in order to
fit his or her beliefs, which are influenced by his or her desires,
instead of arranging his or her beliefs to fit the way the world
actually is. Objectification, then, is a process in which the social
world comes to be shaped by desire and belief. An objectifier thinks
that her or his beliefs have come to fit the world, where in fact the
world has come to fit her or his beliefs.
When it comes to the objectification of women, Langton explains that
women become submissive and object-like because of men’s desires and
beliefs. Men desire women to be this way, and, if they have power,
they force women to become this way. Following the norm of Assumed
Objectivity, then, men form the belief that women are in fact
submissive and object-like, and also that women are like that due to
their nature. So, when it comes to women’s objectification, the world
conforms to men’s minds. Men’s beliefs, however, have the wrong
direction of fit because men arrange the world to fit their beliefs
and desires about women being submissive and object-like. The norm of
Assumed Objectivity, then, yields the belief that women are submissive
and object-like, which is true but has the wrong direction of fit
(Langton 2000, 138–142), along with the false belief that women
are naturally this way. (For a further discussion about beliefs with
an anomalous direction of fit, as well as a discussion of the
mechanisms that are responsible for generating them, see also
Langton’s work on ‘projection’ and its role in women’s
objectification in her 2004 article “Projection and
Objectification”. For a criticism of Langton’s argument that the
norm of Assumed Objectivity is responsible for yielding beliefs that
are true but have a wrong direction of fit, see Papadaki 2008.)
So far, we have looked at various concerns regarding the wrongness
involved in objectification. A number of thinkers, however, have
challenged the idea that objectification is always morally
problematic.
Alan Soble questions the widely held Kantian view according to which
human dignity is something that people have. He argues that
objectification is not inappropriate. Everyone is already only an
object and being only an object is not necessarily a bad thing. In one
sense, then, no one can be objectified because no one has the higher
ontological status that is required to be reduce-able by
objectification. In another sense, everyone is vulnerable to
objectification, and everyone can and may be objectified, because to
do so is to take them to their correct ontological level. He writes:
In the case of pornography, then, there is nothing wrong, according
to Soble, with treating pornographic actors and models as objects for
sexual pleasure and deny their humanity. That is because there is no
negative objectification that needs to be taken into moral
account. Soble adds that pornography’s task is in fact a good one;
pornography takes these people (both men and women), who according to
him are good at sex, and makes sure that they do something with their
lives (Soble 2002b).
Leslie Green is another thinker who argues that it is permissible and
also required to treat people as objects. As Green explains, people
are embodied, extended in space, they exist in time, and they are
subject to the laws of nature. People, however, are clearly more than
objects. What is problematic therefore, according to Green, is to
treat a person merely as an object, merely as a means to
one’s own ends. We can treat other people as means only if we at the
same time respect their integrity as agents with their own purposes
(Green 2000, 44).
Green points to Kant’s Categorical Imperative, according to which the
prohibition is against treating a person merely as
means, and not at the same time as an end. As Green emphasises,
there is no prohibition against treating a person as a means
(as an instrument) (Green 2000, 44). In fact, Green holds, “we
must treat others as instruments, for we need their skills, their
company, and their bodies—in fact, there is little that we
social creatures can do on our own, and so little that is
fulfilling” (Green 2000, 45–6). According to Green, when
people are old, severely disabled, or chronically unemployed what they
fear the most is that they no longer are of use to others. As Green
puts it, “they miss not only their diminished agency, but also
their diminished objectivity. … They become
… subjectified” (Green 2000, 46).
Martha Nussbaum too aims to challenge the widely-held idea that
objectification is inconsistent with respect for a person’s
humanity. She offers a systematic analysis of objectification, a
concept not at all easy to define and one that writers on the topic
have not sufficiently clarified, as she acknowledges (Nussbaum 1995,
251).
Objectification, for Nussbaum is the seeing and/or treating a person
as an object; it involves treating one thing as another: one is
treating as an object what in fact is not an object, but a human being
(Nussbaum 1995, 256–7). Nussbaum, then, disagrees with Green’s
view that people are partly objects. According to Nussbaum, there are
seven features involved in the idea of objectification:
instrumentality, denial of autonomy, inertness, fungibility,
violability, ownership, denial of subjectivity. A detailed exposition
of these seven features is provided in the introduction of this
entry.
According to Nussbaum, a person is objectified when they are seen
and/or treated in one or more of the above seven
ways. Instrumentality, then, Nussbaum points out, the core notion of
Kant’s, MacKinnon’s, Dworkin’s, as well as Green’s conceptions of
objectification, is only one of the ways a person can be treated as an
object. (Nussbaum does believe, however, that, among these seven
notions, instrumentality is especially problematic, and is often
linked to other forms of objectification (Nussbaum 1995,
265)). Nussbaum’s conception of objectification, then, is broader than
Kant/MacKinnon/Dworkin’s because objectification for Nussbaum is not
merely defined in terms of instrumentalisation, and also because it
can take place when a person is only seen, but not treated,
as an object (seen in one or more of the above seven ways that she
mentions).
According to Nussbaum, objectification need not have devastating
consequences to a person’s humanity. In fact, Nussbaum criticises
MacKinnon and Dworkin for conceiving of objectification as a
necessarily negative phenomenon (Nussbaum 1995, 273). Nussbaum
believes that it is possible that “some features of
objectification… may in fact in some circumstances… be
even wonderful features of sexual life”, and so “the term
objectification can also be used… in a more positive
spirit. Seeing this will require … seeing how the allegedly
impossible combination between (a form of) objectification and
equality, respect, and consent might after all be
possible” (Nussbaum 1995, 251).
According to Nussbaum, then: “In the matter of objectification
context is everything. … in many if not all cases, the
difference between an objectionable and a benign use of
objectification will be made by the overall context of the human
relationship” (Nussbaum 1995, 271); “… objectification has
features that may be either good or bad, depending upon the overall
context” (Nussbaum 1995, 251). Objectification
is negative, when it takes place in a context where equality,
respect and consent are absent. Among the negative objectification
cases she discusses in her article are Hankinson’s Isabelle and
Veronique, the magazine Playboy, and James’s The
Golden Bowl. And it is benign/positive, when it is
compatible with equality, respect and consent. Nussbaum gives an
example of benign objectification: “If I am lying around with my
lover on the bed, and use his stomach as a pillow there seems to be
nothing at all baneful about this, provided that I do so with his
consent (or, if he is asleep, with a reasonable belief that he would
not mind), and without causing him pain, provided as well, that I do
so in the context of a relationship in which he is generally treated
as more than a pillow” (Nussbaum 1995, 265).
Nussbaum believes that ‘Lawrentian objectification’
(objectification occurring between the lovers in D. H. Lawrence’s
novels) is a clear example of positive objectification. The passage
from Lady Chatterley’s Lover that she quotes in her article
describes a sex scene between two lovers. Connie and Mellors, in a
context characterised by rough social equality and respect, identify
each other with their body parts, they “… put aside their
individuality and become identified with their bodily organs. They see
one another in terms of those organs” (Nussbaum 1995,
275). Consequently, the two lovers deny each other’s autonomy and
subjectivity, when engaging in the sex act.
However, Nussbaum explains, “when there is loss of autonomy in
sex, the context is… one in which on the whole, autonomy is
respected and promoted. … Again, when there is loss of
subjectivity in the moment of lovemaking, this can be and frequently
is accompanied by an intense concern for the subjectivity of the
partner at other moments…” (Nussbaum 1995,
274–6). As Nussbaum also emphasises in her latest essay on
objectification, a person’s “chosen resignation of autonomous
self-direction, or her willed passivity may be compatible with, and
even a valued part of, a relationship in which the woman is treated as
an end for her own sake… as a full fledged human being”
(Nussbaum 2007, 51). Furthermore, Connie and Mellors do not treat each
other merely as means for their purposes, according to Nussbaum. Even
though they treat each other as tools for sexual pleasure, they
generally regard each other as more than that. The two lovers, then,
are equal and they treat one another as objects in a way that is
consistent with respecting each other as human beings.
Nussbaum’s list of the seven features involved in objectification and
the relations that exist between them provides perhaps the most
systematic analysis of the concept of objectification to date. But
Papadaki has argued that Nussbaum’s conception is too broad (Papadaki
2010a). A person is objectified, according to Nussbaum, if they are
seen and/or treated as an object (in one or more of the seven ways
that she mentions). If every time a person is treated (or merely seen)
by another, say, as an instrument (not a mere instrument) for
some further purpose, we take it that the person in question is
objectified, then it seems that in our daily lives we objectify nearly
everyone, including ourselves. Inevitably, we use each other and
ourselves instrumentally all the time (for instance, I use a taxi
driver as a means to get to my destination, I use myself as a means to
prepare a meal, etc). Papadaki argues that if objectification is to be
a meaningful concept, we need to restrict it. Halwani is also in favor
of a narrower conception of objectification. He argues that we are
better off with a definition of objectification that includes
“only treatment or behavior towards someone”. According to
this view, if someone merely sees or regards another in a sexual way,
there is no objectification. Such a definition, Halwani suggests,
“…is less cluttered and more accurately reflects the
problem with objectification: its impact on the objectified (often
thought as victims)” (Halwani 2008, 342 and Halwani
2010, 187–8). He believes that we are better off arguing that,
in Nussbaum’s positive objectification cases, there is no
objectification to begin with. This is better than “engaging in
mental gymnastics to try to show that there is objectification but
that it is okay or good” (Halwani 2010, 197). Nussbaum herself
seems to be concerned, at times, about her objectification category
being too inclusive. For example, she states that sometimes we do not
treat the occurrence of only one of the seven notions on her list as
sufficient for objectification (Nussbaum 1995, 258). However, Papadaki
suggests, she does not give us enough guidance as to how we can decide
whether objectification is present when a person is treated in one of
the seven ways she mentions. In addition, she suggests that once
objectification’s association with the morally problematic is
weakened, there is the risk that the fight against (negative)
objectification might be undermined (Papadaki 2010a, 27–31).
Recently, Nancy Bauer has expressed scepticism regarding the
possibility of laying out a set of criteria for what counts as sexual
objectification. She argues that it is difficult to specify the marks
and features of a term that plays a normative role in our mutually
shared worldview. And if the term in question is important to my
outlook, but not yours, she claims that it is impossible for me to
specify criteria for the term’s application that pick out the
phenomenon from your point of view. She writes: “If the
term ‘sexual objectification’ is critical in helping you make
sense of the world as you see it, then, more or less, you will know
sexual objectification when you see it. … Insofar as the
philosophical literature sets out to delineate the marks and features
of sexual objectification, it is bound not only to fail but to miss
the very phenomenon it seeks to illuminate” (Bauer 2015,
part I).
Regarding the feminist concept of sexual objectification, Bauer
explains that it was coined as part of a feminist shift in how to
understand the world and one’s experience in it. According to the
shift in question, in a context in which women experience widespread,
systematic, diachronic, and structural disadvantages, certain ways of
perceiving and representing women tend to cause them material and
psychological harm. Bauer argues that once someone participates in
this shift, the term ‘sexual objectification’ will
‘light up’ the relevant phenomena, and the person in
question will see objectification everywhere she looks in contemporary
culture. This is the case even if she is not in a position to specify
exactly its marks and features. Bauer explains that
‘lighting up’ in certain cases may take the form of a
conversion experience that consists in our seeing things that we did
not see before. For Bauer, the metaphor of ‘lighting up’
is crucial in thinking about sexual objectification and other terms
that make sense only in a context of a systematic normative way of
understanding the world (what she calls a ‘worldview’
(Bauer, forthcoming, part II)).
 Undoubtedly, objectification is a concept difficult to define, as
Nussbaum also acknowledges, since it turns out to be
‘slippery’ and ‘multiple’ (Nussbaum 1995,
251). How to best to define objectification, if we can
define it at all, and whether this notion should be restricted to
describe the morally objectionable, or expanded to cover benign and/or
positive aspects of the way we see and treat each other in our daily
lives is an ongoing debate. Much recent feminist work has been devoted
to comprehensive philosophical analyses of objectification, which will
hopefully lead to more complete and coherent understandings of this
notion.