Bioethics and second wave feminism both independently gathered
momentum during the 1960s, a pivotal era for social transformation in
many areas of the world. Something that might be called the bioethics
“movement” was first triggered by widespread protest
against such gross abuses of medical authority as the Nazi
doctors’ experiments on unconsenting concentration camp inmates,
culminating in the Nuremberg Doctors’ Trial of 1946 (Weindling
2004), and the Tuskegee Syphilis Study, a forty-year study of poor
black men with untreated syphilis in the American Deep South (Reverby
2009). Over the decades since then bioethics has blossomed into an
interdisciplinary field that borrows from a cluster of interrelated
areas of scholarship including philosophy, theology, law, medicine,
and the social and biological sciences, and that (in the United States
in particular) has become highly professionalized. Bioethics has
generated a massive literature ranging over a broad array of moral
problems that arise within biomedical and life science research, the
healthcare professions, and the institutions and bodies that deliver
healthcare services. Increasingly, its remit goes beyond what are
traditionally deemed medical topics to include public health issues
and areas of social care that interact with medical and life
sciences. Its reach extends from the beginning to the end of human
life, to areas of biology and genetics on which medicine draws, to
research that seeks to expand the knowledge base of medicine; and many
contemporary bioethicists are also interested in the societal impacts
of the life sciences in general. In some countries bioethicists now
also enjoy considerable professional prestige. Some serve on public
policy panels and in medical school faculties, and others have been
engaged as consultants to industry. Conferences introduce newcomers to
the field and disseminate recent bioethical scholarship. Many
professional medical and allied health organizations require bioethics
training for certification, while regulations in the United States and
other countries now expect medical schools to include research ethics
in their curricula. A few bioethicists have even become media
celebrities.
And as the field of bioethics has professionalized and diversified,
questions have arisen about its direction and focus. Notwithstanding
its early attention to instances of exploitation and abuse, some
critics have discerned an increasing conservatism in bioethics that
neglects the concerns of marginalized groups. These critics argue that
with institutionalization, bioethics is losing sight of its radical
origins (Holmes 1999; Purdy 2001; Eckenwiler and Cohn 2007).
Bioethicists are tending to frame issues and formulate theory from the
vantage point of privileged social and professional groups, even in
the developing regions of the world as local bioethicists there seek a
share in the prestige of high technology medicine (Salles and Bertomeu
2002; Luna 2006). During the 1980s, feminists in particular argued
that bioethics was developing in a way that gave too little attention
to gender-specific disparities in healthcare research and therapy, or
to the effects of other power disparities, such as class and
ethnicity, on quality of healthcare.
By the early 1990s, feminist bioethics had emerged as a distinctive
academic concentration offering sustained critique of mainstream
bioethics. These critiques evolved out of several lines of influence.
One was the late twentieth century women’s health movement.. In
the early years of second wave feminism, activist feminists directed
attention to areas of health care where women’s interests were
most obvious, and yet were severely neglected: access to birth control
and abortion, pregnancy, and the control of representations of female
sexuality. An upsurge of concern about sexist biases in medical
research and practice was rekindled by the protest movements of the
1960s and awareness of the increasing medicalization and
commodification of women’s bodies. Public notice of the
widespread and, it has to be said, continuing under-representation of
women in clinical trials increased that momentum (Baylis, Downie and
Sherwin 1999). Feminists campaigned on clinical issues with direct
relevance to women’s biology: for increased research into breast
cancer, more convenient and cheaper contraceptive methods, more
research into the physiology of menopause, and the avoidance of
unnecessary surgical interventions (e.g., hysterectomies, cesarean
sections, radical mastectomies) where less alternatives are available.
These campaigns were supported by several advocacy groups in the
United States, United Kingdom and elsewhere, and later on by a number
of global women’s health movements. These groups and movements
struggled to raise public awareness of women’s health issues,
influence national health policy, and act as a counterbalance to the
priorities of professional medicine and the pharmaceutical
industry.
Engaging with these activist concerns, feminists drew on late
twentieth century scholarship in feminist moral and social theory that
utilizes sex, gender, and other marginalizing characteristics as
categories of analysis that are bound up with power relations across
public and private life. (Alison Jaggar’s 2001 Encyclopedia
of Ethics entry on “Feminist Ethics” provides an
excellent summary of many of the key features of second wave feminism
that influenced feminist bioethics.) This research called attention to
the need for theoretical grounding to provide a framework for
practical strategies to curtail oppressive practices in medicine and
healthcare.  It is within this context of attention to practical
issues combined with the drive to provide a conceptual underpinning
for analysis and, ultimately, reform, that the emergence of feminist
bioethics should be understood. Feminists working in bioethics today
speak in many different voices, reflecting their disparate social
positioning and academic backgrounds, and the new global reach of the
field.  Nonetheless, they share significant commonalities, both in
their criticisms of dominant structures and in their efforts to build
a more adequate framework that is responsive to the diversity of the
circumstances of women and other groups. In doing so they call
attention to neglected voices that are seldom represented within
mainstream bioethics. Notably, feminist discourse highlights the way
in which hierarchical rankings that categorize people by sex, race,
ethnicity, age, disability, or susceptibility to genetic disease, can
perpetuate unjust practices in health and social care, research, and
public health. Some feminists integrate cross-disciplinary analysis of
structural and social frameworks that divide and marginalize people
with insights from the women’s health movement, others
concentrate their analysis on a specific axis of oppressive practice,
but all recognize interrelationships among such practices.
Feminist critique also addresses the fundamental theory of
mainstream bioethics. Feminist-friendly bioethicists have noted
systemic weaknesses in the explanatory framework that grounds the
bioethical analysis of research and clinical practices and
increasingly also of public health measures. Critics fault both the
abstract character of much bioethical theory and inattention to such
key components of morality as the contexts that frame health care and
the relational networks that inform patient decision making. The
tendency to ground theory in a set of abstract principles that are
only subsequently applied to practical problems makes it easy to
ignore (bio)ethically relevant particulars such as the unequal burden
borne by women by virtue of their conventional reproductive and
nurturing roles, or inequities between social and economic
groups. Finally, some feminist theorists are developing alternative
methodologies to remedy the epistemological shortcomings of the
dominant bioethical model of reasoning.
By the 1980s bioethics as a discipline was growing, courses were
proliferating and increasing the market for bioethics texts, but the
marginalization of feminist perspectives persisted in both course
texts and bioethics journals. Essays by feminists in the leading texts
were limited primarily to treatment of reproductive issues such as
abortion and maternal-fetal relations. Less initial attention was
given to interconnections between these issues and more pervasive
bioethical concerns such as the limits of physician authority,
conflicts between commercial interests and patient wellbeing, or the
conflation of moral and medical values. In these early days, feminist
commentary on innovative reproductive interventions was also beginning
to appear (e.g., Arditti, Klein and Minden 1984; Corea 1985; Stanworth
1987; Rapp 2000). In 1992 a collection of articles previously
published in the journal Hypatia was brought out
as Feminist Perspectives in Medical Ethics (Holmes and Purdy
1992). Susan Sherwin published No Longer Patient: Feminist Ethics
and Health Care, the first book-length treatment of feminist
bioethical theory (1992).  To bring attention to disregard of feminist
perspectives, Susan Wolf undertook a project at the Hastings Center
which led to the anthology Feminism and Bioethics: Beyond
Reproduction (1996). This collection incorporates feminist
perspectives on many issues that had seldom been discussed in standard
course texts, including the under-representation of women subjects in
medical research, the pervasive influence of the abstract
individualistic conception of personal autonomy, and stigmatizing
portrayals of HIV-positive women.  At around the same time Susan Bordo
(1993) and Mary Mahowald (1993) published volumes critiquing medical
and cultural attitudes toward women’s bodies. Susan
Wendell’s The Rejected Body (1996) pressed this theme
further, integrating the experiences of disabled people into
discussions of bodily life. A further milestone in the development of
feminist bioethics was the publication of Rosemary
Tong’s Feminist Approaches to Bioethics: Theoretical
Reflections and Practical Applications (1997).
Gradually, mainstream bioethics journals and organizations began to
recognize feminist approaches. Several journals featured special
issues by feminist scholars spanning a cluster of topics including
AIDS, reconfiguration of the principle of autonomy, gender issues in
psychiatry, and the global dimensions of feminist bioethics. Bioethics
conferences in a number of countries began to schedule sessions that
explicitly addressed feminist approaches and topics, and more
feminists were included on the general program, while the market for
more feminist-friendly teaching texts has expanded and publishers have
been responsive (see e.g., Teays and Purdy 2001; Fulford, Dickenson
and Murray 2002; Baylis, Downie, Hoffmaster and Sherwin 2004; Singer
and Viens 2008). These and similar efforts resulted in feminist
writings on an increasing diversity of substantive topics
beginning to appear in bioethics journals and anthologies. Feminist
critiques of bioethical theory also gained some currency,
though they tended to be classified among “alternative”
approaches (along with communitarianism, casuistry, and the ethics of
care). Thus the healthcare priorities of women and other underserved
groups still received disproportionally little bioethical
attention. And despite these advances, concerns persisted that
feminists were under-represented on governmental panels formulating
public policy. The strategic importance of feminist involvement at the
policy-making level to redress injustices and promote more equitable
policy choices was emphasized by Sherwin and Baylis (2003), while
other feminists have highlighted the need to reframe public policy and
the research that underpins it to include the social impact of gender
and other biases (Rogers 2006; Mahowald 2006).
Coinciding with the appearance of a critical mass of feminist
bioethics scholarship, in 1993 the International Network on Feminist
Approaches to Bioethics (FAB) was founded to provide a congenial home
for feminists working in bioethics, to encourage international
cross-fertilization, and to influence the agenda of mainstream
bioethics. FAB aims to foster development of a more inclusive theory
of bioethics at both the academic and grassroots levels. Three goals
have been central: extension of bioethical theory to integrate
feminist concerns; development of theory to include analyses not just
of gender but also of class, ethnicity and other social categories;
and creation of new strategies and methodologies that include socially
marginalized experiences and perspectives. The articulation of these
objectives represents an effort to systematize prevailing
commonalities among feminists working in the field and stimulate
further collaborative work. FAB’s central focus includes
adaptation of the theoretical grounding of bioethics to more fully
reflect key components of moral life, including power differences that
structure physician/patient and researcher/subject relationships, the
influence of wider social and institutional relationships, and
cross-cultural perspectives on bioethical issues that reflect
intersections between specific technologies and the social, political
and economic structures within which they are embedded. 
FAB has held its own Congress every 2 years since 1996, usually
immediately before the World Congress of Bioethics (WCB) organized by
the International Association of Bioethics, and taking themes which
relate to the WCB theme but giving them a particularly feminist slant.
Papers presented at these Congresses have been published in four
anthologies (Donchin and Purdy 1999; Tong, Anderson and Santos 2001;
Tong, Donchin and Dodds 2004; Scully, Baldwin-Ragaven and Fitzpatrick
2010), while another volume focusing on postmodern approaches includes
a selection of papers from the 2000 FAB conference (Shildrick and
Mykitiuk 2005).
To encourage more work in feminist bioethics and disseminate it
more widely, in 2007 FAB established its own journal,
the International Journal of Feminist Approaches to Bioethics
(IJFAB).  IJFAB has provided a new forum within
bioethics for feminist thought and debate. It is currently published
semiannually, and the initial issue “Doing Feminist
Bioethics” appeared in Spring 2008. IJFAB invites
submissions approaching any problem or topic in bioethics from the
resources of feminist scholarship for its open issues, and encourages
proposals for special thematic issues that have covered topics such as
research ethics, ethical issues in psychiatry, aging and long-term
care, disability, vulnerability, transnational reproductive travel,
food ethics, fitness, and climate change. IJFAB also invites
individual commentaries or conversations among groups of scholars on
contemporary problems in bioethics, as well as personal narratives
that illuminate topics in bioethics. From its
beginning, IJFAB has been committed to expanding the field of
bioethics beyond a narrow focus on science and technology to include
attention to public health and the social determinants of health, as
well as broader issues such as food, the environment, labor, or
globalization, that are directly related to community health. Further
details on IJFAB can be found in
Other Internet Resources.
In the following sections this article turns to consider
substantive issues addressed by feminist bioethics; feminist
bioethical work on bioethical theory; and feminist contributions to
bioethical methodology.
What follows is not intended to be an exhaustive list of
substantive topics, past and present, in feminist bioethics, but
rather an indication of some central and longstanding areas of
interest, directions in which these might be going, and examples of
areas where feminist bioethics has brought a fresh and, feminists
would argue, valuable perspective.
The early years of feminist bioethics were dominated by a focus on
reproductive issues, which were seen as being of particular salience
to women and an area of life within which women are commonly
discriminated against and oppressed. The focus is understandable, not
least because it is often easier for non-feminist bioethicists to see
reproductive issues as “feminist” simply by virtue of the
fact that both biologically and socially they tend to affect women
more than men. It is important to realize, however, that the early
work on abortion, surrogacy or assisted conception is identified as
feminist not simply because it addressed issues that reflect
women’s interests, but because a feminist framework brought a
distinctive approach to the examination of reproductive medicine and
assisted conception: distinctive not just in taking the experiential
perspective of women rather than men, but analytically in having an
eye to the structural and interpersonal power differentials that shape
both the experience and the delivery of these technologies in many
different societies and cultures across the globe. For example,
several authors have critiqued the oversimplified dichotomization
between the popular slogans “pro-life” and
“pro-choice” in the abortion debate (Sherwin 2008;
Tooley et al. 2009). A key insight of feminist bioethics is
that, because women bear a disproportionate share of the associated
risks and burdens, new reproductive technologies are not gender
neutral, a fact frequently ignored in debates about the ethics of
assisted reproduction.
The assessment of the social and ethical implications of
reproductive medical innovations persists, growing ever more complex
with the proliferation of techniques to generate, test and manipulate
embryos (e.g., Gupta 2000; Shanley 2001; Kukla 2005; Mullin 2005;
Harwood 2007; the issue of Bioethics on reproductive autonomy
edited by Carolyn McLeod 2009; Baylis and McLeod 2014). Two concerns
remain paramount: that the availability of genetic testing and
screening technologies in the context of reproductive medicine exerts
pressure on women (and men) to utilize prenatal techniques to produce
only “perfect” children (Rapp 2000; Rothman 2001) and that
as it becomes easier to identify impairments prenatally, and prevent
the birth of children with those impairments, the stigma experienced
by disabled children and by their families will increase. Authors
voice concern that future development of enhancement techniques,
whether genetic or other, will exacerbate these tendencies and pose
even greater threats to social equality, alongside the health benefits
they may offer. Many of these issues overlap with others, such as the
impact of caregiving responsibilities on the caregiver, and the effect
of particular economic policies on socially marginalized groups.
Branching off from looking at reproductive issues per se
is feminist bioethics’ significant and distinctive contributions
to the bioethical analysis of the donation of reproductive tissues,
for research or for reproductive purposes. Feminist bioethics’
insight into the politics of the use of eggs, embryos and other
reproductive tissues in medicine and research, including stem cell
research, a key topic in in the bioethical landscape of the last
decade, opens up questions about the potential exploitation of women
and women’s bodies—and the meaning of
“exploitation” in complex worlds in which therapy and
research overlap (Nisker et al. 2010; Tremain 2006). Donna
Dickenson (2007) in particular is noted here for her extensive work on
property and ownership of the body and body parts, as is Cathy Waldby
for her examination of the global economy of reproductive tissues
(Waldby and Mitchell 2006; Cooper and Waldby 2014).
A further area of strong feminist bioethical interest is the
interaction between medicine, health status, and family and social
care. Feminist bioethicists have argued that there are legitimate
questions to be asked about the scope of and justification for claims
about the forms of care offered, and the balance between individual,
familial, state and commercial suppliers of medical and social care.
These questions are being asked more widely in mainstream bioethics,
prompted by longterm changes to the shape of family life across
different societies and, as a result, the way families interact with
medical and social care. At the same time, the demographic changes
leading to aging populations are combining with economic and political
forces to drive the retrenchment of health and welfare structures
across many western countries. As a result, care responsibilities are
increasingly falling back onto families, and implicitly onto
traditional family structures in which responsibility for the care of
dependent members is assumed to lie with women members of the family.
Feminist critics have pressed for both empirical and normative
consideration of familial versus societal responsibilities in the
areas of health and other forms of care, asking critical questions
about how these responsibilities come to exist and are enacted in a
range of situations. In 2011 a group of leading scholars, both
feminist and others, established an international consortium,
the Network of Ethics of Families, specifically to provide a
more robust theoretical ethical framework in this area (Verkerk et
al. 2014, in Other Internet Resources).
Feminist scholars have also called for greater clarity about the
meaning of care (or sometimes, dependency) work and who it is done by,
warning against the conflation of the types of care performed by
nurse, nurse-aides, home helps, and family members, and equally
against the invisibility of the unpaid care work provided by family
members compared to the world of (even relatively low-) paid care
work. Noting the gendered nature of much longterm care work, a number
of feminist bioethicists (Tong 2009; Lanoix 2013a,b) have been
examining the ethics of the national and international arrangements of
care for children, elderly and chronically ill people, and the
associated development of international migrant care work (Weir 2008;
Eckenwiler 2011, 2013).
Bioethics overall has seen an explosion of interest in public
health ethics, distinct from the more clinically-focused ethical
questions that dominated the field in its early decades. In many ways,
the central perspectives and current concerns of public health ethics
were long anticipated by feminist health care movements and feminist
bioethics. Public health ethics is concerned with the multiple
activities of public health, carried out by a range of health
professionals and agents, and is necessarily concerned with health
inequities both nationally and globally, how they operate and how they
can be minimized or eradicated in public health, but also crucially
bringing a broader perspective that includes an interest in how these
inequities come about in the first place. As Rogers notes,
a feminist approach leads us to examine not only
the connections between gender, disadvantage, and health, but also the
distribution of power in the processes of public health, from policy
making through to programme delivery. (Rogers 2006: 351; Baylis, Kenny
and Sherwin 2008)
The increasing interest in public health
 research ethics in general has also led to some work focusing
 specifically on women’s interests and vulnerabilities (e.g.,
 Macklin 2011).
A notably vibrant and fruitful strand of feminist bioethics
engagement in the early twenty-first century has been with issues of
embodiment and particularly disability. As Baldwin-Ragaven and Scully
(2010) note, feminist bioethics has necessarily contained a
longstanding discussion about what it means bioethically to have/be a
“non-standard” body, given that the female body has
generally been seen as nonstandard within the biomedical and
bioethical contexts. Feminist bioethical scholarship has sometimes
overlapped with the growing company of feminist disability scholars,
many of whom write about disability as a form of embodied social
exclusion that can intersect or synergize with gender. This engagement
has produced a body of work that problematizes the construal of the
impaired body in bioethics as a problem to be solved by biomedical
means and for which the key bioethical issues are to do with
regulating the technologies that can be applied to prevent or cure
disability (Silvers, Wasserman and Mahowald 1998; Fine and Asch 1988;
Parens and Asch 2000; Wong 2002; Tremain 2005; Scully 2008; Ho 2011;
Hall 2011). A special issue of IJFAB on disability appeared
in 2010 (volume 3, number 2).  There has also been rich theoretical
work on the social and cultural expectations of normality, and the
political choices that are made in the area of prevention of and
support for disabled people, contributed through feminist discussion
of the norms of dependency (Kittay 1999) and vulnerability (Scully
2014).
A different slant on embodiment is provided by the existing and
growing body of feminist work on medicalization, particularly the
medicalization of non-standard embodiments or embodied states and
their classification as pathologies, and the questions of autonomy and
choice that such medicalization raises (Purdy 2001, 2006; Garry 2001).
Feminists writing in this area include Alison Reiheld (2010) and Laura
Guidry-Grimes and Elizabeth Victor (2012). The pathologization of the
obese body and its relationship to fat stigma and cultural beauty
standards has been extensively discussed on the IJFAB blog,
while other sites of attention are the medicalization of intersex
(M. Holmes 2008; Feder 2014) and of altered states of consciousness
(Harbin 2014). Feminist bioethics has also generated a growing body of
work on transgendered embodiment (Draper and Evans 2006; J.L. Nelson
2014),
Given a history in which women’s voices and experiences have
frequently been discounted as “mad”, it is perhaps not
surprising that feminist bioethics has also pioneered the critical
ethical examination of mental health issues, in particular the role of
psychiatry and its treatment of women. Revealingly, as early as 2001
the Journal of Medicine and Philosophy published a special
issue devoted to feminist bioethics and containing some key 
papers on psychiatric issues (volume 26, number
4). In a special issue of IJFAB (volume 4, number1, 2011)
several authors examined questions of mental health and
illness. Again, this scrutiny is not unique to feminist bioethics;
what is distinctive is the way these issues are refracted through a
feminist lens that pays close attention to thorny questions of power,
authority and the silencing of anomalous voices.  Especially pertinent
in this area is the question of epistemic power—judgments about
the validity of subjective experiences, symptoms, or perceptions that
may lie outside the norm—with a close eye to the power of
institutions such as the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM), and
what some critics see as the pharmaceutical industry’s
problematic investment in the medicalization of people’s
distress.
As the preceding discussion illustrates, feminists have
participated in scholarly discussion of virtually all the major topics
in bioethics.  Their contributions are distinctive not least because
of the foundational relationship of feminist scholarship to activism,
which means that the scholarly treatment of these topics is grounded
in a critique of the background norms and conditions that produce
observable and persistent injustices in medicine and healthcare. This
is one reason why feminist bioethical theory tends to have a practical
orientation. Its criticisms most characteristically address the
adequacy of mainstream bioethical theory that emphasizes universal
moral principles framed abstractly, individualistically and isolated
from context (the most widely cited example of such a theoretical
framework is Beauchamp and Childress’ Principles of
Biomedical Ethics). Though some feminist criticism objects to any
attempt to formulate universal principles at all, most is more
circumscribed, directed principally against theoretical frameworks
that presuppose a generic individual subject that is abstract,
disembodied and socially disembedded, in a way that has enabled
morally relevant particulars to be ignored, and that privileges the
perspective of an elite, historically mostly male group (Walker
2008). Feminist critics point out that this theoretical orientation
generally has the consequence of justifying the prevailing status
quo, thereby inhibiting any real consideration of social
change.
Feminist bioethics’ theoretical approaches also take some
distinctive approaches to ontology and epistemology that challenge
traditional philosophical positions on the way that knowledge,
subjectivity and moral agency are mobilized within ethical discourse.
The search for a more satisfactory moral grounding for bioethics has
taken feminist scholars in several directions. A few favor dispensing
with principles entirely and reconstituting bioethics through
narrative case-specific interpretation along the lines pioneered by
Nel Noddings (1984) and her followers. Others, without going this far,
are nevertheless convinced that narrative approaches have useful
applications in bioethics (e.g., H.L. Nelson 2001). Yet others have
criticized the abstract universal approach to theory construction from
the perspective of European thought (e.g., Mary Rawlinson 2001);
noting the masculine markings of the allegedly generic human subject
in philosophy, they decry the failure of purported universalists to
recognize the particularities of women’s disparate conditions.
Other groups of feminists have ventured along the different routes of
post-structuralist and postmodern theory on the one hand (Shildrick
1997; Shildrick and Mykitiuk 2005) and particularism (Little 2001) on
the other, to challenge other kinds of claim to universality . And yet
other feminists think a framework that incorporates universal
principles can and should continue to constitute one dimension of an
adequate bioethical theory, provided that these principles are
formulated in non-exclusionary terms that reflect the relational
context and empirical realities of individual lives.
Two distinct and distinctive areas of contribution to theory by
feminist bioethics are in care ethics/ethics of care, and in the
conceptualization of autonomy.
Originating in the work of feminist psychologist Carol Gilligan
(1982) and the proliferation of scholarship stimulated by her
insights, care theorists have emphasized patterns of moral reasoning
that are allegedly characteristic of women—reasoning that
prioritizes caring, relationships, and responsibilities—and
contrasted them with modes of reasoning that privilege justice and
rights, and which Gilligan and her followers have taken to be more
characteristic of men.  (It should be noted here, however, that the
specifically gendered contours of care and justice in this
work have been challenged by those who see the difference as more to
do with the forms of moral reasoning mobilized by socially and
politically marginalized groups, women being one of these: see e.g.,
Cortese 1990). Care theorists distrust traditional moral principles
and emphasize the necessity of values such as love, care, and
responsibility to capture contextual subtleties and relational bonds
that are overlooked within principle-oriented ethical frameworks.
Both feminists and others have voiced doubts about the capacity of
an ethics based in care alone to address some of the concerns of
feminist bioethics. The first anthology to consider this
controversy, Women and Moral Theory, juxtaposed some of the
leading care theorists with critics who question the significance of a
gender-differentiated morality and its relevance to political and
legal issues (Kittay and Meyers 1987). Critics acknowledge that
gendered social structures must be taken into account, but they take
exception to the distinction between masculine and feminist
“voices” embedded in Gilligan’s orientation. In her
1992 work, No Longer Patient: Feminist Ethics and Health
Care, Susan Sherwin extends this critique of care ethics, arguing
that not only have its advocates too readily accommodated a tradition
that views women’s character as always and essentially different
from men’s, but that the care orientation lacks an overt
political perspective that can adequately account for and unsettle
patterns of domination and oppression that affect women. Numerous
other feminists have expressed reservations that overlap with
Sherwin’s concerns here, including Bartky (1990), H.L. Nelson
(1992), Kuhse (1995), and Gould (1998).
In a 1996 article titled “Rehabilitating Care”, Alisa
Carse and Hilde Lindemann Nelson attempted to respond to leading
criticisms of care ethics by arguing that there are resources within
the ethic of care that can address each of the major problems noted by
critics and that can assist in developing the ethic more fully. Such
reformulation has continued since, as feminists who support some
dimensions of care theory integrate these features into a more
comprehensive moral framework that gives serious attention to issues
of justice (Noddings 2002; Ruddick 1989; Held 1993, 1995, 2006),
moving care ethics beyond interpersonal problems to social and
political issues that require more generalized treatment. For example,
Kittay and others call attention to the universal dimensions of
dependency. They focus on the disproportionate prestige afforded to
high-tech medicine and the low status attached to more mundane work
that provides necessary care to sick, elderly and disabled people
(Kittay 1999; Kittay and Feder 2002; Eckenwiler 2014). Though caring
values count heavily in providing high caliber healthcare, the caring
tasks of medicine are often demeaned as “housekeeping
issues” that attract little interest and even less remuneration,
while “crisis issues” dominate theoretical attention and
in practice reward their practitioners rather better. Later work has
continued to bring attention to this situation, particularly as it
affects those who require extended care. Both Jennifer
Parks’s No Place Like Home: Feminist Ethics and Home Health
Care (2003) and Rosalind Ladd et al.’s
anthology Ethical Issues in Home Health Care (2002) address
questions with exceptional import to the welfare of elderly and
disabled people, bringing to their task much recent feminist work on
justice and care. In the years since then, the care needs of an aging
population in most parts of the world have only increased. In
response, IJFAB devoted a special issue to aging and
long-term care (volume 6, number 2, 2013), including key papers by
Lanoix, Kittay, Tong, Martha Holstein and others (all 2013).
Related work on care has branched off in a number of
directions. The anthology Socializing Care builds on Joan
Tronto’s 1993 call for a political theory that integrates the
practice of care into the qualities needed for democratic citizens to
live well together in a pluralistic society (Hamington and Miller
2006). Authors in this anthology stress power imbalances embedded in
recent tendencies to privatize care, and the need for a public ethics
of care. Others have applied care theory to nursing ethics (e.g.,
Kuhse 1997). Ruth Groenhout (2004) and Susan Dodds (2007) both develop
versions of feminist bioethics that combine a care perspective with
virtue theory. Both Groenhout and Dodds emphasize the holistic nature
of human persons, their particular social contexts, the centrality of
emotional responses in ethical reasoning, and the implausibility of
judging actions separated from the lived narratives that confer
meaning on them.  Groenhout draws examples from several fields
including new reproductive technologies. She notes that adoption of
care theory here would require consideration of many factors beyond
the desires of particular patients, including costs and benefits to
everyone affected by particular medical interventions, the impact of
such services on other healthcare needs, and the risk that technology
will intensify the commodification of children and the bodily
functions of the women who bear them. Scully
(2010a) has considered care
in the context of disability, focusing on the hidden care labor that
disabled people carry out for nondisabled people rather than the care
that disabled people receive. In recent years several feminist
bioethicists have been working to tease out the complex connections
between central moral notions of care, dependence, independence, and
autonomy. A particularly strong line of work here focuses on
vulnerability as a concept within bioethics (Luna 2006, 2009; Rogers,
Mackenzie and Dodds 2012). A special issue of IJFAB on
vulnerability (volume 5, number 2, 2012) addressing a number of topics
included a discussion of a global ethics approach to vulnerability,
injection drug use, and the particular vulnerability of pregnant
research subjects. A recent collection co-edited by Catriona
Mackenzie, Rogers and Dodds (2014) has further pursued work on this
theme.
Another major stream of feminist work addresses the construction of
a theory of autonomy that is more reflective of reality than that
commonly favored in the bioethics literature. Feminist critique here
notes first that the traditional model of autonomy is inadequate: it
directs no attention to the contextual details of personal experience
or of the situations within which autonomy in real life is exercised
to a greater or lesser degree. As Sherwin notes,
we need to move away from the familiar Western
 understanding of autonomy as self-defining, self-interested, and
 self-protecting, as if the self were simply some special kind of
 property to be preserved. (Sherwin et al. 1998: 35)
In a related form of decontextualization, some
bioethicists and physicians reduce autonomy to informed consent and
restrict its exercise in medical practice to a patient’s
selection of choices from a limited set of clinical options (Dodds
2000). This formulation of the principle of respect for autonomy
ignores background conditions that patients bring to their medical
experience, the institutional power relationships and social contexts
that influence their options, and the medical research priorities
that shape them. Expanding on this critique Carolyn Ells adopts
Foucault’s analysis of biopower to argue that informed choice
must be understood in explicitly relational terms that construe power
relations as diffused throughout society (2003). Ells argues here
that the standard conception of choice relies on a false model of
persons that situates them outside relations of power. Once this is
recognized, the need for an understanding of autonomy that grapples
with the complexities of power relations becomes obvious.
This perspective shares with care theory the conviction that human
agents are not fundamentally single-minded, rational, self-interested
choice-makers but social beings whose selfhood is constituted and
maintained within overlapping relationships and communities.
Recognizing the complexity of connection among individuals, their
social milieu, their cultural matrix, and political position, some
feminists are now calling for adoption of a relational model of
autonomy that stresses the web of interconnected (and sometimes
conflicting) relationships that shape individuality. The key anthology
here, Mackenzie and Soljar’s Relational Autonomy
(2000), contains a comprehensive introduction that characterizes
feminist critiques of the standard model of autonomy, and constructive
reformulations, in more detail. The more relational view of the self
developed by feminist moral theory has clear implications for thinking
about autonomy. While accepting that the principle of respect for
autonomy has been essential to the protection of individual liberty,
including of course that of women, the mainstream concepts of
autonomy, based on the picture of the self described above, has little
relevance to the lives of marginalized groups for whom the
possibilities of self-determination are severely constrained by
material, social and political structures. A relational conception of
autonomy argues that
agents’ identities are formed within the
context of social relationships and shaped by a complex of
intersecting social determinants, such as race, class, gender, and
ethnicity.  (Mackenzie and Stoljar 2000: 4)
Early social relationships provide the
groundwork for the later development of self-determination. In its
strongest version, relational accounts argue that the activities that
constitute self-determination are inherently social; relationships,
far from undermining autonomy, provide the conditions of possibility
for the exercise of self-determination and self-actualization
(Donchin 2000: 239; Scully 2008: 161–162).
Other work in feminist bioethics attempts to reconfigure autonomy
to give fuller consideration to patient agency. These approaches view
autonomy not solely as a property possessed by all competent adults
but also as an aspirational achievement that requires moral
development, social cooperation, and supportive institutions. They
emphasize the importance of encouraging the development of autonomy
capacities to balance disparities in education and status that distort
physician-patient, and other, communications. A more adequate
conception would make visible how social norms and pressures influence
the choices offered to patients, and would emphasize the obligations
of healthcare providers to actively support patient autonomy and
decision making.
Yet other scholars have noted features beyond power relationships
that can affect autonomy. In addition to oppressive social
environments, trauma (Brison 2001) and illness (Donchin 2000) can
easily impair autonomy, as the body one has trusted to pursue
one’s plans and projects is shown to be vulnerable, fragile, and
unprotected. The relationship between trust and autonomy is further
explored by McLeod (2002), who has presented a conception of
self-trust within a feminist theoretical framework, thereby adding a
new dimension to the reframing of personal autonomy as
relational. Drawing her illustrations principally from reproductive
contexts, she argues that encounters with healthcare providers can
undermine a woman’s self-trust, thereby threatening her
autonomy. Conversely, providers can respect patient autonomy by
attending to their power to influence patients’ self-trust. Her
conceptual innovations have been extended to further healthcare
contexts (e.g., Goering 2009).
In addition to major substantive issues and bioethical theory,
feminist bioethics has also made distinctive contributions to
bioethical methodology. Feminist bioethics is characterized by shared
theoretical and political orientations that favor certain
methodological approaches, including a focus on empirical experience;
attention to the effects of social, political or epistemic power; and
a commitment to influencing social and political change.
Feminism is based on the observation that experience is gendered:
that is, a person’s experience can differ in significant ways
depending on whether that person is male or female, and attention
needs to be paid to that experience if these differences are not to be
subsumed in the discourse of the most powerful. There is therefore an
associated methodological bias towards methods that ground theory in
lived experience, and that retain a sensitivity to morally relevant
differences in experience that can result from gender, but also from
differences in class, ethnicity, sexuality and so on. Hence although
feminist bioethics is not alone in doing so, it is more likely than
mainstream bioethics to draw on empirical data or narrative and
phenomenological accounts, in order to ensure that both description
and normative claims are anchored in the realities of natural, social,
political and institutional worlds. As a result feminist bioethics has
often drawn on the methods of qualitative social science and health
research, to capture important empirical information about the
situated encounter with medicine and healthcare.
Feminist thought also takes seriously the existence and effects of
power relationships of all kinds, not just those that operate most
obviously in the medical context. This means that feminist methods
also have the cognitive habit of attending to the disclosure and
examination of social structures and practices that are oppressive and
disadvantageous to women, extending the examination of such power
relations beyond the clinic and even the healthcare system, to take
account of social and global economic arrangements that maintain
entrenched patterns of social and political domination.
Finally, it should also be remembered that feminist bioethics is an
academic discipline that, like other areas of feminist scholarship,
originated in and alongside a social movement which has the goal of
achieving global justice and equality for women. Hence, feminist
bioethics aims at going beyond the diagnosis and analysis of a
problem, and pointing towards a future of social and political change.
Feminist bioethicists can never avoid asking the
question, how does this work in the lives of real women and men,
and in the current political frameworks in which we exist?
(Scully 2010b: 136)
Feminist bioethicists continue to bring new issues to bioethics,
and fresh perspectives on existing ones. As a field, bioethics
necessarily must attend to the novel ethical dilemmas that are raised
by advances in medicine and life science technologies, but also social
and political developments that lead to transformations in healthcare
practices. Feminist bioethics offers its own particular style of
analysis to the debate. Thus, as the area of public health bioethics
matures, so too do feminist bioethics’ contributions to
identifying, examining and understanding the role of gender and other
inequalities in public health (Rogers 2006). Or, to give a very
different example, as mitochondrial donation has emerged as a
potential means to avoid the transmission of mitochondrial disease to
subsequent generations, feminist bioethicists have been able to raise
the same sorts of critical questions about the sources of
mitochondria, and the potential for exploitation of women in obtaining
them, as they have raised about the circulation of other forms of
reproductive tissue (Baylis 2013; Dickenson 2013).
In recent years feminist activists have turned their attention to
health needs in developing regions of the world and the formation of
international health policies. Several feminist advocacy groups have
extended their reach to encourage recognition of universal
health-related human rights. A FAB committee contributed to the 2008
revision of the Helsinki Declaration that specifies international
standards for the ethical conduct of medical research. Many of the
amendments to the Declaration originated within that committee
(Eckenwiler et al. 2008; Goodyear et al.
2008). Members of FAB also participated in formulation of the UNESCO
Declaration on Universal Norms on Bioethics (Rawlinson and Donchin
2005). Their work is complemented by non-governmental organizations in
numerous developing countries.
Among the foreseeable developments in years to come is a further
increase in feminist bioethics’ global reach. This is distinct
from its (already strong) international focus: a feminist
consciousness not simply of the way that bioethical issues diversify
between countries, but of the global economic and political systems
that can hold locally specific regimes of oppression and
discrimination in place (see, e.g., Nie 2005). Feminist bioethicists
have made significant contributions to the literature on global
issues. Collaboration between feminists in the more and the less
industrialized regions of the world supported the publication of four
anthologies based on papers from international FAB conferences
(Donchin and Purdy 1999; Tong, Anderson and Santos 2001; Tong, Donchin
and Dodds 2004; Scully, Baldwin-Ragaven and Fitzpatrick 2010). Each of
these in different ways documents how dominant Western technological
practices are crossing geographical boundaries, influencing developing
economies, and often diverting scarce resources from basic healthcare
services that could reduce preventable morbidity and mortality. Of
particular concern are the consequences for those who lack the power
to alter externally imposed conditions that control their lives. The
first volume calls attention to the traditional mind/body dualism,
while contributors to the second volume sought to transcend the usual
dichotomies dividing the contemporary world into developed/developing
economies and technological/nontechnological societies, to address a
broad array of concerns at the intersection of feminism and global
issues. Some chapters focused on the tendency of science to become a
collective project of the international community, others on tensions
between specific cultural practices and features of common humanity
that override geographical and cultural differences, including
childbirth, illness, disability, and death. The 2004 volume draws on
and extends human rights discourse pertinent to health issues and
amplifies debate about global ethics. It takes account of
considerations infrequently addressed in the bioethics literature
including the economic, social, and political effects of globalized
capitalism, and continues the discussion of tensions between cultural
imperialism and cultural relativism, thereby extending analysis to the
needs of marginalized people diversely situated within the global
economy.
In the 2010 volume, entitled Feminist Bioethics: At the Center,
On the Margins, several authors grappled with the ethically
troubling and morally unresolved divides between the global North and
South (Baldwin-Ragaven and Scully 2010). Writers in this volume noted
that feminist bioethics needs to respond to the voices that criticize
(mainly Western) white female privilege, as well as to the North
American Black and Latina scholars who charged late twentieth century
feminist with ignoring their concerns. Feminist bioethics has from its
beginnings made a point of advertising its own disciplinary and
geographical plurality. The current website of the International
Network on Feminist Approaches to Bioethics (see Other Internet
Resources) contains the following (as of December 16, 2015):
FAB has worked since 1992 to create a global community of
scholarship, debate, and action around problems in bioethics... [and]
fosters respect within bioethics for differences among people, while
critically examining the effects of oppression and disadvantage.
The willingness to face squarely the theoretical, professional as well
as political tensions that may result is an example of the critical
and avowedly self-critical nature of feminist bioethics.
Expanding moral perception is an ongoing process. As the 2010 FAB
anthology noted, feminist bioethics is in the paradoxical position
that it continues to stand at the margins of bioethics, and yet many
of its insights have been and continue to be taken up by the
mainstream.  Examples include the so-called empirical turn in
bioethics, or bioethics’ recent calls for greater attention to
be paid to public health issues. This is a double-edged
sword. Obviously, feminists want their views to transform the
bioethical work going on at the “center”, and yet in doing
so there is a danger that the radical and critical edge of feminist
critique will lose its force. Some scholars see feminist bioethics
trying to take a bidirectional trajectory into the future, moving
closer to the heart of mainstream bioethical scholarship while at the
same time maintaining a home for activists and theorists working at
the margins, and this is likely to remain a point of tension within
the field (Nelson 2000).  Nevertheless, while the incorporation of some feminist
thought has blurred the lines between mainstream and marginal
bioethics, and calls into question feminist bioethics’ own
distinctiveness, it is also clear that mainstream bioethics’
assimilation of feminism is very partial: while it may have adopted
some of feminist bioethics’ theoretical and methodological
approaches, it has not taken on board its specific goals of gender and
social justice. The irreducible minimum on which feminist ethics
stands is what Alison Jaggar defined as commitment to the ideas that
“the subordination of women is morally wrong and that the moral
experience of women is worthy of respect” (Jaggar 1991:
95). This is what makes feminist contributions to bioethics
immediately recognizable, and powerful.