According to the most straightforward and ambitious form of the
fitting attitude theory of value, to be valuable is to be the
fitting object of some evaluative attitude. Since FA theories seek
to analyze both value and disvalue, they must include both forms of
approval and disapproval. Thus A. C. Ewing (1948: 168) writes:
“if we analyse good as ‘fitting object of a pro
attitude’, it will be easy enough to analyse bad as
‘fitting object of an anti attitude’, this term covering
dislike, disapproval, avoidance, etc.” For the sake of
simplicity, I will use ‘value’ here to refer both to
positive and negative features, except when it is important to
differentiate between them. Along with Ewing, Franz Brentano is usually
cited as among the first proponents of an FA theory of value. Brentano
(1969: 18) states his view this way: “In the broadest sense of
the term, the good is that which is worthy of love, that which can be
loved with a love that is correct.” Despite his use of the
emotion terms ‘love’ and ‘hate’, Brentano does
not have specific emotions in mind; rather, he includes as forms of
love all desiderative attitudes, and as forms of hate all aversive
ones.
Brentano is typically credited with holding an FA theory of value.
This interpretation requires him to be read as understanding the
correctness of love and other evaluative attitudes as something other
than the truth of some proposition on which they are founded. Fear, for
example, cannot be even partly constituted by the belief that the
feared object is dangerous, such that fear is correct whenever that
proposition is true. Otherwise the value of an object—its
goodness or badness—would make it worthy of love or hate,
respectively, thus reversing the order of explanation definitive of FA
accounts, as opposed to robust realism. All sides grant that it is
fitting to approve of the good and disapprove of the bad; what
differentiates FA theory is its ambition to explicate value by way of
(fitting) evaluative attitudes. Thus when Brentano (1969: 75) writes,
“One loves or hates correctly provided that one's feelings
are adequate to their object—adequate in the sense of being
appropriate, suitable, or fitting”—this is commonly taken
as an injunction so to direct one's love and hate
(Chisholm 1986). If so then both Brentano and Ewing seek to analyze all
value in terms of the whole array of positive and negative evaluative
attitudes. I will term these broadest and most ambitious forms of the
view generic fitting attitude theories of value.
It will prove most perspicuous to hold two related but distinct
claims as constitutive of fitting attitude accounts. First, FA theories
reduce values to a fundamentally different sort of normative notion,
involving what one ought, or has reason, to feel. The first tenet of
the view, then, is the reduction of the evaluative to the
deontic, or normative reduction for short. This is to say that
values such as the good and the funny are to be understood in terms of
what one ought, or has most reason, to feel. This point is explicitly
noted by Chisholm (1986: 53): “This way of defining intrinsic
value, then, makes use of the concept of requirement,”
in order to provide “a way of reducing the concepts of the theory
of value (‘axiology’) to those of ethics
(‘deontology’).” It is important not to understand
‘deontic’ to refer specifically to moral obligation. As
Ewing (1948: 132) observes, when we speak loosely of what we ought to
feel, this “‘ought’ really covers two different
concepts, the concept of fittingness and the concept of moral
obligation.” It is the former notion with which FA analysis is
primarily concerned. I will follow the recent trend of explicating
fittingness in terms of what we have reason to feel rather than what we
ought to feel. But the crucial point is that fittingness, the
fundamental normative notion of FA theory, is distinct from other forms
of endorsement of an attitude, for instance as prudent or morally
obligatory. This is no minor point since—as we shall see in
discussing the wrong kind of reason problem—the theory is doomed
to failure unless it can draw this distinction (D'Arms and
Jacobson 2000b).
The second tenet of FA theory is its response-dependent account
of value, on which values are partly determined by human responses
and attitudes. As David Wiggins (1987: 206) describes the view,
considered as a general theory of value, it holds: “x is
good if and only if x is the sort of thing that calls forth or
makes appropriate a certain sentiment of approbation given the
range of propensities we have to respond in this or that
way.” Notice that Wiggins's formulation is
deliberately equivocal on the crucial point of whether the sentiment
must be merited or merely caused. It allows for both response-dependent
views that embrace normative reduction (by using a notion of
“appropriate” sentiments) and views that instead reduce
value to natural facts (about what sentiments are “called
forth”). This illustrates why it is not trivial to characterize
fitting attitude theories of value in terms of attitudes deemed to be
fitting—that is, via response-dependency and normative reduction.
This way of articulating the two tenets of FA theory has the
significant implication of ruling out those theories of value that hold
one tenet but not the other, which helps settle some outstanding
taxonomic issues. Certain “buck-passing” accounts hold the
normative reduction claim without response-dependency, whereas
dispositional theories, including certain forms of sentimentalism, hold
response-dependency without reducing value to another normative notion.
This will be discussed further in the sections on buck-passing and
sentimentalism.
Consider first the normative reduction claim. Here FA theories
conflict with the commonsense view of value, which derives reasons from
values (cf. Stratton-Lake and Hooker 2006). Take the simplest case: an
innocent pleasure granted to be intrinsically good. Many philosophers
hold such pleasure to be good independently of anything about human
desire or approval. Of course people typically do want pleasure, and
should want it; but such desire is fitting because pleasure is
good. Similarly, we typically approve of people getting pleasure, and
should do so; but approval is fitting because this is a good state of
affairs. According to generic FA theory, by contrast, what it is for
something to be good is for it to be a fitting object of some
pro-attitude such as desire or approval. In this view, what makes
pleasure good is something about our attitudes—albeit not about
our actual attitudes (which may be unfitting). But the central question
remains. Why derive value from the fittingness of attitudes, rather
than understanding evaluative attitudes as being sensitive to values
that exist independently of them, which are fitting whenever this
apprehension is veridical?
The motivation for adopting an FA theory becomes clearer when one
moves from a single case, especially the paradigmatic good of pleasure,
to other good things. Consider a plausible list of intrinsic values:
pleasure, beauty, friendship, and knowledge. Though this isn't
monistic hedonism, it's a very modest pluralism on which there
are four distinct goods instead of one. Someone might wonder what these
things have in common, in virtue of which they are good. Of course
there may be no answer, if it is just a brute fact that there are four
intrinsic goods, which resemble each other simply in having the
property of goodness. But another sort of response suggests itself.
Perhaps what unifies these goods is something about human attitudes.
Maybe pleasure, knowledge, beauty, and friendship are all
desirable or admirable things, where this means not
that we can desire or admire them but that we should (ought, have
reason to) do so, in virtue of facts about human nature, the inherent
qualities of those attitudes, and natural facts about the objects. Were
we lone but rational wolves, we would have no use—and hence no
fitting desire—for the friendship of other wolves, and no reason
to admire lupine loyalty or the other traits requisite for friendship.
Hence the response-dependency thesis makes values
anthropocentric, in that they depend on human capacities and
dispositions, and would be of no inherent interest to rational beings
who lacked those propensities. If this seems problematic with respect
to good and bad, it may seem much more plausible when it comes to the
funny and the shameful.
The notion that value, or at least some range of values, depends
essentially on human responses has been championed by philosophers who
draw an analogy between values and secondary qualities. McDowell (1985:
143) puts the point this way:
Notwithstanding the anthropocentric nature of colors, some things
really are red and others not, and propositions about colors are
knowable. Response-dependency is thus compatible with evaluative truth
and knowledge, although these are not basic facts about the universe.
Both anthropocentrism and the rejection of skepticism are held in
common between sensibility theory, which holds the normative reduction
thesis and thus counts as an FA account, and dispositional theories of
value which do not.
Although the response-dependency thesis provides grounds for giving
priority to the deontic notions, it also presents a challenge to FA
theory. Advocates of the commonsense view object that the relevant
evaluative responses already invoke the value concepts they are
supposed to explicate. W. D. Ross (1939: 278–9) formulates this
challenge with respect to admiration, but it can be posed for any
pro-attitude:
FA theory must hold that attitudes such as admiration and approval
have standards of fittingness that serve to make certain things, and
not others, valuable. Furthermore, these evaluative attitudes must not
already contain the thought that their object is good, on pain of
circularity. This challenge forces FA theory to engage with the
philosophy of emotion. Both Ross and Ewing seem implicitly to accept
some version of the feeling theory of emotion, on which
emotions—or at any rate “mere emotions”—are
simply feelings with no essential cognitive component.
Ewing (1948: 154) responds to the circularity challenge by
suggesting that admiration can be understood as an emotion
without invoking the concept of good, which FA theory is
attempting to analyze: 
But Ewing's response does not seem adequate to meet the
circularity objection. Ross grants that admiration is, in part, an
emotion. His objection is that it also involves thought about the
goodness of the object, as would Ewing's “state of mind
tinged with emotional qualities.” In order to avoid circularity,
it seems that FA theory has to make two claims. First, that such
attitudes as admiration are not merely affectively tinged but simply
emotions. Second, it must offer an account of the emotions on which
they do not include thoughts about their object's value. In the
section on sentimentalism, I will suggest that such a non-cognitive
account of certain basic emotions might prove tenable. But if thoughts
of the object's value are even partly constitutive of the
attitudes FA theory uses to analyze value, then the theory is
circular—whether viciously or not. 
Three possibilities remain for the development of FA theory, which
correspond to its main versions. First, generic FA theories aspire to
give a non-circular account of value generally. They therefore need to
claim that the broad pro and con attitudes utilized by the theory to
explicate good and bad do not already involve those very concepts.
Second, although sensibility theory too aspires to elucidate all value,
it eschews the ambition to give a non-circular account. The question
then becomes whether a circular account really can be informative and,
hence, not vicious. Third, a sentimentalist theory can be more modest
about how broadly the account applies, but it needs to give an account
of the sentiments on which they do not contain those evaluative
concepts analyzed—for instance, an account of amusement that can
be characterized independently of thinking something funny. Finally,
all FA theories have to solve the wrong kind of reason problem, in
order to fix on those considerations for or against evaluative
attitudes that are relevant to the value of their objects. 
The revival of interest in fitting attitude theory is largely due to
several influential defenses of each of its constituent claims. In the
first place, sensibility theories and neo-sentimentalist theories have
recently received both favorable and critical attention. Despite their
differences, both sensibility theory and these recent forms of
sentimentalism are full-fledged versions of FA theory, which subscribe
to both its central tenets. Secondly, though, each of these tenets has
also been endorsed by philosophers who reject the other claim and
therefore do not hold FA accounts. Since these two constitutive claims
have not always been sharply differentiated, both these developments
have increased the interest in FA theory. Several response-dependent
theories of value have been developed, which make values prior to
reasons and thus reject normative reduction (Lewis 1989). From the
other direction, T. M. Scanlon (1998) has advanced what he calls the
buck-passing account of value. Although I will contend that
Scanlon's view is committed only to normative reduction, and
hence is not an FA theory, the literature has tended to assimilate buck
passing accounts with fitting attitude theories. This too has increased
the visibility of the FA theory of value, however illicitly. 
Fitting attitude theories of value are sometimes referred to as
buck-passing accounts, and a burgeoning secondary literature concerns
the viability of “passing the buck,” especially about the
good. This identification of FA theories with buck passing is somewhat
misleading, as they are distinct claims, but those interested in FA
theories of value cannot overlook the literature on buck passing (see
bibliography). Issues of semantics aside, it will be helpful to
differentiate the buck-passing account from the fitting attitude theory
of value. 
In coining the buck-passing trope, Scanlon seems to combine two or
three distinct ideas. First, the leading thought of buck passing, which
inspires its name, is that goodness provides no reasons of its
own, but serves merely to collect things that are valuable on
other grounds. As Scanlon (1998: 97) writes:
In this famous passage, however, Scanlon adds two other thoughts to
the core idea. He claims that “lower-order” properties of
good things provide reasons to respond “in certain ways” to
them. This resembles the normative reduction claim of FA theory;
indeed, Scanlon endorses the strategy of explaining values in terms of
reasons. Finally, although this is less clear, Scanlon seems to suggest
that these lower-order, good-making features must be natural
properties of objects. These three claims are compatible but distinct.
One can pass the buck about goodness—that is, deny that the
goodness of something adds any additional reason to want or get
it—without holding normative reduction. Perhaps good things are
always good in virtue of more specific good-makers, but these
lower-order values determine our reasons. Moreover, even if goodness
provides no reasons of its own, the properties that do provide reasons
might be lower-order but still essentially evaluative properties of
objects, not natural properties. Thus the question is not just whether
to pass the buck, for instance from goodness to more specific
properties, but where does the buck stop?
Let us consider the respects in which the details of Scanlon's
account do and do not resemble FA theory, and then turn to what I take
as the leading thought of the buck-passing metaphor. Because Scanlon
refers to reasons to respond, and elsewhere to various
attitudes one can take toward value, he can seem to be
focusing on the evaluative attitudes at the heart of FA theories. But
Scanlon's notion of response focuses primarily on action, and
secondarily on such practical attitudes as respect, contemplation, and
enjoyment, as opposed to emotions. While his discussion raises
questions about evaluative attitudes that are left unanswered, two
points are clear. First, Scanlon rejects what he calls the teleological
conception of value, according to which value only provides reasons to
promote the valuable (and minimize the disvaluable). Second, Scanlon
(1998: 99) rejects any account of value as systematic as generic FA
theory:
Although it remains open to him to adopt a more limited FA theory of
certain values, Scanlon seems committed to rejecting any generic FA
theory, despite holding the buck-passing account of value quite
generally. 
In order to differentiate buck passing from fitting attitude theory,
we need to discriminate between the aspect of Scanlon's view that
is part of an FA theory, the aspect amenable but not essential to FA
theory, and the aspect that seems orthogonal to it. The analysis of
value in terms of reasons, which we've called normative
reduction, is one of the two constitutive claims of FA theory. (Even
here a caveat is needed, however, since those FA theories that aspire
merely to capture some values may not accept normative reduction as a
general thesis.) One might hold an FA theory specifically for those
values that seem response-dependent, while thinking that certain other
values—including perhaps the good or moral worth—are
autonomous from human response and attitudes. (I take this complex view
to have considerable plausibility.) Since Scanlon does not adopt the
response-dependency thesis, he rejects generic FA analysis on its own
terms, not merely because of his skepticism toward all systematic
theories of value. 
Moreover, various theories that reject normative reduction, such as
simple hedonism, pass the buck with respect to goodness. (I will here
ignore tangential issues about the metaethical grounding of hedonism.)
According to the hedonist, good things all have some natural property,
namely pleasure, which grounds all practical reasons. No additional
reasons are provided by the fact that some state is good, beyond those
given by its pleasure. It would be a mistake of double-counting to
claim that I have two reasons to take a warm bath: that it is
pleasurable, and that it is good. The goodness of pleasurable things
does not add another reason to that given by its pleasantness. Hence
the claims of FA theory and buck-passing are distinct. One can pass the
buck about goodness without holding an FA theory.
Can one hold an FA theory of some value without passing the buck
with respect to it? This is less clear, but it seems so. Consider the
delicious, for example. Does the fact that something is delicious
provide any reason to desire or consume it, or does the delicious pass
the buck to still lower-order natural properties that are the real
reason givers? Surely what makes things delicious are various natural
properties, specifically those to which our taste is sensitive such as
saltiness. Yet saltiness isn't intrinsically reason-giving;
something can be too salty or not salty enough, nor is there a perfect
amount of saltiness. Rather, it seems that the deliciousness of any
particular flavor depends on the other tastes accompanying it. Hence
deliciousness is a holistic property of how something tastes, dependent
on human sensibilities. I cannot see why one should be tempted to pass
the buck from the delicious to those complex natural properties that,
along with features of human taste, make certain things delicious. On
the contrary, it seems better to hold that the fact that something is
delicious gives one reasons: reasons to praise the dish, to admire the
chef, and of course to eat it. 
Suppose that values such as the delicious are most readily
identified by way of human tendencies to respond. This seems a
significant difference between pleasure and deliciousness, which might
make buck passing about the good—at least on certain conceptions
of goodness—more promising than it is for the delicious. For the
hedonist, there is a reasonably satisfying explanation of the goodness
of things that simply adverts to a (putatively) natural property:
pleasure. No such explanation is likely to be available about the
delicious, because it's so implausible to think we can always
pick out the natural properties in virtue of which something is
delicious. (The same point holds of the beautiful and other aesthetic
properties.) Talk about deliciousness usefully groups things
together—usefully for us humans, that is—by explaining what
they have in common, at a level that can be widely understood despite
our ignorance of the ultimate delicious-making properties. This
motivates the claim of FA theory that for something to be delicious is
for it to merit gustatory pleasure. Despite the fact that the
deliciousness of food is in some way a matter of its (and our) natural
properties, this does not imply that deliciousness fails to be
reason-giving or that we must take lower-order properties to provide
our reasons to enjoy some taste. In other words, the buck stops here:
at what merits gustatory pleasure. 
Hence the issue at the core of buck-passing, about whether the
highest-order evaluative concepts provide reasons, seems orthogonal to
FA theory except in one respect. Like FA theory, Scanlon's
account reduces values to reasons and thereby adopts the normative
reduction thesis. While there may be something about FA theories that
make them especially amenable to passing the buck with respect to
goodness, this point has not yet been adequately established. And if we
do not pass the buck all the way down to natural properties, then such
evaluative concepts as the funny and the beautiful might provide
reasons of their own. Thus some of the values for which FA theory seems
most plausible are also those least amenable to a buck-passing account.
Once we move from generic FA theories to analogous accounts of more
specific values, the motivation for further buck-passing becomes more
elusive. 
The term sensibility theory was coined to refer to a collection of
similar views put forward most notably by John McDowell (1985, 1987,
1996) and David Wiggins (1976, 1987), which claim values to be
anthropocentric and use perceptual metaphors to describe evaluative
thought and experience (Darwall, Gibbard, and Railton 1992). According
to this view, value properties cannot be reduced to natural properties
in a way that supports useful generalizations or explanations. Rather,
as Wiggins (1987: 193) puts it: “Our subjective reactions to
objects or events will often impose groupings upon them that have no
purely naturalistic rationale.” Sensibility theory therefore
adopts the response dependency thesis quite broadly, holding it of all
values.
This is one of two respects in which values resemble secondary
qualities. Although redness might be identified with a messy
disjunction of physical properties, there would be no point in grouping
that disjunction together were it not for human color vision. The other
analogy is that this anthropocentrism does not lead (most) philosophers
to deny that there are facts about what is and isn't red, or to
be generally skeptical of claims about knowledge of color facts.
Sensibility theory insists that the same is true of values. Yet there
are also two crucial disanalogies between values and color acknowledged
by these theories. The first is that sensibility theory explicates
value in terms of the responses it merits, not just those it
normally causes (McDowell 1985: 143). (To say that an object
merits some response is equivalent to saying that the response is
fittingly directed at the object.) And an evaluative response to an
object is fitting—pending a caveat to be discussed in the final
section on right and wrong kinds of reason—when there is
sufficient reason to feel it toward that object. Thus sensibility
theory explicates values in terms of reasons: it adopts normative
reduction. Since it holds both response dependency and normative
reduction, sensibility theory is a version of the FA theory of value.
The other disanalogy concerns the disparity between color vision,
which is very similar among humans, and our senses of humor, shame, and
the like, where people have quite different sensibilities. The merit
schema makes it essentially contestable what counts as funny, good, or
honorable, whereas what counts as red is not essentially contestable or
often contested. “There is, of course, a striking disanalogy in
the contentiousness that is typical of values;” McDowell (1985:
144) grants, “but I think it would be a mistake to suppose this
spoils the point.” Instead, he concludes that this
contentiousness allows for further criticism of actual responses, and
precludes their simply bootstrapping themselves into correctness.
“The aspiration to understand oneself is an aspiration to change
one's responses, if that is necessary for them to become
intelligible otherwise than as defective,” he writes (1985: 145).
By contrast, there can be no sensible aspiration to change one's
color vision through criticism and regulation, though one can conclude
that it is defective and, hence, reserve judgment about certain colors
based on one's experience. 
While the advocates of sensibility theory can be elusive about crucial
details of their program, they seem to hold that their view can
capture all value. Wiggins (1976: 95) adopts a generic FA theory that
aims to include all evaluations—as good or bad, beautiful or
ugly, ignoble, brave, just, disgusting, amusing, etc. (He excludes
what he calls directive judgments, such as “this is to be
done.”) But he also conceives each of these value properties as
being associated with a specific response or reaction, as the funny is
associated with amusement. Through a process of refinement, some value
properties eventually become detached from independently identifiable
responses, but they will still be paired with something worth calling
a reaction. Although these “further properties that lie at a
progressively greater distance from specific kinds of affect”
(Wiggins 1987: 196–7) cannot be paired with distinct sentiments, they
will still be constrained by human emotional capacities. It seems
strange that the sensibility theorists say so little about the
disparity between these various evaluative properties—between,
say, the funny and the just. All such values are claimed to be coeval
with responses, in that the response is not logically or
psychologically prior to the property. But the plausibility of this
claim varies depending on the “distance” of the value from
the sentiment, and the differences among sentiments.
Sensibility theory embraces circularity because it holds a view
about the emotions on which they cannot be identified without invoking
the very concepts FA analysis attempts to analyze. As McDowell (1987:
160) writes: “If there is no comprehending the right sentiments
independently of the concepts of the relevant [evaluative] features, a
no-priority view is surely indicated.” Wiggins (1987: 195) holds
such a no-priority view even of the relation between amusement and the
funny, but his argument on this point is less than compelling (cf.
D'Arms and Jacobson 2006a). However, a more compelling case for a
no-priority view might be found for resentment. Perhaps resentment is
best understood as a specific form of anger, restricted conceptually to
cases founded on moral reasons. Then wrongness might be explicated in
terms of fitting resentment, while resentment is understood partly in
terms of wrongness.
The circularity implied by such a no-priority view is claimed not be
vicious because it helps elucidate values. Thus Wiggins (1987: 189)
writes that sensibility theory “hopes to elucidate the concept of
value by displaying it in its actual involvement with the sentiments.
One would not, according to [this view], have sufficiently elucidated
what value is without that detour.” But this claim can be
attacked from both sides. According to forms of sentimentalism that
limit their FA theory to a core class of emotions, sensibility theory
exaggerates the interdependence of these responses (such as fear,
amusement, disgust, shame, and the like) with their associated value
properties (the fearsome, funny, disgusting, shameful, etc.). Here the
sentiments are plausibly prior to the values, and circularity can be
avoided by giving an account of these emotions that does not advert to
the evaluative concepts at issue. Yet with respect to good and bad, it
is hard to see how much is elucidated by the detour through the
sentiments. Sensibility theory does not seem to improve upon generic FA
theories, with their vague references to pro-attitudes, in this
respect. What is it to approve of something other than to think it
good—perhaps with a charge of positive affect? Here the
circularity seems vicious precisely because the detour is so brief and
uninformative.
Sentimentalism can be understood broadly, so as to include
sensibility theory despite its no-priority claim, or more narrowly as
the thesis that a given value “depends on some internal sense or
feeling which nature has made universal in the species” (Hume
1740/1975: 172). Note that sentimentalism must claim, in either case, that
those emotions on which it focuses are not merely epistemic routes to
independently existing values. For instance, amusement cannot merely be
a sensitivity to the funny, in order to be amenable to a sentimentalist
theory of humor in terms of (fitting) amusement. I will here adopt the
narrow usage, which makes sensibility theory not a form of
sentimentalism but a close relation to it. The crucial difference is
that a Humean sentimentalist view gives priority to those universal
human feelings: certain basic or pan-cultural emotions I'm
referring to as sentiments. These will not include all the
various states commonly called emotions, and a sentimentalist might
well accept a no-priority account of the relation between certain
values and “cognitively sharpened” emotions such as
resentment, as opposed to simple anger (D'Arms and Jacobson
2003). 
Although response-dependency is an essential aspect of
sentimentalism, not all such theories accept normative reduction. On
one reading of Adam Smith's prototypical sentimentalism, although
he holds that evaluative judgments concern what emotional response is
proper, he then defines that notion dispositionally, in terms
of actual rather than merited responses and endorsements. “To be
the proper and approved object” of a sentiment, he writes,
“can mean nothing but to be the object [of that sentiment] which
naturally seems proper, and is approved of (1982: 69). Another reading
of Smith, which attributes a sentimentalist FA theory to him, has his
standard of propriety determined by an essentially normative notion of
an impartial spectator.
Although sentimentalism can adopt dispositionalism rather than FA
theory, those versions that embrace normative reduction reduce the
values on which the theory focuses to a primitive normative notion of
fittingness or merit. Thus the shameful is understood as what merits
shame, the funny as what merits amusement, and so forth. Moreover,
sentimentalism can aspire to give a non-circular account of those
sentiments that are claimed to be part of basic human nature, despite
having (somewhat) different elicitors in different cultures and
individuals. How many such sentiments there are, and which ones, is a
matter of dispute that need not be entered into here. The important
point is that even these forms of sentimentalism need not adopt an FA
theory of all values; they can focus on those values that seem most
intimately tied to specific human sentiments, such as the shameful,
funny, fearsome, and pride-worthy. This modest sentimentalism holds an
FA theory only of certain values, those most amenable to
response-dependency and normative reduction. It must deny
response-independent accounts of these values, such as the incongruity
theory of humor, on which the funny is analyzed as the incongruous.
Sentimentalists will hold that such theories are either open to
manifold counterexamples or are only speciously response-independent
(Scruton 1987). 
The circularity challenge appears most trenchant when wielded against
generic FA theories, since the broad pro-attitudes they require, in
order to capture all value, seem already to involve the thought that
something is valuable. What is it to approve of some outcome except to
think it good, perhaps with a tinge of positive affect? Perhaps desire
can be understood more plausibly than approval as an independently
identifiable state, which can be characterized without invoking the
concept good. But it is less clear that the good is its object, as it
would have to be for an FA theory to analyze the desirable in terms of
fitting desire. It seems equally plausible that desire aims at what is
good for the agent. Suppose some outcome would be extremely beneficial
to me, though indifferent (or worse) when considered impartially. Why
think that fitting desires must always take as their object things
that are good from the point of view of the universe, rather than good
for the person who desires them? It is hard to see why such a desire
would be unfitting, not just selfish. Yet one can also desire
something contrary to one's interests when it is sufficiently good for
others. Such a desire could also be fitting, it seems. Perhaps this
problem can be circumvented by distinguishing reasons to desire
something for some individual's sake (such as the agent), but this
shows at least that generic FA theories need to draw a further
distinction between reasons to desire. Moreover, any account of desire
that involves the notion of either good or good-for seems already to
involve the concept it proposes to analyze, and similar problems
attend accounts in terms of other generic attitudes such as approval
or preference. Although other accounts of desire or pro-attitudes are
possible, the circularity worry threatens generic FA theories of value
because they cannot appeal to more specific attitudes that seem more
amenable to characterization without reference to an evaluative
concept. 
Sensibility theory embraces circularity by holding that values and
evaluative responses are “made for each other” through a
process of mutual adjustment. This circularity is claimed not to be
vicious because it has explanatory power. Such an account, on which
specific sentiments (e.g., anger) can be refined into emotional
responses (resentment) shaped by the property with which they're
associated (wrongness), seems to work in some cases. Maybe this
isn't a vicious circle insofar as it connects wrongness with
anger (and guilt), thereby elucidating the nature of its motivational
force, but this argument is considerably less plausible in other cases.
It is hard to see how an analysis of the funny in terms of amusement,
which is then characterized in terms of seeing something as funny,
elucidates anything.
The challenge for sentimentalism, by contrast, is to produce a
theory of the sentiments on which they can be understood independently
of the evaluative concepts that the theory uses them to analyze.
Suggestions about how to do so have been given (Gibbard 1990), but no
fully developed account has yet been offered. Moreover, sentimentalists
who hold even a limited FA theory must give an account of the
sentiments on which they are amenable to judgments of when they are and
aren't fitting—unlike mere feelings—yet do not
essentially involve the very concepts that they are meant to elucidate.
The theory must avoid circularity while maintaining the resources to
solve the wrong kind of reason problem.
Fitting attitude theories hold that for something to be valuable is
for it to merit some relevant evaluative attitude. Whether framed in
terms of reasons or some other normative notion, the fundamental issue
concerns when there is sufficient reason to have some particular
evaluative attitude or sentiment such as approval or contempt. These
are questions over which people can intelligibly disagree; moreover, FA
theories seem capable of making sense of fundamental evaluative
disagreement. As long as parties to the debate understand the attitude
in question—which is especially likely when it is part of a
shared human repertoire of sentiments—they can sensibly disagree
about when such reasons obtain, even if they hold very different
standards of fittingness. This seems to be just what is at stake in
disputes of taste or sensibility: fundamental disagreement over whether
something is funny, disgusting, shameful, and so forth.
However, the wrong kind of reason problem poses a challenge to this
central aspiration of FA analysis. The problem is that there seem to be
reasons for having various attitudes that do not bear directly on the
evaluative questions that the analyses seek to analyze. Take for
example Roger Crisp's (2000) demon who threatens to punish you
unless you desire a cup of mud. While this seems like a reason to
desire the mud, it obviously doesn't make the mud any more
desirable. As a result, the question of whether there is reason to
desire the mud appears to deviate from the question of whether the mud
is good. Someone who holds that there is sufficient reason to desire
it, given by the advantages of having that desire, does not have an
evaluative disagreement (about desirability) with someone who denies
there to be reason to desire such garden-variety mud. Rather, they are
addressing different questions. Any genuine difference of opinion over
the value of the mud requires disagreement over whether there are
reasons of the right kind for desiring it: the sort of reasons
that bear on evaluative judgment, as opposed to reasons to have or
forbear from having the evaluative attitude (Rabinowicz and
Rönnow-Rasmussen 2004).
Of course, no misunderstanding would arise in this case, as the
claim that there are strategic reasons to desire the mud is unlikely to
be confused with an evaluation of the mud itself. In this respect
Crisp's case is typical of those discussed in the literature,
most of which pose no real danger of conflation. As a result, the WKR
problem has come to be treated simply as a technical objection to FA
analysis, which yields apparent counterexamples to the theory. These
cases are designed precisely to be obviously WKRs, because
they are put forward to show that to be valuable isn't simply to
be something that there is just any sort of reason to value. The
criticism suggests that an FA analysis must be more precise: it must
equate value with reasons of the right kind for having attitudes, while
finding some way to distinguish just these reasons. The obvious cases
on which most of the literature focuses pose no such challenge, since
everyone agrees that they are not relevant to the evaluative judgment
at issue. 
But it has been suggested that in addition to the obvious cases,
there are interestingly wrong kinds of reason as well
(D'Arms and Jacobson 2000a). These are considerations in favor
(or against) some attitude that fail to bear on the relevant evaluative
judgment of something despite focusing on its properties. To use an
example from Berys Gaut (2007: 241): “Imagine a comedy full of
hilarious jokes, all of which were so vicious and cruel that audiences
watched in stony silence, without being amused at all, since they
correctly thought that it would be wrong to feel amusement.”
Although viciousness and cruelty are properties of these jokes, they
are supposed to make it the case that amusement at them is contrary to
virtue. While some philosophers, such as Gaut himself, take the
viciousness of a joke always to detract from its humor, others hold
that it merely makes appreciating its humor morally problematic
(Jacobson 2008). After all, the jokes are stipulated to be hilarious.
As McDowell (1987: 161, fn. 18) notes: “Much of what is
ordinarily appealed to in ranking objects for amusement is…not
obviously relevant to this issue [of comic evaluation]; for
instance jokes that one may deplore as being ‘in bad taste’
(usually on moralistic grounds) are not thereby shown not to be
extremely funny.” Such interesting WKRs can be taken as
reasons of the right kind and conflated with them, thus creating a form
of spurious evaluative disagreement, analogous to the spurious
evaluative disagreement created when a seemingly moral dispute rests on
a factual disagreement.
Intuitively, reasons of the right kind are those that bear on the
value of the object—for instance, reasons to desire the mud that
bear on whether the mud is desirable. The challenge for FA analyses is
how to capture this intuitive idea in a non-tautological fashion. There
are two general strategies for solving the wrong kind of reason
problem. The first is to draw a distinction between object-given and
state-given considerations, where a state-given consideration is one
that invokes some value of having the evaluative attitude toward an
object (e.g., desiring the mud), whereas an object-given consideration
focuses only on features of the object (Parfit 2001). Proponents of
this distinction hold that state-given considerations can only provide
reasons of the wrong kind, like the demonic incentive which attaches to
the state of desiring the mud; whereas object-given considerations,
such as the mud's foul taste, can provide the right kind of
reason (not) to desire it. Various technical worries about this
distinction have been raised, and attempts to answer them offered
(Olson 2004, Rabinowicz and Rönnow-Rasmussen 2006). The larger
worry is that certain features of an object, such as the cruelty of a
joke or the fact that one is not responsible for some bad trait, do not
make any overt reference to a state or attitude. Yet they might
nevertheless bear on whether to have the state (because amusement is
vicious or shame counterproductive) without bearing on the value of the
object (whether the joke is hilarious or the trait shameful). The force
of the thought that one should not feel contempt or shame at such
traits might depend on the judgment that it would be unfair, or
otherwise vicious, to feel contempt or shame at those traits for which
the bearer is not responsible. Interestingly wrong kinds of reason do
not wear their normative import on their sleeve, as do obviously wrong
kinds of reason such as demonic incentives. 
In addition to the formal test given by the distinction between
state-given and object-given reasons, and the psychological test given
by asking to what attitude one can follow some consideration, there
might be a more substantive solution to the problem. A modest form of
sentimentalism will seek to determine considerations of fit, and thus
reasons of the right kind, through consideration of the specific
sentiment at issue. Perhaps it is something about guilt, such as the
fact that it motivates reparation; and something about shame, such as
the fact that it motivates concealment; that explains why lack of fault
undermines the fittingness of guilt but not shame. If so then reasons
of the right kind might be distinguished even in the most interesting
and difficult cases. This will require no mere detour through the
sentiments, but a more thoroughgoing investigation into
them—particularly into the actions they typically motivate and
the conditions that alleviate and exacerbate them. To make matters more
challenging, this interpretive project must not help itself to
evaluative concepts, such as the wrong and the shameful, in order to
explicate the concerns of guilt and shame. At any rate, to do so would
be to give up on the ambition of offering a non-circular theory of even
those values most amenable to FA accounts.