Learning-theoretic analysis assesses dispositions for forming beliefs.
Several terms for belief acquisition processes are in common use in
philosophy; I will use “inductive strategy”,
“inference method” and most frequently “inductive
method” to mean the same thing. The best way to understand how
learning theory evaluates inductive methods is to work through some
examples. The following presentation begins with some very simple
inductive problems and moves on to more complicated and more realistic
settings.
Let’s revisit the classic question of whether all ravens are black.
Imagine an ornithologist who tackles this problem by examining one
raven after another. There is exactly one observation sequence in
which only black ravens are found; all others feature at least one
nonblack raven. The figure below illustrates the possible observation
sequences. Dots in the figure denote points at which an observation
may be made. A black bird to the left of a dot indicates that at this
stage, a black raven is observed. Similarly, a white bird to the right
of a dot indicates that a nonblack raven is observed. Given a 
complete sequence  of observations, either all observed ravens are
black or nonblack; the figure labels complete observation sequences
with the statement that is true of them. The gray fan indicates that
after the observation of a white raven, the claim that not all ravens
are black holds on all observation sequences resulting from further
observations.
If the world is such that only black ravens are found, we would like
the ornithologist to settle on this generalization. (It may be
possible that some nonblack ravens remain forever hidden from sight,
but even then the generalization “all ravens are black” at
least gets the observations right.) If the world is such that
eventually a nonblack raven is found, then we would like the
ornithologist to arrive at the conclusion that not all ravens are
black. This specifies a set of goals of inquiry. For any given
inductive method that might represent the ornithologist’s disposition
to adopt conjectures in the light of the evidence, we can ask whether
that method measures up to these goals or not. There are infinitely
many possible methods to consider; we’ll look at just two, a skeptical
one and one that boldly generalizes. The  bold method 
conjectures that all ravens are black after seeing that the first
raven is black. It hangs on to this conjecture unless some nonblack
raven appears. The skeptical method does not go beyond what is
entailed by the evidence. So if a nonblack raven is found, the
skeptical method concludes that not all ravens are black, but
otherwise the method does not make a conjecture one way or another.
The figure below illustrates both the bold and the skeptical
method.

Do these methods attain the goals we set out? Consider the bold
method. There are two possibilities: either all observed ravens are
black, or some nonblack raven is found. In the first case, the method
conjectures that all ravens are black and never abandons this
conjecture. In the second case, the method concludes that not all
ravens are black as soon as the first nonblack raven is found. Hence
no matter how the evidence comes in, eventually the method
gives the right answer as to whether all ravens are black and
sticks with this answer. Learning theorists call such methods
reliable because they settle on the right answer no matter
what observations the world provides.
The skeptical method does not measure up so well. If a nonblack raven
appears, then the method does arrive at the correct conclusion that
not all ravens are black. But if all ravens are black, the skeptic
never takes an “inductive leap” to adopt this
generalization. So in that case, the skeptic fails to provide the
right answer to the question of whether all ravens are black.
This illustrates how means-ends analysis can evaluate methods: the
bold method meets the goal of reliably arriving at the right answer,
whereas the skeptical method does not. Note the character of this
argument against the skeptic: The problem, in this view, is not that
the skeptic violates some canon of rationality, or fails to appreciate
the “uniformity of nature”. The learning-theoretic
analysis concedes to the skeptic that no matter how many black ravens
have been observed in the past, the next one could be white. The issue
is that if all observed ravens are indeed black, then the skeptic
never answers the question “are all ravens
black?”. Getting the right answer to that question requires
generalizing from the evidence even though the generalization
could be wrong.
As for the bold method, it’s important to be clear on what it does and
does not achieve. The method will eventually settle on the right
answer—but it (or we) may never be certain that it has
done so. As
 William James
 put it, “no bell tolls” when science has found the right
answer. We are certain that the method will eventually settle on the
right answer; but we may never be certain that the current answer is
the right one. This is a subtle point; the next example illustrates it
further.
Nelson Goodman posed a famous puzzle about inductive inference known
as the (New) Riddle of Induction ([Goodman 1983]). Our next example is
inspired by his puzzle. Goodman considered generalizations about
emeralds, involving the familiar colours of green and blue, as well as
certain unusual ones:
Now let us introduce another predicate less familiar than
“green”. It is the predicate “grue” and it
applies to all things examined before t just in case they are
green but to other things just in case they are blue. Then at time
t we have, for each evidence statement asserting that a given
emerald is green, a parallel evidence statement asserting that emerald
is grue. The question is whether we should conjecture that all
emeralds are green rather than that all emeralds are grue when we
obtain a sample of green emeralds examined before time t, and
if so, why.
Clearly we have a family of grue predicates in this problem, one for
each different “critical time” t; let’s write
grue(t) to denote these grue predicates. Following Goodman,
let us refer to methods as  projection rules  in discussing
this example. A projection rule succeeds in a world just in case it
settles on a generalization that is correct in that world. Thus in a
world in which all examined emeralds are found to be green, we want
our projection rule to converge to the proposition that all emeralds
are green. If all examined emeralds are grue(t), we want our
projection rule to converge to the proposition that all emeralds are
grue(t). Note that this stipulation treats green and grue
predicates completely on a par, with no bias towards either. As
before, let us consider two rules: the  natural projection rule
which conjectures that all emeralds are green as long as only green
emeralds are found, and the gruesome rule which keeps
projecting the next grue predicate consistent with the available
evidence. Expressed in the green-blue vocabulary, the gruesome
projection rule conjectures that after observing some number of
n green emeralds, all future ones will be blue. The figures
below illustrates the possible observation sequences, the natural
projection rule, and the gruesome projection rule. 

The following figure shows the gruesome projection rule. 

How do these rules measure up to the goal of arriving at a true
generalization? Suppose for the sake of the example that the only
serious possibilities under consideration are: (1) Either all emeralds
are green or (2) all emeralds are grue(t) for some critical
time t. Then the natural projection rule settles on the
correct generalization no matter what the correct generalization is.
For if all emeralds are green, the natural projection rule asserts
this fact from the beginning. And suppose that all emeralds are
grue(t) for some critical time t. Then at time
t, a blue emerald will be observed. At this point the natural
projection rule settles on the conjecture that all emeralds are
grue(t), which must be correct given our assumption about the
possible observation sequences. Thus no matter what evidence is
obtained in the course of inquiry—consistent with our background
assumptions—the natural projection rule eventually settles on a
correct generalization about the colour of emeralds.
The gruesome rule does not do as well. For if all emeralds are green,
the rule will never conjecture this fact because it keeps projecting
grue predicates. Hence there is a possible observation
sequence—namely those on which all emeralds are green—on
which the gruesome rule fails to converge to the right generalization.
So means-ends analysis would recommend the natural projection rule
over the gruesome rule. 
The means-ends analysis of the Riddle of Induction illustrates a
number of philosophically important points that holds for
learning-theoretic analysis in general.
Equal Treatment of All Hypotheses. As in the previous example,
nothing in this argument hinges on arguments to the effect that
certain possibilities are not to be taken seriously a priori. In
particular, nothing in the argument says that generalizations with
grue predicates are ill-formed, unlawlike, or in some other way a
priori inferior to “all emeralds are green”.
Language Invariance. The analysis does not depend on the
vocabulary in which the evidence and generalizations are framed. For
ease of exposition, I have mostly used the green-blue reference frame.
However, grue-bleen speakers would agree that the aim of reliably
settling on a correct generalization requires the natural projection
rule rather than the gruesome one, even if they would want to express
the conjectures of the natural rule in their grue-bleen language
rather than the blue-green language that we have used so far.
Dependence on Context. Though the analysis does not depend on
language, it does depend on assumptions about what the possible
observation sequences are. The example as described above seems to
comprise the possibilities that correspond to the colour predicates
Goodman himself discussed. But means-ends analysis applies just as
much to other sets of possible predicates. Schulte [1999] and
Chart [2000] discuss a number of other versions of the Riddle of
Induction, in some of which means-ends analysis favours projecting
that all emeralds are grue on a sample of all green emeralds.
Our first two examples feature simple universal generalizations. Some
subtle aspects of the concept of long-run reliability, particularly
its relationship to falsificationism, become apparent if we consider
generalizations that allow for exceptions. To illustrate, let us
return to the world of ravens. This time the ornithological community
is more guarded in its generalizations concerning the colour of
ravens. Two competing hypotheses are under investigation.
Assuming that one or the other of these hypotheses is correct, is
there an inductive method that reliably settles on the right one? What
makes this problem more difficult than our first two is that each
hypothesis under investigation is consistent with any finite amount of
evidence. If 100 white ravens and 50 black ravens are found, either
the 50 black ravens or the 100 white ravens may be the exception to
the rule. In terminology made familiar by
 Karl Popper’s
 work, we may say that neither hypothesis is falsifiable. As a
consequence, the inductive strategy from the previous two examples
will not work here. This strategy was basically to adopt a
“bold” universal generalization, such as “all ravens
are black” or “all emeralds are green”, and to hang
on to this conjecture as long as it “passes muster”.
However, when rules with possible exceptions are under investigation,
this strategy is unreliable. For example, suppose that an inquirer
first adopts the hypothesis that “all but finitely many ravens
are white”. It may be the case that from then on, only black
ravens are found. But each of these apparent counterinstances can be
“explained away” as an exception. If the inquirer follows
the principle of hanging on to her conjecture until the evidence is
logically inconsistent with the conjecture, she will never abandon her
false belief that all but finitely many ravens are white, much less
arrive at the correct belief that all but finitely many ravens are
black.
Reliable inquiry requires a more subtle investigative strategy. Here
is one (of many). Begin inquiry with either competing hypothesis, say
“all but finitely many ravens are black”. Choose some
cut-off ratio to represent a “clear majority”; for
definiteness, let’s say 70%. If the current conjecture is that all but
finitely many ravens are black, change your mind to conjecture that
all but finitely many ravens are white just in case over 70% of
observed ravens are in fact white. Proceed likewise if the current
conjecture is that all but finitely many ravens are white when over
70% of observed ravens are in fact black.
A bit of thought shows that this rule reliably identifies the correct
hypothesis in the long run, no matter which of the two competing
hypotheses is correct. For if all but finitely many ravens are black,
eventually the nonblack exceptions to the rule will be exhausted, and
an arbitrarily large majority of observed ravens will be black.
Similarly if all but finitely many ravens are white.
Generalizations with exceptions illustrate the relationship between
Popperian falsificationism and the learning-theoretic idea of reliable
convergence to the truth. In some settings of inquiry, notably those
involving universal generalizations, a naively Popperian
“conjectures-and-refutations” approach of hanging on to
conjectures until the evidence falsifies them does yield a reliable
inductive method. In other problems, like the current example, it does
not. Generally speaking problems with unfalsifiable hypotheses require
something other than the conjectures-and-refutations recipe for
reliable methods (this assertion hinges on what exactly one means by
“falsifiable hypothesis”; see
 Section 3
 (The Limits of Inquiry and the Complexity of Empirical Problems). The moral is that relying on
falsifications is sometimes, but not always, the best way for
inquiry to proceed.
This section provides further examples to illustrate
learning-theoretic analysis. The examples in this section are more
realistic and address methodological issues arising in scientific
practice. The space constraints of the encyclopedia format allow only
an outline of the full analysis; there are references to more detailed
discussions below. More case studies may be found in [Kelly 1996, Ch.
7.7, Harrell 2000]. Readers who wish to proceed
to the further development of the theory and philosophy of means-ends
epistemology can skip this section without loss of continuity. 
One of the hallmarks of elementary particle physics is the discovery
of new conservation laws that apply only in the subatomic realm [Ford
1963, Ne’eman and Kirsh 1983, Feynman 1965]. (Feynman groups one of
them, the conservation of Baryon Number, with the other “great
conservation laws” of energy, charge and momentum.) Simplifying
somewhat, conservation principles serve to explain why certain
processes involving elementary particles do  not  occur: the
explanation is that some conservation principle was violated (cf.
Omnes [1971, Ch.2] and Ford [1963]). So a goal of particle inquiry is
to find a set of conservation principles such that for every process
that is possible according to the (already known) laws of physics, but
fails to be observed experimentally, there is some conservation
principle that rules out that process. And if a process is in fact
observed to occur, then it ought to satisfy all conservation laws that
we have introduced.
This constitutes an inference problem to which we may apply means-ends
analysis. An inference method produces a set of conservation
principles in response to reports of observed processes. Means-ends
analysis asks which methods are guaranteed to settle on conservation
principles that account for all observations, that is, that rule out
unobserved processes and allow observed processes. Schulte [2008]
describes an inductive method that accomplishes this goal.  Informally
the method may be described as follows. 
The logic of conservation laws is such that the observation of some
reactions entails the possibility of other unobserved ones. The
learning-theoretic method rules out all reactions that are not
entailed. It turns out that the conservation principles that this
method would posit on the currently available evidence are 
empirically equivalent  to the ones that physicists have
introduced. Specifically, their predictions agree exactly with the
conservation of charge, baryon number, muon number, tau number and
Lepton number that is part of the Standard Model of particle physics. 
For some physical processes, the only way to get empirically adequate
conservation principles is by positing that some hidden particles have
gone undetected. Schulte [2009] extends the analysis such that
an inductive method may not only introduce conservation laws, but also
posit unseen particles. The basic principle is again to posit unseen
particles in such a way that we rule out as many unobserved reactions
as possible. When this method is applied to the known particle data,
it rediscovers the existence of an electron antineutrino. This is one
of the particles of key concern in current particle physics. 
There has been a substantive body of research on learning causal
relationships as represented in a causal graph [Spirtes et al. 2000].
Kelly suggested a learning-theoretic analysis of inferring causality
where the evidence is provided in the form of observed significant
correlations among variables of interest (a modern version of
Hume’s “constant conjunctions”). The following
inductive method is guaranteed to converge to an empirically adequate
causal graph as more and more correlations are observed [Schulte, Luo
and Greiner 2007].
Some philosophers of mind have argued that the mind is composed of
fairly independent modules. Each module has its own
“input” from other modules and sends “output”
to other modules. For example, an “auditory analysis
system” module might take as input a heard word and send a
phonetic analysis to an “auditory input lexicon”. The idea
of modular organization raises the empirical question of what mental
modules there are and how they are linked to each other. A prominent
tradition of research in cognitive neuroscience has attempted to
develop a model of mental architecture along these lines by studying
the responses of normal and abnormal subjects to various stimuli. The
idea is to compare normal reactions with abnormal ones—often
caused by brain damage—so as to draw inferences about which
mental capacities depend on each other and how.
Glymour [1994] asked the reliabilist question whether there are
inference methods that are guaranteed to eventually settle on a true
theory of mental organization, given exhaustive evidence about normal
and abnormal capacities and reactions. He argued that for some
possible mental architectures, no amount of evidence of the
stimulus-response kind can distinguish between them. Since the
available evidence determines the conjectures of an inductive method,
it follows that there is no guarantee that a method will settle on the
true model of cognitive architecture.
In further discussion, Bub [1994] showed that if we grant certain
restrictive assumptions about how mental modules are connected, then a
complete set of behavioural observations would allow a
neuropsychologist to ascertain the module structure of a (normal)
mind. In fact, under Bub’s assumptions there is a reliable method for
identifying the modular structure. Glymour has also explored to what
extent richer kinds of evidence would resolve underdetermination of
mental architecture. (One example of richer evidence are double
disassocations. An example of a double dissocation would be a pair of
patients, one who has a normal capacity for understanding spoken
words, but fails to understand written ones, and another who
understands written words but not spoken ones.)
These studies illustrate some general features of learning theory:
1. Generality. The basic notions of the theory are very
general. Essentially, the theory applies whenever one has a question
that prompts inquiry, a number of candidate answers, and some evidence
for deciding among the answers. Thus means-ends analysis can be
applied in any discipline aimed at empirical knowledge, for example
physics or psychology.
2. Context Dependence. Learning theory is pure normative a
priori epistemology in the sense that it deals with standards for
assessing methods in possible settings of inquiry. But the approach
does not aim for universal, context-free methodological maxims. The
methodological recommendations depend on contingent factors, such as
the operative methodological norms, the questions under investigation,
the background assumptions that the agent brings to inquiry, the
observational means at her disposal, her cognitive capacities, and her
epistemic aims. As a consequence, to evaluate specific methods in a
given domain, as in the case studies mentioned, one has to study the
details of the case in question. The means-ends analysis often rewards
this study by pointing out what the crucial methodological features of
a given scientific enterprise are, and by explaining precisely why and
how these features are connected to the success of the enterprise in
attaining its epistemic aims.
3. Trade-offs. In the perspective of means-ends epistemology,
inquiry involves an ongoing struggle with hard choices, rather than
the execution of a universal “scientific method”. The
inquirer has to balance conflicting values, and may consider various
strategies such as accepting difficulties in the short run hoping to
resolve them in the long run. For example in the conservation law
problem, there can be conflicts between theoretical parsimony, i.e.,
positing fewer conservation laws, and ontological parsimony, i.e.,
introducing fewer hidden particles. For another example, a particle
theorist may accept positing undetected particles in the hopes that
they will eventually be observed as science progresses. The ongoing
search for the Higgs boson illustrates this strategy. An important
learning-theoretic project is to examine when such tradeoffs arise and
what the options for resolving them are. Section 4 extends
learning-theoretic analysis to consider goals in addition to long-run
reliability.
After seeing a number of examples like the ones described above, one
begins to wonder what the pattern is. What is it about an empirical
question that allows inquiry to reliably arrive at the correct answer?
What general insights can we gain into how reliable methods go about
testing hypotheses? Learning theorists answer these questions with
characterization theorems. Characterization theorems are
generally of the form “it is possible to attain this standard of
empirical success in a given inductive problem if and only if the
inductive problem meets the following conditions”. 
A fundamental result describes the conditions under which a method can
reliably find the correct hypothesis among a countably infinite or
finite number H1, H2,
…, Hn, …. of mutually exclusive
hypotheses that jointly cover all possibilities consistent with the
inquirer’s background assumptions.  This is possible just in case
each of the hypotheses is a countable disjunction of refutable
empirical claims . By “refutable” I mean that if the
claim is false, the evidence combined with the inquirer’s background
assumptions will eventually conclusively falsify that disjunct within
the hypothesis (see Kelly [1996, Ch. 3.3]).
For illustration, let’s return to the ornithological example with two
alternative hypotheses: (1) all but finitely many swans are white, and
(2) all but finitely many swans are black. As we saw, it is possible
in the long run to reliably settle which of these two hypotheses is
correct. Hence by the characterization theorem, each of the two
hypotheses must be a disjunction of refutable empirical claims. To see
that this indeed is so, observe that “all but finitely many
swans are white” is logically equivalent to the disjunction
A recent characterization theorem due to Baltag, Gierasimczuk, and
Smets emphasizes the topological concept of separability [Baltag et
al. 2015]. In epistemic terms, topological separation means (lack of)
 underdetermination
 by evidence. For example, the classic first axiom of separation
requires that for any two possible states of the world, there are two
possible observation sequences, each consistent with one state of the
world but not the other. Thus the first separation axiom entails that
a complete observation sequence determines a unique state of the
world. Baltag et al. define a topological notion of what it means for
evidence to separate competing hypotheses in an inductive problem, and
prove that this concept of inductive separability characterizes which
inductive problems allow reliable learning. 
A few points will help explain the significance of characterization
theorems.
1. Structure of Reliable Methods. Characterization theorems
tell us how the structure of reliable methods is attuned to the
structure of the hypotheses under investigation. For example, the
theorem mentioned establishes a connection between falsifiability and
testability, but one that is more attenuated than the naïve
Popperian envisions: it is not necessary that the hypotheses under
test be directly falsifiable; rather, there must be ways of
strengthening each hypothesis that yield a countable number of
refutable “subhypotheses”. We can think of these refutable
subhypotheses as different ways in which the main hypothesis may be
true. (For example, one way in which “all but finitely many
ravens are white” is true is if there are are at most 10 black
ravens; another is if there are at most 100 black ravens, etc.)
2. Import of Background Assumptions. The characterization
result draws a line between the solvable and unsolvable problems.
Background knowledge reduces the inductive complexity of a problem;
with enough background knowledge, the problem crosses the threshold
between the unsolvable and the solvable. In many domains of empirical
inquiry, the pivotal background assumptions are those that make
reliable inquiry feasible. (Kuhn [1970] makes similar points about the
importance of background assumptions embodied in a
“paradigm”). 
3. Language Invariance. Learning-theoretic characterization
theorems concern what Kelly calls the “temporal
entanglement” of various observation sequences [Kelly
2000]. Ultimately they rest on entailment relations between given
evidence, background assumptions and empirical claims. Since logical
entailment does not depend on the language we use to frame evidence
and hypotheses, the inductive complexity of an empirical problem as
determined by the characterization theorems is
language-invariant. 
A longstanding criticism of convergence to the truth as an aim of
inquiry is that, while fine in itself, this aim is consistent with any
crazy behaviour in the short run [Salmon 1991]. For example, we saw in
the New Riddle of Induction that a reliable projection rule can
conjecture that the next emerald will be blue no matter how many green
emeralds have been found—as long as eventually the rule
projects “all emeralds are green”. One response is that if
means-ends analysis takes into account other epistemic aims in
addition to long-run convergence, then it can provide
strong guidance for what to conjecture in the short run.
To illustrate this point, let us return to the Goodmanian Riddle of
Induction. Ever since Plato, philosophers have considered the idea
that stable true belief is better than unstable true belief,
and epistemologists such as Sklar [1975] have advocated similar
principles of “epistemic conservatism”. Kuhn tells us that
a major reason for conservatism in paradigm debates is the cost of
changing scientific beliefs [Kuhn 1970]. In this spirit, learning
theorists have examined methods that minimize the number of times that
they change their theories before settling on their final conjecture
[Putnam 1965, Kelly 1996, Jain 1999]. Such
methods are said to minimize mind changes. 
The New Riddle of Induction turns out to be a nice illustration of
this idea. Consider the natural projection rule (conjecture that all
emeralds are green on a sample of green emeralds). If all emeralds are
green, this rule never changes its conjecture. And if all emeralds are
grue(t) for some critical time t, then the natural
projection rule abandons its conjecture “all emeralds are
green” at time t—one mind change—and
thereafter correctly projects “all emeralds are
grue(t)”. Remarkably, rules that project grue rather
than green do not do as well. For example, consider a rule that
conjectures that all emeralds are grue(3) after observing one green
emerald. If two more green emeralds are observed, the rule’s
conjecture is falsified and it must eventually change its mind, say to
conjecture that all emeralds are green (supposing that green emeralds
continue to be found). But then at that point, a blue emerald may
appear, forcing a second mind change. This argument can be generalized
to show that  the aim of minimizing mind changes allows only the
green predicate to be projected on a sample of all green emeralds 
[Schulte 1999]. We saw in
 Section 1.2
 above how the natural projection rule changes its mind at most once;
the figure below illustrates in a typical case how an unnatural
projection rule may have to change its mind twice or more.

The same reasoning applies to the question about whether all ravens
are black. The bold generalizer that conjectures that all ravens are
black after observing samples of only black ravens succeeds with at
most one mind change: if indeed all ravens are black, the generalizer
never changes its mind at all. And if there is a nonblack raven, the
refutation occasions one mind change, but afterwards the question is
settled. 
Contrast this with the contrary method that asserts that there is a
nonblack raven after observing a sample of all black ones. If only
black ravens continue to be observed, the contrary method has to
eventually change its mind and assert that “all ravens are
black”, or else it fails to arrive at the correct
generalization. But then at that point, a nonblack raven may appear,
forcing a second mind change. Thus the goal of stable belief places
strong constraints on what a method may conjecture in the short run
for this problem: on observing only black ravens, the options are
“all ravens are black” or “no opinion yet”,
but not “there is a nonblack raven”. 
In the conservation law problem, the restrictive method described in
 Section 2.1
 is the only method that minimizes mind changes. Recall that the
restrictive method adopts a set of conservation laws that rule out as
many unobserved reactions as possible. It can be shown that if there
are n known elementary particles whose reactions are observed,
this method requires at most n mind changes. (The number of
elementary particles in the Standard Model is around n = 200).
For learning causal graphs, the following variant of the method
described in
 Section 2.2
 minimizes the number of mind changes.
This example illustrates that sometimes minimizing mind changes
requires withholding beliefs. Intuitively, this occurs when there are
two or more equally simple explanations of the data, and the inquirer
has to wait until further observations decide between these
possibilities. Jumping to one of the simple conclusions might lead to
an unnecessary mind change in case an alternative equally simple
explanation turns out to be correct. In such cases there is a
trade-off between the goals of achieving stable belief, on the one
hand, and quickly settling on a true belief on the other [Schulte
1999]. We discuss the connection between simplicity and stable belief
in the next section.
A strong intuition about inductive inference and scientific method is
that we should prefer simpler hypotheses over complex ones; see the
 entry on simplicity.
 Statisticians, computer scientists, and other researchers concerned
with learning from observations have made extensive use of a
preference for simplicity to solve practical inductive problems
[Domingos 1999]. From a foundational point of view, simplicity is
problematic for at least two reasons. 
The justification problem: Why adopt simple hypotheses? One
obvious answer is that the world is simple and therefore a complex
theory is false. However, the apriori claim that the world is simple
is highly controversial—see the
 entry on simplicity.
 From a learning-theoretic perspective, dismissing complex hypotheses
impairs the reliability of inductive methods. In Kelly’s
metaphor, a fixed bias is like a stopped watch: We may happen to use
the watch when it is pointing at the right time, but the watch is not
a reliable instrument for telling time [Kelly 2007a, 2010].
The description problem: Epistemologists have worried that
simplicity is not an objective feature of a hypothesis, but rather
“depends on the mode of presentation”, as Nozick puts it.
Goodman’s Riddle illustrates this point. If generalizations are
framed in blue-green terms, “all emeralds are green”
appears simpler than “all emeralds are first green and then
blue”. But in a grue-bleen language, “all emeralds are
grue” appears simpler than “all emeralds are first grue
and then bleen”.
Learning theorists have engaged in recent and ongoing efforts to apply
means-ends epistemology to develop a theory of the connection between
simplicity and induction that addresses these concerns [Kelly 2010,
Harmann and Kulkarni 2007, Luo and Schulte 2006, Steel 2009]. It turns
out that a fruitful perspective is to examine the relationship between
the structure of a hypothesis space and the mind change complexity of
the corresponding inductive problem. The fundamental idea is that,
while simplicity does not enjoy an a priori connection with truth,
choosing simple hypotheses can help an inquirer find the truth more
efficiently, in the sense of avoiding mind changes.
Kelly’s road metaphor illustrates the idea. Consider two routes
to the destination, one via a straight highway, the other via back
roads. Both routes eventually lead to the same point, but the back
roads entail more twists and turns [Kelly 2007a, 2010]. 
A formalization of this idea takes the form of an Ockham
Theorem: A theorem that shows (under appropriate restrictions)
that an inductive method finds the truth as efficiently as possible
for a given problem if and only if the method is the Ockham
method, that is, it selects the simplest hypothesis consistent
with the data. An Ockham theorem provides a justification for
Ockham’s inductive razor as a means towards epistemic aims. 
Whether an Ockham theorem is true depends on the description of the
Ockham method, that is, on the exact definition of simplicity for a
set of hypotheses. There is a body of mathematical results that
establish Ockham theorems using a language-invariant simplicity
measure, which we explain next.
Say that a hypothesis H from a background set of possible
hypotheses H is verifiable if there is an evidence
sequence such that H is the only hypothesis from H that
is consistent with the evidence sequence. For example, in the black
raven problem above, the hypothesis “there is a nonblack
raven” is verifiable since it is entailed by an observation of a
nonblack raven. The hypothesis “all ravens are black” is
not verifiable, since it is not entailed by any finite evidence
sequence. The following procedure assigns a simplicity rank to each
hypothesis H from a set of hypotheses H [Apsitis 1994,
Luo and Schulte 2006].
Hypotheses with higher simplicity rank are regarded as simpler than
those with lower ranks. Simplicity ranks are defined in terms of
logical entailment relations, hence are language-invariant. Simplicity
ranks as defined can be seen as degrees of falsifiability in
the following sense. Consider a hypothesis of simplicity rank 1. Such
a hypothesis is falsifiable because an evidence sequence that verifies
an alternative hypothesis of rank 0 falsifies it. Moreover, a
hypothesis of simplicity rank 1 is persistently falsifiable in the
sense that it remains falsifiable no matter what evidence sequence
consistent with it is observed. A hypothesis of simplicity rank
n+1 is persistently falsifiable by hypotheses of rank n.
Let us illustrate the definition in our running examples.
In the Riddle of Induction, the verifiable hypotheses are the grue
hypotheses with critical time t: any sequence of t green emeralds
followed by blue ones entails the corresponding grue(t)
generalization. Thus the grue hypotheses receive simplicity rank 0.
After the grue hypotheses are eliminated, the only remaining
hypothesis is “all emeralds are green”. Given that it is
the only possibility in the restricted hypothesis space, “all
emeralds are green” is entailed by any sequence of green
emeralds. Therefore “all emeralds are green” has
simplicity rank 1. After removing the all green hypothesis, no
hypotheses remain.
In the raven color problem, the verifiable hypothesis is “a
nonblack raven will be observed”, which receives simplicity rank
0. After removing the hypothesis that a nonblack raven will be
observed, the only remaining possibility is that only black ravens
will be observed, hence this hypothesis is verifiable in the
restricted hypothesis space and receives simplicity rank 1.
The simplicity rank of a causal graph is given by the number of direct
links not contained in the graph.
Therefore the fewer direct links are posited by the causal model, the
higher its simplicity rank.
The simplicity rank of a set of conservation laws is given by the
number of independent laws. (Independence in the sense of linear
algebra.) Therefore the more nonredundant laws are introduced by a
theory, the higher its simplicity rank. Each law rules out some
reactions, so maximizing the number of independent laws given the
observed reactions is equivalent to ruling out as many unobserved
reactions as possible.
The following theorem shows the connection between the mind-change
complexity of an inductive problem and the simplicity ranking as
defined.
Thus for an inductive problem to be solvable with at most n
mind changes, the maximum simplicity rank of any possible hypothesis
is n. In the Riddle of Induction, the maximum simplicity rank
is 1, and therefore this problem can be solved with at most 1 mind
change. The next result provides an Ockham theorem connecting
simplicity and mind change performance. 
Ockham Theorem. Let H be a set of empirical hypotheses
with optimal mind change bound n. Then an inductive method is mind
change optimal if and only if it satisfies the following
conditions.
This theorem says that a mind-change optimal method may withhold a
conjecture as a skeptic would, but if it does adopt a definite
hypothesis, the hypothesis must be the simplest one, in the sense of
having the maximum simplicity rank. Thus the mind change optimal
methods discussed in
 Section 4
 are all Ockham methods that adopt the simplest hypothesis consistent
with the data. The Ockham theorem shows a remarkable reversal from the
long-standing objection that long-run reliability imposes too few
constraints on short-run conjectures: If we add to long-run
convergence to the truth the goal of achieving stable belief, then in
fact there is a unique inductive method that achieves this goal
in a given empirical problem. Thus the methodological analysis
switches from offering no short-run prescriptions to offering a
complete prescription.
While these results establish a fruitful connection between simplicity
and mind-change optimality, a limitation of the approach is that it
requires that some hypotheses must be conclusively entailed by some
evidence sequence. This is typically not the case for statistical
models, where the probability of a hypothesis may become arbitrarily
small but usually not 0. For instance, consider a coin flip problem
and the hypothesis “the probability of heads is 90%”. If
we observe one million tails, the probability of the hypothesis is
very small indeed, but it is not 0, because any number of tails is
logically consistent with a high probability of heads. Kevin Kelly has
developed a notion of simplicity that is appropriate for statistical
models and proved Ockham theorems for this setting (see
 Other Internet Resources).
 
Kant distinguished between categorical imperatives that one ought to
follow regardless of one’s personal aim and circumstances, and
hypothetical imperatives that direct us to employ our means towards
our chosen end. One way to think of learning theory is as the study of
hypothetical imperatives for empirical inquiry. Many epistemologists
have proposed various categorical imperatives for inductive inquiry,
for example in the form of an “inductive logic” or norms
of “epistemic rationality”. In principle, there are three
possible relationships between hypothetical and categorical
imperatives for empirical inquiry.
1. The categorical imperative will lead an inquirer to obtain his
cognitive goals. In that case means-ends analysis vindicates
the categorical imperative. For example, when faced with a simple
universal generalization such as “all ravens are black”,
we saw above that following the Popperian recipe of adopting the
falsifiable generalization and sticking to it until a counterexample
appears leads to a reliable method.
2. The categorical imperative may prevent an inquirer from
achieving his aims. In that case the categorical imperative
restricts the scope of inquiry. For example, in the case of
the two alternative generalizations with exceptions, the principle of
maintaining a universal generalization until it is falsified leads to
an unreliable method (cf. [Kelly 1996, Ch. 9.4]).
3. Some methods meet both the categorical imperative and the
goals of inquiry, and others don’t. Then we may take the best of both
worlds and choose those methods that attain the goals of inquiry and
satisfy categorical imperatives. (See the further discussion in this
section.)
For a proposed norm of inquiry, we can apply means-ends analysis to
ask whether the norm helps or hinders the aims of inquiry. This was
the spirit of Putnam’s critique of Carnap’s confirmation functions
[Putnam 1963]: the thrust of his essay was that Carnap’s methods were
not as reliable in detecting general patterns as other methods would
be. More recently, learning theorists have investigated the power of
Bayesian conditioning (see the entry on
 Bayesian epistemology).
 John Earman has conjectured that if there is any reliable method for
a given problem, then there is a reliable method that proceeds by
Bayesian updating [Earman 1992, Ch.9, Sec.6]. Cory Juhl [1997]
provided a partial confirmation of Earman’s conjecture: He proved that
it holds when there are only two potential evidence items (e.g.,
“emerald is green” vs. “emerald is blue”). The
general case is still open.
Epistemic conservatism is a methodological norm that has been
prominent in philosophy at least since Quine’s notion of
“minimal mutilation” of our beliefs [1951]. One version of
epistemic conservatism, as we saw above, holds that inquiry should
seek stable belief. Another formulation, closer to Quine’s, is the
general precept that belief changes in light of new evidence should be
minimal. Fairly recent work in philosophical logic has proposed a
number of criteria for minimal belief change known as the AGM
axioms [Gärdenfors 1988]. Learning theorists have shown that
whenever there is a reliable method for investigating an empirical
question, there is one that proceeds via minimal changes (as defined
by the AGM postulates). The properties of reliable inquiry with
minimal belief changes are investigated in [Martin
and Osherson 1998, Kelly 1999, Baltag et al. 2015].
Much of computational learning theory focuses on inquirers with
bounded rationality, that is, agents with cognitive
limitations such as a finite memory or bounded computational
capacities. Many categorical norms that do not interfere with
empirical success for logically omniscient agents nonetheless limit
the scope of cognitively bounded agents. For example, consider the
norm of consistency: Believe that a hypothesis is false as soon as the
evidence is logically inconsistent with it. The consistency principle
is part of both Bayesian confirmation theory and AGM belief revision.
Kelly and Schulte [1995] show that consistency prevents even agents
with infinitely uncomputable cognitive powers from reliably assessing
certain hypotheses. The moral is that if a theory is sufficiently
complex, agents who are not logically omniscient may be unable to
determine immediately whether a given piece of evidence is consistent
with the theory, and need to collect more data to detect the
inconsistency. But the consistency principle—and a fortiori,
Bayesian updating and AGM belief revision— do not acknowledge
the usefulness of “wait and see more” as a scientific strategy.
More reflection on these and other philosophical issues in means-ends
epistemology can be found in sources such as [Glymour 1991], [Kelly
1996, Chs. 2,3], [Glymour and Kelly 1992], [Kelly et al.
1997], [Glymour 1994], [Bub 1994]. Of
particular interest in the philosophy of science may be
learning-theoretic models that accommodate historicist and relativist
conceptions of inquiry, chiefly by expanding the notion of an
inductive method so that methods may actively select paradigms for
inquiry; for more details on this topic, see [Kelly 2000, Kelly 1996,
Ch.13]. Booklength introductions to the mathematics of learning theory
are [Kelly 1996, Martin and Osherson 1998, Jain et al. 1999].
“Induction, Algorithmic Learning Theory and Philosophy” is
a recent collection of writings on learning theory [Friend et al.
2007]. Contributions include introductory papers (Harizanov, Schulte),
mathematical advances (Martin, Sharma, Stephan, Kalantari),
philosophical reflections on the strengths and implications of
learning theory (Glymour, Larvor, Friend), applications of the theory
to philosophical problems (Kelly), and a discussion of
learning-theoretic thinking in the history of philosophy (Goethe).