A foundational or noninferentially justified belief is one that does
not depend on any other beliefs for its justification. According to
foundationalism, any justified belief must either be foundational or
depend for its justification, ultimately, on foundational beliefs.
Historically, foundationalism was very widely, almost universally
accepted. Aristotle argued that “not all knowledge is
demonstrative” (i.e., not all knowledge is based on an argument
from other things known), and that some knowledge must be
“independent of demonstration” (Posterior
Analytics, I.3). Many of the medieval philosophers seemed in
agreement with Aristotle, holding that all knowledge must rest on
“first principles” or “self-evident truths” of
some sort. More recently, Descartes famously held that all knowledge
must rest on a secure foundation of indubitable truths (see the entry
on
 Descartes’s epistemology).
 Many other philosophers of the early modern period, including Locke,
Leibniz, Berkeley, Hume, and Reid, all seemed to accept
foundationalism as well, despite disagreeing about much else. When an
argument was implicitly or explicitly offered for the view, it was
most often some version of the now famous epistemic regress argument.
(See Aristotle’s Posterior Analytics, I.3, for an early
version of this argument.) Before presenting the argument we should
discuss a principle it depends on.
Suppose I claim to be justified in believing that Fred will die
shortly and offer as my evidence that Fred has an untreatable and
serious form of cancer. Concerned, you ask me how I discovered that
Fred has cancer, and I respond that it is just a hunch on my part. As
soon as you become convinced (perhaps after further questioning) that
I have no good reason to suppose that Fred has cancer, you will
immediately conclude that my suspicion about Fred’s condition
gives me no justification for believing that Fred will soon die.
Generalizing, one might suggest the following principle:
To be justified in believing P on the basis of E one
must be justified in believing E.
Now consider another example. Suppose I claim to be justified in
believing that Fred will die shortly and offer as my justification
that a certain line across his palm (his infamous
“lifeline”) is short. Rightly skeptical, you wonder this
time what reason I have for believing that palm lines have anything
whatsoever to do with length of life. As soon as you become satisfied
that I have no justification for supposing that there is any kind of
probabilistic connection between the character of this line and
Fred’s life, you will again reject my claim to have a justified
belief about Fred’s impending demise. That suggests that we
might expand our principle to include a second clause.
Principle of Inferential Justification (PIJ):
To be justified in believing P on the basis of E one
must be (1) justified in believing E, and (2) justified in
believing that E makes probable P.
One might note that in the palm reading example there actually is no
significant, objective probability between the length of Fred’s
so-called “life-line” and his life span. Perhaps this is
why my belief that he is going to die soon is unjustified, and not
that I don’t satisfy clause (2). Against this, the proponent of
PIJ might ask us to consider an amendment to the case. Suppose that,
surprisingly, it turns out that there is some objective,
significant probabilistic connection between “life-lines”
and the life spans of the individuals who have them, though again,
suppose that I do not have any justification for believing that there
is such a connection. This possibility seems coherent: the fact that
the relevant objective probabilistic relation obtains is not
sufficient for one to have justification for believing that it
obtains. But then, intuitively, I remain unjustified in believing that
Fred is going to die soon. Or consider the possibility that I believe
Fred will die because he has just ingested a lot of hemlock, and when
you ask me why I think hemlock would lead to death, I say that
I’m not sure, that it is just a hunch on my part that it is
going to kill him. Again, if I lack justification for believing that
hemlock is a deadly poison, or that it is likely to have this effect,
then intuitively, I lack justification for believing that Fred will
die soon. What more, then, is needed? A natural though controversial
suggestion is that one must satisfy something like clause
(2).[3]
With the first clause of PIJ, one can present a relatively
straightforward epistemic regress argument for foundationalism. That
clause basically says that one cannot acquire justification for a
belief by inferring it from an unjustified belief. It also seems that
one cannot acquire justification for a belief by way of a circular,
inferential justification—one cannot rely even in part on a
proposition as a premise in an inference in support of that very
proposition. We seem left with two options: allow that some beliefs
have justification without depending on other beliefs, or suppose that
all justification is inferential. If all justification is inferential,
then for someone S to be justified in believing some
proposition P, S must be in a position to legitimately
infer it from some other proposition E1. But E1 could
justify S in believing P only if S were justified
in believing E1, and if all justification were inferential,
S would have to infer it (or at least be able to infer it) from
some other proposition justifiably believed, E2, a proposition
which in turn would have to be inferred from some other proposition
justifiably believed, E3, and so on, ad infinitum. But
finite beings cannot complete an infinitely long chain of
reasoning—arguably, even an infinite being cannot complete an
infinitely long chain of reasoning; if it were completed, it would no
longer be infinite. And so, if all justification were inferential, no
one could be justified in believing anything at all to any extent
whatsoever.
This, however, is not yet an argument for foundationalism as much as
an argument against what we might call
“inferentialism”—the view that all justification is
inferential—for it leaves open the skeptical position that we
are not, and could not be, justified in believing anything at all,
whether by inference or otherwise. This most radical of all
skepticisms seems absurd (it entails that one couldn’t even be
justified in believing it). But, strictly speaking, none of this shows
that we have non-inferential justification for any of our beliefs, or
even that non-inferential justification is possible. At best, it shows
only that, if justification is possible, or if we
are or could be justified in believing anything at all, then
that justification must take a foundationalist structure. The
epistemic regress argument for foundationalism thus needs an
additional premise, though one that all but the most radical skeptics
would accept: that epistemic justification is in principle possible
for beings like us. 
If we accept the more controversial second clause of PIJ, the looming
regresses proliferate. Not only must S above be justified in
believing E1, S must also be justified in believing that
E1 makes likely P, a proposition he would have to infer
(if there are no foundations) from some other proposition F1,
which he would have to infer from F2, which he would have to
infer from F3, and so on ad infinitum. But S
would also need to be justified in believing that F1 does in
fact make likely that E1 makes likely P, a proposition
he would need to infer from some other proposition G1, which he
would need to infer from some other proposition G2, and so on.
And he would need to infer that G1 does indeed make likely that
F1 makes likely that E1 makes likely P, and so
on. Without noninferentially justified beliefs, it would seem that we
would need to complete an infinite number of infinitely long chains of
reasoning in order to be justified in believing anything!
PIJ is controversial, especially its second clause. It is important to
note that either clause of the principle can be used by itself to
generate the allegedly vicious regress for the philosopher who rejects
foundations. It is the two clauses combined that are supposed to
present the anti-foundationalist with an infinite number of vicious
regresses. A number of philosophers (among them foundationalists)
would argue that the second clause of PIJ confuses levels of epistemic
questions. It is far too strong to require someone to have a justified
belief in a probabilistic connection between available evidence and
the conclusion reached on the basis of that evidence. Such a
requirement is at best plausible for having second-level
justification, justification for the epistemic belief that one has an
inferentially justified belief. In responding to a challenge presented
to one’s having an inferentially justified belief in P on
the basis of E, one might find oneself searching for
justification to support the claim that E makes probable
P, but that is only because in the context of the challenge one
is trying to support or justify the claim that one has a justified
belief. A similar claim might be made with respect to clause (1) of
the principle, although it is more difficult to generate the
supporting intuition.
In any event, the careful foundationalist is certainly not
confused about level-distinctions. The foundationalist who
supports PIJ is claiming that a necessary condition for
someone’s having an inferentially justified belief in P
based on E is that the person have both a justified belief in
E and a justified belief in the proposition that E makes
P probable. It is simply not enough that E is true or
that E does in fact make probable P. Our original
examples used to support PIJ would seem to reinforce that conclusion.
Even if there happened to be some bizarre connection between palm
lines and length of life, for example, the person who has no reason to
believe that such a connection exists has no justification for
conclusions reached about length of life based on this anatomical
feature of people. Similarly, even though there is in fact a
connection between ingesting hemlock and dying, a person who had no
reason to believe that ingesting hemlock would bring about death has
no justification for believing that someone (who has just ingested
hemlock) is about to die. 
There are responses to the charge of vicious regress facing
anti-foundationalists. One is to deny the premise that circular
inferences are vicious or no good: granted, one can’t
effectively convince someone who is skeptical of the truth of P
that it is true by relying on an inference that ultimately comes back
to P, but perhaps circular inferences can provide justification
despite being dialectically ineffective (i.e., ineffective in
persuading others). Still, it seems odd to say that one could justify
P by use of an inference from P . After all, if
P is already justified, the subject does not need to use it to
justify P; and if it is not justified then, in line with the
first clause of PIJ, one could not use it to justify P. More
plausibly, the anti-foundationalist might reject the presupposition
that all justification is linear or one-directional, that it flows
from one belief to another, or is inherited by a belief from others.
According to coherentism about epistemic justification, beliefs are
justified “holistically” rather than in a linear,
piecemeal way. Each belief is justified by virtue of its coherence
with the rest of what one believes—in other words, by virtue of
belonging to a coherent set or web of beliefs. The coherentist avoids
the appearance of vicious circularity by insisting that one
needn’t first have justification for believing the
other propositions in one’s belief system. The coherence
theorist’s response to the argument for foundationalism is, of
course, only as plausible as the coherence theory of justification
(see
 coherentist theories of epistemic justification).
One other response is to embrace infinitism and hold that an infinite
regress is not necessarily vicious or problematic. Infinitism has a
few defenders (e.g., Peter Klein (1998) and more recently, Fantl
(2003) and Aikin (2011)). The infinitist accepts the need to be
able to supply non-circular justification for believing what
we do, but argues that given the complexity of the human mind and its
capacity to entertain and justifiably believe an infinite number of
propositions, there is nothing vicious about the relevant regresses we
face. There is no reason to suppose that we would be unable to justify
every proposition we believe by appeal to some other different
proposition which we justifiably believe. Infinitism is a view that
should be seriously considered, particularly once one realizes that
one not only can but arguably does have an infinite number of
justified beliefs (e.g., that 2 is greater than 1, that 3 is greater
that 1, and so on.).
Foundationalists are united in their conviction that there must be a
kind of justification that does not depend on the having of other
justified beliefs They nevertheless disagree radically among
themselves as to how to understand noninferential justification. In
the latter part of the 20th century, the rise of
externalist epistemologies has generated even more fundamentally
different versions of foundationalism. It will not be possible to
survey all of the strikingly different analyses or theories that have
been offered of noninferential justification. In what follows we will
examine a few of the more prominent versions of classical and
contemporary internalist and externalist foundationalism.
Descartes is often taken to be the paradigm of a classical
foundationalist. Determined to build knowledge on appropriate and
secure foundations, he seemed to want to identify foundational
knowledge with infallible belief. Implicitly or explicitly, others
seemed to follow his lead by restricting noninferentially justified
beliefs to beliefs that cannot be mistaken. Following Lehrer (1974:
81) we might formulate the following definition of infallible belief:
S’s belief that P at t is infallible if
S’s believing P at t
 entails[4]
 that P is true.
As Lehrer and others have pointed out, it is far from clear that this
concept of infallible belief has much relevance to an attempt to
understand the epistemic concept of noninferential justification. The
first and most striking problem involves necessary truths. Every
necessary truth is entailed by every proposition, and thus if I happen
to believe a necessary truth, P, that I believe P will
entail that P is true. Thus by the above definition my belief
that P will be infallible whenever P is a necessary
truth even if P is far too complicated for me to prove and I
believe it solely on a whim.
Furthermore, a foundation of knowledge and justified belief restricted
to infallible beliefs (as defined above) would arguably be far too
flimsy to support any sort of substantial epistemic edifice. There are
a few contingent propositions that are entailed by the fact that they
are believed. My belief that I exist entails that I exist, that I have
at least one belief, that someone has beliefs, that experience
(broadly construed) exists, etc. But once we get past these sorts of
“self-referential” propositions, propositions whose very
subject matter is encompassed by the fact that they are believed, it
is hard to come up with uncontroversial examples of contingent
infallible beliefs. Ayer (1956: 19) argues that as long as the belief
that P is one state of affairs and P’s being the
case is an entirely different state of affairs (not including as a
constituent the former) there can be no logical absurdity in the
supposition that the former could occur without the latter (see
BonJour 1985: 27, for a similar argument). 
It may be that classical foundationalists start off on the wrong foot
if they seek foundations in logical relations between the mere fact
that someone believes some proposition and the proposition’s
being true. Noninferential justification is, after all, a kind of
justification, and if the impossibility of error is essential to
noninferential justification, it may be more plausible to locate the
source of infallibility in a special kind of justification available
in support of a belief. Let us say that S’s belief is
infallibly justified at t when S’s ground or
justification for believing P at t entails the truth of
P—in other words, when S cannot have that ground
or justification for believing that P and while P is
false. The suggestion, then, is that a belief is noninferentially
justified only if it is infallibly justified in this sense.
We still need to qualify the entailment in some way to circumvent the
problem discussed earlier. Whenever I have any justification at all
for believing a proposition that turns out to be necessarily true,
that justification will entail the necessary truth. But we do not want
just any sort of justification to yield infallibly justified belief,
even if the object of that belief is a necessary truth. This problem
is notoriously difficult to solve, but intuitively the solution should
have something to do with the relation between the fact that would
make true the proposition entailed and the fact that would make true
the proposition that entails it. More specifically, we could say that
P entails* Q only if the fact that would make P
true is at least a constituent of the fact that would make Q
true. This suggestion can be considered at best only preliminary since
we will obviously need a more detailed account of facts and their
constituents. That I have grey hair entails that someone has grey
hair, but is my having grey hair a constituent of the fact that is
someone’s having grey hair? There is certainly a sense in which
it is something one can point to in answer to the question “What
makes it true that someone has grey hair?” One cannot
appropriately point to my having grey hair as something that makes it
true that two plus two equals four. With some such relation in place,
perhaps we can appropriately restrict the class of necessary truths we
can be infallibly justified in believing, and still allow contingent
truths to be infallibly justified: there is a sense in which one can
“point” to one’s own experience when asked,
“What makes it true that you are in pain?”
Consider again my belief that I’m in pain (when I am). If such a
belief is noninferentially justified, in what does the justification
for that belief consist? What is it that distinguishes this belief
from my belief about, say, whether it will rain next week? Some
foundationalists want to locate the noninferential justification in
the truth-maker for the proposition believed. What justifies me in
believing that I’m in pain when I am is the mere fact that
I’m in pain. But again, what is it about my being in pain as
opposed to its raining next week which makes it appropriate to claim
that my being in pain justifies me in believing that I’m in pain
while its raining next week doesn’t justify me in believing that
it will rain next week?
It is tempting to think that the foundationalist is better off
appealing to some special relation that I have to my pain
which makes it unnecessary to look to other beliefs in order to
justify my belief that I’m in pain. It is the fact that I have a
kind of access to my pain that no one else has that makes my
belief noninferentially justified while others must rely on inference
in order to discover that I am in this state. This takes us to another
classical version of foundationalism, the acquaintance theory. Perhaps
the best known proponent of an acquaintance theory is Bertrand Russell
(1910–11, 1913; for more on the acquaintance theory, see entry
on
 knowledge by acquaintance vs. description).
 But it takes little imagination to read the view into most of the
British empiricists. Roughly the view is that what justifies S
in believing that he is in pain is the fact that S is
acquainted with his pain in a way in which he is not acquainted with
any contingent facts about other people, the physical world, the
future, and so on. Russell (1910–11) characterizes acquaintance
as a relation of direct or immediate awareness, a relation in
which, as he and some others have put it, something is
“presented” or simply “given” to the subject
(Lewis 1929 and 1946; Moser 1989: 80ff.; Fales 1996). 
Some doubt that acquaintance with some fact is sufficient, on its own,
to justify belief in a corresponding proposition. To help see the
motivation for this, consider inferential beliefs again. A justified
belief that P cannot provide justification for believing every
other proposition it entails, for it might be that the entailment
relation is beyond one’s cognitive grasp, or the inference is
not something one is able to make. (As already discussed in
 section 1,
 this might lead us to accept the second clause of PIJ.) Similarly,
some acquaintance theorists argue that acquaintance with some fact
cannot provide justification for a belief in the absence of an
awareness of (or at least an ability to become aware of) the relevance
of the fact to the truth of the proposition believed. For example, I
may be acquainted with a very specific color or shape in my visual
field, and also believe (correctly) that I am experiencing
such-and-such a color or shape, but I might actually be really bad at
identifying such specific features and my belief might be little more
than a lucky guess. Suppose these theorists also accept a
correspondence conception of truth according to which, roughly, a
proposition is true just in case it corresponds to the facts or to the
way the world is; they might add that to be fully justified in
believing a proposition to be true one must be acquainted not only
with the fact that makes the proposition true but also with the
relation of correspondence that holds between the proposition and the
fact. For example, in order to be justified in believing that I am
experiencing fuchsia, I must be acquainted with (or at least be able
to become acquainted with) the “match”, “fit”,
or correspondence between my thought or belief that I am experiencing
fuchsia and the fact that I am experiencing
 fuchsia.[5]
When acquaintance with the fact that P is part of what
constitutes my noninferential justification for believing P,
there is a trivial sense in which my noninferential justification is
infallible. I can’t be directly acquainted with the fact that
P while I believe P falsely. However, most contemporary
foundationalists are fallibilists about foundational justification:
they hold that one could be foundationally justified in believing
propositions that are false. It seems plausible that I could be
justified in believing, for example, that I am experiencing a mild
pain when in fact I am experiencing an itch, or that I could be
justified in believing I am experiencing a specific shade of color
when I am in fact experiencing a slightly different shade. Even some
acquaintance theorists (e.g., Fumerton 1995) allow that one can be
noninferentially justified in believing P by virtue of being
directly acquainted with a fact very similar to, but ultimately
different from, the fact that P (the fact that makes P
true). Such an acquaintance theory could allow for the possibility of
noninferentially justified but false belief that P. Huemer
(2007), Poston (2010), and Tucker (2016) argue, however, that
classical foundationalists have difficulty accommodating fallible
foundational beliefs. For some replies, see Fumerton (2010 and 2016),
and Hasan (2013).
Not all classical foundationalists require acquaintance with the
correspondence (or some other similar relation) between some thought
or proposition and a distinct fact for one to have knowledge by
acquaintance. For example, according to McGrew (1995, 1998), for any
object of acquaintance or direct awareness it is possible to form a
belief in which a demonstrative concept refers directly to it. By
virtue of my acquaintance with a painful experience, I can believe
directly of it that it exists, or that the property demonstrated,
painfulness, is instantiated. We could express the belief roughly by
saying “I am experiencing this.” For this kind of
belief (unlike most other beliefs regarding contingent facts), to
genuinely understand or grasp the content of the belief is to
grasp its truth. Such demonstratively formed beliefs are guaranteed to
be true: 
For what this belief amounts to is that one has a certain experience;
and a necessary condition for the formation of the belief itself is
that one be having just that experience. (McGrew 1995: 90) 
Rather than attempt to accommodate fallible foundations, McGrew
follows early classical foundationalists in arguing that infallibility
or infallible justification (what he calls
“incorrigibility”) is in fact required for noninferential
justification. Some worry, however, that such foundations, even if
they are generally available, are too “thin”: that I am
“experiencing this”doesn’t seem to convey
anything about what sort of experience I am having, and it is
difficult to see how we could get from here to justified beliefs that
involve categorizing or conceptualizing our experiences in more
informative ways (see, e.g., Sosa 2003).
Once the received view, classical foundationalism has come under
considerable attack in the last few decades. Here we will consider the
most prominent objections that target the classical view of
foundational beliefs. (For some more objections and discussion, see
entry on
 knowledge by acquaintance vs. description.)
Laurence BonJour (1985: ch. 4) raised a highly influential objection
to foundationalism (an objection raised before he joined the ranks of
foundationalists). The objection presupposed a strong form of what we
might call access internalism. (We discuss the internalist/externalist
controversy in more detail in
 section 6
 below.) The access internalist argues, roughly, that a feature of a
belief or epistemic situation that makes a belief noninferentially
justified for us must be a feature to which we have actual or
potential access. Moreover, we must have access to the fact that the
feature in question is relevant to the truth or probability of what we
believe. So suppose some foundationalist offers an account of
noninferential justification according to which a belief B is
noninferentially justified only if it has some characteristic
X. BonJour then argues that the mere fact that the belief has
X could not justify the believer in holding B. The
believer would also need access to the fact that B has X
and that beliefs of this sort are likely to be true. But according to
the strong access requirement BonJour accepts, this requires actual or
potential knowledge or justified belief that B has
X and that beliefs of this sort are likely to be true. So
B would need other justified beliefs for its justification.
B’s status as a noninferentially justified belief is
destroyed. 
BonJour presented the objection on the way to developing a coherence
theory of empirical justification. But it ultimately became obvious
that the objection to foundationalism, if good, was too strong. Given
the structure of the argument it should become evident that the
coherence theory (and any other theory) would be equally vulnerable to
the argument. Just replace “X” with some
complicated description of beliefs cohering with each other. Coherence
of one’s beliefs would never be sufficient for justification,
for one would have to already be justified in believing that
one’s beliefs were coherent and that such coherence makes
one’s beliefs likely to be true. That might suggest to the
classical foundationalist that strong access internalism is a view to
be avoided.
Michael Bergmann (2006: chs. 1 and 2) argues, however, that if to
avoid regress we drop the strong access requirements that are so dear
to some internalists, we also lose the motivation for the view. As
Bergmann sees it, the attraction of internalism is its claim to be
able to construe justification in such a way that it gives a subject
with a justified belief a certain assurance from the subjective
perspective, an assurance that externalist views (discussed below)
don’t offer. According to Bergmann, even acquaintance with truth
bearers, truth makers and a correspondence holding between them
doesn’t carry with it assurance unless it is accompanied by a
justified belief that all these relations obtain. And this will take
us again on the road to regress. Bergmann’s challenge is serious
and the traditional acquaintance theorist who rejects the strong
access requirement will need to convince you that a believer
can’t stand in those relations of acquaintance without acquiring
assurance of the truth (see Hasan 2011 for a reply along these lines).
Alternatively, the internalist might attempt to convince you that the
regress that comes with accepting the strong access requirement is not
vicious after all (see Fales 2014).
BonJour was quite aware that some classical foundationalists would
attempt to avoid the regress problem raised in the previous section by
appeal to the idea that some things are simply “given” to
us, or that we directly “apprehend” or are
“acquainted with” them. Inspired by Sellars (1963),
BonJour (1978, 1985: ch. 4) presented the following objection to
classical foundationalism, often referred to as the “Sellarsian
Dilemma”. Does the awareness or acquaintance that is the alleged
source of noninferential justification involve the acceptance of a
proposition or thought, or at least the categorization of some sensory
item or the application of some concept to experience? If, on the one
hand, the acquaintance or awareness is propositional or conceptual in
this way, then while such acts or episodes of awareness seem capable,
in principle, of justifying other beliefs, they would surely need to
be justified themselves. The episode of awareness would involve
something like the acceptance of a proposition, or the categorization
of experience, and such an attitude or act clearly needs justification
if it is to justify anything else. But then, the allegedly
foundational belief is not foundational after all. If, on the other
hand, we can regard direct awareness as nonpropositional and
nonconceptual, then while these acts or states of awareness do not
require or even admit of justification they also don’t seem
capable on their own of providing a reason or justification for
propositional items like beliefs. Therefore, the classical
foundationalist’s acquaintance or direct awareness cannot serve
as a foundational source of knowledge or justified belief.
One proposed solution to the dilemma begins by emphasizing that
acquaintance with a fact is not by itself an epistemic relation. The
acquaintance theorist can argue that one has a noninferentially
justified belief that P only when one has the thought that
P and one is acquainted with both the fact that P, the
thought that P, and the relation of correspondence holding
between the thought that P and the fact that P. On such
a view no single act of acquaintance yields knowledge or justified
belief, but when everything that is constitutive of a thought or a
proposition’s being true is immediately before consciousness,
there is nothing more that one could want or need to justify a belief.
Acts of acquaintance, including acquaintance with propositions, do not
involve belief, judgment, or concept application, and so do not need
justification. However, if the objects of acquaintance, that with
which we are acquainted, can be propositional, then perhaps
acquaintance with the rights sorts of items (including propositional
ones) can make a difference to justification. This view thus grants
that a single act of acquaintance with a fact does not provide
justification, but rejects the dilemma’s assumption that there
are no acts of acquaintance that can, singly or in any combination,
make a difference to justification. (See Fumerton 1995 for a reply of
this sort. For a reply that is similar in many respects, see BonJour
2000 and 2003.)
A classical foundationalist who prefers McGrew’s (1995, 1998)
view, according to which noninferentially justified beliefs are formed
by demonstrative reference, would give a somewhat different response.
An act of acquaintance alone is not sufficient for justification; one
must also form a belief in such a way that the direct object of
acquaintance becomes a constituent of the belief itself, or part of
the belief’s very content. The relevance of the truth-maker to
the proposition believed is transparent and guaranteed by the manner
in which the belief is formed: acquaintance simply picks out some
feature of experience and takes it up into the content of a belief or
judgment that asserts that the feature exists or is instantiated. This
view thus grants that an act of acquaintance does not automatically
provide justification for a corresponding belief, but rejects the
dilemma’s assumption that there is no way to use the act of
acquaintance in forming one’s belief in a way that does make a
difference to justification. 
The direct acquaintance theorist does presuppose the intelligibility
of a world that has “structure” independent of any
structure imposed by the mind. Without facts that are independent of
the thoughts and judgments that represent them, one could not make
sense of a relation of acquaintance between a person and a fact, a
relation that grounds noninferential justification. More radical
contemporary rejections of foundationalism may well involve
dissatisfaction with the foundationalist’s implicit commitment
to a strong realistic correspondence conception of truth as involving
some relation to mind-independent facts. A discussion of problems with
the correspondence conception and alternatives would take us far
afield, however. (For more, see the entry on the
 correspondence theory of truth.)
Just as some reject the conception of truth underlying classical
foundationalist accounts of noninferential justification, so others
profess to be bewildered by some of the fundamental concepts employed
in defining noninferential justification. The acquaintance theorist
tends to have relatively little to say by way of analyzing what direct
acquaintance is. To be sure, one can try to give someone a feel for
what one is talking about by contrasting one’s awareness of pain
with the temporary distraction caused by an engrossing conversation.
It is tempting to suppose that for a short time the pain was still
present but the person with the pain was no longer aware of the fact
that the pain exists. This awareness, the acquaintance theorist will
argue, is obviously something over and above mere belief in the
existence of the pain, as one can believe that one is in a mental
state (say a subconscious mental state) without being aware of that
state. Like most theories foundationalism will, however, ultimately
rest its intelligibility on an appeal to a basic or primitive concept,
one that defies further analysis. Just as one needs to end epistemic
regresses with foundational justification, the foundationalist will
argue, so one needs to end conceptual regresses with concepts one
grasps without further definition.
Although opponents of classical foundationalism are not always eager
to admit it, we suspect that the primary dissatisfaction with
classical foundationalism lies with the difficulty the view has
avoiding radical skepticism. On infallible belief, infallible
justification, or direct acquaintance theories of foundational
justification, there is precious little included in the foundations of
knowledge. Most classical foundationalists reject the idea that one
can have noninferentially justified beliefs about the past, but the
present disappears into the past in the blink of an eye. How can one
even hope to get back the vast body of knowledge one
pre-philosophically supposes one has, if one’s epistemic base is
so impoverished? If the second clause of the Principle of Inferential
Justification were accepted, the problem is even more serious. One
might be able to convince oneself that one can know noninferentially
the principles of deductive reasoning, but deduction will not take one
usefully beyond the foundations of knowledge and justified belief. As
Mill (1906: 126) argued, there is a very real sense in which one
doesn’t advance one’s knowledge significantly employing a
form of reasoning that takes one only to conclusions that were
implicitly contained in the conjunction of one’s premises. To
advance beyond foundations we will inevitably need to employ
non-deductive reasoning and according to PIJ that will ultimately
require us to have noninferential knowledge of propositions describing
probability connections between evidence and conclusions that are not
logically implied by the evidence. It is not absurd on the face of it
to suppose that one can have noninferential a priori
knowledge of probabilistic connections, but it is perhaps an
understatement to suppose that the view is not popular (see Russell
1948 for an excellent discussion of this issue).
We noted above that at least many philosophers are convinced that
acceptance of classical foundationalism leads inevitably to an
unacceptably radical skepticism. Some contemporary epistemologists
seek a more modest foundationalism that will make it much easier to
respond to the skeptic’s arguments. Michael Huemer’s
(2001) phenomenal conservatism and Jim Pryor’s (2000) dogmatism
are both views that are far more “permissive” in allowing
a far more extensive range of beliefs to have foundational
justification. And their views are not unrelated to Chisholm’s
longstanding efforts (e.g., 1989) to locate noninferential
justification for believing various propositions about one’s
past and physical environment in the character of one’s
experiential states.
Huemer offers his view as an improvement on a cruder view once
defended by Chisholm (1980) that is often called “epistemic
conservatism” and sometimes, more aptly, “doxastic
conservatism”. The doxastic conservative takes the mere fact
that you find yourself believing some proposition P to be a
prima facie justification for believing the proposition in
question. This view does not imply that the mere fact that you believe
something renders the belief justified, for it may be that your belief
is prima facie justified but not ultima facie
justified: if you have good reasons to disbelieve P, or good
reasons to think that your belief that P is unreliable or
untrustworthy, then your belief is “defeated” and not
justified. In other words, according to doxastic conservatism, if
S believes that P then, in the absence of
defeaters, S has justification for believing that
P.
Many worry that the view is vulnerable to counterexamples, for it
seems committed to regarding beliefs that clearly have nothing going
for them as justified. One of the better counterexamples involves
cases in which one forms a belief in a proposition one has no evidence
for or against. Suppose that despite lacking any evidence for or
against the belief, S somehow comes to believe that there is an
even number of grains of sand on a particular beach (Foley 1983:
174–5), or that a particular coin that is tossed and lands out
of sight has landed “tails” up (Christensen 1994: 74).
Suppose also that S lacks any defeaters for the belief:
S has no evidence against the proposition, and is no longer
aware of having formed the belief without evidence or in an unreliable
way. Doxastic conservatism yields the counterintuitive result that
this belief is rational or justified. (For an attempt to respond to
this and related objections, see McCain 2008.) 
In any event, most foundationalists sympathetic to internalism prefer
a view according to which a non-belief state provides justification
for noninferential belief. According to phenomenal
conservatism, the justifying state is a “seeming” or
“appearance”: if it seems to S that
P, then, in the absence of defeaters, S thereby has some
degree of justification for believing that P (Huemer 2001,
2007, 2013; Cullison 2010; Tucker 2010; Skene 2013). These appearances
come in various sorts: sensory or perceptual, intellectual or
intuitive, mnemonic, and introspective. Many use the term
“dogmatism” to refer to the same view, or to the view
restricted to some domain, typically to perception: if it
perceptually seems to S that P, then,
in the absence of defeaters, S thereby has some justification
for believing that P. However, it is worth noting that Pryor
himself uses the term “dogmatism” to refer to the view
that “justification is sometimes both immediate and
underminable” (2013: 96), and so uses the term in a way that is
compatible with the rejection of phenomenal conservatism and dogmatism
as these terms are generally understood. While those who accept the
principle (whether in its general form or as restricted to perceptual
seemings) do thereby hold that some states provide immediate but
underminable or defeasible justification, it is possible to accept
that some other states provide immediate but underminable
justification and deny that perceptual seemings do. However, for
simplicity and to follow the more common usage, we use the two labels
“phenomenal conservatism” and “dogmatism” more
or less interchangeably in what follows.
The main motivation for phenomenal conservatism is straightforward. As
already noted, the view is far more “permissive” than
classical foundationalism in allowing for more extensive foundational
justification. For example, I believe that there is a cat on my lap,
that I had fish for dinner last night, that I feel thirsty, that I am
thinking about getting a glass of water, that pleasure is good, and
that 2 + 3 = 5. Prima facie, it is plausible to say that I
believe these propositions because they seem or appear to be
true—because it seems to me that there is a cat on my lap, that
I had fish last night, and so on. If I do indeed believe these things
on the basis of these seemings or appearances, and they constitute an
adequate source of justification, then, in the absence of defeaters, I
am justified in so believing. As Huemer has recently put it, 
if undefeated appearances are not a source of justified belief, then
how is one to avoid skepticism about the external world, the past,
values, abstract objects, and so on? Unless this challenge can be met,
we would be wise to place our trust in the appearances…. (2013:
349)
What exactly are these “seemings” or
“appearances”? The distinction between seemings and
beliefs is typically introduced with examples. Once we are familiar
with the Müller-Lyer illusion, we no longer believe that the
lines are of unequal length even though, in some sense, they still
appear to be unequal. The same holds for various apparent intuitions
and apparent memories that we become convinced are false. Huemer and
others will claim that seemings cannot be identified with dispositions
to believe, inclinations to believe, or impulses to believe, though
not everyone will agree about this. Huemer argues for this on three
main grounds (2007: 30–1). First, it is possible to have a
persisting seeming or appearance (e.g., that one line is longer than
another, or that a stick submerged in water is bent) but be so
convinced that it is a mere illusion that you have no disposition or
inclination to believe it. Second, it is possible to be inclined to
believe that P (because, e.g., you really want it to be true)
in the absence of a corresponding seeming that P. Third,
appearances can provide non-trivial explanations for what we believe
or what we are disposed to believe: I am inclined to believe that
there is a bus approaching because it perceptually seems that there
is; understanding the latter seeming as an inclination to believe
trivializes the explanation. 
Proponents of phenomenal conservatism and dogmatism thus generally
hold that seemings are distinct from beliefs and inclinations to
believe. But they also hold that seemings are nevertheless
“belief-like” in that they are propositional attitudes or
at least have propositional or representational contents. And they
hold that seemings have a distinctive phenomenal character: seemings
are “assertive” (Huemer 2013); they have a
“phenomenal force” to them such that “it
‘feels as if’ we can just tell that those propositions are
true…just by virtue of having them so represented” (Pryor
2000: 547, n. 23); “a seeming that P
‘recommends’ P as true or ‘assures’ the
subject of P’s truth” (Tucker 2013). One
interesting disagreement with important implications for epistemology
and the philosophy of mind concerns the relationship between seemings
and sensations or sensory experiences. According to some (e.g., Huemer
2001: ch. 4 and Tolhurst 1998) sensations are themselves a kind or
species of seeming—perceptual seemings—while others (e.g.,
Tucker 2010) take sensations to be distinct from perceptual seemings,
though often accompanied by them. (For more on the relationship
between sensations and seemings, see Tucker 2013: 7–8.)
Both Huemer and Pryor make clear that the intentional states that
provide justification do so without one’s having to be aware of
the fact that one is in such states. They might both allow, however,
that one can turn one’s attention inward to discover the fact
that one is in such states, and that one can, in principle, discover
(perhaps a priori) that the states in question do give one
the relevant epistemic justification. 
In this section, we focus on objections commonly raised against
phenomenal conservatism and dogmatism, though they arguably apply to
other internalist foundationalist views as well.
As one might expect, the main worry with both Huemer’s
phenomenal conservatism and Pryor’s dogmatism is the very air of
dogmatism that Pryor embraces in his label for the view. It strikes
many epistemologists that these views make getting justification for
one’s beliefs too easy. Perhaps sensations are representational
states, and perhaps there is the kind of representational state that
Huemer and other phenomenal conservatives call an appearing or a
seeming, but as why should we assume that they accurately represent
the world around us? Fear is a representational or propositional
state, but from the fact that I fear that there are ghosts, it hardly
seems to follow that I have a prima facie justification for
believing that there are ghosts. For that matter, belief is a
representational state and if we doubt that mere belief can provide
justification, why should we think another representational state,
like a seeming, provides justification? Huemer and Pryor will answer
that the representational states they offer as justifiers, perhaps
because of their peculiar “phenomenal force” or
“assertiveness”, are simply different in this respect.
While providing no guarantee that the world is as represented, they
simply carry with them justification that other representational
states are incapable of providing.
The claim that phenomenal conservatism and dogmatism make getting
justification too easy can be motivated by the “problem of easy
knowledge”. Since this problem has been raised against both
internalist and externalist alternatives to classical foundationalism,
we present this problem in
 section 8,
 after discussing externalism.
A recent objection to phenomenal conservatism and dogmatism involves
appeal to cases of “cognitive penetration”, cases in which
propositional attitudes (beliefs, fears, desires, etc.) that the
subject already has give rise to a related seeming. The objection
comes in two forms. The first is the “illegitimate boost”
objection. If I have prior justification to believe that P
(e.g., that my car is in my garage), and that belief causes me to have
a seeming that P (e.g., the belief and expectation make it
visually seem to me that my car is in my garage when I glance quickly
in the direction of my garage), dogmatism entails that the
belief’s justification goes up. The usual reply here is that the
relevant claim is not counterintuitive. I gain no additional
justification via the seeming if I have a good reason to suspect that
my having the seeming depends on my having the belief; but in the case
where I have no such reason, it is not clearly counterintuitive to say
that I am justified. Tucker (2013: 14) gives a useful analogy to
testimony: if Bill and Jill both testify to me, at different times,
that there is free pizza on the quad, then both testimonies give me
more reason to believe than either of them separately, and this still
holds if unbeknownst to me Jill tells me only because she
heard it from Bill. 
The second form of the “cognitive penetration” objection
is sometimes called the “tainted source” objection (Huemer
2013), and it arises from the fact that propositional attitudes other
than justified belief—fears and desires,
unjustified
beliefs, etc.—can influence how things seem to us. Suppose, for
example, that Jill fears that Jack is angry with her, and that upon
seeing Jack that fear partly causes it to seem to her that Jack is
angry with her (Siegel 2013). Many find it counterintuitive that Jill
could acquire justification for her belief in this way. The natural
suggestion is that the etiology of the belief matters to its epistemic
justification (see, e.g., Markie 2005, 2013; Goldman 2009; Lyons 2011;
Siegel 2013). Once again, there are some who do not share the
intuition that the subject’s justification is affected by the
belief’s causal history when that causal history is not
accessible to the subject (e.g., Huemer 2013). But at least some
phenomenal conservatives admit to feeling the pull of the intuition in
response to some of the cases, and attempt to account for it by saying
that there is something else that is epistemically bad in the
situation—e.g., while the belief is epistemically justified, the
agent is epistemically irresponsible, criticizable, or cognitively
defective in some way (e.g., Skene 2013), or lacks the sort of
justification that can turn true belief into knowledge (e.g., Tucker
2010). Some worry, however, that not all the problematic
“tainted source” cases can be handled in these ways (see
Markie 2013 and McGrath 2013.)
The epistemic landscape has changed dramatically in the last thirty or
forty years with the rise of externalist epistemologies. It is
notoriously difficult to define clearly the controversy between
internalists and externalists in epistemology. (For a detailed
discussion of alternative ways of defining the controversy, see
Fumerton 1995: chs. 3 and 4. See also the entry on
 internalist and externalist conceptions of epistemic justification.)
There are at least two common ways of understanding the controversy.
It is sometimes taken to be a controversy over whether or not one can
identify epistemic properties with “internal” states of
believers. According to the view we might call “internal state
internalism” (sometimes called “mentalism”),
justification is analyzed in terms of or depends essentially and only
on what is inside the mind. It follows on this view that no two
individuals can be internally or mentally alike and yet differ in the
justification they have for the same beliefs. In one sense, then, to
be an externalist (a non-mentalist) is to claim that one’s
justification involves or depends essentially on some facts or states
of affairs outside the mind. Others take the controversy to center
over the question of whether one requires certain sorts of access for
justification. The “access internalist” holds (roughly)
that being justified in believing that P requires that there be
something within or at least available to one’s perspective or
awareness which is relevant to the truth or justification of P.
(While some access internalists seem to have held that everything that
determines justification must be accessible, as we are about to see,
hardly any internalists hold such a strong position.) The
“access externalist” denies that justification requires
any such access. The access externalist need not deny that something
relevant to the truth of P is, at least sometimes,
accessible to the subject who has justification for P; but
paradigm externalists deny that access is always required for
justification. 
Some accept both forms of “internalism”, though perhaps
take one sense to be more fundamental than the other. For example, one
might take access internalism to be more fundamental, and hold that
one can have access only to mental states and internal facts about
them, and so accept mentalism as a consequence. Or one might take the
mentalist thesis to be more fundamental, and argue that one has some
minimal access to the relevant mental facts, and so accept some form
of access internalism as well. But it is possible to accept one form
of internalism and reject the other. Some mentalists might deny that
we have access to all the mental states or features that make a
difference to justification. And some access internalists might hold
that we can be directly aware of external objects, external states of
affairs, or external abstract entities or relations, and take this
direct awareness to make a difference to one’s justification;
they would deny that one’s justifiers must always be mental,
though they might accept the thesis that there can be no difference in
justification without a mental difference, assuming that
access even to a non-mental entity counts as a mental
relation or mental state.
Access internalisms vary depending on what sort of
“access” is required (true belief, justified belief,
acquaintance, etc.), and on what it is that must be accessed for
justification. There are thus stronger and weaker forms of access
internalism, and as a result the epistemic landscape is quite complex.
Certainly, paradigm externalists would reject the second clause of the
PIJ. According to virtually all externalists, one can arrive at a
justified belief in P by inferring it from E without
being aware of any sort of evidential connection between E and
P; the fact that there is a good evidential connection between
E and P can be external to the subject’s mind and
inaccessible to the subject. They would also reject a parallel
principle for noninferential justification: one can arrive at
a justified belief on the basis of some sensory or other
belief-independent input without being aware of any sort of evidential
connection between the input and the belief. Phenomenal conservatives
and dogmatists tend to agree with the paradigm externalist in
rejecting the requirement that one grasp a connection between
one’s epistemic grounds or evidence and the proposition believed
(though they deny that external conditions like reliability discussed
below are also needed for justification). However, externalists
typically allow that in principle one could have a foundational belief
in the absence of any appearance or seeming. Some epistemologists have
combined some modest internal requirements with externalist ones in
their accounts of epistemic justification (see, for example, Alston
1989 and Steup 2004).
While the externalist defends radically different views than those of
classical foundationalists, the structure of knowledge and
justification that emerges from such theories is still often a
foundationalist structure. We might first illustrate the point by
examining the view defended by the most prominent of the externalists,
Alvin Goldman’s
 reliabilism.[6]
 The fundamental idea behind reliabilism is strikingly simple.
Justified beliefs are reliably produced beliefs. Reliably produced
beliefs are beliefs that are the product of a reliable process, and a
reliable process is one that yields beliefs that are usually true (or
would usually be true if enough of them were
 generated).[7]
 Justified beliefs are worth having because justified beliefs are
probably true.
Goldman initially distinguished two importantly different sorts of
justified beliefs—those that result from belief-independent
processes and those that result from belief-dependent processes. The
former are processes that take as their “input” stimuli
other than beliefs; the latter are beliefs produced by processes that
take as their input at least some other beliefs. So, for example, it
is possible that we have evolved in such a way that when prompted with
certain sensory input we immediately and unreflectively reach
conclusions about external objects. And we may live in a world in
which beliefs about the external world produced in this way are
usually true (or would usually be true if enough of them were
generated). Such beliefs will be justified by virtue of being the
product of reliable belief-independent processes. This is basically
the “base clause” of the reliabilist’s analysis, a
principle of foundational or noninferential justification: if a belief
is the product of a reliable belief-independent process, then it is
justified. Reliabilists generally add to this a condition requiring,
in effect, that there be no defeaters available to the
subject—e.g., no good reason or justification to think that the
belief is false, unreliable or untrustworthy. (Specifying the needed
“no defeater” condition in the base clause without using
epistemic terms like ‘justification’ and
‘reason’ is a nontrivial matter. Goldman (1979) proposes
adding the condition that there be no reliable belief-withholding
process available to the subject.) These foundational beliefs can in
turn be taken as input for reliable belief-dependent processes in
order to generate still more justified beliefs. A belief-dependent
process is “conditionally” reliable if its output beliefs
are usually (or would usually) be true if the relevant input beliefs
are true. The output beliefs of conditionally reliable
belief-dependent processes are justified, provided that the input
beliefs are justified. This is basically the “recursive
clause” of the reliabilist’s analysis, a principle of
nonfoundational or inferential justification: if a belief is the
output of a conditionally reliable belief-dependent process, and the
input beliefs are justified, then (absent defeaters) the output belief
is justified.
The above is a crude sketch of Goldman’s early
reliabilism—he later modified it to deal with a number of
objections. But the sketch is enough to bring out the foundationalist
structure inherent in a reliabilist account. The reliabilist actually
accepts the first clause of PIJ, and avoids the epistemic regress by
embracing a kind of justified belief that does not owe its
justification to the having of other justified beliefs. Any undefeated
belief resulting from a reliable belief-independent process is
justified. No other beliefs are involved in the justification. So,
such beliefs are foundational.
It should be noted that Goldman (1979) himself denies that one could
give a strict definition of an evaluative or normative epistemic term
like ‘justification’ without using other, similar
evaluative or normative terms. Still, he is interested in providing
“substantive conditions”, conditions that specify, in
non-epistemic terms, when a belief is justified. In that sense,
Goldman remains interested in providing a general and substantive
theory of justification.
We have illustrated the way in which an externalist account of
justified belief can exemplify a foundationalist structure by
examining one of the most prominent versions of externalism,
reliabilism. But other versions of externalism are also implicitly or
explicitly committed to a version of foundationalism, or, at the very
least, give an account of justification that would enable one to
distinguish noninferential from inferential justification, direct from
indirect knowledge. Consider, for example, a crude version of the
so-called causal theory of knowledge according to which one knows a
proposition when one believes it and the belief is caused (in the
“right” way) by the very fact that makes true what is
believed. On such an account one can distinguish causal chains leading
to the belief in question that involve intermediate beliefs from those
that do not. Using this distinction, one can again define a
distinction between foundational and nonfoundational knowledge:
roughly, the causes of belief that do not include other beliefs are
the ones that would be foundational
 knowledge.[8]
Externalist versions of foundationalism are probably attractive to
many because they seem to allow at least the possibility of a much
expanded foundational base of justified beliefs. Unlike the Cartesian
view, the reliabilist’s distinction between noninferentially and
inferentially justified belief has nothing to do with whether the
beliefs are somehow infallible or infallibly justified. If nature has
been co-operative enough to insure the evolution of cognitive agents
who respond to their environmental stimuli with mostly true beliefs,
then there might be an enormous store of foundational knowledge upon
which we can draw in arriving at inferentially justified conclusions.
On most externalist accounts of noninferentially justified belief
there are literally no a priori constraints on what might end
up being noninferentially justified. Any proposition might have been
believed as the result of the operation of some conceivable sort of
reliable belief-forming process. Moreover, many epistemologists hold
that justifiers must in some way be truth-conducive or probable, and
the requirement of reliability (or some other such external condition)
makes the connection to the truth explicit. In contrast, non-classical
internalist foundationalist views like phenomenal conservatism
threaten to sever the connection between justification and truth or
probability, for it is possible that propositions that seem true are
mostly false. 
A full evaluation of externalist versions of foundationalism is far
beyond the scope of this entry (see the entry on
 internalist and externalist conceptions of epistemic justification).
 Here we must inevitably be selective, and focus on reliabilism for
illustration (see entry on
 reliabilist epistemology).
The very ease with which the externalist can potentially broaden the
foundational base of knowledge or justified belief is, ironically, one
of the primary concerns of those philosophers unhappy with externalist
epistemology. One of the best-known objections to externalism attempts
to show that the externalist’s conditions for foundational
belief are not sufficient for justification. Recall that for the
reliabilist a belief is justified if it is the product of a reliable
belief-independent process and there are no defeaters for the belief
available to the subject. Consider BonJour’s (1985: ch. 3) case
of Norman: We can imagine that Norman is a highly reliable
clairvoyant, that his clairvoyance produces a belief that the
President is in New York. Suppose also that he does not realize that
he is a clairvoyant, and that he has no reasons or evidence for or
against the belief or the reliability of whatever process produced it.
Intuitively, Norman’s belief is unjustified. Or consider
Lehrer’s (1990) case of Truetemp, who, without knowing it, has a
chip implanted in his head that produces very precise and highly
accurate beliefs about the ambient temperature. Truetemp often gets
temperature beliefs from the operation of the chip, but he has never
checked their correctness. Intuitively, Truetemp’s belief that
the temperature is now exactly 47 degrees is not justified.
Reliabilism seems to yield the wrong result, justifying too many
beliefs. 
There have been a number of attempts to respond to such cases. One
response is defended by Bergmann (2006: ch. 1 and 2) and was already
discussed above in connection with regress problems for access
internalism
 (section 3.1).
 Proponents of the objection often claim that what the cases suggest
is that there must be something the subject is aware of or has access
to that makes a difference to his perspective on the truth or
appropriateness of the belief. Bergmann argues that this requirement,
as tempting or intuitive as it may be, leads to serious regress
problems. (For some replies on behalf of internalism, see Rogers and Matheson 2011, Hasan 2011,
and Fales 2014.)
Many others attempt to accommodate these intuitions in some way.
Goldman (1986) argues that in the cases described it is natural to
think that subjects like Norman do have defeaters available, and this
explains our intuition to regard them as unjustified. However, many,
including some other reliabilists, think it is easy to further specify
or amend the cases to ensure that the defeaters are not available
(Lyons 2009: 123–4). Some accept a modest form of internalism,
introducing a relatively weak access requirement, e.g., that the
subject must have an experience or accessible mental state that is in
fact a reliable way to arrive at beliefs, though the subject need not
have access to the reliability of the experience (Alston 1989).
However, there seem to be many possible cases, including versions of
the cases of Norman and Truetemp, where these conditions are satisfied
but the intuition is the same; we might suppose for example that some
phenomenological sensation, like some unusual sort of itch, headache,
or olfactory sensation, is in fact a highly reliable indicator of the
truth of their beliefs regarding the whereabouts of the President or
the ambient temperature. This intuitively makes no difference when
they are unaware that it is reliable (see Lyons 2009: 125). 
A more recent attempt to respond to the Norman and Truetemp cases adds
a restriction for basic or noninferential beliefs: they must be
perceptual beliefs, beliefs produced by a “perceptual
system” (see Lyons 2009: ch. 4, for more on what counts as a
perceptual system). Lyons (2009: ch. 5) argues that the original
Norman case doesn’t specify whether the belief is a product of a
perceptual system, and in the Truetemp case it is the product of an
implanted chip and not a perceptual system; he also argues that once
we change the details to make the beliefs the result of perceptual
systems the intuitions seem to change. For example, imagine that
Norman* is like Norman except that he belongs to an alien species all
members of which have clairvoyant abilities, thanks to their evolved
perceptual organs and reliable processes of information transfer.
Lyons claims that, intuitively, someone like Norman*’s belief
that the President is in New York is justified, even if Norman* is not
aware of the existence or reliability of such processes.
Just as the cases of Norman and Truetemp are designed to show that
reliabilism makes getting foundational justification too easy, other,
similar cases seem to show that reliabilism make getting
nonfoundational justification too easy. Suppose, for example,
that while you are asleep a group of logician-neuroscientists implant
a device in your head that takes some of your highly reliable
foundational beliefs (say, introspective or perceptual beliefs) as
input and responds by selecting at random from a list of complex
theorems of logic and producing a belief in that theorem. Intuitively,
such beliefs are not justified despite their high degree of
reliability. (This example is taken from Lyons 2009: 126). One
intuitive diagnosis is that the relation between the output beliefs
and input beliefs is not evidential or inferential, or the process by
which the output beliefs are generated is not an evidential or
inferential one. The challenge for the reliabilist who wants to avoid
saying that such beliefs are justified, and avoid adding internalist
constraints, is to provide a better account of inferential processes.
To retain its externalism, the account must not have good inference
depend on awareness of or access to a logical or probabilistic
connection between propositions believed.
The objections discussed above challenge the sufficiency of the
externalist’s proposed conditions for justification. However,
even if the above counterexamples to sufficiency are met, we might
question whether the externalist’s conditions capture something
essential to or necessary for foundational justification, or for the
justification of other beliefs on the basis of foundational ones. Is
unconditional, belief-independent reliability, for example, really
necessary for justification at the foundational level? And is
conditional, belief-dependent reliability really necessary for the
justification of other beliefs? 
The “new evil demon problem” (Lehrer and Cohen 1983; Cohen
1984) challenges the claim that externalist conditions like
reliability really are necessary. Suppose that there is a subject that
is just like you in all internal respects, except that while your
beliefs are (let’s assume) reliably produced, your twin’s
or counterpart’s are not, for his or her beliefs are produced by
a powerful deceiving demon. Intuitively, your twin is no less
justified than you are. But given that your twin’s beliefs are
not reliable, the reliabilist must say that your twin’s beliefs
are not justified.
Various responses have been proposed. Some see no significant problem
with denying that the evil demon victim is unjustified. If this is not
a blanket rejection of the appeal to intuitions, it would help to
account for the intuitions in some way, and some responses that appeal
to an ambiguity in “justification” could be understood as
doing just that. For example, Goldman (1988) says that the
counterpart’s belief is “weakly justified” in the
sense that the belief, though formed by an unreliable process, is one
the subject is epistemically responsible or blameless for having, but
the belief is not “strongly justified” in the sense that
involves reliability. This does not seem to be adequate, for
intuitively, there is something positive about the deceived
counterpart’s situation that is not captured by saying that he
is epistemically responsible or blameless. A subject who reasons in
accordance with principles that are horribly defective in ways he
cannot detect may have tried his best and be as epistemically
blameless as an evil demon victim who attends carefully to his
experiences and follows good principles of reasoning, but
there’s something clearly positive about the latter’s
epistemic situation that goes beyond epistemic blamelessness (see Audi
1993: 28, and Pryor 2001: 117 for discussion of this point). Some
externalists like Bach (1985) and Engel (1992) posit a similar sort of ambiguity between doxastic and
personal justification, i.e., between a belief’s being
justified and a person’s being justified in holding the
belief, so that the demon victim is justified in believing as he does,
but his beliefs are not justified. Kvanvig and Menzel (1990) object that a person’s
being justified in believing something entails that their belief is
justified, so that the distinction cannot help with the problem, but
Littlejohn (2009) argues that there is no such entailment, that the
distinction between personal and doxastic justification is coherent
and well-motivated, and that it can help with the new evil demon
problem. 
Rather than simply deny the intuition, or explain it away by positing
an ambiguity, a number of reliabilists attempt to accommodate the
intuition by amending the conditions for justification. An earlier
response by Goldman (1986) attempts to defend “normal worlds
reliabilism” according to which a subject’s belief is
justified if the process producing the belief is reliable in normal
worlds, where a “normal world” is, roughly, a world where
our general beliefs about the actual world are true. It is no surprise
that Goldman himself was quick to give this up. One obvious worry with
this response is that it rules out even the possibility that
“abnormal” processes like clairvoyance be justified.
Another is that it rules out the possibility that our general beliefs
about the world are unjustified (Pollock and Cruz 1999: 115). More recently, some have
suggested more sophisticated amendments to the conditions or to the
sort of reliability required so as to accommodate the intuition while
avoiding the problems of normal worlds reliabilism (see
Comesaña 2002; Majors and Sawyer 2005; Henderson and Horgan
2006).
We end by presenting the “problem of easy knowledge” that
has been raised against both internalist and externalist alternatives
to classical foundationalism (see Cohen 2002 for an initial
formulation of the problem). The problem as presented there has two
main forms. The first involves cases of deductive closure. Suppose, to
use an example from Cohen (2002), that I am looking to acquire a red
table for my room and do not want to end up with a table that only
looks red—e.g., a white table illuminated by red lights. Suppose
that upon looking at a particular table I find that it seems red to
me. If phenomenal conservatism is true, then I can arrive at
knowledge, or at least justified belief, by the following simple
inference:
The same goes for the following inference: 
The problem is that it seems implausible that I could come to be
justified in believing—let alone know—that the table is
not a white table illuminated by red lights merely on the
basis of its looking or seeming to be red. Of course, I may and often
do have independent reasons to trust that the colors of tables are
normally the way they look (colored lights are rare, I don’t
notice any such lights, etc.), and the above argument makes no mention
of that. But given phenomenal conservatism or dogmatism, a perceptual
seeming alone would confer justification for beliefs of the form (1)
in the absence of defeaters, whether or not one had good independent
reasons to take the seeming to be trustworthy. Similarly, given
reliabilism, a reliable perceptual process alone would confer
justification for beliefs of form (1) in the absence of defeaters. The
same applies to the second inference: it is implausible that I could
come to be justified in believing that I am not a handless
brain-in-a-vat that merely seems to have hands on the basis of a
perception or perceptual seeming that I have hands. 
It is difficult to see how these views can deny that (3) could be
justified in this way. Let’s make this explicit: suppose that in
each case (1) is indeed noninferentially justified for me on the basis
of the corresponding seeming or reliable perceptual process, that I
know the obvious entailment (2) a priori, and that on the basis of
this I infer (3). Suppose also that we accept the following
intuitively plausible principle of closure: if S is justified
in believing that P, knows that P entails that Q,
and infers on the basis of this that Q, then S is
justified in believing that Q. (This is a principle that
phenomenal conservatives and dogmatists themselves tend to accept. A
few externalists, such as Dretske (1970) and Nozick (1981) deny the
closure principle at work in the objection, but many externalists are
reluctant to deny that something like it holds, for they do not want
to deny that we could be justified in inferring (3) from (1).) It then
follows that I am justified in believing (3). The objector who uses
this against phenomenal conservatism or reliabilism takes the lesson
here to be that mere seemings or reliable processes (respectively)
cannot be a source of foundational or noninferential justification.
Justification can’t be that easy. 
The problem of easy knowledge (or easy justification) comes in a
second form as well: phenomenal conservatism and reliabilism allow one
to acquire justification in the reliability of one’s perceptual
appearances in a way that appears to be illegitimate: by relying on
those very appearances themselves. If phenomenal conservatism is true,
then I can arrive at knowledge or at least justified belief in the
reliability of my apparent perceptions in the following way:
Therefore (probably), my perceptual seemings are true. 
Given some plausible principle of justification by induction, I can
infer from the premises that my perceptual seemings are (probably)
reliable. The problem is that it is intuitively implausible that I
could come to acquire justification for the reliability of my seemings
by relying on the very seemings whose reliability one is attempting to
justify. But it’s not clear how the phenomenal conservative can
deny that this is a legitimate way to acquire justification in the
reliability of one’s seemings. 
Externalists also seem vulnerable to the second form of the problem of
easy knowledge. They must apparently allow that a circular
track-record argument could provide justification for belief in the
reliability or trustworthiness of fundamental sources of belief. For
example, the reliabilist can rely on perception to justify the
reliability of perception, memory to justify the reliability of
memory. And it seems implausible that one could acquire justification
for the reliability of such sources in this way (see Vogel 2008b for
an argument against reliabilism along these lines).
One possible reply is to grant that such arguments are
question-begging and epistemically useless if presented to someone who
doubts the reliability or trustworthiness of such seemings or apparent
perceptions, but hold that it can still provide a subject who lacks
that doubt with justification. While the argument is question-begging
against the skeptic, that is no reason to deny that one could, in the
absence of defeaters, acquire knowledge or justification on the basis
of such arguments (Pryor 2004; Markie 2005; Bergmann 2008). However,
some object that such arguments remain intuitively
problematic—the arguments seem not to justify at all, whether or
not they should persuade skeptics. (Cohen 2005; see also Vogel 2008a:
539–42, for further examples of cases for which dogmatism allows
subjects to have justification that they really lack). 
One might begin to wonder whether the problem of easy knowledge is a
problem for all foundationalist views if it is a problem for
any. Indeed, some have argued that classical foundationalists are in
no better a position than phenomenal conservatives and externalists
with respect to the problem, for they too will have to allow that one
could rely on acquaintance with facts to justify the existence and
trustworthiness of acquaintance. First, consider a parallel case of
deductive closure:
And a parallel case of circularity:
Therefore (probably), acquaintance is a source of true beliefs.
Classical foundationalists might respond that the problem is not one
of permitting some source to justify propositions about itself or its
epistemic credentials. The problem is that some alleged sources make
the justification implausibly easy. Classical foundationalism does
not; the intuition that the knowledge or justification acquired is
implausibly easy or unsatisfying in the argument forms just presented
is absent or at least much weaker (see Fumerton 2006). The problem
that classical foundationalism faces is that it makes justification
too hard, not too easy.