Ramsey was born in Cambridge on 22 February 1903. His father was
a mathematician and Fellow of Magdalene College whilst his mother
campaigned for women’s suffrage and other social causes. In 1920
Ramsey matriculated as an undergraduate student at Trinity College,
Cambridge, from which he graduated in 1923 with a First in
Mathematics.  The year before he matriculated, whilst still a 17 year
old school boy, Ramsey became friends, through his father’s
connections, with C.K. Ogden and I.A. Richards, also a Fellow of
Magdalene. Ramsey had already read Russell’s Introduction to
Mathematical Philosophy and G.E. Moore’s Ethics
but because he had become interested in learning German, Ogden gave
Ramsey Mach’s Die Analyse der Empfindungen
[Analysis of Sensations] to read. Ramsey, still in his final
school year, went on to read Louis Couturat, Henri Poincaré
and Hermann Weyl. By 1921, Ogden had become so impressed by
Ramsey’s philosophical acumen and facility with German that he
commissioned Ramsey, as a second year undergraduate, to translate
Wittgenstein’s Tractatus into English – in the
face of Moore’s scepticism that the Tractatus could be
translated into English at all. Back in 1920, Ramsey also discussed
with Ogden and Richards their theory of thought and language, later
famously elaborated in The Meaning of Meaning (1923), which
Ramsey reviewed – unfavourably – in Mind
(1924). Ramsey nonetheless praised “the excellent appendix on
C.S.  Peirce” and this lead him to study the volume of
Peirce’s papers, Chance, Love and Logic (1923), which
Ogden had just published in his book series for Kegan Paul. During
Ramsey’s first year as an undergraduate, Ogden also arranged for
him to meet Russell in London and encouraged Ramsey to attend
Moore’s lectures with him and Richards; Ramsey duly went along
in his second term to Moore’s lectures on “Incomplete
Symbols and Logical Constructions”. Moore was later to recall
“In the early twenties F.P. Ramsey attended at least one course
of my lectures.  I had soon come to feel of him, as of Wittgenstein,
that he was much cleverer than I was” (1944, 35). 
In his first year as an undergraduate, Ramsey had met and befriended
R.B. Braithwaite, then a mathematics undergraduate a year ahead of
him. Braithwaite introduced Ramsey to J.M. Keynes, the
economist. Ramsey was soon after elected to the Cambridge Apostles,
the secret debating society of which Braithwaite and Keynes were both
active members. Ramsey attended Keynes’ economics lectures and
they discussed Keynes’ Treatise on Probability (1921).
Ramsey’s criticisms appeared the following year in a review of
Keynes’ book for Ogden’s journal, The Cambridge
Magazine (1922); Keynes had maintained that probability is an
objective relation between propositions but Ramsey denied we perceive
such relations nor grasp them intellectually. After his finals, Ramsey
turned to writing a critical notice for Mind of Wittgenstein’s
Tractatus (1923). Ogden had written to Wittgenstein
suggesting that he meet with Ramsey and Ramsey duly went to Puchberg,
near Vienna, in September 1923 to spend a fortnight with Wittgenstein
working through the Tractatus with him. In 1924 Ramsey spent
6 months in Vienna being psychoanalysed, during which time he met
Moritz Schlick and Hans Hahn, both members of the Vienna Circle. He
returned to Cambridge in October 1924 where he had been appointed as a
Fellow In Mathematics at King’s College, where Keynes, also a
Fellow, had pushed for Ramsey’s appointment. At a meeting of the
Moral Sciences Club that December, Ramsey met his future wife, Lettice
Baker; they married in 1925 and had two daughters together.
Once back in Cambridge, Ramsey settled down to teach, including a
course on the foundations of mathematics, and to write the papers in
philosophy, economics and mathematics for which he was to become
famous. He started by completing “The Foundations of
Mathematics”, which he had begun in Vienna, and
“Universals”, both published in 1925. The former was
intended to rescue logicism by remedying the defects Ramsey found in
Principia Mathematica, whilst the latter was a development of
the programme of logical analysis advertised in the
Tractatus; they won Ramsey immediate éclat. But it was
the following year in which Ramsey really struck out on his own,
writing “Truth and Probability” (1926a) although he did
not publish it, which started from Ramsey’s criticisms of Keynes
and provides a subjective theory of probability and a pragmatic view
of induction, and “Facts and Propositions” (1927a),
initially inspired by his reading of Peirce and Russell’s
Analysis of Mind (1921), in which Ramsey’s philosophy
of mind and language began to have, as he put it, a distinctive
‘pragmatist tendency’ (1927a, 170). It was also the year
that Ramsey began dedicated work on economics which resulted in the
first of his seminal papers on economics, ‘A contribution to the
theory of taxation’ (1927b), later followed by his
‘Mathematical Theory of Saving’ (1928a). Ramsey also wrote
his influential paper, ‘On a Problem of Formal Logic’
(1930), which contains the mathematical results now called
‘Ramsey’s Theorems’. In 1927 Ramsey also began work
on a book manuscript, On Truth ([OT]). During the last two
years of his life, Ramsey wrote a number of philosophical notes and
papers, including ‘Theories’ and ‘General
Propositions and Causality’, both completed in 1929. They were
published by Braithwaite (in [FM]), along with ‘Truth and
Probability’, in a posthumous volume of Ramsey’s papers,
The Foundations of Mathematics and other Logical Essays,
whilst the manuscript on truth did not appear until 1991. 
After meeting and falling out with Ramsey when visiting
Keynes in 1925, Wittgenstein returned to settle in Cambridge in 1929.
He was admitted as a Ph.D. student, submitting the Tractatus
as his thesis, Ramsey was his supervisor; they met regularly during
what was to be the last year of Ramsey’s life. Wittgenstein was
later to recall the significance of these conversations for his own
intellectual development in the preface to Philosophical
Investigations. Ramsey fell ill at the end of November 1929 and
was diagnosed with jaundice. He had been corresponding with Schlick and
had promised to write a review of Rudolf Carnap’s
Aufbau. He died on 19 January 1930 in Guy’s Hospital
in London. His death was unexpected and its causes remain uncertain. In
an obituary for the Cambridge Review, Braithwaite wrote,
‘His intellectual subtlety was combined with the most delightful
simplicity and candour. Intolerant of fools, he inspired others by his
mental fertility and integrity. To one at least of his friends his
death is as if a lighthouse were extinguished and we were left to grope
our way in the dark’ (1930, 216). 
 Mellor’s BBC radio programme on Ramsey, produced in 1978
(see Other Internet Resources below), features the first hand
testimony of Braithwaite, Lettice Ramsey, and I.A. Richards. See also
Sahlin 1990, 221–9, Mellor 1995 and Taylor 2006. Ramsey’s
sister, Margaret Paul, provides a more personal account of
Ramsey’s life, drawing upon letters and diaries, in her memoir
(2012). Misak (2020) provides an in-depth intellectual biography of Ramsey.
Ramsey, as we saw in the previous section, was still an undergraduate
when, aged 19, he completed a translation of
the Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (Wittgenstein
1922). Alas, C. K. Ogden got all the credit and it has been known
since as the ‘Ogden translation’. Ramsey’s
translation is usually considered to be superseded by the
Pears-McGuinness translation (1961), but one should not lose sight of
the fact that it was carefully scrutinized by Wittgenstein, who gave
it his seal of approval. Ramsey then wrote a searching review of
the Tractatus (1923) in which he raised many serious
objections (Methven 2015, chapter 4) (Sullivan 2005). One such
objections is the ‘colour-exclusion problem’ (1923, 473),
against Wittgenstein’s claim in 6.3751 that it is
“logically impossible” that a point in the visual field be
both red and blue. This claim was linked to the requirement that
elementary propositions be logically independent (otherwise, the
analysis of the proposition would not be completed), a pillar of
the Tractatus. Wittgenstein’s recognition in 1929 that
he could not sustain his claim (Wittgenstein 1929), probably under
pressure at that stage from discussions with Ramsey, was to provoke
the downfall of the Tractatus.
In 1923 and 1924, Ramsey also visited Wittgenstein, who was teaching
at Puchberg am Schneeberg (Lower Austria). During these visits,
Wittgenstein made changes to the text and translation, that were
incorporated in later editions. (Details are given in (Lewy 1967).) At
first under the spell, Ramsey became disillusioned. In 1923, he wrote
home that he would “try and pump him for ideas for
[Principia Mathematica’s] further development which I
shall attempt” (Wittgenstein [LO], 78), but in 1924 he remarked
laconically: “He is no good for my work” (Sahlin 1997,
64).
Ramsey’s first major self-assigned task in the foundations of
mathematics was indeed to revise Whitehead and
Russell’s Principia Mathematica, partly in the hope
that his version would meet some of Wittgenstein’s criticisms of
its axioms and treatment of identity, but also because of some further
defects he diagnosed in its treatment of the paradoxes and in its
inability properly to account for the ‘extensionality’ of
mathematics (1925a, [PP] 177–178). For further details about the
content of the following paragraph, see the entry for Principia
Mathematica.
Ramsey drew a distinction between ‘logical’ and
‘semantical’ paradoxes, with Russell’s paradox
belonging to the former category and Richard’s or
Grelling’s paradoxes to the latter (1925a, [PP]
183–184). According to him, the heart of the problem was in the
way the theory of types was devised to deal with the paradoxes, as
understood in terms of the ‘vicious-circle principle’
(‘whatever involves all of a collection must not be one of the
collection’):
These contradictions it was proposed to remove by what is called the
Theory of Types, which consists really of two distinct parts directed
respectively against two groups of contradictions. These two parts
were unified by being both deduced in a rather sloppy way from the
‘vicious-circle principle’, but it seems to me essential
to consider them separately. (1925a, [PP] 187)
Ramsey rightly saw that a ‘simple’ theory of types
(sometimes called ‘ramseyfied’) that distinguishes types
of propositional functions by their arguments would deal with
‘logical’ paradoxes, but in order to deal with the other
paradoxes, Whitehead and Russell had introduced a
‘branched’ or ‘ramified’ theory of types with
a hierarchy of levels of functions (and of propositions), that led to
further difficulties, one of which being the inability even to
formulate theorems of classical mathematics such as the least upper
bound theorem, unless one introduced the ‘Axiom of
Reducibility’ according to which for any function at any level
there exists an equivalent one at the first level (1925a, [PP]
187–192). (Another worry, that one could not formulate
mathematical induction in its full generality turns out to have been
unfounded.)  Wittgenstein had pointed out in the Tractatus
that it is not a tautology (6.1233), so that it could hardly serve as
an axiom. To circumvent this, Ramsey introduced his own notion of
‘predicative function’ and showed that if one gets rid of
the ‘vicious-circle principle’, the levels can be
collapsed and the need for the ‘Axiom of Reducibility’ is
obviated (1925a, [PP] 195–205). Thus, Ramsey had in effect shown
how to deal with the paradoxes and the ‘extensionality’ of
mathematics without the need for a ‘ramified’ theory of
types. (In this he was preceded by Leon Chwistek (Chwistek 1921).)
This, Ramsey concluded, would secure mathematics against the
“Bolshevik menace” of the intuitionist critique of Brouwer
and Weyl (1925a, [PP] 219).
Ramsey also took seriously Wittgenstein’s critique (5.53–5.533)
of the definition of identity in Principia Mathematica
(∗13.01) in terms of indiscernibility (with F a predicative
function):
Wittgenstein argued that to say that two things are the same,
x = y, is nonsense, while
x = x is empty and showed how to get rid of
identity with an ‘exclusive’ reading of the variables
(Hintikka 1956), (Wehmeier 2008), (Wehmeier 2012), with the exception
of some propositions such as the axiom of infinity that cannot be so
read, and are thus to be rejected (5.535). To save the latter (and the
axiom of choice, which was then called the ‘Multiplicative
Axiom’), Ramsey introduced ‘functions in extension’
(including arbitrary pairings of arguments with values, and indicated
here with the subscript \(e\)), replacing the above with:
He then argued that this is a tautology if \(x = y\), and a
contradiction if \(x \neq y\). This is the subject on which he
eventually sparred with Wittgenstein, when the latter wrote a letter
in 1927 (reproduced in [NP] 340–341). Wittgenstein argued that
either way this formula is nonsensical and cannot be substituted for
x = y. Two drafts of a rejoinder by Ramsey
are preserved ([NP] 342–346), but the matter was dropped
subsequently, although Wittgenstein came back to it repeatedly after
Ramsey’s death, for example in (Wittgenstein [BT], § 113).
(For further discussion see Marion 1995; Sullivan 1995; and Methven
2015, chapter 7.)
It is said that, when Wittgenstein returned to Cambridge in January
1929, it was primarily to discuss philosophy with Ramsey, who he
obviously deemed a worthy interlocutor, and they reportedly met on a
regular basis, until Ramsey’s death the following January. They
both left behind manuscripts which show that Ramsey had shifted his
views on a number of topics, while Wittgenstein’s thought was
also set in motion towards his later views. In the preface to
the Philosophical Investigations, he wrote:
For since I began to occupy myself with philosophy again, sixteen
years ago, I could not but recognize grave mistakes in what I set out
in that first book. I was helped to realize these mistakes – to
a degree which I myself am hardly able to estimate – by the
criticism which my ideas encountered from Frank Ramsey, with whom I
discussed them in innumerable conversations during the last two years
of his life.[1]
(Wittgenstein 1953 [PI, 4])
Although one can at least point out with McGuinness that
“Wittgenstein clearly learnt a lot from Ramsey”
(McGuinness 2006, 25), if one asks who made the larger contribution in
these discussions, there is considerable disagreement, with claims
ranging from the idea that literally none of the later
Wittgenstein’s key ideas can be traced to Ramsey (Kienzler 1997,
75–76), to claims of various degrees of a more substantial
influence by Ramsey on Wittgenstein (Glock 2005, Majer 1991; Marion
1998, chapters 4–5; Marion 2012; Methven 2015, chapter 9; Misak
2016a, chapter 7; Misak 2016b; Misak 2018; Sahlin 1990; Sahlin
1997). It is perhaps better simply to talk of a confluence of ideas,
and the following, being restricted to Ramsey, will show that he
reasoned along lines largely independent from Wittgenstein, and began
shifting his views before 1929.
This confluence is particularly visible in texts relating to the
foundations of mathematics, where Ramsey became disillusioned
with Principia Mathematica, perhaps under the influence of
Wittgenstein, whose criticisms of the axioms of infinity and
reducibility, he had already taken seriously in ‘The Foundations
of Mathematics’, as was just pointed out. Ramsey initially
adopted Wittgenstein’s view of the quantifiers in the
Tractatus as ‘logical products’ and
‘sums’, with universality being expressed, for predicate
F, as an infinite conjunction
And existence as an infinite disjunction
(1926c, [PP] 240; 1927a, [PP] 48–49). In absence of a rule of
generalization, one has at most that a universality implies any of its
instances:
and the product becomes infinite, and without a rule of existential
elimination all one has is that an instance implies existence:
The disjunction being infinite, it cannot sum up all the disjuncts.
Wittgenstein had hinted in the Tractatus at a logic-free
equational calculus for arithmetic (6.02–6.031 & 6.241), but
Ramsey thought this to be a “ridiculously narrow view of
mathematics” (1925a, [PP] 180), and wanted the convenience
afforded by quantifiers. He assessed two alternatives to Wittgenstein,
Thoralf Skolem’s proposal simply to do away with the
quantifiers, in a paper where he introduced primitive recursive
arithmetic (Skolem 1923 [1967]) and Hermann Weyl’s suggestion in
‘Über die neue Grundlagenkrise der Mathematik’ (Weyl
1921 [1998]) – the very paper in which he joined Brouwer in his
critique of classical mathematics, – that universality should be
understood in analogy with bank drafts, as ‘instructions for
judgements’, while existence would be a ‘judgment
abstract’, classical existence being compared to a treasure map
that does not tell us where to find the treasure (Weyl 1921 [1998],
97–98). These explanations happen to justify (1.1) and (1.2)
above. Weyl claimed further that (1.1) and (1.2) cannot be negated
since one could not, say, survey infinitely many disjuncts, so the law
of excluded middle would not hold. 
In two of his last papers, ‘Principles of Finitist
Mathematics’ and ‘The Formal Structure of Intuitionist
Mathematics’ ([NP] 197–200), Ramsey sided with Weyl. It
appears that he wanted to obtain arithmetic by adding quantifiers,
with Weyl’s rules, to Skolem’s primitive recursive
arithmetic. But he did not provide a rule of existential elimination
and rules that he proposed in these papers appear to restrict formulas
with quantifiers to those that can be converted to prenex normal form
(with quantifiers prefixed on the left, followed with a
quantifier-free matrix). In intuitionism, the law of the excluded
middle applies to atomic formulas and, if quantifiers are in prenex
normal form, the theory remains constructive. This is what Ramsey
captured, but the result is not the full intuitionistic arithmetic, as
not all intuitionistic formulas are equivalent to prenex formulas. In
‘Principles of Finitist Mathematics’, he stated that his
rules provide “all the logical modes allowed by the
finitists” ([NP] 201), but if he meant
‘intuitionism’, the claim was inaccurate.
Ramsey already discussed Weyl earlier, for example in
‘Mathematical Logic’ (1926c, [PP] 230 & 233), without
approving him, so one needs to explain why he changed his mind in
1928–29. This may be the result of changes in his underlying
conception of theories from his 1928 manuscript On Truth
([OT] 33–34) to ‘Theories’ (1929). According to his
later view, a ‘primary system’ of true or false
observational statements is entailed, via a
‘dictionary’, by a ‘secondary system’ of
hypotheses (1929a, [PP] 112–115). This is a view that has roots
in both the introduction to Heinrich Hertz’s The Principles
of Mechanics (Hertz 1899) and in chapter VI of Norman
Campbell’s Physics. The Elements (Campbell 1920), but
Ramsey described, as we shall see, hypotheses not as statements or
propositions, but, adapting Weyl’s expression, as ‘rules
for judging’.
At a deeper level, Ramsey’s change of mind can be traced back to
his having read C. S. Peirce’s
Chance, Love and Logic (Peirce 1923). In ‘Fact and
Propositions’ (1925) he had already written: “The essence
of pragmatism I take to be this, that the meaning of a sentence is to
be defined by reference to the actions to which asserting it would
lead, or, more vaguely still, by its possible causes and
effects” (1927a, [PP] 51). This forms part of what Nils-Eric
Sahlin called ‘British Pragmatism’ (Sahlin 1997, 65;
Marion 2012), and Cheryl Misak ‘Cambridge Pragmatism’
(Misak 2016). This causal theory allowed him to tie logical form with
causal properties, for example when he argued that
disbelieving p and believing its negation ¬ p
have the same causal properties (1927a, [PP] 44). (There is a link
worth noticing here with his view on ‘Universals’ (1925),
since this suggestion allows him to avoid ‘negative
facts’.) Ramsey suggested at that stage that a causal theory of
this sort could accommodate the quantifiers as understood (as above)
by Wittgenstein: “Feeling belief towards ‘For
all \(x\), \(fx\)’ has certain causal properties which
we call its expressing agreement only with the possibility that all
the values of \(fx\) are true” (1927a, [PP] 49). By
1928–1929, however, his pragmatism finally led him to abandon
this suggestion.
In his review of the Tractatus, Ramsey thought that
Wittgenstein’s suggestion for eliminating the subject (5.542)
was “an important advance” (1923, 469), but he
assumed the opposite in ‘Truth and Probability’ (1928). In
a passage where he admitted following Peirce (1926a, [PP] 90 n. 2),
he argued that the human mind “works essentially according to
general rules or habits” (1926a, [PP] 90):
The mind works by general laws; therefore if it infers \(q\) from
\(p\), this will generally be because \(q\) is an instance of a
function \(\phi x\) and \(p\) the corresponding instance of a function
\(\psi x\) such that the mind would always infer \(\phi x\) from
\(\psi x\). (1926a, [PP] 91)
And, again in pragmatist manner, he argued that one judges habits in
terms of their success: “given a habit of a certain form, we can
praise or blame it accordingly as the degree of belief it produces is
near or far from the actual proportion in which the habit leads to
truth” (1926a, [PP] 92).
In ‘General Propositions and Causality’ (1929), Ramsey
followed this with Peirce’s idea that beliefs “guide our
actions” (Peirce 1992, 114), describing a belief as a “map
by which we steer” (1929b, [PP] 146). It is for this very
reason that he could not countenance the belief qua map being
infinite: “if we professedly extend it to infinity, it is no
longer a map; we cannot take it in or steer by it. Our journey is over
before we need its remoter parts” (1929b, [PP] 146). He then
introduced the notion of ‘variable hypotheticals’ as
forming the “system with which the speaker meets the
future” and described them in terms strongly reminiscent of
Weyl:
Variable hypotheticals are not judgments but rules for judging
‘If I meet a \(\phi\), I shall regard it as a
\(\psi\)’. This cannot be
negated but it can be disagreed with by one who does
not adopt it. (1929b, [PP] 149)
… when we assert a causal law we are asserting not a fact, not
an infinite conjunction, nor a connection of universals, but a
variable hypothetical which is not strictly a proposition at all, but
a formula from which we derive propositions. (1929b, [PP], 159)
There is indeed a definite connection here with his growing qualms, of
a ‘finitist’ nature, about the axiom of infinity:
“So too there may be an infinite totality, but what seems to be
propositions about it are again variable hypotheticals and
‘infinite collection’ is really nonsense” (1929b,
[PP] 160).
Ramsey’s last papers thus show that he was moving towards an
original synthesis of Weyl’s intuitionism (or finitism) with
pragmatism (Majer 1989; Majer 1991; Marion 2012; Misak 2016a (chapter
6); Misak 2018; Sahlin 1990, chapter 4). As for the confluence of
ideas, it is possible that Wittgenstein’s notion of
‘hypothesis’ had other sources (Marion 2008), but he also
came to reject his own view of the quantifiers in
the Tractatus (for example in his Cambridge lectures
(Wittgenstein [LC], 217 & 219)), and his own language bore strong
resemblance to that of Weyl and Ramsey when he spoke of a hypothesis
as a “law for forming expectations” (Wittgenstein [PR],
§228).
Ramsey is famous for his denial of the particular-universal
distinction. But his ontological vision was even more radical and
austere than this suggests because Ramsey also denied the existence of
complex entities, including complex universals, facts and
propositions.  Ramsey’s main arguments for this austere ontology
appear in his two landmark papers “Universals” (1925b) and
“Facts and Propositions” (1927a). At a general level we
can think of Ramsey as endeavoring to bring our views of ontology
clear of the shadows of words (MacBride 2005a, 2018 chapter 10).
At this point in his intellectual development, the mid-1920s, Ramsey
was developing the insights he found in Russell and Wittgenstein. But
Ramsey not only took many of their ideas to a new level of detail and
sophistication but pushed boundaries by showing that they had not gone
far enough. “Universals” provides a luminous example of
Ramsey pushing against boundaries that had held Russell
back. According to Russell, “The influence of language on
philosophy has, I believe, been profound and almost unrecognized. If
we are not to be misled by this influence it is necessary to become
conscious of it and to ask how far it is legitimate” (Russell
1924, 330). Russell was specifically concerned that the
subject-predicate form common to Indo-European languages had misled
Western philosophers, conditioning them to take for granted a
substance-attribute ontology whilst being blind to the existence of
relations. Russell proposed to remedy the situation by introducing
alongside the category of particulars, a broader category of
universals which subsumed both (monadic) attributes and (polyadic)
relations. But, in “Universals”, Ramsey argued that
Russell had not gone far enough, because the particular-universal
distinction itself was just a further shadow cast by language. Ramsey
wrote, “nearly all philosophers, including Mr Russell himself
have been misled by language in a far more far-reaching way than
that”, i.e. more far-reaching than being led merely to deny the
existence of relations, because “the whole theory of particulars
and universals is due to mistaking for a fundamental characteristic of
reality, what is merely a characteristic of language” (1925b,
405). But Ramsey wasn’t aiming to replace the
particular-universal distinction with an alternative distinction of
his own. Instead he aimed to inculcate in his reader a studied
indifference, which meant withholding judgment, at least a priori,
about the forms or categories of atomic objects, as Wittgenstein had
done in the
Tractatus.
Ramsey diagnosed that Russell had been led astray by supposing the
subject-predicate distinction to be a logical distinction. So Ramsey
devoted “Universals” to arguing it isn’t logical.
Ramsey recognised there wasn’t just one candidate for being the
subject-predicate distinction. So “Universals” is divided
into an examination of several candidates. Ramsey argued they reflect
merely accidental features of our language or subjective needs or
biased interests, so none of them provide a basis for an objective
classification of what there is.
Ramsey begins ‘Universals’ with what was to became a
celebrated argument of early analytic philosophy (see Sahlin 1990,
192–202 and Simons 1991 for helpful accounts of Ramsey’s main
lines of argument in “Universals”). To persuade us there are serious
issues to engage here, Ramsey compared
 and,
 Whilst they are different sentences, Ramsey invites us to agree
that they say the same about what’s out there even though they
differ in their surface forms. He reflected, ‘Now of one these
sentences ‘Socrates’ is the subject, of the other
‘wisdom’; and so which of the two is subject, which
predicate, depends upon what particular sentence we use to express
our proposition, and so had nothing to do with the logical nature of
Socrates or wisdom, but is a matter entirely for language’
(1925b, 404). Ramsey hypothesises that the subject-predicate distinction
isn’t a semantic or representational distinction at all, hence
not in the business of marking a division of things, but rather a
distinction which we employ to communicate to conversational partners
the focus of our discussion: “If the centre of our interest is
Socrates we say ‘Socrates is wise’, if we are discussing
wisdom we may say ‘wisdom is a characteristic of Socrates’; but
whichever we say we mean the same thing”.
Ramsey’s aim was not to conclusively establish this hypothesis
on the basis that (3.1) and (3.2) are used to make the same assertion–as
indeed many of his critics have supposed. What they miss is that to be
fit for purpose, Ramsey’s argument only had to be strong enough
to make us seriously entertain the possibility that the
subject-predicate distinction doesn’t serve a representational
function, because that’s enough to throw doubt upon the procedure
of classifying things on the basis of the subject-predicate
distinction, hence strong enough to make it evident that “the
question requires a new examination” (1925b, 405).
(Anscombe [1959, 108], Geach [1950, 474–5; 1975, 143–4]
and Dummett [1973, 63–4] have all criticised Ramsey’s
argument here on the grounds that whilst a predicate may be negated a
name may not – although see Anscombe’s
‘Retractation’ [1965]. Coming from a different direction,
Simons [1991, 159], Dokic and Engel [2002, 40–1] and Lowe [2004,
307] argue that Ramsey was mistaken to think that ontological issues
could ever be settled in logico-linguistic terms. MacBride [2005a,b]
argues that the former criticisms miss their intended mark because
Ramsey was committed to denying that negative predicates correspond to
the constituents of atomic facts; whereas the latter criticisms miss
their mark because Ramsey was in fact arguing that logical reflection
fails to determine the nature of the atomic facts. Hochberg [2004,
197–9], Mulligan [2000], Simons [1992, 151–2] raise
further difficulties for Ramsey’s initial argument that builds
upon the equivalence of (3.1) and (3.2) but MacBride [2018,
207–10] argues that these criticisms rest upon a failure to
appreciate the radical character of Ramsey’s challenge.)
Ramsey begins his new examination by considering whether molecular
statements can be analysed into subjects and predicates –
specifically predicates which stand for complex universals. He
argues, reductio ad absurdum, that they don’t. He
assumes that if two analyses of a proposition invoke different
constituents then they are analyses of different
propositions. Absurdity results when this assumption is combined with
the claim that complex predicates are terms for complex universals.
This is because more than one complex predicate may be isolated in a
sentence of the form ‘aRb’ – predicates
that may be represented by ‘xRb’,
‘aRy’ and‘xRy’. If these
predicates are terms for different universals, then the sentence
‘aRb’ expresses no less than three propositions.
The propositions are distinct because they correspond to the three
different collections of constituents: (i) xRb, a,
(ii) aRx, b, and
(iii) xRy, a, b. But this is absurd because
‘aRb’ says only one thing: that
aRb. Ramey concluded, “so the theory of complex
universals is responsible for an incomprehensible trinity, as
senseless as that of theology” (1925b, 406). Ramsey must also
have thought but doesn’t spell out, that it’s a
consequence of this argument that complex particulars should be
dismissed too – otherwise particulars would be distinguished from
universals in terms of complexity. (For discussion of Ramsey’s
argument against complex universals see Oliver 1992; Mellor 1992;
and MacBride 2005a, 86-94; 2018, 210–220.)
Ramsey next looks to see if a logical distinction between subject
and predicate applies to atomic statements. Russell had argued that
predicates can be distinguished from subjects by the fact that the
former exhibit a distinctive incompleteness because they carry the form
of the statements in which occur. Ramsey agreed that it’s natural
to feel that an adjective like ‘wise’ is incomplete in a
manner that ‘Socrates’ is not. But, Ramsey argued,
predicates only appear to be especially incomplete because as ordinary
language users we overlook relevant data: we routinely distinguish wide
from narrow scope occurrences of predicates but we don’t do the same
for subjects even though the same distinction can be drawn for them.
Ramsey cites Russell’s theory of descriptions as the inspiration for
the wide-narrow scope distinction, which Ramsey elaborates in terms of
a distinction between more and less encompassing ranges of propositions
in which an expression figures. Ramsey concludes that to be a
substantive (or adjective) “is not an objective but a subjective
property, in the sense that it depends not indeed on any one mind but
on the common elements in all men’s minds and purposes” (1925b,
413). 
Since the difference between ‘Socrates’ and
‘wise’ turns out to be subjective in this way, it tells us
nothing about the objective classification of the constituents of
atomic facts. Moreover, Ramsey continued, once we are explicit about
the wide and narrow scope occurrences of atomic expressions, there is
no reason to think that any of them are especially incomplete. Ramsey
held that it is only the ‘biassed interest’ of
mathematicians, i.e. their extensionalism, that make things appear
otherwise (1925b, 416). They neglect to distinguish between complex
predicates which really do require variables for their depiction
(xRa ∨ xSb) and atomic expressions which
don’t (‘f’ in ‘fa’), because
they are only interested in the extensional matter whether these
expressions are true or false of the same things. But to avoid
‘useless complication’ mathematicians treat the latter
terms as requiring variables for their representation too
(‘fx’), hence producing the appearance that there
is some class of atomic terms which are incomplete because they
require variables (1925b, 414–5). But, Ramsey continued, if it
were not for the biased interests of the mathematician, we would allow
‘f’ to stand alone, so removing the appearance of an
especially incomplete class of atomic terms.
Having completed his examination, Ramsey concluded that we can know
nothing whatever about the classification of the constituents of atomic
facts. But when he came to reprise his argument a year later in
“Universals and ‘the Method of Analysis’”
(1926b), Ramsey adopted the more modest conclusion that whilst we cannot
know a priori the forms of the atomic facts we may yet know
them a posteriori: “When I wrote my article I was sure
that it was impossible to discover atomic propositions by actual
analysis. Of this I am now very doubtful, and I cannot be sure that
they may not be discovered to be all of one or another of a series of
forms which can be expressed by R1(x),
R2(x,y),
R3(x,y,z)…. This
I admit may be found to be the case, but no one can as yet be certain
what atomic propositions there are, it cannot be positively asserted;
and there is no strong presumption in its favour, for I think that the
argument of my article establishes that nothing of the sort can be
known a priori” (1926b, 31) (see Methven 2018 for
discussion of the relationship between Ramsey 1925b and 1926b).
Ramsey’s less well-known arguments against the ontology of facts
and propositions appear in the context of Ramsey’s discussion of
the nature of truth and belief. In “Facts and
Propositions” (1927a) he argued against the existence of facts
on the grounds that the expression ‘the fact that…’
cannot be completed to make either a name or a description of a fact
(1927a, 155–7). Indeed, he claimed, ‘the fact
that…’ disappears upon paraphrase of the contexts in
which it occurs. As Ramsey put the point (1927a, 159): 
is no different from
By ‘is no different from’ (his words) Ramsey meant
something like “semantically equivalent”. So his
argument is that (3.3) is just a long-winded way of saying (3.4) and
because (3.4) has no constituent expression that refers to a fact, it
follows that (3.3) has no constituent expression that refers to a fact
either.
We can imagine Ramsey unpacking this argument further. Statements like
(3.3) commit us to the existence of facts if any statements do; they
constitute our best effort to explicitly affirm the existence of
facts.  Since even statements like (3.3) don’t commit us to facts,
because they’re just paraphrases of statements like (3.4), we
cannot have reason to believe in the existence of facts at all. To
transpose a remark of Ramsey’s from another context, if you
can’t say that facts exist, you can’t whistle it
either. We could call this Ramsey’s ‘redundancy theory of
facts’, emphasising another parallel, this time with his famous
redundancy theory of truth (according to which ‘a has
R to b is true’ says the same as ‘a
has R to b’). 
Ramsey renounced propositions conceived as the single objects of
judgment, which may be true or false, for the reasons that had already
led Russell to give up propositions so conceived, namely ‘the
incredibility of the existence of objects as “that Caesar died
in his bed” which could be described as objective falsehoods,
and the mysterious nature of the difference, on this theory, between
truth and falsehood’ (1927a, 153–4). Ramsey, like Russell,
didn’t spell this out, but we can think of Ramsey as pointing,
inter alia, to the difficulty of explaining the unity of a
proposition aRb in terms of R’s holdings
between a and b, which is difficult to understand if
the proposition is false since then R doesn’t hold
between a and b. Ramsey continued to find objective
falsehoods incredible in his later manuscript ‘On Truth’:
‘it is only the hardiest verbalists who can persuade themselves
‘that the earth is flat’ is the name of something
real’ ([OT] 85).
Ramsey concluded with Russell, ‘that a judgment had no single
object, but is a multiple relation of the mind or mental factors to
many objects, those, namely, which we should ordinarily call
constituents of the propositions judged’ (1927a, 154). So we can
think of Ramsey offering two arguments for renouncing propositions
conceived as single objects: a negative argument, that they’re
incredible and mysterious, but also a positive argument arguing that
propositions so conceived are dispensable based upon Ramsey’s
own views about truth and belief which don’t require them. In
‘Facts and Propositions’ Ramsey put forward a version of
Wittgenstein’s picture theory according to which a subject
‘will believe that aRb by having names for a, R, and b connected
in his mind and accompanied by a feeling of belief’ (1927a, 160)
but Ramsey was already pushing in more radical, pragmatist direction
which emphasised the significance of action for understanding the
notion of belief, hence shifting attention further away from an
ontology of facts and propositions. (See the section on Belief and
Truth.)
It is Ramsey’s ontological views on the particular-universal
distinction that have attracted the most attention. On the historical
front, Ruth Barcan Marcus (1993) argues that Ramsey’s
“Universals” bore a significant influence on
Russell’s subsequent intellectual development; see MacBride 2004
and Hochberg 2004 for further discussion. MacBride (2018) puts
Ramsey’s “Universals” in historical context, arguing
that “Universals” should be interpreted as the final stage
in an extended conversation about particulars and universals,
involving G.E. Moore, Russell, Wittgenstein and Whitehead. Misak
(2020) explores the connection between “Universals”
and Ramsey’s later pragmatist writings. Braithwaite (1926) and
Strawson (1959, chapter 5) argued, contra Ramsey, that the
particular-universal distinction may be understood in spatio-temporal
terms. See MacBride 2005c and Lowe 2006 (chapter 7) for further
discussion of Ramsey’s views on universals from a contemporary
point of view.
Ramsey’s primary analysis of belief and assertion appears in
his papers ‘Truth and Probability’ (1926a), ‘Facts
and Propositions’ (1927a) and ‘The Nature of Truth’
(1929c), with some significant remarks on general beliefs made in
‘Universals of Law and of Fact’ (1928b) and ‘General
Propositions and Causality’ (1929b).
In ‘Truth and Probability’ Ramsey presents his renowned
view on the nature of partial belief, and this paper is considered the
inaugural work of the family of approaches to probability known as
subjectivism. The present section, nevertheless, focuses on
his semantic analysis of belief and assertion, and not on subjective
probabilities; thus the analysis of partial belief developed in
‘Truth and Probability’ will be left aside.
Ramsey was a pragmatist about belief (Hookway 2005, 182ff; Dokic and
Engel 2002, 2, 8, 55), although not about truth. He explicitly
declares his pragmatism in ‘Truth and Probability’ (1926a)
and also in ‘Fact and Propositions’ (1927a). In
‘Truth and Probability’ he explains his approach to
rationality as ‘a kind of pragmatism: we judge mental habits by
whether they work’ (1926a, [PP] 93–94). In ‘Facts
and Propositions’, in contrast, the issue is meaning: ‘The
essence of pragmatism I take to be this, that the meaning of a
sentence is to be determined by reference to the actions to which
asserting it would lead’ (1927a, [PP] 51). He attributes his
pragmatism about meaning to the influence of Bertrand Russell. In
fact, in The Analysis of Mind (1921), Russell explained the
intentional properties of words through their causal history. As Acero
(2005, 16) stresses, for Russell at that time, the meaning of a word
was its use, and it seems to be this aspect of Russell’s
philosophy of mind that Ramsey acknowledges as the source of his
pragmatism about meaning in ‘Facts and Propositions’ (cf.
Dokic and Engel 2002, 22). Sahlin (1990, 70) and Hookway (2005,
185–187) point out that Peirce must also have had an effect on
Ramsey’s pragmatist views, since many themes in Peirce’s
early works are detectable in Ramsey’s writings (Hookway 2005,
185–6). Recently, Misak (2016a) has tracked Peirce’s
influence on Ramsey in full detail, using the entries on Peirce that
Ramsey inserted into his diary. It is now clear that Ramsey read
Peirce extensively and that the American philosopher deeply influenced
Ramsey’s views on meaning, truth and probability (Misak 2016a,
157).
As a pragmatist, Ramsey individuates beliefs by attending to their
causes and effects. Thus, attitudes towards two sentences prompted by
the same causes and producing the same effects express the same
belief, no matter the linguistic constitution of the sentences used to
express it. ‘Belief’, Ramsey acknowledges, is an ambiguous
term (1927a, [PP] 40). Both human beings and non-linguistic animals
can be said to possess beliefs. In non-linguistic animals, beliefs are
dispositions to act; in linguistic animals, beliefs are mental states
with a particular kind of content that involves entertaining
words. Chickens that avoid eating a particular kind of caterpillar,
due to systematically connecting it with disagreeable past
experiences,
believe that caterpillars of this kind are poisonous. This is
Ramsey’s causal theory of belief, which Dokic and Engel (2002,
24) extend to beliefs of any kind and attribute to Peirce’s
influence on Ramsey. The beliefs of linguistic animals are
specifically defined in terms of attitudes towards complexes of signs
with logical structure (Hookway 2005,  185). Both kinds of belief,
linguistic and non-linguistic, are analysed in pragmatist terms, in
which ‘the relations between belief and action do take centre
stage in some of [Ramsey’s] most influential writings on this
topic’ (Hookway 2005, 186).
Even if the main targets of Ramsey’s analysis are those beliefs
expressed in words and ‘consciously asserted and denied’
(1927a, [PP] 40), it is still illuminating to consider his treatment
of animal belief, in which the pragmatist connection between belief
and action is yet more perspicuous.
Ramsey distinguishes mental and objective factors in his analysis of
belief. In the case of the chicken, the simplest one, the mental
factor is part of the animal’s external behaviour (1927a, 159),
i.e. its behaviour of refraining from eating caterpillars on the basis
of disagreeable past experiences. The objective factor in this case is
a conglomerate of some relevant aspects of the world, i.e. the
caterpillar and the property of being poisonous, with which the mental
factor stands in some kind of relation. In beliefs expressed in words,
on the other hand, the mental factor is partly constituted by those
words or symbols ‘spoken aloud or merely imagined, connected
together’. Beliefs expressed in words can be classified into
three different categories: (i) those whose content is represented by
predicates or relations together with their arguments, i.e. by atomic
sentences with simple structures such as ‘aRb’,
(ii) those whose content includes logical connectives
(‘not’, ‘and’, ‘or’), and (iii)
general beliefs. In (i), the simplest linguistic case, an agent having
a belief that aRb means that she connects the words
‘a’, ‘R’ and
‘b’ in her mind in a certain way. A further
ingredient of the mental factor in linguistic creatures is a sort of
feeling that accompanies the words in one’s mind. By
‘feeling’ Ramsey does not mean a private sentiment, but
rather some attitude of the agent that might be expressed in less
subjective terms, such as ‘“specific quality” or
“act of assertion” and “act of denial”’
(loc. cit., n. 2).
Purely private feelings towards contents, Ramsey argues, play no
role in the analysis of belief and are useless for measuring degrees of
belief, as he explains in ‘Truth and Probability’:
There are basically two reasons why he takes private feelings to be
irrelevant for the analysis of belief. The first of these concerns the
difficulty of assigning objective measurements, but probably the
definitive reason has to do with the fact that our most unshakable
beliefs come without any particular sensation (Dokic and Engel 2002,
7). As Ramsey puts it: ‘[N]o one feels strongly about things he
takes for granted’ (loc. cit.). At this point the similarities
with the view that Wittgenstein would hold in his pragmatist period
are evident (for the mutual influence between Ramsey and Wittgenstein,
see §2 above).
Linguistic beliefs of the second category, i.e. those that also
include logical terms such as ‘not’, ‘and’ and
‘or’ are more complex. In analyzing them, Ramsey heavily
relies on the Tractarian view of logical constants. Ramsey, like
Wittgenstein, thinks that logical words are not names, i.e. they do not
represent. The meanings of ‘not’ and ‘or’ are
determined by the agents’ attitudes towards the sentences that
include them. Believing that not-p and disbelieving that
p are ‘equivalent occurrences’ (1927a, [PP] 43),
i.e.  they express the same attitude because their practical effects
are indistinguishable (1927a, [PP] 44; Dokic and Engel 2002,
24).
A specific difficulty of analyzing beliefs of this second category
derives from the need to identify attitudes held towards several
atomic sentences at the same time. While considering atomic sentences
one by one, Ramsey says, an agent only needs to consider two mutually
exclusive feelings, those of full belief and full disbelief. The
‘intermediate attitudes of partial belief’, which he
proposes to ‘leave to the theory of probability’ (1927a,
[PP] 45), are discussed in ‘Truth and Probability’. To
deal with attitudes held towards various atomic sentences at once,
Ramsey borrows from the former Wittgenstein the notion of
truth-possibility. When
n atomic sentences are at play, there are
2n possible combinations of fully believing and
fully disbelieving. Thus, ‘the meaning of a sentence is
agreement and disagreement with such and such
truth-possibilities’ (op. cit., 46), and a proposition is
‘a disjunction of the truth-possibilities with which [it]
agrees’ (op. cit., 47).
The third category of linguistic beliefs are general beliefs, i.e.
those whose expression involves the words ‘all’ and
‘some’. Concerning general propositions, Ramsey
successively held two different views. The first of these, explained
in ‘Facts and Propositions’ (1927a) and ‘Universals
of Law and Fact’ (1928b), is essentially the Tractarian view
that quantified sentences are conjunctions and disjunctions of atomic
propositions (Sahlin 1990,  76; Dokic and Engel 2002, 30). The
only difference he found between conjunctions and disjunctions, on the
one hand, and universal and particular sentences, on the other, was
that the arguments of genuine conjunctions and disjunctions can be
enumerated, whereas the arguments of quantified sentences are given by
means of propositional functions. These propositional functions show
their usefulness in those cases in which either we do not know their
particular instances, or there are so many of them that enumerating
them is impossible. When such enumeration is logically possible we
have universals of fact; when it is not, we have universals of
law. One might think that the details that distinguish conjunctions,
disjunctions, and universals of fact from genuine general propositions
would vanish from the perspective of an omniscient subject who could
entertain the totality of all application instances. Ramsey
nevertheless rejects this idea because the role of general
propositions is pragmatic, as an aid in the task of systematizing
‘our knowledge as a deductive system’ (1928b, [PP] 143),
rather than semantic.
The second view appears in ‘General Propositions and
Causality’ (1929b), and this is a fully pragmatist account
according to which general beliefs do not have a truth-value (Dokic
and Engel 2002, 30; Sahlin 1990, 78). Here Ramsey presents his famous
account of atomic beliefs as maps: ‘A belief of the primary
sort’, i.e. one without quantifiers, ‘is a map of
neighbouring space by which we steer’ (1929b, [PP] 146). If
beliefs are maps of the neighbourhood, general beliefs –
understood as codifying general inferences – should be maps of
infinite extension, except that an infinite map is ‘no longer a
map; we cannot take it in or steer by it. Our journey is over before
we need its remoter parts’ (loc. cit.). Quantified sentences are
thus ‘rules for action or attitudes’
(Dokic and Engel 2002, 31), and express ‘an inference we are at
any time prepared to make’ (1929b, [PP] 146). Dokic and Engel
(2002) also stress the similarities between Ramsey’s account of
general beliefs and Wittgenstein’s view of laws as rules of
inference.
General beliefs with general contents, ‘variable
hypotheticals’ as Ramsey calls them, are not propositions at all.
With respect to the role of general beliefs, Ramsey is prepared to
explicitly endorse a central thesis of any pragmatist approach to
meaning: ‘[m]any sentences express cognitive attitudes without
being propositions’ (1929b, [PP] 147). The cognitive attitude they
express is still belief, which in the case of general beliefs Ramsey
characterizes as composed of (i) a general enunciation, i.e. the
endorsement of a sentence that expresses it – ‘all men are
mortal’, for instance – and (ii) ‘a habit of singular
belief’ (1929b, [PP] 148). These two steps are connected by the
psychological law that gives the meaning of ‘all’ (1929b,
[PP] 149).
The posthumously-published paper ‘The Nature of Truth’
(1929c) is specifically devoted to the analysis of truth, and there
Ramsey develops the few lines about truth included in ‘Facts and
Propositions’ (1927a). Even if that earlier paper mostly deals
with belief, the brief remarks it contains on truth are among
Ramsey’s most influential contributions to philosophy. What he
has to say in there about truth is stated almost as ‘an obvious
fact’ (Sahlin 1990, 56), hence his famous remark that
‘there is really no separate problem of truth but merely a
linguistic muddle’ (1927a, [PP] 38).
In ‘The Nature of Truth’ Ramsey explains that beliefs, in
the sense that is relevant here, are necessarily beliefs that
‘something or other is so-and-so’ (1929c, 7ff). He
calls this ‘so-and-so’ the ‘propositional
reference’ (loc. cit.) and uses it as the criterion of
propositional individuation, in the sense that if ‘two men both
believe that the earth is flat we say they have the same belief’
(loc. cit.).  Individuating beliefs by their propositional references
might seem at odds with the pragmatist method given in terms of causes
and effects that Ramsey used in ‘Facts and
Propositions’. But this superficial tension is defused if
propositional references, which are not linguistic but conceptual, are
individuated by their consequences (which include actions). Other
mental states – doubts, desires, fears, regrets, etc. – have
propositional references too, but only beliefs have ‘affirmative
or assertive character’ (1929c, 8). Ramsey proposes to extend
the ordinary meaning of the term ‘belief’ to cover mental
states with any degree of assertive force – from mere conjecture
to full certainty – and propositional content. The contents of
beliefs, in this extended sense, are the bearers of truth:
‘Truth and falsity are ascribed primarily to
propositions’, he says (1927a, [PP] 38). Later, he substitutes
‘proposition’ with ‘propositional reference’
(1929c, 7), but this rewording owes more to philosophical
precaution than any substantial change in view.
Truth adds nothing substantive to the content of beliefs, according to
Ramsey. He claims that the meaning of truth is ‘perfectly
obvious, that anyone can see what it is and that difficulty
only arises when we try to say what it is, because it is
something which ordinary language is rather ill-adapted to
express’ (1929c, 9). Because of this, Ramsey’s view is
generally interpreted as a redundancy theory of truth (Sahlin 1990,
56–59; Dokic and Engel 2002, 18; Hookway 2005,
56–58), a kind of minimalism or deflationism about truth
similar to the views put forward by Aristotle and Frege (cf. Sahlin
1990,  56), and later on by Tarski, Wittgenstein, Quine (cf. Hookway
2005, 57), Field and Horwich (cf. Koslow 2005, 106).
Nevertheless, there is more to Ramsey’s view than what the
label ‘redundancy’ suggests. The bearers of truth, i.e.
propositions, can be referred to directly, as in ‘that Caesar was
murdered’, or identified by description, as in ‘what she
said’. Correspondingly, truth can be attached to the direct
expression of a proposition, as in ‘It is true that Caesar was
murdered’, or to a description, as in ‘what she says is
true’. When truth applies to expressions of the first kind,
Ramsey characterizes its role as eliminable: ‘it is evident that
“It is true that Caesar was murdered” means no more than
that Caesar was murdered, and “It is false that Caesar was
murdered” means that Caesar was not murdered’ (1927a, [PP],
38–9). But when the truth predicate applies to expressions of the
second kind, Ramsey explicitly claims that it cannot be dispensed with:
‘In the second case in which the proposition is described and not
given explicitly we have perhaps more of a problem, for we get
statements from which we cannot in ordinary language eliminate the
words “true” and “false”’ (loc.
cit.).
Let us consider the following three examples of truth ascriptions in
English:
To say what truth consists in, and deal with any kind of
truth ascription, Ramsey enriches ordinary English into English* by
the addition of single propositional
variables – ‘p’, ‘q’,
etc., ranging over the set of declarative sentences – and
propositional quantifiers. In English* the truth predicate vanishes
and its role is taken over by propositional variables and
quantifiers. The semi-formal sentences (4.1*)–(4.3*) are
translations of (4.1)–(4.3) into English*:
Note that the translation shows that the truth apparatus is
redundant in English*, but not that it is redundant in
English.
The definition of truth Ramsey provides in ‘The Nature of
Truth’ is: ‘A belief is true if it is a belief that
p, and p’ (1929c, [OT] 9), where the first
instance of the propositional variable ‘p’
represents the propositional reference that individuates the belief at
issue (1929c, [OT] 7), and the second instance represents the objective
factor. This definition is expressed in English*, since ordinary
English does not have the necessary resources:
As we claim to have defined truth we ought to be able to substitute
our definition for the word “true” wherever it occurs. But
the difficulty we have mentioned renders this impossible in ordinary
language which treats what should really be called
pro-sentences as if they were pro-nouns. […]
“that” and “what” even when functioning as
short for sentences always require to be supplied with a verb: this
verb is often “is true” and this peculiarity of language
gives rise to artificial problems as to the nature of truth, which
disappear at once when they are expressed in logical symbolism, in
which we can render “what he believed is true” by “if
p was what he believed, p” (1929c, [OT] 10, his
emphasis).
This text is possibly the first unequivocal expression of a
prosentential theory of truth (Dokic and Engel 2002, 19;
Frápolli 2005a, 113–138; 2013, 61ff).
Ramsey (1929c, [OT] 9) anticipated a possible reaction to his use of
propositional variables and to the translation of (4.1)–(4.3) as
(4.1*)–(4.3*).  The objection is the following:
(4.1*)–(4.3*) cannot be English* counterparts of English
sentences because they are not well-formed.  Free-standing instances,
the objection goes, of the variables ‘p’ and
‘q’ cannot fill the argument-slots of
truth-functions, such as conjunction and material implication, which
need complete sentences as arguments. Free-standing uses of the
variables in ‘and p’ and ‘then
q’ would lack a verb to complete these clauses into
genuine instances of the grammatical category of sentences.
Ramsey’s reply insists on the sentential status of the variables
‘p’ and ‘q’, which stand for
items that already contain a verb and express a truth-bearer (loc.
cit.).
What Ramsey did not anticipate was the classification of his view
either as a redundancy or as a pro-sentential theory. On the contrary,
he thought that it would be interpreted as a correspondence theory of
truth, and although he did not accept the metaphysical commitments of
the many versions of correspondentism, he did not reject the label
either. In fact, he acknowledges that truth is objective correspondence
to the facts (see for instance 1929c, [OT] 11; 1929d, 36). Dokic and
Engel (2002, 25) point out that Ramsey was a realist about truth
conditions and also about truth, but this realism was modulated by his
pragmatism: ‘his kind of realism is distinct from the kind of
realism which underlies a full-blown correspondence theory of truth. It
is a form of pragmatic realism, which associates truth to
beliefs-habits and to actions.’ Thus, Ramsey’s take on
truth has a pragmatist background, but it is not a pragmatist view of
truth. It is a kind of sophisticated redundancy theory that is realist
about truth conditions, and also includes some of the technical
apparatus that prosentential theories developed later on (see Williams
1976, Grover 1992, Brandom 1994, Frápolli 2013).
In “General Propositions and Causality” (1929b) Ramsey
made some remarks about conditional judgements, which have influenced
thinking about conditionals since the 1960s. Most famous is this
footnote:
To understand what Ramsey means by “degree of belief in \(q\)
given \(p\)” we need to turn to his earlier essay “Truth
and Probability” (1926a), where he develops an interpretation of
probability as the logic of partial belief ([FM] 157).  (Note, Ramsey
did not take this to be the only notion of probability: “The
conclusions we shall come to as to the meaning of probability in Logic
must not … be taken as prejudging its meaning in physics”
(ibid.). The editor adds that a final chapter, on probability in
science, was designed but not written.)  Here he introduces a
“very useful new idea – ‘the degree of belief in
\(q\) given \(p\)’” (1926a, [FM] 180). One of his basic laws
is:
As a law of probability, this was not new. It was in use since the
eighteenth century. It is needed to answer a compulsory question: how
likely is it that two events will happen? Answer: it is the
probability of the first, multiplied by the probability of the second
on the supposition that the first happens. What was novel in
Ramsey’s essay was the interpretation of probability as degree
of belief; and what was novel in the 1929 paper (1929b) was the
linking of “degree of belief in \(q\) given \(p\)” with
our ordinary, typically uncertain, conditional judgements.
Explaining “degree of belief in \(q\) given \(p\)”, Ramsey
says “It roughly expresses the odds at which [the subject] would
now bet on \(q\), the bet only to be valid if \(p\) is true”
(1926a, [FM] 180). Ramsey was aware that the link between degrees of
belief and betting behaviour is imperfect (1926a, [FM] 170). Here the
message is that a
conditional degree of belief is to a conditional
bet, as an unconditional degree of belief is to an unconditional
bet. For a bet on \(q\), you ask yourself, which is more likely and by
how much, \(q\) or \(\neg q\)?  For a bet on \(q\) given \(p\), you
ask yourself, which is more likely, and by how much, \(p \:\&\:
q\), or \(p \:\&\: \neg q\)? If you judge \(p \:\&\: q\) much
more likely than \(p \:\&\: \neg q\), you have a high degree of
belief in \(q\) given \(p\). Equivalently, under the hypothesis or
supposition that \(p\), you judge it to be likely that \(q\).
Ramsey then warns against some possible misunderstandings of
“degree of belief in \(q\) given \(p\)”, which will be
discussed below.
The main business of “General Propositions and Causality”
is to discuss the nature of causal generalisations, also called
variable hypotheticals – and naturally this leads him to discuss
their singular conditional instances. He argues that “variable
hypotheticals are not judgements but rules for judging ‘If I
meet a \(\phi\) I shall treat it as a \(\psi\)’. This cannot be
negated, but it can be disagreed with by one who
does not adopt it” (1929b, [FM] 241, italics original). There is
emphasis throughout on the idea that these conditional judgements are
not propositions. After an example in which \(A\) says “If I eat
the pie I will get a stomach-ache” and \(B\) disagrees, Ramsey
writes:
Later, with the same example, “it is not that he believes [a
proposition] \(p\), we \(\overline{p}\); but he has a different degree of
belief in \(q\) given \(p\) from ours; and we can obviously try to
convert him to our view” (1929b, [FM] 247, followed by the
famous footnote). Here is another passage:
When we deliberate about a possible action, we ask ourselves what
will happen if we do this or that. If we give a definite answer of the
form ‘If I do \(p\), \(q\) will result’, this
can be properly regarded as a material implication or disjunction
‘Either not \(p\), or \(q\)’. But it differs, of
course from any ordinary disjunction in that one of its members is not
something of which we are trying to discover the truth, but something
within our power to make true or false. …
Besides definite answers ‘If \(p\), \(q\) will result’, we
often get ones ‘If \(p\), \(q\) might result’ or
‘\(q\) would probably result’. Here the degree of
probability is not a degree of belief in ‘Not-\(p\) or
\(q\)’, but a degree of belief in \(q\) given \(p\), which it is
evidently possible to have without a definite degree of belief in
\(p\), \(p\) not being an intellectual problem. And our conduct is
largely determined by these degrees of hypothetical belief. (1929b,
[FM] 246)
Two observations are in order: first, in the case of certainty that if
\(A\), \(B\), provided that \(A\) does not have probability 0, degree
of belief in the material conditional and the conditional degree of
belief in \(B\) given \(A\) coincide. Writing “\(\bel\)”
for degree of belief: if \(\bel(A \amp \neg B\)) = 0 but \(\bel(A) \neq
0\), both \(\bel(A \supset B) = 1\) and \(\bel(B \given A) = 1.\) The
only other case in which they coincide is if \(\bel(A) = 1.\)
Otherwise, \(\bel(A \supset B) \gt \bel(B \given A),\) radically so when
\(\bel(B \given A)\) is low but \(\bel(\neg A)\) is high. Second, it is
clear that Ramsey does not reductively define conditional degree of
belief in terms of the ratio: \(\bel(A \amp B)/\bel(A),\) for the
conditional degree of belief can be assessed even without any specific
value for \(\bel(A).\) Indeed, in the fundamental law stated above, the
right-hand side is much more use as a route to the probability of a
conjunction, rather than the other way round.
Ramsey does not treat counterfactual conditionals in terms of
conditional degrees of belief. The famous footnote continues:
That is, a degree of belief in \(q\) given \(p\) exists only when the
degree of belief in \(p\) is non-zero. Ramsey does make a few remarks
about counterfactuals, noticing the ‘subtle syntactic
variations’. For instance, “If he was there, he must have
voted for it (for it was passed unanimously), but if he had been
there, he would have voted against it (such being his nature)”
(1929b, [FM] 249). (Here we have an early precursor of the
Oswald-Kennedy pair: if Oswald didn’t do it, someone else did;
but if Oswald hadn’t done it, no one else would have; see Adams
1970.) There are a few remarks about counterfactuals in Ramsey’s
paper but no settled view of them is presented.
Bruno de Finetti (1937, based on lectures of 1935), shortly after
Ramsey and independently, also developed an account of probability as
degree of belief. (Unlike Ramsey, de Finetti argued that this was the
only kind of probability.) In a separate lecture (1936) he gave a
theory of “conditional events” or “tri-events”
as he called them. Like Ramsey, he provided an account of conditional
judgements in terms of conditional probabilities, and gave a
three-valued account of such a conditional “if \(p\),
\(q\)”: true if \(p \:\&\: q\), false if \(p \:\&\: \neg q\),
void if \(\neg p\). He also connects this with conditional bets: won
if \(p \:\&\: q\), lost if \(p \:\&\: \neg q\), called off if \(\neg
p\). He gives three-valued truth tables for the other connectives when
applied to conditionals, and claims that the probability of a
“tri-event” is the probability of its truth given that it
has a truth value – which, in the case of “if \(p\),
\(q\)” is just the probability of \(q\) given \(p\). The results
for more complex sentences are controversial, but there has been a
fair amount of work in this tradition, much of it summarised by Peter
Milne (1997). It is interesting that this second exposition of
probability as degree of belief also connected conditional degree of
belief to ordinary conditional judgements, and also recognised that
the latter could not then be treated as ordinary propositions.
Ernest Adams wrote two papers (1965, 1966), and later a book (1975)
developing a logic for conditionals assessed as conditional
probabilities. Like Ramsey, he was sceptical of the idea of
conditionals as propositions with truth conditions, and developed a
logic based on probability. He showed that valid arguments have an
interesting probability-preserving property: the uncertainty (i.e. 1
− the probability) of the conclusion cannot exceed the sum of
the uncertainties of the premises. He applied this criterion to
arguments with conditionals, and an interesting logic emerged. The
paradoxes of material implication are invalid. Specifically, with
material implication, \(\neg A\) guarantees the truth of \(A
\to B\). But here, the probability of \(\neg A\) can be high while the
probability of \(B\) given \(A\) is low.  (\(B\) given \(A\) is the
analog of \(A \to B\).) More surprisingly, there are counterexamples
to transitivity, contraposition, and strengthening of the antecedent
(see Section 3.2 of the entry on
  indicative conditionals, 
for examples and more details).
Robert Stalnaker’s first paper on the subject, “A
Theory of Conditionals”, appeared in 1968. Stalnaker refers to
Ramsey. He also mentions Adams (1966) in a footnote, and indicates that
he will devote another paper to the probabilistic aspects of the
theory. This is his “Probability and Conditionals” (1970),
and its abstract announces that “conditional propositions are
introduced as propositions whose absolute probability is equal to the
conditional probability of the consequent given the antecedent”.
Then David Lewis (1976) proved that there is no proposition the
probability of whose truth can be systematically equated with the
conditional probability of \(B\) given \(A\) – a result
which Ramsey and de Finetti appear to have foreseen.
Probability is not discussed in the 1968 paper, but Adams’s
logic is in the background as a guide: it turns out that
Stalnaker’s logic coincides with Adams over their common domain
(Adams puts aside sentences in which conditionals are embedded in
other connectives). Thus, for example, Stalnaker also has the
counterexamples to transitivity, contraposition and strengthening of
the antecedent (1968, 48–9).
Stalnaker puts Ramsey’s suggestion thus: “add the
antecedent (hypothetically) to your stock of knowledge (or beliefs),
and then consider whether the consequent is true. Your belief about the
conditional should be the same as your hypothetical belief, under this
condition, in the consequent” (1968, 43).
Stalnaker was interested in a theory which covered both indicative
conditionals and counterfactual conditionals. He held that something
similar happened with the latter:
First, add the antecedent (hypothetically) to your stock of beliefs;
second, make whatever adjustments are required to maintain consistency
(without modifying the hypothetical belief in the antecedent); finally,
consider whether the consequent is then true.
… Now we have found an answer to the question, “How do
we decide whether or not to believe a conditional statement?”
the problem is to make the transition from belief conditions to truth
conditions; that is, to find a set of truth conditions for statements
having conditional form which explains why we use the method we do use
to evaluate them. The concept of a possible world is just what
we need to make this transition, since a possible world is the analogue
of a stock of hypothetical beliefs. The following set of truth
conditions, using this notion, is a first approximation to the account
that I shall propose:
Consider a possible world in which \(A\) is true, and which otherwise
differs minimally from the actual world.  “If A, then
B” is true (false) just in case B is
true (false) in that possible
world. (44–45, italics original)
And close-possible-world semantics for conditionals was born.
A consequence of Stalnaker’s setting the probabilistic
considerations aside in his influential 1968 paper is that
Ramsey’s idea came to be taken differently: it was applied in
the context of full, all-or-nothing belief; it was applied to
counterfactuals as well as indicatives; and consequently, there was
much emphasis on belief revision. The phrase “the
Ramsey Test” was coined by William Harper (1975, 1976), and it
caught on. He explains it thus: “Accept ‘if \(A\),
\(B\)’ if and only if the minimum revision of your system
of beliefs needed to accept \(A\) also requires accepting
\(B\)” (1975, 245; 1976, 118). Peter Gärdenfors
(1986, 81) says the same. Sven Ove Hansson (1992) says “In
modern studies of belief dynamics, the Ramsey test is taken to
‘presume … some method of revising states of
belief’ [quoting Gärdenfors]. Thus ‘If \(p\)
then \(q\)’ is taken to be believed if and only if
\(q\) would be believed in the belief state that would result from
revising the present belief state by \(p\)” (1992, 522).
Stephen Read says “Ramsey’s idea was simple, but
appealing. One should believe a conditional ‘If \(A\),
\(B\)’ if one would come to believe \(B\) if one were
to add \(A\) to one’s stock of beliefs” (1995,
47).
This emphasis on belief revision is not found in
Ramsey’s work. Indeed, he distances himself from that idea. On
the page where he introduces “degree of belief in \(q\)
given \(p\)”, Ramsey writes:
Thus, for Ramsey conditional degree of belief is a synchronic
notion, not a diachronic one. It is a feature of one’s present
belief-state, not to be defined in terms of how one’s
belief-state would change on acquiring more information.
Why did Ramsey issue these warnings? Here is one example which may be
what he had in mind. Mary is an atheist. However, if she were to learn
that she had a fatal disease, she would acquire a belief in God. But
she doesn’t now believe “If I get a fatal disease, there
is a God”! Another example: I am about to pick a card and look
at it. I know there are three kings in the pile, two red and one black.
My conditional degree of belief that I pick a red card, given that I
pick a king, is 2/3. That determines the odds on which I would bet on
Red given King. But if I do pick a king, I won’t have a degree
of belief 2/3 that it is red. I am not colour blind. Then there
examples like Lewis’s “If Reagan was in the pay of the
KGB, we’ll never find out”. This is something he
believes. But if he were to learn the antecedent, he would not then
believe the consequent! As Lewis says, “It might be no easy thing
to judge what would be learned if [\(A\)] were learned, in view of
the variety of ways that something might be learned” (1986,
156). He concludes that a conditional degree of belief is a good but
fallible guide to the degree of belief you would have in \(B\) if
you learned \(A\). Edgington’s (1995) reply to Read,
§1, discusses the disparity between what Ramsey himself said,
and much that goes under the name “the Ramsey Test”. In
the famous footnote, Ramsey speaks of people “adding \(p\)
hypothetically to their stock of knowledge” – that
is, supposing that \(p\). The consequences of doing so for
one’s conditional beliefs, is not invariably equivalent to the
consequences of coming to believe \(p\), for one’s
unconditional beliefs.
Many philosophers have followed the path along which Ramsey took the
first steps, and Adams developed – of understanding our
typically uncertain conditional judgements in terms of conditional
degrees of belief (see Edgington 2014 for more details and
references).
In ‘Truth and Probability’ (1926a), Ramsey sets out an
influential account of the nature, measurement, and norms of partial
belief. The essay is a pioneering work on subjectivist
interpretations of probability (also known as personalist
interpretations; see the entry on
 interpretations of probability).
According to subjectivism, probabilities can be interpreted as
numerical representations of an individual’s subjective degrees
of confidence, such that two individuals could assign different
probabilities to the same proposition even given the same evidence.
First written in 1926 and still incomplete at the time of its
publication in 1931 (a year after Ramsey’s death), ‘Truth
and Probability’ was not very widely discussed until after the
publication of Savage’s The Foundations of Statistics
(1954), at which time subjectivism came to prominence. Many of the key
ideas and arguments original to the essay have reappeared in later
foundational works in the subjectivist tradition (e.g., de Finetti
1937, Savage 1954, Jeffrey 1965). This section outlines some of
Ramsey’s major contributions to this tradition.
Ramsey’s central goal in ‘Truth and Probability’ is
to show that the laws of probability provide us with a ‘logic of
partial belief’ – that is, the laws specify general
necessary conditions on any consistent set of partial beliefs, in a
manner analogous to how the laws of classical logic might be taken to
generate necessary conditions on any consistent set of full beliefs.
The argument for this claim is grounded in Ramsey’s novel
approach to probability, namely subjectivism. The essay begins,
however, with a discussion of the two major approaches to
understanding probabilities at the time in Cambridge: frequentism, and
a version of the logical interpretation put forward by the economist
John Maynard Keynes in A Treatise on Probability (1921).
Regarding frequentism – according to which the probability of an
event is the relative frequency with which that type of event occurs,
or would occur, over repeated trials – Ramsey adopts a
conciliatory tone. For many cases (e.g., coin flips and rolls of a
die), frequencies provide a natural interpretation of the probability
calculus, but they are insufficiently general for Ramsey’s
purposes. (We’ll return to the role of frequencies in
Ramsey’s theory below.) On the other hand, Ramsey presents a
detailed critique of Keynes’ theory. According to Keynes,
probabilities are an objective and quantifiable relation between
propositions – roughly, the probability of an hypothesis \(h\),
given evidence \(e\), is the degree to which \(h\) is logically
implied by \(e\). Importantly, Keynes’ assumed that this
relation could be perceived through intuition – to which Ramsey
objects:
[T]here really do not seem to be any such things as the probability
relations [Keynes] describes. He supposes that, at any rate in certain
cases, they can be perceived; but speaking for myself I feel confident
that this is not true. I do not perceive them… moreover I
shrewdly suspect that others do not perceive them either, because they
are able to come to so very little agreement as to which of them
relates any two given propositions. (1926a, [FM] 161)
For example, for even very simple pairs of propositions (such as
‘This is red’ and ‘That is blue’), where one
might have expected objective relations to be more readily accessible,
there is very little agreement as to what probability relation might
connect them. Ramsey also notes that, while most people will agree
that the probability of a fair coin landing heads is \(\frac{1}{2}\),
‘we can none of us say exactly what is the evidence which forms
the other term for the probability relation about which we are then
judging’ (1926a, [FM] 162).
Having dismissed Keynes’ theory, Ramsey moves on to his
alternative, subjectivist view. The guiding idea throughout is
that:
[T]he degree of a belief is a causal property of it, which we can
express vaguely as the extent to which we are prepared to act on it.
(1926a, [FM] 169)
That is, partial beliefs are connected to choice and action, in that
the more confidence one has in a proposition \(p\), the more willing
one will be to choose those options that lead to favourable outcomes
under the assumption that \(p\) is true. Although he does not say much
about the nature of this connection in ‘Truth and
Probability,’ in ‘Facts and Propositions’ (1927a,
170) Ramsey expresses sympathy for the pragmatist view according to
which a full belief that \(p\) just is a set of actions that
tends to lead to favourable outcomes at worlds where \(p\) is
true:
It is, for instance, possible to say that a chicken believes a certain
sort of caterpillar to be poisonous, and mean by that merely that it
abstains from eating such caterpillars on account of unpleasant
experiences connected with them. The mental factors in such a belief
would be parts of the chicken’s behaviour…  Thus any
set of actions for whose utility \(p\) is a necessary and sufficient
condition might be called a belief that \(p\)…  (1927a,
[FM] 144)
It is plausible that Ramsey intended a similar account for partial
beliefs – that partial beliefs either are patterns of
behaviour, or perhaps behavioural dispositions, or that they’re
otherwise definable primarily in terms of such things. In any case,
Ramsey recognised that, if this vague connection between belief and
choice could be suitably precisified, then it could be used to build a
definition of degrees of belief in terms of choices.
Like other quantities throughout the sciences, Ramsey argues,
‘the degree of a belief… has no precise meaning
unless we specify more exactly how it is to be measured’ (1926a,
[FM] 167). To precisify his account, therefore, Ramsey sketches a
procedure for the measurement of partial belief, which includes as a
part also the measurement of utilities. The procedure takes as input
the subject’s preferences (as revealed by her choices) over
and it outputs precise numerical representations of her partial
beliefs and utilities. It can be roughly summarised as follows:
Elicit Preferences:
Elicit the subject’s preferences by offering her a sequence of
choices between pairs of worlds and/or gambles.
Determine Utilities:
Assuming the subject is an expected utility maximiser, use her
preferences to determine her numerical utilities.
Define Beliefs:
Define (a) the subject’s degree of belief towards \(p\) in terms
of her utilities for binary gambles involving \(p\), and (b) her
degree of belief towards \(p\) given \(q\) using her utilities for
binary and ternary gambles involving \(p\) and \(q\).
The following paragraphs will briefly discuss these three steps. More
thorough treatments of Ramsey’s procedure can be found in
(Sahlin 1990), (Bradley 2001), and (Elliott 2017).
Regarding the first step, Ramsey says:
[Suppose] that our subject has certain beliefs about everything; then
he will act so that what he believes to be the total consequences of
his action will be the best possible. If then we had the power of the
Almighty, and could persuade our subject of our power, we could, by
offering him options, discover how he placed in order of merit all
possible courses of the world… Suppose next that the
subject is capable of doubt; then we could test his degree of belief
in different propositions by making him offers of the following kind.
Would you rather have world [\(\omega_1\)] in any event; or world
[\(\omega_2\)] if \(p\) is true, and world [\(\omega_3\)] if \(p\) is
false? (1926a, [FM] 177)
A common objection to this early stage of the procedure is that if the
experimenter were to convince their subject that they ‘had the
power of the Almighty’, then this would radically alter the
beliefs supposedly being measured (e.g., Jeffrey 1983, 158–60;
cf. Sobel 1998, 255–6; Bradley 2001, §3.2; Eriksson &
Rabinowicz 2013).
More prosaically, a measurement procedure can be considered accurate
only if it doesn’t itself significantly alter the measurand.
Measurement procedures usually involve some unavoidable
change to the quantity being measured – placing a cold thermometer
into a hot liquid will slightly cool the liquid, for example, but for
most purposes this effect is negligible. The objection at hand is
therefore that merely having the subject come to believe that
they have some choice over these worlds and gambles will generally
involve a substantial change to their beliefs – enough to
undermine the accuracy of Ramsey’s procedure. For example, the
process might alter the subject’s beliefs regarding the claim
‘Experimenters have the capacity to make it the case that
\(\omega_1\) obtains if \(p\) is true, and \(\omega_2\) obtains
otherwise’, with potentially many ripple on effects through to
her other beliefs. Interestingly, Ramsey makes note of a similar
problem for an alternative gambling-based measurement procedure
(1926a, [FM] 170), but for unknown reasons does not discuss the worry
as it arises for his own proposal.
The second step of Ramsey’s procedure is the most complicated,
and it requires a suite of background assumptions about the partial
beliefs, utilities, and preferences of the subject. In his words,
I propose to take as a basis a general psychological theory, which is
now universally discarded, but nevertheless comes, I think, fairly
close to the truth in the sort of cases with which we are most
concerned. I mean the theory that we act in the way we think most
likely to realize the objects of our desires, so that a person’s
actions are completely determined by his desires and opinions.
(1926a, [FM] 174)
Ramsey’s point here is that, given some general assumptions, it
will be possible – at least sometimes – to specify
exactly what a subject’s degrees of belief and
utilities are once we have enough information about her preferences.
However, Ramsey’s statement of the ‘general psychological
theory’ in the quoted passage underspecifies the assumptions he
implicitly relies on to justify his procedure. We can precisify
matters on his behalf, and assume that for the subject in
question,
While these assumptions clearly involve some degree of idealisation,
Ramsey justifies them by noting that the development of any
measurement process ‘cannot be accomplished without introducing
a certain amount of hypothesis or fiction’ (1926a, [FM] 168),
and that the assumptions come close enough to the truth to render them
still useful (1926a, [FM] 173).
The reasoning by which we go from preferences to a numerical
representation of utilities is complicated, and in Ramsey’s
paper mostly left unstated. It begins with the notion of an
ethically neutral proposition, which can here be defined
as:
Ethical Neutrality:
\(p\) is ethically neutral for a subject iff, for all worlds
\(\omega\) consistent with \(p\) and \(\neg{p}\), the subject is
indifferent between \(\omega\), \(\omega \amp p\), and \(\omega \amp
\neg{p}\).
That is, a proposition \(p\) is ethically neutral if the truth or
falsity of \(p\) is a matter of indifference to the subject,
regardless of the wider context in which its truth or falsity obtains.
Having characterised ethical neutrality in terms of preferences,
Ramsey is ultimately able to construct a definition (in terms of
preferences over gambles) for when the difference in utility
between two worlds \(\omega_1\) and \(\omega_2\) is equal to
that between \(\omega_3\) and
 \(\omega_4\).[4]
This provides Ramsey with the resources needed to sketch a
representation theorem, which forms the centrepiece of his
paper. According to this theorem, the subject’s preferences will
satisfy eight relatively simple conditions only if there exists at
least one function, \(\mathcal{U}\), such that the difference in
utility between \(\omega_1\) and \(\omega_2\) is at least as great as
that between \(\omega_3\) and \(\omega_4\) if and only if
Moreover, this function \(\mathcal{U}\) is unique up to positive
linear transformation – that is, for any other function
\(\mathcal{U}^*\) with the same property,
for some positive real number \(r\) and constant \(c\). Given
Ramsey’s background assumptions (6.1)–(6.3), these two points
together entail that the subject’s preferences satisfy
Ramsey’s conditions on preferences only if \(\mathcal{U}\) is
the function that represents her utilities on an interval scale. Or,
to put the point more simply: if the subject’s
preferences satisfy Ramsey’s conditions, then they
contain enough information to determine her utilities exactly.
Included amongst Ramsey’s axioms are some obvious coherence
conditions, such as that preferences ought to be transitive; as well
as less obvious conditions, e.g., that for every pair of worlds
\(\omega_1\), \(\omega_2\), there’s a \(\omega_3\) whose utility
is exactly halfway between that of \(\omega_1\) and \(\omega_2\).
There has been very little empirical investigation into Ramsey’s
axioms, primarily due to the widespread opinion that his
representation result has been superseded by the results of Savage
(1954) and later decision theorists (see, e.g., Fishburn 1981).
However, Ramsey’s assumption that there exists an ethically
neutral proposition (needed for the definition of equal differences in
utility to make sense) has attracted substantial critical discussion.
Ramsey provides his readers with no reasons to believe that even one
ethically neutral proposition exists, still less that their existence
is a precondition for the consistency of partial beliefs. For
discussion, see (Sobel 1998), (Bradley 2001), (Eriksson &
Hájek 2007), and (Elliott 2017). 
The third and final stage of Ramsey’s measurement procedure
takes us from the subject’s utilities to a definition of her
degrees of belief:
Having thus defined a way of measuring value we can now derive a way
of measuring belief in general. If the option of [\(\omega_2\)] for
certain is indifferent with that of [‘\(\omega_1\) if \(p\),
\(\omega_3\) otherwise’], we can define the subject’s
degree of belief in \(p\) as the ratio of the difference between
[\(\omega_2\)] and [\(\omega_3\)] to that between [\(\omega_1\)] and
[\(\omega_3\)]. (1926a, [FM] 179)
In a footnote, Ramsey adds that \(\omega_1\) must imply \(p\), and
\(\omega_3\) must imply \(\neg{p}\). The definition makes sense in
light of the background assumptions (6.1)–(6.3) above: the world
\(\omega_2\) has the same utility as the gamble ‘\(\omega_1\) if
\(p\), \(\omega_3\) otherwise’ just in case
Where \(\mathcal{U}(\omega_1) \neq \mathcal{U}(\omega_3)\), this
equality can be rearranged to give a definition of
\(\mathcal{P}(p)\):
As Ramsey notes,
This amounts roughly to defining the degree of belief in \(p\) by the
odds at which the subject would bet on \(p\), the bet being conducted
in terms of differences of value as defined. (1926a, [FM]
179–80)
Ramsey’s definition of conditional probability (1926a, [FM] 180)
follows an essentially similar strategy. Having thus outlined his
strategy for defining degrees of belief, Ramsey proves that from his
preference conditions and subsequent definitions, the following
‘laws of probability’ follow:
These four conditions then imply that \(\mathcal{P}\) satisfies
finite additivity:
Ramsey goes on to say:
These are the laws of probability, which we have proved to be
necessarily true of any consistent set of degrees of belief. Any
definite set of degrees of belief which broke them would be
inconsistent in the sense that it violated the laws of preference
between options… (1926a, [FM] 182)
In this passage we find an early version of a representation theorem
argument for probabilistic norms on partial belief and for expected
utility theory, of the kind later made popular by Savage. (See also
Skyrms 1987, and the entry on
 normative theories 
 of rational choice: expected utility, §2.2). It is dubious,
 however, that Ramsey
really proved that the stated laws must be true of any consistent set
of partial beliefs. Amongst the axioms of his representation theorem
for utilities are several non-necessary conditions, as well as
conditions (like those regarding the ethically neutral proposition)
which are not plausible as conditions of consistency on
preferences. More importantly, Ramsey’s ‘proof’ is
grounded in strong theoretical assumptions about the connection
between degrees of belief and preferences, which Ramsey admits are
idealizations.
In the same paragraph, Ramsey states that:
If anyone’s mental condition violated these laws, his choice
would depend on the precise form in which the options were offered
him, which would be absurd. He could have a book made against him by a
cunning better and would then stand to lose in any event. (1926a, [FM]
182)
The reasoning behind the last claim is never made explicit, though it
is evident that Ramsey was putting forward what has come to be known
as a Dutch Book Argument, later made more precise by de Finetti (1937;
see entry the on 
 Dutch book arguments).
Having established what he takes to be the conditions of
consistency for partial beliefs, Ramsey concludes his paper
with a lengthy discussion on what (in addition) might make a set of
partial beliefs reasonable. He proposes a condition of
calibration, or fit with known frequencies:
Let us take a habit of forming opinion in a certain way; e.g. the
habit of proceeding from the opinion that a toadstool is yellow to the
opinion that it is unwholesome. Then we can accept the fact that the
person has a habit of this sort, and ask merely what degree of opinion
that the toadstool is unwholesome it would be best for him to
entertain when he sees it… And the answer is that it will in
general be best for his degree of belief that a yellow toadstool is
unwholesome to be equal to the proportion of yellow toadstools which
are in fact unwholesome. (This follows from the meaning of degree of
belief.) (1926a, [FM] 195)
So, for example, if 1 in 100 yellow toadstools is unwholesome, then
ceteris paribus one should believe that this
toadstool is unwholesome, given that it is yellow, to degree
\(0.01\).Something like this condition has reappeared in a number of
later works (e.g., Shimony 1988; Lewis 1980); see the entry on
Interpretations of Probability, §3.3.4, for more discussion.
It would be hard to understate the importance of the above ideas to
the subjectivist tradition. It is a major testament to the originality
of Ramsey’s essay that it contains not only the first
appearances of two of the main contemporary arguments for
probabilistic norms on partial belief, but also an influential case
for a normative link between partial beliefs and known frequencies.
Furthermore, most attempts to characterise degrees of belief in the
subjectivist tradition have made central appeal to their connection
with preferences. (See de Finetti 1937, Savage 1954, Anscombe &
Aumann 1963, Maher 1993; for criticisms of the approach, see Joyce
1999, §1.3; Eriksson & Hájek 2007.) Indeed, in much of
philosophy, economics and psychology today, the default or orthodox
way to operationalise degrees of belief is in terms of choices, along
essentially the same lines that Ramsey put forward.
Ramsey’s main contributions to the philosophy of science stem
from three posthumously published papers written in 1928 and 1929, one
on theoretical terms in theories and two on the distinction between (in
modern terminology) laws of nature and accidental generalizations.
In both papers on laws, Ramsey (1928b, §2; 1929b, [FM]
237–38) considers accidental generalization to be conjunctions
([NP], n. 40; cf. Ramsey 1927a, [FM] 152–53) and thus normal
propositions. In “Universals of Law and Fact”, Ramsey
(1928b, §12) considers laws of nature to be propositions with a
special status:
Thus laws of nature are the axioms and theorems in the simplest
axiomatization of all of our knowledge. And while we currently do not
know everything, we can still find the simplest axiomatization for
what we do know and what we expect to come to know (§16).
Following Lewis (1973 [1986], §3.3), a similar view of laws has
been developed and discussed as the “Best System” account
of laws, which, however, does not demand that we find the simplest
axiomatization of all our knowledge, but rather of as much of
our knowledge as is possible while retaining a high enough level of
simplicity (see also Carroll 2016, §2).
“General Propositions and Causality”, written in the
summer of 1929 (Braithwaite 1931, xiii) and with additional notes from
September 1929 ([NP] note 74), explicitly retracts the view that laws
(here called ‘variable hypotheticals’) are propositions
(1929b, [FM] 238). Rather (1929b, [FM] 241):
Thus variable hypotheticals “form the system with which the
speaker meets the future” in that “we trust [a conjunction
of their instances] to guide us in a new instance” exactly
because the conjunction is evidence for the variable
hypothetical. Simplicity may still play a role, but not as
constitutive of laws (as in the earlier, Best System account), rather
only as epistemic justification for adopting a rule of judgment
(1929b, [FM] 242). This allows again for the non-arbitrariness if not
uniqueness of laws. Unknown laws are those rules of judgment whose
adoption is justified by unknown facts (1929b, [FM] 243–45).
In both papers, ‘if … then …’ statements,
called ‘conditionals’, are taken to differ from material
implications in that they can be inferred from the system of laws
(1928b, §15; 1929b, [FM] 248). Ramsey (1929b, [FM] 249) takes
conditionals to encompass both the indicative and subjunctive mood
(see §5 on Conditionals) and he identifies causal laws with
conditionals in which the event described in the antecedent takes
place before the event described in the consequent.
Ramsey’s earlier, Best System account of laws fits well with
Humean constraints of metaphysics (Carroll 2016, §2), and Ramsey
(1929b, [FM] 252–53; 254–55, n. 4) is explicit that his
later, non-propositional account of laws avoids “real
connections of universals” and is in the spirit of Hume. At
first Ramsey (1928b, §15) even states that the material
implication is all we practically need, while later acknowledging that
conditionals are necessary for assigning praise and blame (1929b, [FM]
245–46).
His non-propositional account of laws, Ramsey (1929b, [FM] 254, n. 2)
notes, renders theoretical laws twice removed from propositions:
In his paper “Theories” (1929a), written in the summer of
1929 (Braithwaite 1931, xiii), Ramsey calls the observational language
‘primary system’. The non-observational (theoretical)
language is called ‘secondary system’. The paper is
thoroughly instrumentalistic, since the factual content of theories
consists only of their primary implications. This is made clear in a
comment on the paper, written in August 1929 ([NP] 229, footnote
removed; see also Ramsey (1931, [FM] 260):
The essence of a theory is that we make our assertions in a form
containing a lot of parameters, which have to be eliminated in order
to get our real meaning.
We mean to assert everything that can be deduced and does not
contain a parameter.
The “parameters” here are the secondary terms. And Ramsey
([NP] 236) stresses in a note on the infinite in mathematics
that their use does not entail any ontological commitment:
To investigate the relation of the primary and the secondary
system, Ramsey (1929a, [FM] 215–19) provides a primary system
for an agent who, in discrete time intervals, can move forwards and
backwards, open and close their eyes, and see blue, red, or
nothing. In the secondary system, Ramsey formulates a toy theory that
describes the movement of the agent among three locations and the
sometimes changing color of the locations. A dictionary defines the
primary terms in the secondary system so that, for instance, the agent
sees blue if and only if situated at a blue location with open
eyes.
Ramsey (1929a, [FM] 217–19) shows that all the theory’s
implications in the primary system can be listed without the use of
the secondary system and, contrary to “Russell, Whitehead, Nicod
and Carnap” (220), that it is virtually impossible to define the
secondary terms in the primary system:
The qualifier “simple” is needed to exclude the
following case: Assume that all the models of the theory and the
dictionary are finite and all objects have names in the primary
system.  Then in each model \(M_i\), each term \(T_j\) of the
secondary system is co-extensional with a formula \(\phi_{i,j}\) in
the primary system. If furthermore each model is named by a sentential
constant \(C_i\) of the primary system, one can define each term
\(T_jx_1\ldots x_n\) as the conjunction of the material implications
\(C_i \to \phi_{i,j}(x_1,\ldots ,x_n)\) for all models \(M_i\)
(220–21).  However, Ramsey (1929a, [FM] 230) argues, apart from
being cumbersome, definitions for secondary terms actually hinder
scientific development because they require conceptual decisions based
on fiat rather than further empirical discoveries (cf. Braithwaite
1953, 52–76). This criticism was later rediscovered by Carnap
(1936, 449).
To avoid these problems, Ramsey (1929a, [FM] 231) suggests a
way of applying a theory without defining the secondary terms:
\(\alpha\), \(\beta\), and \(\gamma\) are variables for the terms of
the secondary system and are interpreted purely extensionally, so that
the theory states “There are extensions \(\alpha\), \(\beta\),
and \(\gamma\) that satisfy the sentences of the dictionary and the
axioms”. In contemporary presentations, the axioms are usually
denoted \(T\) (for ‘theory’), the dictionary is denoted
\(C\) (for ‘correspondence rules’), and the secondary
terms \(T_1,\ldots ,T_n\) are treated as parameters in \(T\) and
\(C\), so that the conjunction of axioms and dictionary is written as
\(TC(T_1,\ldots ,T_n)\). What is now called the ‘Ramsey
sentence’ \({TC}^R\) is then written as
that is, in the conjunction of all axioms and sentences of the
dictionary, the theoretical terms \(T_1,\ldots ,T_n\) are replaced by
variables \(X_1,\ldots ,X_n\) and bound by existential quantifiers.
This procedure is now known as ‘Ramseyfication’ or
‘Ramsification’. If some of the theoretical terms are of
the highest order (predicates or functions of \(n^{\mathrm{th}}\)
order in \(n^{\mathrm{th}}\) order logic), then Ramseyfication
increases the order of the theory by one. While higher-order
existential quantification was commonly used to express consistency
when Ramsey wrote “Theories”, he was the first to quantify
on only some of the terms (Demopoulos 2003, 256).  Crucially, the
Ramsey sentence contains no theoretical terms while still entailing
the same primary statements as \(TC\) (for a simple proof, see Bohnert
1967, 342–43). Since all of \(TC\)’s sentences are in the
scope of the existential quantifiers introduced during Ramseyfication,
\({TC}^R\) does not assign meaning to individual secondary sentences
or terms. However, we can still reason with them by deriving primary
propositions from them within the scope of the quantifiers, just as we
can derive propositions from variable hypotheses (1929a, [FM] 232;
Bohnert 1967, 344–47). Hence secondary universal sentences are
“at two removes” from propositions, and secondary
sentences and terms are only meaningful in the context of the theory
to which they belong (1931, 260).
As an example, consider a simplification of Ramsey’s toy theory
that states that being at a blue location with open eyes is followed
by being at a red location with open eyes: \(\forall x(Bx \wedge Ox
\to Rx' \wedge Ox')\), where \(x'\) is the successor of
\(x\). ‘Blue’ (\(B\)), ‘red’ (\(R\)), and
‘open eyes’ (\(O\)) are theoretical terms. The
correspondence rules define the observational terms ‘perceiving
blue’ as ‘being at a blue location with open eyes’,
\(\forall x(Px \leftrightarrow Bx \wedge Ox)\), and correspondingly
‘perceiving red’ \(\forall x(Qx \leftrightarrow Rx \wedge
Ox)\). The Ramsey sentence of \(TC\) is then:
This is equivalent to the observational sentence \(\forall x(Px \to
Qx')\), which states that perceiving blue is followed by perceiving
red. For any specific location \(a\), this variable hypothetical then
becomes the proposition \(Pa \to Qa'\).
While sentences of any order can be Ramseyfied, many technical
discussions (e.g., the overview by van Benthem 1978) treat the special case in which
axioms and dictionary are of first order and the Ramsey sentence is of
second order. In this case, the class of models of the observational first-order
implications of \(TC\) can be a proper superset of the class of models
of \({TC}^R\). This has been known at least since 1941 as the difference
between elementary and pseudoelementary classes (Hodges 1993, 207,
260) and is regularly rediscovered in philosophy (see Demopoulos 2011,
179). It entails that \({TC}^R\) can be false in a structure even though
all the first order implications of \(TC\) are true. Specifically,
\(TC\) may only have tautological observational implications even
though the Ramsey sentence is not logically true; this situation is
one version of the distinction between syntactic and semantic
conservativeness known from definition theory (Gupta 2015, §2.3;
Przełęcki 1969, 52–53).
Carnap (1963, §24.D) used the Ramsey sentence for distinguishing
between the analytic and synthetic components of higher-order theories
(Uebel 2016, §3.5), and Lewis (1970) significantly modified the
Ramsey sentence to arrive at explicit definitions of secondary terms
(Andreas 2017, §4.4). This Ramsey-Lewis sentence has become
central in the philosophy of mind (Levin 2017, §4.1) and
philosophical methodology (Papineau 2016, §2.3).
In current terminology, the semantics of the Ramsey sentence is the
following: \({TC}^R\) is true in a structure \(S\) for the primary terms
if and only if it is possible to add interpretations for the secondary
terms to \(S\) such that \(TC\) is true (Przełęcki 1969,
ch. 6; Andreas 2017, §4.2). Sneed (1971, 106) modified the
semantics of the Ramsey sentence for the use in structuralism (Schmidt
2014, §2.2.1; Stegmüller 1976, 88–89). Maxwell (1970,
186–88) identified the Ramsey sentence with its semantics to
argue that the Ramsey sentence expresses structural realism (see also
Ladyman 2016, §3.2).
Despite being employed as a mathematician at Cambridge Ramsey only
published one paper (1930) firmly in that subject, though
two ideas he introduced in his more philosophical papers
(1926a, 1929b), also led eventually to new lines
of mathematical research. Each of these three contributions has proved
seminal and they are now rightly associated with his name.
Of these three Ramsey is best known within philosophy for his somewhat
sketchy description of what later became known as the Dutch Book
argument or theorem, see Vineberg 2016. In his unpublished paper
“Truth and Probability” (1926a), Ramsey proposed a set of
axioms and assumptions, his Laws of Preference, which enable
a subject to correlate the value of options \(\alpha, \beta, \gamma\)
and the preference relation between them with real numbers under the
standard ordering. Using \(\alpha\) etc. as Ramsey does to denote both
the option and its correlated real number allows a subject in turn to
equate their degree of belief in a proposition \(p\) with the
ratio 
 when, as far as the subject is concerned, the option
and the option
are equally preferable.
Ramsey then asserted that for partial belief (i.e. not certain
belief) “This amounts roughly to defining the degree of belief
in \(p\) by the odds at which the subject would bet on \(p\), the bet
being conducted in terms of differences of value as defined”. In
making this rough identification then Ramsey draws on the already
“old-established” idea of measuring one’s degree of
belief in a proposition \(p\) in terms of ones willingness to bet on
its being true (1926a, [FM] 172). While he does not elaborate
further on this connection it is implicit in the derivations that
follow that Ramsey concludes that there is a number \(x\) such that
for any option \(\xi\) and any stake \(t\) (positive or negative),
\(\xi\) for certain is equivalent to:
As above this gives \(\bel(p)=x\), from which we might surmise that
Ramsey intends \(\bel(p)\) to be that number for which the options:
are all equally acceptable to the subject. (There is an assumption
here that the stake \(t\) is not so great as to incur
“diminishing marginal utility”.)
With this definition of the function \(\bel(p)\) and its further
extension \(\bel(p\mid q)\) to conditional belief in \(p\) given \(q\),
for which Ramsey claims credit, he argues that if a subject’s
degrees of belief are consistent in the sense of obeying these Laws of
Preference (alternatively, as Ramsey simply states, do not allow a
[Dutch] book to be made against him by which he would lose in any
event) then \(Bel\) must satisfy the “fundamental laws of
probable belief (degrees of belief between 0 and 1)”, which he
gives as:
Ramsey also states, again without proof, the converse (1926a, [FM],
183):
Having degrees of belief obeying the laws of probability implies a
further measure of consistency, namely such a consistency between the
odds acceptable on different propositions as shall prevent a book
being made against you.
Nowadays, this result is commonly attributed to John Kemeny (1955) and
independently Sherman Lehman (1955).
Such casual allusions to important new mathematical results without
further explanation seems to have been a feature of Ramsey’s
writing.
Unaware of Ramsey’s result, Bruno de Finetti published (1931) a
detailed direct proof that if a subject’s (unconditional)
degrees of belief \(\bel(p)\) do not allow such a book, he calls such a
subject coherent, then \(\bel\) must satisfy what would later
become know as Kolmogorov’s Axioms (1933) for a finitely
additive probability function and conversely. In consequence of this
fuller explication the forward direction of the Dutch Book argument
for belief as probability is commonly attributed to de Finetti
alone.
In recent times Dutch Book arguments have become an established topic
in philosophy and mathematics in terms of analysing and extending the
original argument to other logics, see Vineberg 2016.
A second important mathematical contribution of Ramsey is based on the
following brief footnote in his otherwise philosophical
paper General Propositions and Causality (1929b, [FM]
247):
If two people are arguing ‘If \(p\) will \(q\)?’ and are
both in doubt as to \(p\), they are adding \(p\) hypothetically
to their stock of knowledge and arguing on that basis about \(q\);
so that in a sense ‘If \(p\), \(q\)’ and
‘If \(p\), not \(q\)‘ are contradictories.
Starting with Robert Stalnaker (1968) this has been (mis)interpreted
(see the section on Conditionals) as a bridge between logics of
(indicative) conditionals (Edgington 2014, Arlo-Costa 2016) and logics
of belief revision (Hansson 2017). In the former the interest is in
formalising the properties of conditional assertions such
as if \(p\) then \(q\), denoted \(p>q\), their
semantics and the rules and constraints that, arguably, they should
obey. For the latter the focus is on capturing the rules and
constraints that, again arguably, should apply when an agent’s
set of beliefs \(K\), is to be revised, to \(K*p\) say, on receipt of
new information \(p\) which, in particular, may not even be consistent
with the original \(K\).
The above footnote has been formalised within this notation as the so
called Ramsey’s Test:
An agent with belief set \(K\) should accept \(p \gt q\) iff \(q
\in K*p\)
Through this recipe then any logic of conditionals generates a logic
of belief revision, and conversely. In this way it can act as
a test of the appropriateness of a logic of conditionals by
opening up the corresponding logic of belief revision to scrutiny, and
again conversely.
Not surprisingly then Ramsey’s Test, in this or in its many
amended forms, has been hugely influential in the formal development
of the logics of conditionals and belief revision in recent years, in
philosophy and equally in artificial intelligence.
Despite its important contribution however Ramsey’s Test has in
certain guises fallen foul of so called Triviality Theorems,
starting with Gärdenfors (1986), which show that under certain
conditions and apparently reasonable constraints on the belief
revision Ramsey’s Test can only apply to a very limited family
of belief sets \(K\). That is, agents who satisfied Ramsey’s
Test could only consistently subscribe to very limited and trivial
belief sets. In particular this can happen if we allow \(>\) to
freely appear in the logical language from which the sentences \(p,q\)
etc. are formed since then it would seem that the Ramsey Test would
equally amount to:
Ramsey Test (RT):
For an agent with belief set \(K\), \((p>q) \in K\) iff \(q\in K * p\)
From this it follows that \(*\) must be monotonic in the sense that if
\(K \subseteq K'\) then \(K*p \subseteq K'*p\), since if \(q \in K*p\)
then \((p>q) \in K\) by (RT) so \(K \subseteq K'\) gives \((p>q)
\in K'\) and hence by (RT) again \(q \in K'*p\). But this is a
conclusion which goes against intuition, and unless the allowed belief
sets \(K\) are severely limited, contradicts ostensibly reasonable
assumptions about \(*\), including in particular that if \(p\) is
consistent with \(K\) then \(K*p\) should be simply the logical
consequences of \(K \cup\{p\}\).
Ramsey’s third contribution, and the one most directly important
for mathematics, consists of two closely related theorems proved in
the paper On a Problem of Formal Logic (1930) which was read
to the London Mathematical Society on the 13th December 1928. This
material is uncompromisingly aimed at mathematicians and with
apologies its explication herein requires some necessary
technicalities.
The first of these theorems says that if \(n,r\) are finite positive
numbers and \(X\) is an infinite set and we partition the set of
subsets of \(X\) of size \(n\) into \(r\) parts then there is an
infinite subset \(Y\) of \(X\) such that every subset of \(Y\) of size
\(n\) is in the same part. The second theorem gives a version of the
first, but for finite sets of sufficiently large size. It says that,
for any finite positive numbers \(m,n,r\) there is a finite positive
\(k\) such that if \(X\) has at least \(k\) elements, and we partition
the sets of subsets of \(X\) of size \(n\) into \(r\) parts, then
there is a subset \(Y\) of \(X\) with at least \(m\) elements such
that every subset of \(Y\) of size \(n\) is in the same part of the
partition. Ramsey gave an upper bound on such a \(k\) in terms of
\(m,n,r\) but even today the actual value of the least such \(k\),
known as the Ramsey Number \(R_n(m,r)\), is unknown in all
but a handful of cases for small \(n,m,r\). These two results are now
referred to as the Infinite and Finite Ramsey Theorems,
respectively. They can be viewed as generalizing Dirichlet’s
much earlier Schubfachprinzip or Pigeon Hole
Principle (1832).
Ramsey then uses the finite theorem in this paper to show that for
each sentence, from a relational language with equality, of the
form 
where \(\theta\) is quantifier free, one could effectively decide if
it was satisfiable in some structure of cardinality \(\kappa\). Ramsey
achieved this by showing that one can write down a natural number
\(k\) such that for any cardinal \(\kappa \geq k\) this sentence can
be satisfied in some structure of cardinality \(\kappa\) just if it
can be satisfied in some structure of cardinality \(k\), and to
determine this latter just requires checking its satisfiability in one
of the finitely many such structures. An important innovation in his
proof was the notion of indiscernibles which was to reappear,
apparently independently, three decades later in Model Theory. It was
subsequently employed in the proof of Michael Morley’s seminal
Categoricity Theorem (1965) and later in the proof of the
Paris-Harrington Theorem (Paris & Harrington 1977).
This result of Ramsey’s improved on earlier joint work of Paul
Bernays and Moses Schönfinkel (1928) and solves the
prospective Spectrum Problem (Scholz 1952), for sentences of
the above form, now referred to as the Bernays-Schönfinkel-Ramsey
Class. That is, for such sentences it enables us to determine the
class of cardinalities of structures in which that sentence can be
satisfied. As a corollary it gives that one can effectively decide if
a sentence in this class is satisfiable in
some structure. However it seems clear from the accompanying
discussion that Ramsey was aware that there was also a direct and
simple proof of this fact.
This corollary would seem to justify Ramsey’s stated aim in this
paper to provide a step towards a positive solution to
Hilbert’s Entscheidungsproblem though it is possible
that the aim he actually had in mind was the related Spectrum
Problem. Hilbert’s goal was later shown to be not achievable by
the undecidability results of Alonzo Church (1936) and independently
Alan Turing (1937). In fact Ramsey’s positive contribution
turned out to be the best possible in the sense that decidability
fails once the order of the blocks of existential and universal
quantifiers is reversed, see Kalmár & Surányi
1950, and Mortimer 1975.
Ramsey’s Theorems were later popularised in an influential paper
of Paul Erdős and George Szekeres (1935) and initiated in the
early 1970s the establishment of Ramsey Theory as a major
subdiscipline of Combinatorics. The basic aim in this subdiscipline is
to show that mathematical structures of a certain type and size (and
generally non-uniform) must have within them uniform substructures of
a certain type and size, see Katz & Reimann 2018,
Nešetřil & Rödl 1990, and Spencer & Graham
1990.
Ramsey’s Theorems themselves have yielded numerous important
applications, generalizations and concepts in other branches of
mathematics. For example the notion of a Ramsey Cardinal,
\(\kappa\), where we require that for a set \(X\) of cardinality
\(\kappa\) and any partition of the finite subsets of \(\kappa\) into
two sets there is a subset \(Y\) of \(X\), also of cardinality
\(\kappa\), such that any two finite subsets of \(Y\) of the same size
are in the same part of the partition. Ramsey Cardinals were one of
the first examples of large cardinals, a central area of
research in Set Theory. One feature of such cardinals is that they are
so large that their existence cannot be proved within ZFC.
In addition to these contributions to mathematics Frank Ramsey (1925a)
devoted much effort to addressing what were by then seen as problems
in Whitehead & Russell’s attempt in their Principia
Mathematica (1910–1913), to base mathematics on formal
logic, an enterprise which Ramsey initially strongly supported though
he ultimately became disappointed with his efforts to correct its
shortcomings, see Paul 2012 (232). Since then this approach to the
foundations of mathematics has been very largely overshadowed amongst
mathematicians by the practically simpler device of assuming as a
foundation Zermelo-Fraenkel Set Theory.