Friedrich Daniel Ernst Schleiermacher (1768–1834) was born in
Breslau as the son of a clergyman of the reformed church. His earlier
education took place in institutions of the Moravian Brethren
(Herrnhuter), a strict pietist sect. However, while there he also
pursued broader humanistic interests. Largely as a result of skepticism
about certain Christian doctrines taught there, he moved to the more
liberal University of Halle in 1787. However, he continued in theology
(with philosophy and classical philology as minor fields). He passed
his theological examinations in Berlin in 1790. This was followed by a
period as a private tutor, which ended in 1793, partly, it seems, due
to friction caused by his sympathy with the French Revolution, to which
his employer was opposed.
During the periods just mentioned he was heavily occupied with the
study and criticism of Kant’s philosophy. This work culminated in
several unpublished essays—On the Highest Good (1789),
On What Gives Value to Life (1792–3), and On
Freedom (1790–3)—which rejected Kant’s
conception that the “highest good [summum bonum]”
requires an apportioning of happiness to moral desert, and Kant’s
connected doctrine of the “postulates” of an afterlife of
the soul and God, while developing an anti-Kantian theory of the
thoroughgoing causal determination of human action and of the
compatibility of this with moral responsibility. In 1793–4 he
wrote two essays about Spinoza: Spinozism and Brief
Presentation of the Spinozistic System. A major catalyst for these
essays was Jacobi’s work On the Doctrine of Spinoza, in
Letters to Mr. Moses Mendelssohn (1785), which was highly critical
of Spinozism. But they also show the influence of Herder’s work
God: Some Conversations (1787), which championed a modified
form of Spinozism. In his two essays Schleiermacher himself embraces a
modified form of Spinoza’s monism similar in character to
Herder’s (in particular, like Herder, he is inclined to
substitute for Spinoza’s single substance the more active
principle of a single fundamental force). He also attempts to
defend this position by showing it to be reconcilable with central
features of Kant’s theoretical philosophy (notably, Kant’s
doctrine of things in themselves). This neo-Spinozistic position would
subsequently be fundamental to Schleiermacher’s most important
work in the philosophy of religion, On Religion: Speeches to Its
Cultured Despisers (1799). However, in thus rejecting
Jacobi’s anti-Spinozism, Schleiermacher seems also to have
absorbed something from Jacobi that would be equally important for his
future philosophy of religion: the idea (for which his pietist
background no doubt made him receptive) that we enjoy a sort of
immediate intuition or feeling of God.
During the period 1794–6 Schleiermacher served as a pastor in
Landsberg. In 1796 he moved to Berlin, where he became chaplain to a
hospital. In Berlin he met Friedrich and August Wilhelm Schlegel, as
well as other romantics, became deeply engaged in the formation of the
romantic movement, and collaborated with the Schlegel brothers on the
short-lived but important literary journal Athenaeum
(1798–1800). Among Schleiermacher’s contributions to this
journal was the short proto-feminist piece Idea for a Catechism of
Reason for Noble Ladies (1798). During the period 1797–9, he
shared a house with Friedrich Schlegel. Encouraged by the romantic
circle to write a statement of his religious views, in 1799 he
published his most important and radical work in the philosophy of
religion, On Religion: Speeches to Its Cultured Despisers
(revised editions followed in 1806, 1821, the latter including
significant “explanations”, and 1831). This work sought to
save religion in the eyes of its cultured despisers (prominent among
them some of the romantics, including Friedrich Schlegel) by, inter
alia, arguing that human immortality and even God are inessential
to religion; diagnosing and excusing current religion’s more
off-putting features in terms of its corruption by worldly bourgeois
culture and state-interference; and arguing that there are an endless
multiplicity of valid forms of religion. The book won Schleiermacher a
national reputation. In the same year (1799) he also published an essay
on the situation of the Jews in Prussia, Letters on the Occasion of
the Political-Theological Task and the Open Letter of Jewish
Householders. In this work he rejected an expedient that had been
proposed for ameliorating the situation of the Jews in Prussia of
achieving their civil assimilation through baptism (which would, he
argues, harm both Judaism and Christianity) and instead advocated full
civil rights for Jews (on certain rather reasonable conditions). The
same year also saw Schleiermacher’s composition of the
interesting short essay Toward a Theory of Sociable Conduct,
which is important as his first significant discussion of the art of
conversation (an art that would later be central to his discipline of
dialectics). Finally, 1799 also saw his publication of a highly
critical review of Kant’s Anthropology. The review in
particular took Kant to task for his dualistic philosophy of mind and
his superficial, disparaging attitude toward women and other
peoples.
During the following several years Schleiermacher complemented
On Religion with two substantial publications that were more
ethical in orientation: the especially important Soliloquies
(1800; second edition 1810) and the Outlines of a Critique of
Previous Ethical Theory (1803). In 1800 he also defended his
friend Friedrich Schlegel’s controversial and arguably
pornographic novel Lucinde from the same year in his
Confidential Letters Concerning Friedrich Schlegel’s
Lucinde—a shared proto-feminism constituting a large part of
his reason for sympathizing with Schlegel’s book. During the
period 1799–1804 Schleiermacher developed with Schlegel the
project of translating Plato’s dialogues. As time went on,
however, Schlegel left this work to Schleiermacher, which contributed
to increasingly difficult relations between the two men after 1800.
Schleiermacher’s translations appeared during the period
1804–28 (though not quite all of the dialogues were translated in
the end), and are still widely used and admired today.
While in Berlin Schleiermacher developed romantic attachments to two
married women, Henriette Herz and Eleonore Grunow—the latter of
which attachments led to scandal and unhappiness, eventually causing
Schleiermacher to leave the city. He spent the years 1802–4 in
Stolpe. By 1804 he was teaching at Halle University. During the period
1804–5 he began lecturing on ethics (as he would do again
repeatedly until 1832). In 1805 he also began delivering his famous and
important lectures on hermeneutics (which he repeated regularly until
1833). In 1806 he published the short book Christmas Eve, a
literary work that explores the meaning of Christian love by depicting
a German family’s celebration of Christmas Eve. This is in
keeping with On Religion’s ideal that (Christian)
religion should be family- rather than state-centered. In 1806–7
he left Halle as a result of the French occupation, and moved back to
Berlin. From this time on he began actively promoting German resistance
to the French occupation and the cause of German unity. In 1808 he
published Occasional Thoughts on Universities in a German Spirit,
together with an Appendix on One about to be Founded, a work
written in connection with plans for founding a new university in
Berlin (now known as the Humboldt University), to which Wilhelm von
Humboldt likewise contributed theoretically soon afterwards as well as
leading the project’s implementation. In 1808 Schleiermacher
married a young widow, Henriette von Willich, with whom he had several
children. In 1808–9 he became preacher at the
Dreifaltigkeitskirche, in 1810 professor of theology at the University
of Berlin, and by 1811 also a member of the Berlin Academy of
Sciences.
After becoming a member of the Academy he often delivered addresses
before it, among which several on ethics, one on translation from 1813,
one on the philosophy of Socrates from 1815, and one on Leibniz’s
idea of a universal language from 1831 are especially significant.
In 1811 he lectured on dialectics for the first time (as he would do
again regularly until his death, at which time he was in the early
stages of preparing a version for publication). In 1812 he began
lecturing on the history of philosophy (as he would again repeatedly in
subsequent years). In 1813 he delivered as an address, and then
published as an essay, On the Different Methods of
Translation—a very important work in translation theory
deeply informed by his own experience as a translator. In 1813–14
he lectured on pedagogy, or the philosophy of education, for the first
time (as he would do on two subsequent occasions: 1820–1 and
1826). In 1818 he lectured on psychology for the first time (as he
would again repeatedly until 1833–4). In 1819 he lectured on
aesthetics for the first time (as he subsequently did on two further
occasions, the last of them in 1832–3). In the same year he also
began lecturing on the life of Jesus (as he did again on four further
occasions over the following twelve years)—thereby inaugurating
an important genre of literature on this subject in the nineteenth
century.
In 1821–2 he published his major work of systematic theology,
The Christian Faith (revised edition 1830–1). In 1829 he
published two open letters on this work (nominally addressed to his
friend Lücke), in which he discusses it and central issues in the
philosophy of religion and theology relating to it in a concise and
lucid way.
Schleiermacher died in 1834. As can be seen even from this brief
sketch of his life and works, a large proportion of his career was
taken up with the philosophy of religion and theology. However, from
the secular standpoint of modern philosophy it is probably his work in
such areas as hermeneutics (i.e., the theory of interpretation) and the
theory of translation that is most important. Accordingly, this article
will begin with these more interesting areas of his thought, only
turning to his philosophy of religion briefly at the end.
Since the topics of language and human psychology are central to
Schleiermacher’s hermeneutics and theory of translation, it is
appropriate to begin with some discussion of his philosophies of
language and mind. Schleiermacher nowhere presents his philosophy of
language separately; instead, it is found scattered through such works
as his lectures on psychology, dialectics, and hermeneutics. The
following eight positions—all but the last of which are heavily
indebted to Herder—are especially worth noting:
The next five of the eight positions are especially important for
Schleiermacher’s hermeneutics and theory of translation (to be
discussed below):
As was mentioned earlier, with the sole exception of this final
feature (semantic holism), Schleiermacher’s entire philosophy of
language is heavily indebted to Herder. However, while refining
Herder’s philosophy of language with this final feature, it also
weakens it in other respects. For example, whereas Herder’s
version of doctrine
 (4)
 normally restricted itself
to a claim that thought is essentially dependent on and bounded by
language, Schleiermacher’s version asserts the outright
identity of thought with language, or with inner language. But
such a strong version of the doctrine is philosophically
problematic—vulnerable to counterexamples in which thought occurs
without any corresponding (inner) language use, and vice versa. Again,
as we noted, in later works Schleiermacher tends to add to the
Herderian doctrine
 (5)
 a thesis that concepts are
empirical schemata à la Kant (see
 (6)).
This is likely to seem problematic at first sight because of its
inclusion of sensory images in meaning. But that is arguably not so:
Herder had already included them in a way as well; contrary to first
appearances, doing so need not conflict with a suitably interpreted
doctrine that meanings are word-usages; and the currently popular
attack on such “psychologism” in modern philosophy of
language influenced by Frege and Wittgenstein, which is likely to make
such a position seem suspect, may well itself be misguided. What
is problematic about Schleiermacher’s thesis is rather
that Kant’s theory of empirical schemata had implied that there
is a sharp distinction between meanings, conceived as something purely
psychological, and word-usages, so that Schleiermacher’s
unmodified reintroduction of the theory implies the same, and hence
conflicts with doctrine
 (5),
 the doctrine that
meaning is word-usage. Finally, whereas for Herder doctrine
 (7)
 was merely an empirically established rule of thumb
and admitted of exceptions, Schleiermacher in his lectures on ethics
and dialectics attempts to give a sort of a priori proof of
linguistic and conceptual-intellectual diversity even at the level of
individuals as a universal fact—a proof that is dubious
in its very a priori status, in its specific details, and in its
extremely counterintuitive implication (often explicitly asserted by
Schleiermacher) that, strictly speaking, no one can ever understand
another person.
Schleiermacher’s philosophy of mind is found mainly in his
lectures on psychology. It is too extensive to present in detail here.
But the following four central principles—all of which have their
roots in Herder, and especially in Herder’s main work on the
philosophy of mind, On the Cognition and Sensation of the Human
Soul (1778)—are especially striking and important:
Finally, one feature of Schleiermacher’s philosophy of mind
that distinguishes it from Herder’s, and from other
German predecessors’, is also worth noting: Schleiermacher says
relatively little about unconscious mental processes, and when
he does mention them often seems skeptical about them. For example, he
argues that thought cannot be unconscious, and that so-called
“obscure representations” are in fact merely sensuous
images that do not involve thoughts.
Some of Schleiermacher’s most important philosophical work
concerns the theories of interpretation (“hermeneutics”)
and translation. Friedrich Schlegel was an immediate influence on his
thought here. Their ideas on these subjects began to take shape in the
late 1790s, when they lived together in the same house in Berlin for a
time. Many of their ideas are shared, and it is often unclear which of
the two men was the (more) original source of a given idea. But since
Schlegel’s surviving treatments are much less detailed and
systematic than Schleiermacher’s, the latter inevitably take on
prime importance.
Schleiermacher’s theories of interpretation and translation
rest squarely on three of the Herder-inspired doctrines in the
philosophy of language that were described above:
 (4)
 thought is essentially dependent on and bounded by, or
even identical with, language;
 (5)
 meaning is
word-usage; and
 (7)
 there are deep linguistic and
conceptual-intellectual differences between people. Doctrine
 (7)
 poses a severe challenge to both interpretation and
translation, and it is the main task of Schleiermacher’s theories
to cope with just this challenge. Schleiermacher’s most original
doctrine in the philosophy of language, doctrine
 (8)
 (semantic holism), is also highly relevant in this
connection, for, as Schleiermacher recognizes, semantic holism greatly
exacerbates the challenge to interpretation and translation that is
posed by
 (7).
Schleiermacher lectured on hermeneutics frequently between 1805 and
1833. The following are his main principles:
(a) Hermeneutics is strictly the theory of understanding
linguistic communication—as contrasted, not equated, with
explicating, applying, or translating it.
(b) Hermeneutics should be a universal
discipline—i.e., one that applies equally to all subjects areas
(such as the Bible, law, and literature), to oral as well as to written
language, to modern texts as well as to ancient ones, to works in
one’s own language as well as to works in foreign languages, and
so forth.
(c) In particular, the interpretation of sacred texts such as the
Bible is included within it—this may not rely on special
principles, such as divine inspiration (either of the author or of the
interpreter).
(d) Interpretation is a much more difficult task than is generally
realized: contrary to a common misconception that “understanding
occurs as a matter of course”, in fact “misunderstanding
occurs as a matter of course, and so understanding must be willed and
sought at every point” (HHM 109–110;
HC 21–22). (This position derives from
Schleiermacher’s version of principle
 (7):
deep linguistic and conceptual-intellectual diversity.)
How, then, is interpretation to be accomplished?
(e) It is essential to distinguish clearly between the question of
the meaning of a text or discourse and the question of its
truth. Assuming that a text or discourse must be true will
often lead to serious misinterpretation.
(f) Before the interpretation proper of a text or discourse can even
begin, the interpreter must acquire a good knowledge of its historical
context. (The suggestion found in some of the secondary literature that
Schleiermacher thinks that historical context is irrelevant to
interpretation is absurd.)
(g) Interpretation proper always has two sides: one linguistic, the
other psychological. Linguistic interpretation’s task (which
rests on principle
 (5))
 consists in inferring from
evidence that consists in particular actual uses of words to the rules
that are governing them, i.e., to their usages and thus to their
meanings; psychological interpretation instead focuses on an
author’s psychology. Linguistic interpretation is mainly
concerned with what is common or shared in a language; psychological
interpretation mainly with what is distinctive to a particular
author.
(h) Schleiermacher implies several reasons why an interpreter needs
to complement linguistic interpretation with psychological in this way.
First, he sees such a need as arising from the deep linguistic and
conceptual-intellectual distinctiveness of individuals. This
distinctiveness at the level of individuals leads to the problem for
linguistic interpretation that the actual uses of words that are
available to serve as evidence from which to infer an author’s
exact usage or meaning will usually be relatively few in number and
poor in contextual variety—a problem which an appeal to authorial
psychology is supposed to help solve by providing additional clues.
Second, an appeal to the author’s psychology is also required in
order to resolve ambiguities at the level of linguistic meaning that
arise in particular contexts (i.e., even after the range of meanings
available to the author for the word(s) in question is known). Third,
in order fully to understand a linguistic act one needs to know not
only its linguistic meaning but also what more recent philosophers have
called its “illocutionary force” or intention. For example,
if I encounter a stranger by a frozen lake who says to me, “The
ice is thin over there”, in order fully to understand his
utterance I need to know not only its linguistic meaning (which in this
case is clear) but also whether it is being made as a factual
observation, a threat, a joke, or whatnot. (Schleiermacher himself
places most emphasis on the first of these three considerations.
However, if, as Schleiermacher does, one wants to argue that
interpretation needs to invoke psychology generally, and if,
as I hinted earlier, linguistic and conceptual-intellectual
distinctiveness is not in fact the pervasive phenomenon that
Schleiermacher usually takes it to be, then it is arguably the latter
two considerations that should be considered the more fundamental
ones.)
(i) Interpretation also requires two different methods: a
“comparative” method (i.e., a method of plain induction),
which Schleiermacher sees as predominating on the linguistic side of
interpretation, where it takes the interpreter from the particular uses
of a word to the rule for use that governs them all; and a
“divinatory” method (i.e., a method of tentative, fallible
hypothesis based on but also going well beyond the empirical evidence
available; the etymology to keep in mind here is not so much Latin
divinus, which would point toward prophecy, but rather French
deviner, to guess or conjecture), which he sees as
predominating on the psychological side of interpretation. (The
widespread notion in the secondary literature that
“divination” is for Schleiermacher a process of
psychological self-projection into texts contains a grain of truth, in
that he does think that interpretation requires some measure
of psychological common ground between interpreter and interpretee, but
is basically mistaken.)
(j) Ideal interpretation is of its nature a holistic activity (this
principle in part rests on but also goes well beyond
Schleiermacher’s semantic holism). In particular, any
given piece of text needs to be interpreted in light of the whole text
to which it belongs, and both need to be interpreted in light of the
broader language in which they are written, their larger historical
context, a broader pre-existing genre, the author’s whole corpus,
and the author’s overall psychology. Such holism introduces a
pervasive circularity into interpretation, for, ultimately,
interpreting these broader items in its turn depends on interpreting
such pieces of text. Schleiermacher does not see this circle as
vicious, however. Why not? His solution is not that all of these tasks
should be accomplished simultaneously—for that would far exceed
human capacities. Rather, it essentially lies in the (very plausible)
thought that understanding is not an all-or-nothing matter but instead
something that comes in degrees, so that it is possible to
make progress toward full understanding in a piecemeal way. For
example, concerning the relation between a piece of text and the whole
text to which it belongs, Schleiermacher recommends that we first read
through and interpret as best we can each of the parts of the text in
turn in order thereby to arrive at an approximate overall
interpretation of the text, and that we then apply this approximate
overall interpretation in order to refine our initial interpretations
of each of the particular parts, which in turn gives us an improved
overall interpretation, which can then be re-applied toward still
further refinement of the interpretations of the parts, and so on
indefinitely.
Schleiermacher’s debts to Herder in this theory of
interpretation extend well beyond the framework-principles
 (4),
 (5),
 and
 (7)
 mentioned earlier. Indeed, Schleiermacher’s
theory as it has just been described is almost identical to
Herder’s. Some of the common ground here is admittedly due to the
fact that they were both influenced by the same predecessors,
especially J.A. Ernesti. But Schleiermacher’s theory owes
exclusively to Herder the two central moves (often wrongly thought to
have been original with Schleiermacher) of supplementing
“linguistic” with “psychological”
interpretation and of identifying “divination” as the
predominant method of the latter. (Herder had already made these two
moves, especially in On Thomas Abbt’s Writings [1768]
and On the Cognition and Sensation of the Human Soul [1778].)
Schleiermacher’s theory as it has just been described in essence
merely draws together and systematizes ideas that already lay scattered
through a number of Herder’s works.
There are some significant exceptions to this rule of continuity,
however—respects in which Schleiermacher’s theory deviates
from Herder’s. But it is precisely here that
Schleiermacher’s theory tends to become more philosophically
problematic.
To begin with two deviations that are not problematic, but
rather advantageous: First, as was previously mentioned, Schleiermacher
exacerbates the challenge to interpretation that principle
 (7)
 already poses by introducing principle
 (8),
 semantic holism. Second, Schleiermacher’s
theory explicitly introduces principle
 (b),
 the
ideal of the universality of hermeneutics. This principle is
very much in the spirit of Herder’s theory, but it does go beyond
its letter. (There were, however, some clearer precedents for
it—for example, in van der Hardt, Chladenius, Pfeiffer, Grosch,
and Meier.)
Turning now to deviations that are problematic, we already
noted several examples of such problematic deviations concerning the
exact force of the three principles in the philosophy of language that
underpin Schleiermacher’s theory of interpretation,
 principles
 (4),
 (5),
 and
 (7).
 But the following are further examples. Whereas
Herder rightly emphasizes the vital importance in interpretation of
correctly identifying a work’s genre, and also the great
difficulty of doing so in many cases, especially due to the constant
changes in genres that take place and the consequent pervasive
temptation falsely to assimilate unfamiliar genres to more familiar
ones, Schleiermacher pays relatively little attention to this subject.
Again, unlike Herder, Schleiermacher, especially in his later work,
more closely specifies psychological interpretation as a process of
identifying, and tracing the necessary development of, a single
authorial “seminal decision [Keimentschluß]”
that lies behind a work and unfolds itself as the work in a necessary
fashion. However, this seems an unhelpful move, for how many works are
actually composed, and hence properly interpretable, in such a way?
Again, whereas Herder includes not only an author’s linguistic
behavior but also his non-linguistic behavior among the evidence that
is relevant to psychological interpretation, Schleiermacher normally
insists on a restriction to the former. But this too seems misguided;
for example, the Marquis de Sade’s recorded acts of
cruelty seem no less potentially relevant to establishing the (as we
now put it) sadistic side of his psychological make-up, and hence to
interpreting his texts accurately, than his cruel statements. Again,
unlike Herder, Schleiermacher regards the central role of
“divination”, or hypothesis, in interpretation as a ground
for sharply distinguishing interpretation from natural science, and
hence for classifying it as an art rather than a science. However, he
should arguably instead have regarded it as a ground for considering
interpretation and natural science similar. (His mistake here
was caused by a false assumption that natural science works by a method
of plain induction—i.e., roughly: this first a is
F, this second a is F, this third a
is F, … therefore all as are
F—rather than by hypothesis.)
Schleiermacher’s theory also tends to play down, obscure, or
miss certain important points concerning interpretation that Friedrich
Schlegel had already made. Schlegel’s treatment of hermeneutic
matters—in texts such as his Philosophy of Philology
(1797) and the Athenaeum Fragments
(1798–1800)—largely resembles Schleiermacher’s. But
it also includes the following three points which are either less bold,
obscured, or altogether missing in Schleiermacher: (i) Schlegel notes
that texts (at least superior ones) often express unconscious
meanings: “Every excellent work … aims at more than it
knows” (On Goethe’s Meister [1798]
[PJ 2:177]). Schleiermacher sometimes implies a
similar-looking view, most famously in his doctrine that the
interpreter should aim to understand an author better than he
understood himself, but Schlegel’s version of such a position is
more radical, envisaging indeed an “infinite depth” of
meaning that is largely unknown to the author himself. (ii) Schlegel
emphasizes that a work often expresses important meanings, not
explicitly in any of its parts, but rather through the way in which
these are put together to form a whole. This is a very important point.
Schleiermacher perhaps in a way makes it as well, but if so,
then only as incorporated into and obscured by his more dubious
doctrine of the “seminal decision”. (iii) Unlike
Schleiermacher, Schlegel emphasizes that works typically contain
confusions that the interpreter needs to identify and which the
interpreter also needs to explain when they occur:
It is not enough that one understand the actual sense of a confused
work better than the author understood it. One must also oneself be
able to know, characterize, and even construe the
confusion even down to its very principles. (KFSA
18:63)
This is another very important point.
Despite these significant but limited shortcomings in the details of
Schleiermacher’s hermeneutics, his pupil August Boeckh, an
eminent classical philologist, subsequently gave a broadly faithful and
even more systematic re-articulation of Schleiermacher’s
hermeneutics in lectures that were eventually published as his
Encyclopedia and Methodology of the Philological Sciences
(delivered as lectures 1809–66; published posthumously 1877), and
through the combined influence of Schleiermacher’s and
Boeckh’s treatments it achieved something very much like the
status of the official hermeneutical methodology of nineteenth-century
classical and biblical scholarship.
Schleiermacher applied his scrupulous hermeneutic method fruitfully
to several areas of scholarship that centrally require interpretation.
One example of this is the series of lectures on the life of Jesus that
he delivered between 1819 and 1833. Another—for philosophers
perhaps more significant—example is his work as a historiographer
of philosophy. For further discussion, see the supplementary
 document
 Schleiermacher’s Historiography of Philosophy.
As was already mentioned, Schleiermacher also develops his theory of
translation on the foundation of the Herder-influenced principles in
the philosophy of language
 (4),
 (5),
 and
 (7),
 together with
 (8),
 his own semantic holism, which exacerbates the
challenge to translation already posed by (7).
Schleiermacher was himself a masterful translator, whose German
translations of Plato are still widely used and admired today, about
two hundred years after they were done. So his views on translation
carry a certain prima facie authority. He explains his theory
of translation mainly in the brilliant essay On the Different
Methods of Translation (1813). The following are some of his main
points:
(a) Translation usually faces the problem of a conceptual gulf
between the source language and the target language (as the latter
currently exists). (This is an application of principle
 (7).)
(b) This situation makes translation an extremely difficult task,
posing a major obstacle to the attainment of translation’s
traditional primary goal, that of faithfully reproducing the original
meaning in the target language. In this connection, Schleiermacher in
particular notes the following problem (which might be dubbed the
paradox of paraphrase): If, faced with the task of translating an alien
concept, a translator attempts to reproduce its intension by
reproducing its extension with the aid of an elaborate paraphrase in
his own language, he will generally find that as he gets closer to the
original extension he undermines the original intension in other ways.
For instance, faced with Homer’s color word
chlôros, a word that Homer sometimes applies to things
that we would classify as green (e.g., healthy foliage) but at other
times to things that we would classify as yellow (e.g., honey), a
translator might attempt to reproduce the extension correctly by
translating the word as “green or yellow”. But in doing so
he would be sacrificing the original intension in other ways—for
Homer did not have either the concept green or the concept
yellow (only the concept chlôros), and in addition for
Homer chlôros was not a disjunctive
concept.
(c) Schleiermacher also identifies a number of further challenges
that commonly exacerbate the difficulty of translation. For example, he
notes that in the case of poetry it is necessary to reproduce not only
the semantic but also the musical aspects of the original, such as
meter and rhyme—and this not merely as a desideratum over and
above the main task of reproducing meaning, but also as an essential
part of that task, because in poetry such musical features
serve as essential vehicles for the precise expression of meaning. And
he argues that in addition to reproducing meaning a translation should
attempt to convey to its readership where an author was being
conceptually conventional and where conceptually original—for
example, by using older vocabulary from the target language in the
former cases and relative neologisms from it in the latter. But he also
notes that in both of these connections the added requirement or
desideratum involved will frequently stand in tension with that of
finding the closest semantic fit—since, for example, it will turn
out that the word that would best reproduce a rhyme or best reflect a
concept’s vintage is not the one that is closest in meaning to
the word in the original.
(d) Because of this great difficulty, the translator needs to
possess real interpretive expertise, and to be an “artist”,
if he is to cope with the task of translation at all adequately.
(e) The conceptual gulf that poses the central challenge here might
in principle be tackled in one of two broad ways: either by bringing
the author’s linguistic-conceptual world closer to that of the
reader of the translation or vice versa. The former approach had been
championed, among others, by Luther in his classic Letter on
Translation (1530) and had been practiced by him in his
translation of the Bible (he called it Verdeutschung,
“Germanizing”). However, Schleiermacher finds it
unacceptable, mainly because it inevitably distorts the author’s
concepts and thoughts. Schleiermacher therefore champions the
alternative approach of bringing the reader toward the
linguistic-conceptual world of the author as the only acceptable
one.
But how can this possibly be accomplished?
(f) According to Schleiermacher, the key to a solution lies in the
plasticity of language. Because of this plasticity, even if the usages
of words, and hence the concepts, expressed by the target language
as it currently exists are incommensurable with the
author’s, it is still possible for a translator to
bend the language of the translation as far possible toward that of
the original in order to communicate as far as possible an impression
of the system of concepts developed in it. (DM 25)
(This solution presupposes principle
 (5)
 in the
philosophy of language.) For instance, the translator faced with the
task of translating Homer’s word chlôros would
select the closest counterpart in the target language, say
“green”, but then modify its usage over the course of the
translation so that it is applied not only to things that are green
(e.g., healthy foliage) but also to things that are yellow (e.g.,
honey).
(g) This approach entails a strong preference for translating any
given word in the original in a uniform way throughout the translation
rather than switching between two or more different ways of translating
it in different contexts.
(h) This approach also makes for translations that are considerably
less easy to read than those that can be achieved by the alternative
approach (Verdeutschung). However, this is an acceptable price
to pay given that the only alternative is a failure to convey the
author’s meaning at all accurately. Moreover, the offending
peculiarities have a positive value in that they constantly remind the
reader of the conceptual unfamiliarity of the material that is being
translated and of the “bending” approach that is being
employed.
(i) In order to work at all effectively, though, this approach
requires that large amounts of relevant material be translated, so that
the reader of the translation becomes habituated to it and acquires
enough examples of a particular word’s unfamiliar use in enough
different contexts to enable him to infer the unfamiliar rule for use
that is involved.
(j) Even this optimal approach to translation has severe
limitations, however. In particular, it will often be impossible to
reproduce the holistic aspects of meaning—the several related
usages of a given word, the systems of related words/concepts, and the
distinctive grammar of the language. And since these holistic features
are internal to a word’s meaning, this will entail a shortfall in
the communication of its meaning by the translation. Reading a
translation therefore inevitably remains only a poor second best to
reading the original, and the translator should think of his task as
one of striving to approximate an infinite, never fully realizable,
ideal.
(k) Translation is still amply justified, though—not only for
the obvious reason that it is necessary in order to make works
available to people who want to read them but are not in the fortunate
position of knowing the original languages, but also for the less
obvious reason that through its “bending” approach it
effects a conceptual enrichment of their language (and through its
reproduction of musical features a musical enrichment).
(l) Nor (Schleiermacher adds in answer to a worry that Herder had
expressed) need we fear that this enrichment will deprive our language
of its authentic character. For in cases where a real conflict with
that character arises, the enrichments in question will soon wither
from the language.
Here again (as in the case of interpretation), not only the
framework principles
 (4),
 (5),
 and
 (7),
 but most of
these ideas about translation come from Herder. In particular,
Schleiermacher’s central strategy of “bending” the
target language in order to cope with conceptual incommensurability,
and his point that it is also important to convey the musical aspects
of an original (poetic) text in order to convey its meaning accurately,
both do so. (Relevant Herderian sources here are the Fragments on
Recent German Literature [1767–8] and the Popular
Songs [Volkslieder] [1774 and 1778/9].)
However, unlike Schleiermacher’s theory of interpretation,
which, as was mentioned earlier, often worsens Herder’s, this
theory of translation tends to refine Herder’s in some modest
but significant ways. Among the ideas just adumbrated, examples of
this occur in (b), where Schleiermacher’s paradox of paraphrase
is largely novel; (c), where his ideal of making clear in a
translation at which points the author was being conceptually
conventional and at which points conceptually original is novel in
comparison with Herder; (h), where his idea that the oddities that
result from the “bending” approach are not only an
acceptable price to pay but can actually serve a positive function is
novel; (i), which is a novel point; (j), where the point that semantic
holism imposes principled limitations on the successfulness of
translations is novel; and (l), which plausibly contradicts
Herder.
Schleiermacher tended to be quite self-deprecating about his
sensitivity to and knowledge of art, and hence about his aptitude for
aesthetics (e.g., in On Religion and the Soliloquies,
where he is clearly rather in awe of the greater talent and expertise
in this area that such romantic friends as the Schlegel brothers
enjoyed), and accordingly tended to shy away from discussing the
subject in detail in his earlier work. However, he did eventually bring
himself to confront the subject systematically, namely, in his lectures
on aesthetics (first delivered in 1819, and then again in 1825 and
1832–3).
Part of his motivation behind this eventual confrontation with the
subject—and part of the reason why it remains interesting
today—derives from the fact that the phenomenon of art, and in
particular the phenomenon of non-linguistic art (e.g., painting,
sculpture, and music), prompts a certain theoretical question that is
of fundamental importance, not only for the philosophy of art itself,
but also for hermeneutics, or the theory of interpretation, and for the
philosophy of language that underlies it: Do non-linguistic arts such
as painting, sculpture, and music express meanings and thoughts, and if
so how? This question is obviously important for the philosophy of art.
But it is also important for hermeneutics, or the theory of
interpretation, because it carries in its train such further questions as
whether the theory of interpretation ought not to treat additional
forms of expression besides the linguistic ones that
Schleiermacher’s own hermeneutics treats, what the appropriate
methods of interpretation might be in such additional cases, and how
such additional cases and their interpretive methods might relate to
linguistic ones. Moreover, the question mentioned is also important for
the philosophy of language that underpins Schleiermacher’s theory
of interpretation, as embodied in principles
 (4)
and
 (5).
 For a positive answer to this question
might threaten those two principles, or at least show that they need
major revision.
In his last cycle of aesthetics lectures (1832–3)
Schleiermacher initially pursued a very simple strategy for dealing
with these issues concerning non-linguistic art. However, he soon
realized that the strategy in question was untenable, and abandoned it
for a more promising but also more ambiguous position.
His whole train of thought there closely followed one that Herder
had already pursued in the Critical Forests (1769), so it may
be useful to begin with a brief sketch of the latter. By the time of
writing the Critical Forests Herder was already committed to
his own versions of principles
 (4)
 and
 (5).
 Accordingly, in reaction to the phenomenon of the
non-linguistic arts the book initially set out to argue for a theory of
their nature that would preserve consistency with those principles, and
it did so in a very straightforward way, denying the non-linguistic
arts any the ability to express thoughts or meanings
autonomously of language by denying them any ability to
express thoughts or meanings at all: whereas poetry has a
sense, a soul, a force, music is a mere succession of objects in time,
and sculpture and painting are merely spatial; whereas poetry not only
depends on the senses but also relates to the imagination, music,
sculpture, and painting belong solely to the senses (to hearing,
feeling, and vision, respectively); whereas poetry uses voluntary
and conventional signs, music, sculpture, and painting employ only
natural ones. However, as Herder proceeded with his book he
came to realize that this simplistic solution was untenable: in the
third part of the book he stumbled upon the awkward case of ancient
coins, which, though normally non-linguistic, clearly do nonetheless
often express meanings and thoughts in pictorial ways. This realization
did not lead him to abandon his versions of principles
 (4)
 and
 (5),
 however. Instead, it
brought him to a more refined account of the non-linguistic arts which
was still consistent with those principles: the non-linguistic arts do
sometimes express meanings and thoughts, but the meanings and thoughts
in question are ones that are parasitic on a prior linguistic
expression or expressibility of them by the artist. In the fourth
part of the book (which was not published until the middle of the
nineteenth century, and was hence unknown to Schleiermacher) Herder
already extended this solution from coins to painting; and in
subsequent works he extended it to sculpture and music as well.
Schleiermacher’s aesthetics lectures follow a strikingly
similar course. He at first sets out to develop a version of the theory
that Herder had initially developed in the Critical Forests,
correlating the several non-linguistic arts with the different senses
as Herder’s theory had done (his only significant revision here
consists in modifying Herder’s correlation of sculpture with the
sense of touch to include vision as well as touch). Like Herder’s
initial theory, Schleiermacher’s is largely motivated by his
prior commitment to principles
 (4)
 and
 (5),
 which, again like Herder’s initial theory, it
seeks to vindicate in a naive way: non-linguistic arts, such as music
and sculpture, do not express meanings or thoughts
autonomously of language because they do not express them
at all. For example, Schleiermacher argues that music merely
expresses physiologically based “life-conditions
[Lebenszustände]”, not representations or thoughts.
However, rather like Herder with his ancient coins, in the course of
developing this naive solution Schleiermacher stumbles upon a case that
forces him to the realization that it is untenable: He develops his
naive solution smoothly enough for the cases of music and painting, but
then in the middle of his discussion of sculpture he suddenly recalls
Pausanias’s account that the very earliest Greek sculptures were
merely rough blocks whose function was to serve, precisely, as symbols
of religious ideas (oops!). He subsequently goes on to note
that an analogous point holds for other non-linguistic arts, such as
painting, as well. Accordingly, at this stage in his lectures he
changes tack. He now acknowledges that non-linguistic arts do
(at least sometimes) express meanings and thoughts after all, and he
goes on to vacillate between two new, and mutually conflicting,
accounts of that fact: (a) The arts in question do so in such a way
that the meanings and thoughts involved are at least sometimes not
(yet) linguistically articulable. (In particular, he suggests that the
early Greek sculpture just mentioned expressed religious ideas that
only later got expressed linguistically.) This account would
entail abandoning or at least severely revising principles
 (4)
 and
 (5).
 (b) The arts in question
do so in virtue of a pre-existing linguistic articulation or
articulability of the same meanings and thoughts in the artist. (He
actually only says in virtue of “something universal”,
“a representation”, but a dependence on language seems
clearly implied.) This account is similar to Herder’s final
account, and, like it, would preserve principles
 (4)
 and
 (5).
 In the end, then, having
renounced his initial—clearly untenable—position,
Schleiermacher is left torn between these two more plausible-looking
positions, which, however, contradict each other.
The eighteenth- and nineteenth-century German hermeneutic tradition
as a whole was similarly torn between these two positions. As has
already been mentioned, (b) was the considered position at which Herder
eventually arrived. But (a) had strong champions as well—in
particular, Hamann, Wackenroder and Tieck, Hegel (concerning
architecture and sculpture), and the later Dilthey. The choice between
these two positions is a genuinely difficult one, philosophically
speaking.
Where does this leave Schleiermacher in relation to the several
issues bearing on his hermeneutics and his philosophy of language that,
I suggested, encouraged him to undertake this investigation of
non-linguistic art in the first place? Concerning the primary question,
whether the non-linguistic arts express meanings and thoughts and if so
how, he has now realized that they do indeed (at least sometimes)
express meanings and thoughts, but he remains torn on exactly how they
do so. Concerning his theory of interpretation, that realization is
already important, because it shows that interpretation theory does
indeed need to extend its coverage beyond linguistic cases to include
at least some cases of non-linguistic art. But he remains torn on the
further issues in this area—in particular, on whether, as (a)
implies, there will be cases in which the interpretation of
non-linguistic art will transcend the interpretation of any associated
language or, as (b) implies, it will always be dependent on and
restricted by the interpretation of associated language. Finally,
concerning the philosophy of language that underpins his theory of
interpretation, he remains torn about whether the meanings and thoughts
that are expressed by non-linguistic art are always parasitic on
language (position (b)), so that principles
 (4)
and
 (5)
 can be retained without any qualification
or modification, or they are instead sometimes independent of language
(position (a)), so that principles
 (4)
 and
 (5)
 will either have to be abandoned or (with
Hamann in his Metacritique [1784]) (re)construed in a way that
stretches their reference to “language” and
“words” to include not-strictly-linguistic-or-verbal symbol
use in the non-linguistic arts.
Another motive behind Schleiermacher’s treatment of art in his
late aesthetics lectures concerns its cultural status, especially
relative to religion. It was an abiding concern of
Schleiermacher’s from early in his career until the very end of
it—one that set him at odds with the predominant tendency of
early German romanticism—to subordinate art to religion. The
final cycle of the aesthetics lectures from 1832–3 is merely the
last in a long line of attempts to achieve this goal. It seems to me,
however, that, partly for reasons already touched on, this last attempt
turns out to be oddly and interestingly self-subverting.
Let us first briefly survey Schleiermacher’s whole series of
attempts to subordinate art, and then consider how this last one proves
self-subverting. It was already one of the early Schleiermacher’s
main goals to turn contemporary culture, and especially the romantic
movement, away from the then fashionable idea that art was the highest
possible type of insight toward the idea that religion was. This is an
important part of the project of On Religion (1799), where he
criticizes the sort of elevation of art above religion that Goethe and
Schiller had begun and the romantics had then accentuated, complains of
the trivial nature of modern art, and argues that art ought to subserve
religion, as Plato had thought. (The early Schleiermacher was in a way
strikingly successful in achieving his goal: after 1799, largely under
his influence, the leading romantics did increasingly turn away from
art toward religion, and to some extent the same was also true of
German culture more generally.) The ethics lectures of 1812–13
continue the same project in a certain way. There Schleiermacher
represents art as of its very nature a collective expression of
religious feeling (one that differs in accordance with the differences
between religions). In other words, he represents art as only true to
its own nature when it subserves religion. The 1830 psychology lectures
develop an interesting variation on the same theme. There
Schleiermacher argues that the perception of beauty is a feeling but
one that has a certain sort of deep cognitive content in that it
expresses the relation of intelligence to Being. This makes it sound
very much like religious feeling, and indeed in these lectures it is
treated as a sort of close second-in-command to religious feeling. It
might seem as though, from Schleiermacher’s standpoint, there was
a danger here of art acquiring too independent and exalted a status.
However, that danger is in part averted by the fact that he is here
talking primarily about natural beauty, and only secondarily
about artistic beauty.
The 1832–3 aesthetics lectures continue this sort of
art-demoting project, but in a different manner. Schleiermacher’s
initial intention there, it seems, was to demote art (in comparison
with religion) in two ways: First, as we saw, the lectures initially
set out to give an account of non-linguistic arts (music, painting, and
sculpture) that represents them as merely expressive of sensuous
feelings and non-cognitive in character. Second, the lectures give an
account of poetry that represents it as merely national and indeed
individual in nature (not universal). Thus the lectures argue that art
generally, and therefore poetry in particular, is national in nature,
not universal like science and (in a way) religion, and more radically
that it indeed has the function of expressing individuality, of
resisting even the commonality of a national language (thereby making
explicit a potential that is also present, though less fully realized,
in normal language use).
However, as I suggested, this twofold strategy for demoting art
turns out to be curiously self-subverting. For one thing, as we saw,
the model of non-linguistic art as merely sensuous and non-cognitive in
the end proves to be unsustainable. Moreover, not only does
non-linguistic art turn out to have a cognitive content after all, but
in addition that fact becomes clear from a case (the earliest Greek
sculpture) in which the content in question is not trivial but deeply
religious in character. Furthermore, this self-subversion would be even
more extreme if position (a) won out over position (b) in the end. For
another thing, poetry’s function of expressing individuality
implies that for Schleiermacher it represents the highest ethical
value (for more on individuality’s high status in
Schleiermacher’s ethics, see below). In short, what was intended
as a demotion of art turns willy-nilly into a sort of
cognitive-religious and ethical exaltation of it.
Most of Schleiermacher’s earliest philosophical work was in
areas of the subject that might reasonably be described as peripheral
in comparison with such central areas as metaphysics and epistemology
(in particular, ethics, philosophy of religion, and hermeneutics). This
fact, together no doubt with the imposing presence of several
intellectual competitors who had recently made or were making
contributions in those central areas (including Kant, Fichte,
Schelling, and Hegel), seems to have spurred him to develop his own
treatment of them. The result was his “dialectics”, which
he began presenting in lecture-form in 1811. (This subject-title calls
to mind relevant positions not only in Plato and Aristotle, but also in
Kant and Hegel.)
Accordingly, Schleiermacher’s dialectics in some ways carries
the marks of a discipline that he felt forced to develop, rather than
one for which he had a clear, compelling vision (as he had for his
philosophy of religion and his hermeneutics, for example). For one
thing, the nature of the discipline undergoes a striking shift between
its two earliest versions (the lectures of 1811 and
1814–15)—which have the character of fairly conventional
treatments of metaphysical and epistemological issues, already
concerned to some extent with resolving disagreements indeed, but in a
purely theoretical way—and its two main later versions (the
lectures of 1822 and the book-fragment from 1833), which make the art
of resolving disagreements through conversation the core of the
discipline (albeit that “conversation” here includes not
only the paradigm case of oral communication but also written
communication and even dialogue internal to a single person’s
mind). This shift might be roughly described as one from a more
Aristotelian to a more Socratic-Platonic conception of
“dialectics”.
For another thing, in all of its versions Schleiermacher’s
dialectics has an oddly rag-bag appearance, including as it does not
only material that would naturally be classified as metaphysics and
epistemology, but also large helpings of philosophy of mind, logic
(especially the logic of concepts and judgments; Schleiermacher treats
the logic of syllogism in a reductive and rather deprecatory way),
philosophy of science, and philosophy of religion.
In its final versions (on which I shall focus here), the discipline
has the following character: Its concern is with what Schleiermacher
calls “pure thought”, as distinguished from the thought of
everyday affairs or of art—that is, with thought that aims at
truth, rather than merely at achieving practical ends or inventing
fictions. (Schleiermacher denies, though, that the former is sharply
divorced from the latter two; rather, it is to some degree implicit in
them as well as vice versa.)
According to Schleiermacher, genuine knowledge of its very nature
requires, not only (1) correspondence to reality, but also (2)
systematic coherence with all knowledge, and (3) universal
agreement among people. The main motive behind this elaborate position
seems to be the thought that there is in principle no way to determine
the fulfillment of condition (1) directly, so that believers
need to rely on guidance by the fulfillment of conditions (2) and (3).
(The German scholar Manfred Frank, in a well known early interpretation
of Schleiermacher’s dialectics that he gave in his book Das
individuelle Allgemeine (1985) accentuated condition (3), attributing to
Schleiermacher on the strength of it a consensus theory of truth.
However, in his subsequent edition of Schleiermacher’s dialectics
lectures Frank rightly admitted that this interpretation had overlooked
the realism implied by condition (1). Incidentally, Frank’s
self-correction of the reading of Schleiermacher’s dialectics
that he had given in Das individuelle Allgemeine also
undercuts his equally well known early reading of
Schleiermacher’s hermeneutics there, which built upon this
ascription to Schleiermacher of a consensus theory of truth an
ascription to him of a—roughly Gadamerian—conception of
interpretation as an ongoing construction of facts about meaning
through the development of interpretations.)
Not surprisingly given how strong the three conditions just
mentioned are, Schleiermacher considers genuine knowledge to be only an
“idea” toward which we can make progress, not something
that we can ever actually achieve. (Not coincidentally, this position
resembles his official positions in hermeneutics and translation theory
that the correct understanding of another person and the correct
translation of a text are only goals to which we can approximate, not
ones that we can ever actually achieve. This is a characteristically
romantic pattern.)
Schleiermacher’s dialectics is largely conceived as a
methodology for making such progress. This project proceeds relatively
smoothly in connection with conditions (1) and (2). For example, in
connection with (1), Schleiermacher develops certain principles
concerning how to form concepts correctly rather than incorrectly
(i.e., in such a way that—as a more recent idiom would put
it—they, their superordinate genus-concepts, their subordinate
species-concepts, and their contrasting coordinate concepts
“carve nature at the joints”). And in connection with (2),
while he acknowledges that the task of forming a totality of knowledge
is of its nature incompletable, he nonetheless prescribes what he calls
“heuristic” and “architectonic” procedures for,
respectively, amassing pieces of knowledge and forming them together
into a coherent whole.
However, the project runs into deeper difficulties in relation to
condition (3). There are two main problems here. First, besides the
obvious and avowed impossibility of actually accessing all people in
order to come to agreement with them, Schleiermacher also identifies a
further obstacle in the way of reaching, or even making significant
progress toward, agreement with them: the deep differences that exist
between different languages and modes of thought. The dialectics
lectures fail to find a promising way of coping with this problem. The
1822 version attempts to do so in two ways, but neither of them looks
hopeful. Its first approach consists in hypothesizing a domain of
“innate concepts” that are common to everyone (with certain
qualifications, for example, that these concepts require sensations in
order to be actualized). This would certainly solve the problem, but
only by contradicting Schleiermacher’s normal, and
philosophically more plausible, position, from which the problem arose
in the first place, that there is no such conceptual common
ground between all languages (or even, Schleiermacher normally adds,
between all individuals who in some sense share a given language). The
second approach that the 1822 version tries is an argument that we need
to develop a complete history of the differences in question and of how
they arose. However, this proposal seems beside the point—a
distraction from the problem rather than a solution to it.
In his 1833 book-fragment Schleiermacher at some points seems close
to giving up on this problem, saying in one place that because of it
dialectics must restrict itself to a specific “linguistic
sphere”. But at other points he evidently still clings to the
hope of finding common ground that unites different “linguistic
spheres”. What sort of solution does he have in mind? The answer
can perhaps be seen from an 1831 address that he delivered on
Leibniz’s idea of a universal language. In this address he in
effect argues that it was a mistake on Leibniz’s part to suppose
that there was already a conceptual common ground shared by
everyone, which could be captured in a universal language (this also
amounts to a rejection of his own dubious idea in the 1822 lectures of
common “innate concepts”), but that the sort of conceptual
common ground that Leibniz had thus wrongly envisaged as
already existing can nonetheless be achieved (or at
least approached) for the sciences in the future, namely by cultivating
an attitude of openness to the borrowing of conceptual resources from
other languages according as such resources prove themselves useful for
the sciences (a process that, according to Schleiermacher, is in fact
already strongly underway, and which is realizable either through
borrowing the foreign words in question outright or by translating them
into one’s own language in the sort of scrupulous way that his
theory of translation advocates). Schleiermacher notes that this
solution requires an (in any case healthy) shedding of prejudices about
the superiority of one’s own language, mode of thought, and
people over others. This looks like Schleiermacher’s most
promising solution to the problem in question. He did not, however,
live long enough to develop it in detail or to build on it toward a
more complete method for resolving interlinguistic disagreements.
The second, and perhaps more surprising, problem is that
Schleiermacher’s dialectics lectures do not even develop a
substantive account of how to resolve disagreements through
conversation within a “linguistic sphere”.
However, here again it is fortunately possible to supplement the
dialectics lectures with additional material that goes further in such
a direction. One important text in this connection is
Schleiermacher’s early essay Toward a Theory of Sociable
Conduct (1799), which is precisely concerned with the art of
conversation within a linguistic sphere. This early essay emphasizes
the importance of finding (conceptual) “content” that one
shares with one’s interlocutor(s), and restricting one’s
conversation to this. Schleiermacher accordingly recommends that one
begin a conversation guided by a sort of minimal estimate of such
content arrived at from one’s knowledge of such things as the
profession, the educational background, and the class of one’s
interlocutor(s), but that one then tentatively and experimentally work
outwards toward identifying and exploiting further shared
content—a process that he recommends one should undertake, not by
the heavy-handed method of introducing doubtfully shared content
directly, but rather by the subtler method of introducing it indirectly
in the form of a dimension of allusion and satire that one adds to
one’s treatment of already established shared content (after
which, if the response from the interlocutor(s) is positive, it can
join the previously established shared content as a proper
subject-matter for direct treatment).
Another helpful text in this connection is Schleiermacher’s
hermeneutics lectures, which implicitly revise the earlier account just
described in two respects: (a) In that account conversation was to be
restricted to conceptual content that was already shared between
interlocutors. But as we saw previously, by the time Schleiermacher
writes the hermeneutics lectures he is skeptical that people
ever really share conceptual content. Consequently, he would
presumably now set the bar for fruitful conversation somewhat lower
than strict sharing. (b) Also, it seems reasonable to infer from his
conception of hermeneutics that he would now place less emphasis on
discovering pre-existing commonalities, or even near-commonalities, and
more on refining those found and establishing further ones—in
both cases, with the help of an adept use of the art of
hermeneutics.
Finally, Schleiermacher’s hermeneutics lectures also supply a
further part of his seemingly missing solution to the problem of
reaching agreement through conversation, both in inter- and in
intra-linguistic contexts. Clearly, any art of reaching agreement
through conversation is going to depend on an art of interpreting
interlocutors. Accordingly, the dialectics lectures explicitly assert
that dialectics is dependent on hermeneutics (as well as vice versa),
Schleiermacher’s conception of hermeneutics as a universal
discipline ensures its applicability to conversations, and
Schleiermacher indeed mentions in the hermeneutics lectures that he
sometimes applies his own hermeneutical principles in conversational
contexts. In short, Schleiermacher’s hermeneutics itself
constitutes an important component of his art of reaching agreement
through conversation.
In sum, whereas Schleiermacher’s final conception of
dialectics as a discipline leads one to expect it to provide a fairly
detailed set of procedures for resolving both inter- and
intra-linguistic disagreements in conversation (analogous to the
detailed set of procedures for interpretation that one finds in his
hermeneutics), this expectation is largely disappointed by the
dialectics lectures themselves. However, one can supplement the
dialectics lectures from other texts in order to see how Schleiermacher
might have envisaged a fuller solution to this task.
One last point that should be mentioned in this connection is the
following. Schleiermacher’s most prominent motive for developing
such an art of conversation is the epistemological one described above.
That may or may not be a good motive in the end. However,
Schleiermacher also has further, independent motives behind this art
that are more obviously attractive. Thus, his 1831 address on Leibniz
implies two additional motives behind the intercultural side of the
art: first, Schleiermacher’s cosmopolitan concern for humanity as
a whole in all of its diversity constitutes a moral reason for
promoting fruitful intercultural dialogue; and second, his sense that
insight, far from being a monopoly of our own, is dispersed among many
cultures constitutes another reason for us to engage in such dialogue.
Schleiermacher would presumably say that analogous considerations help
to justify the intracultural side of the art as well. Again, the essay
Toward a Theory of Sociable Conduct emphasizes yet another
motive behind the intracultural side of the art. In this essay
Schleiermacher does not yet mention his later epistemological motive at
all, but instead focuses on more direct benefits that he expects from
fruitful conversation between members of society, in particular the
individual’s enrichment of his own limited perspective through an
incorporation of the different perspectives of other people.
Schleiermacher would presumably say that an analogous consideration
helps to justify the intercultural side of the art as well. In short,
even if it were to turn out that Schleiermacher’s predominant
epistemological motive for developing an art of inter- and
intra-cultural conversation were unpersuasive, such an art might still
be valuable for other reasons that he also has in mind such as these
ones.
Finally, it is worth mentioning a few further positions that
Schleiermacher develops in his dialectics, albeit more briefly. One
rather striking position is a denial that any concepts, thoughts, or
cognitions are either purely a priori in character or purely
empirical—either the product of the “intellectual”
function alone or of the “organic” function alone. Rather,
all are the product of both functions—though the
proportions in which they are involved vary from case to
case.
More specifically, as Schleiermacher conceives the situation, all
are located on a continuum that stretches between the maximally
“intellectual” ideas of Being or God and the maximally
“organic” chaos of sensations. These two extremes do not
themselves involve mixture: Being or God is purely intellectual, while
the chaos of sensations is purely organic. However, they do not for
that reason constitute counterexamples to the position just mentioned,
because they are not themselves strictly speaking concepts, thoughts,
or cognitions.
As was mentioned previously, Schleiermacher’s theory of
concepts also says that they are in each case defined by relations of
subsumption under higher concepts, contrast with correlative concepts
similarly subsumed, and subsumption of further concepts under them.
Subsumption under the non-concept Being and the subsumption of a class
of primitive judgments concerning sensations constitute special cases
at the two extremes of this conceptual hierarchy.
Another position that Schleiermacher holds is that the (Kantian)
distinction between analytic and synthetic judgments is a merely
“relative” one. One reason for this position seems to lie
in his view that all judgments are partly empirical in nature (a
consideration that anticipates Quine). But what he mainly seems to have
in mind here is that it is always in some sense up to us to decide how
many and which characteristic marks to build into any given subject
concept, and therefore how many and which judgments in which that
subject concept features will count as analytic or as synthetic.
A last feature of Schleiermacher’s dialectics is more
puzzling. Schleiermacher notes at one point that he wants to chart a
sort of middle course between ancient dialectics, which had the virtue
of openness but the vice of courting skepticism, and the dogmatism of
the scholastics, for whom everything of importance was pre-decided in a
religious principle that they presupposed. His concession to the former
position has in effect already been described above. But what about his
concession to the latter? This takes the form of positing a
“transcendental ground” or God which is (1) beyond all
oppositions, including those of thought/reality, thought/volition, and
concept/judgment, (2) beyond Being (even though Being is itself beyond
such oppositions), (3) an essential impulse behind, and accompaniment
of, all attempts to know, and (4) not thinkable or linguistically
expressible but instead felt. This is all rather mysterious. For
example, the philosophical rationale for positing such a
“transcendental ground” or God as beyond rather than
identical with Being is obscure, and so too is the exact way in which
it is supposed to be the impulse behind, and accompaniment of, all
attempts to know.
Schleiermacher’s ethical thought divides into two overlapping
chronological phases. The first phase—which stretched from the
late 1780s until about 1803—was mainly critical in character.
Early in this phase, the three unpublished essays On the Highest
Good (1789), On What Gives Value to Life (1792–3),
and On Freedom (1790–3) mounted a sustained attack on
Kant’s ethical theory, and at the end of this phase the longer
published work Outlines of a Critique of Previous Ethical
Theory (1803) developed that attack into a more comprehensive and
systematic critique of previous ethical theories. The second
phase—which began around 1800—was by contrast mainly
constructive in character. To this phase belong the
Soliloquies (1800), the Draft of an Ethics
(1805–6), and Schleiermacher’s mature ethics lectures
(including the complete draft from 1812–13, as well as a number
of later partial drafts).
The three early essays On the Highest Good, On What
Gives Value to Life, and On Freedom criticize and reject
central tenets of Kant’s moral philosophy: in particular,
Kant’s inclusion in the “highest good [summum
bonum]” of an apportioning of happiness to moral desert;
Kant’s position that this must be believed in as a presupposition
of morality, so that its own implicit presuppositions, an afterlife of
the soul and a God, must be so as well (the doctrine of the
“postulates”); and Kant’s incompatibilism concerning
causal determinism and the freedom that is required for moral
responsibility, and consequent recourse to the causally indeterministic
noumenal realm as the locus for freedom (On Freedom argues
that all human actions are causally determined, but that this is
compatible with the freedom that is required for moral
responsibility).
A further area of disagreement with Kant forms the hinge on which
Schleiermacher’s development of his own constructive ethical
theory turns. Kant’s fundamental moral principle, the
“categorical imperative”, consisted, according to its
central formulation, in a requirement that an agent’s moral maxim
(or intention) be consistent when universalized, and was conceived by
Kant to apply uniformly to all human beings. Schleiermacher
rejects this position in two ways. First, already in On What Gives
Value to Life, and then especially in the Soliloquies, he
argues against the latter idea of uniformity in ethics—instead
asserting, in the spirit of Herder (and others influenced by Herder,
such as Goethe, Schiller, and fellow romantics), the value of
diversity or individuality even in the moral sphere.
In this connection, Schleiermacher champions not only a (moral)
distinctiveness of different human societies vis-à-vis the human
species as a whole (this had been Herder’s main cause), but also
a (moral) distinctiveness of the individual vis-à-vis his
society (this had also been a cause of Herder’s). (In On
Religion Schleiermacher makes an analogous case for both societal
and individual diversity in religion. His positive evaluation of
societal and individual diversity naturally also extends beyond morals
and religion to other domains.)
Second, Schleiermacher also rejects the content of Kant’s
“categorical imperative” as specified by its central
formulation: the requirement of consistency of a maxim under
universalization. In On Religion and the Soliloquies
Schleiermacher is rather inclined to champion Kant’s subordinate
formula of a commitment to the welfare of humanity, though not
in Kant’s sense of a common rational nature, but instead in
Herder’s sense of all human beings in their diversities as well
as their commonalities. (In On Religion he discusses the
historical dimension of this principle of humanity in a Herderian
spirit, like Herder in Ideas for the Philosophy of History of
Humanity [1784–91] emphasizing the important role that has
been played by (Christian) religion in advancing it, and interpreting
history as its progressive realization.)
This double position of Schleiermacher’s might seem to court
the following sort of problem: What if the moral values of a society or
an individual conflict with the ideal of humanity? What, for example,
if the society is Nazi Germany or the individual Hitler? In the
Soliloquies Schleiermacher forestalls this sort of problem by
limiting the forms of moral distinctiveness and individuality that he
supports to those that are compatible with, or even supportive of, the
ideal of humanity. Thus he expresses his commitment to moral
distinctiveness or individuality in such formulas as that a person
should be an individual “without violating the laws of
humanity”, that “each human being should represent humanity
in his own way”, and that what is valuable is a person’s
“distinctive being and its relation to humanity”.
Similarly, Schleiermacher’s championing of (moral) diversity or
individuality is always combined with requirements of a measure of
conformity with a broader species-wide or societal whole.
This constructive tension between “distinctive
[eigentümlich]” and “universal” sides
of ethics survives to constitute the central principle of
Schleiermacher’s mature ethics lectures. There he begins by
arguing that very general forms or analogues of such a constructive
tension exist as universal facts of nature—that all finite beings
exhibit such a tension, more specifically, that all life does so in the
form of a tension between autonomy and social commonality, and more
specifically still, that all human mental life does so in this same
form. He then goes on to derive from this a moral duty to realize such
a tension in one’s own person.
This position prompts certain questions, to which the answers are
not entirely clear. First, is Schleiermacher not here guilty of the
so-called “naturalistic fallacy”, that of attempting to
deduce an “ought” from an “is”? The answer
would depend on the exact nature of his derivation of the moral duty
from the universal facts of nature, which is obscure. Second, how can a
synthesis of commonality with individuality both be an unavoidable fact
about human nature (e.g., since we can never quite share any
concepts, we also can never quite share any moral concepts in
particular) and be a moral duty? There are two possible answers to this
puzzle. One would appeal to Schleiermacher’s determinism and
compatibilism: that a mode of existence or behavior is inevitable does
not for him preclude its moral obligatoriness. The other would instead
appeal to the fact that the sort of synthesis in question can come in
varying degrees: it might be that some degree of moral
individuality is indeed inevitable for the reason mentioned but that
the degree that is morally required is greater.
In addition to the central principle just discussed, three further
aspects of the mature ethics lectures are worth mentioning briefly: (a)
As was reflected in the argument just sketched, Schleiermacher’s
mature conception of ethics is that it is fundamentally ontological
rather than merely prescriptive in character: it is based on the
immanence of “reason” in “nature”, and is hence
more fundamentally a matter of an “is” than of an
“ought”. (b) Accordingly (with an eye to the role of
“reason” just mentioned), for Schleiermacher ethics is not
fundamentally a matter of sentiments—which, he says, simply
vary—but instead of cognitions, or more exactly, of something
that grounds both ethical sentiments and ethical cognitions. (Here
Schleiermacher is close to agreement with Kant.) (c) Accordingly again
(but this time with an eye to the predominance of ontology over
prescription just mentioned), Schleiermacher divides his ethics into a
Doctrine of Goods, a Doctrine of Virtue, and a Doctrine of Duties,
treating them in this sequence in order to reflect what he takes to be
the priority, or greater fundamentalness, of goods over virtues and of
virtues over duties.
Despite all these intriguing lines of thought,
Schleiermacher’s ethics lectures are not a great success. They
contain a rather unholy mixture of, not only ethics in the usual sense,
but also political philosophy, metaphysics, epistemology, and
philosophy of mind; lurch back and forth between claims of startling
dubiousness and claims of startling banality (with too little in
between); and hold all of this together with a thick stain of
obscurantism and a thin varnish of systematicity. One is often left
with the impression that, having put the more critical phase of his
work in ethics behind him, Schleiermacher found that he did not really
have enough constructive to say about the subject to fill up the hours
in the lecture hall.
Schleiermacher’s political and social philosophy is found
scattered through a considerable number of works from different
periods. Its most systematic, though not necessarily most interesting,
statement occurs in his lectures on the theory of the state, which were
delivered between 1808–9 and 1833.
Concerning international politics, Schleiermacher’s
fundamental position is thoroughly Herderian: a cosmopolitan commitment
to equal moral respect for all peoples in all their diversity. This
position is already articulated in On What Gives Value to Life
(1792–3); it is central to On Religion (1799) and the
Soliloquies (1800), in the form of a commitment to the
Herderian ideal of “humanity”; and it survives in later
works as well (for example, in the 1831 address on Leibniz’s idea
of a universal language).
Concerning domestic politics: Schleiermacher was always somewhat
reticent about fundamental constitutional questions. To judge from his
early enthusiasm for the French Revolution, and his
republican-democratic model of an ideal church in On Religion,
the early Schleiermacher was strongly attracted to republicanism and
democracy (like Herder and the young Friedrich Schlegel). However, his
later position—while it still makes consent a conditio sine
qua non of any genuine state—is more sympathetic to
aristocratic and monarchical forms of government. Thus in his lectures
on the theory of the state from 1829–33 he argues that whereas
smaller and “lower” states are naturally democratic, large
and “higher” ones are naturally aristocratic or
monarchical.
However, Schleiermacher’s domestic politics is more
consistently radical in another respect: liberalism. (Here again he is
heavily indebted to Herder.) This ideal is already prominent in two
works from 1799: the essay Toward a Theory of Sociable Conduct
argues that there should be a sphere of free (by which Schleiermacher
means especially: state-free) social interaction, in order to make
possible the development and communication of individuality; and On
Religion argues strongly against state-interference in religion,
making the liberation of religion from such interference a fundamental
part of its program for developing individualism in religion, and
diagnosing some of the worst vices of current churches and religion in
terms of such interference. This liberalism remains prominent in the
ethics lectures of 1812–13, which add to the positions just
mentioned a proscription of state interference in the universities. And
it is still central to Schleiermacher’s political thought in his
(otherwise much more conservative) late lectures on the theory of the
state from 1829–33, where he argues that the three spheres of
sociality, religion, and science (e.g., the universities) lie beyond
the legitimate power of the state, and notes critically that the
current (Prussian) state falls short of this ideal. His Augsburg
Confession sermons from 1830 are likewise still liberal. Schleiermacher
has several reasons for this broad liberalism, but one of his most
fundamental ones lies in the need to free up a domain in which the
basic good of individuality can develop.
Schleiermacher devotes especially close attention to the question of
religion’s proper relation to the state (and to other
socio-political institutions). As was mentioned, in On
Religion he indicates two main reasons why religion should be
liberated from state interference: first, because individualism in
religion, the autonomous development of a multiplicity of forms of
religion, is valuable; and second, because state-interference corrupts
the nature of religion by, for example, attracting the wrong sorts of
people into leadership positions within the church (men with worldly
skills and motives rather than religious ones) and foisting alien
political functions onto religious mysteries such as baptism and
marriage. He argues that the true socio-political center of religion
should instead be the family—a position that he subsequently goes
on to illustrate in Christmas Eve (1806), a work that depicts
in a literary way a sort of ideal interweaving of (Christian) religion
with family life.
One especially important and interesting case to which he applied
his general insistence on the freedom of religion from
state-interference was that of Prussia’s Jews. (Once again,
Herder had already set an example here—by both developing a
highly sympathetic interpretation of ancient Judaism and forcefully
criticizing modern anti-semitism.) In an early work on the subject of
Jewish emancipation in Prussia, Letters on the Occasion of the
Political-Theological Task and the Open Letter of Jewish
Householders (1799), Schleiermacher argues that Jews should
receive full citizenship and civil rights, provided only that they
compromise in their religious observances to a point that allows them
to meet their duties to the state and that they give up such
politically threatening commitments as those to a coming messiah and to
their status as a separate nation. He argues that Jews should not have
to resort to the expedient of baptism as a means of achieving
citizenship and civil rights (as some (Jewish) contemporaries had
proposed), on the grounds that this expedient would be detrimental both
to the Jews and their religion themselves and to Christianity. In the
latter connection the main concern he expresses is that it would
further water down an already rather watery church. But another of his
concerns is that it would in effect amount to yet more interference by
the state in a religious mystery (baptism). It is significant to note
that Schleiermacher adopts this strikingly liberal position concerning
the Jews despite himself being rather critical of Judaism as religion:
in On Religion he argues that Reimarus’s conception that
there are deep continuities between Judaism and Christianity is
mistaken, and that although Judaism was a beautiful religion in its day
it has long since become corrupted and is now effectively moribund
(unlike vibrant Christianity).
A further important aspect of Schleiermacher’s socio-political
philosophy, especially in its earlier phases, is his proto-feminism (in
which he is again influenced by Herder, who was a pioneer in this area,
but even more so by Friedrich Schlegel). His proto-feminism has several
sides. First, he encourages women to strive for goods that have
traditionally been the monopoly of men. For example, in his short
Idea for a Catechism of Reason for Noble Ladies, he enjoins
women, “Let yourself covet men’s culture, art, wisdom, and
honor”. Second, as a special case of this, he encourages women to
seek sexual fulfillment, and to free themselves from inhibitions about
discussing sex. This is one of the central themes of his
Confidential Letters Concerning Friedrich Schlegel’s
Lucinde (1800). Third, he identifies women as a source of valuable
moral and intellectual resources for the benefit and improvement of
society as a whole. One example of this lies in their natural aversion
to the sorts of insensitivity and violence to which men are commonly
prone, and their potential ability to restrain instead of encouraging
or permitting these. In this vein the Idea for a Catechism
enjoins women, “You should not bear false witness for men. You
should not beautify their barbarism with words and works”.
Another (less morally urgent and more localized) example, discussed in
Toward a Theory of Sociable Conduct, concerns the ability of
women, due to their broad education but their freedom from the narrow
confines of the professions, to direct social conversation away from
limited professional concerns toward deeper and more broadly shared
ones (Schleiermacher is thinking here especially of the hostesses of
salons of the period that he himself attended). Yet another example can
be found in an argument that Schleiermacher develops in his ethics
lectures to the effect that women are by nature more attuned to
recognizing and respecting individuality, whereas men are more attuned
to recognizing and respecting abstract generalizations, and that
accordingly one of the key functions of marriage is to bring about a
valuable blending of these (equally important) intellectual-moral
qualities in each partner. (It should be noted, however, that
Schleiermacher in his later years tended to be more conservative in his
views about women.)
At the risk of repetition, it is worth underscoring that in its
broad cosmopolitan concern for other peoples, Jews, and women
Schleiermacher’s socio-political philosophy was continuing a
paradigm that was above all the achievement of a single predecessor:
Herder.
Another noteworthy feature of Schleiermacher’s socio-political
philosophy, especially prominent in the works from 1799–1800, is
a broad critique of some central modern socio-economic institutions and
a set of proposals for remedying their harmful effects. (The
Soliloquies casts this critique in the form of an attack on
the self-satisfaction of the Enlightenment very reminiscent of
Herder’s attack on the same in This Too a Philosophy of
History (1774).) Three parts of Schleiermacher’s case are
especially interesting: First, in Toward a Theory of Sociable
Conduct he implicitly criticizes modern division of labor on the
grounds that it blinkers people, inhibiting their development of their
own individuality and their sense for the individuality of others. His
proposed solution here is the development of a sphere of
“sociability”—that is, a sphere of free conversation
and social intercourse, in which such one-sidedness can be overcome.
Second, in On Religion he criticizes the deadeningly
repetitive labor that is typical of modern economies as an obstacle to
spiritual, and in particular religious, self-development. His proposed
solution here is mainly a hope that advances in technology will free
people from the sort of labor in question. Third, in On
Religion and the Soliloquies he criticizes the hedonism,
utilitarianism, and materialism of the modern age for preventing
people’s spiritual and religious self-development. His proposed
solution here is mainly the sort of revival of a vibrant religious and
moral life for which On Religion and the Soliloquies
plead.
Finally, another noteworthy aspect of Schleiermacher’s
political and social philosophy is his philosophy of education, a
subject with which he engaged throughout his career. Especially
interesting in this regard is a work that he published in 1808 in
connection with the plans for founding a new university in Berlin (now
known as the Humboldt University): Occasional Thoughts on
Universities in a German Spirit, together with an Appendix on One about
to be Founded. This work preceded Wilhelm von Humboldt’s
better known pieces on the same topic, which date from 1809–10,
and it evidently had a strong influence on them. Schleiermacher and
Humboldt both write in a very liberal and progressive spirit (with only
modest differences of position), and thereby not only collectively
generated the model of the university that Humboldt helped to implement
in Berlin and which thereby became the model of the modern university
tout court, but also developed many principles on the subject that
would still repay serious consideration today (for example, Britain
could learn a lot from them). Among the principles that Schleiermacher
develops and which Humboldt took over are: a conception that
the university should promote not only knowledge but also
individuality; a principle that this requires the greatest possible
independence of the university from the state (something that will in
the end also serve the state’s own interests better); a principle
that it also requires that there should be as much freedom as possible
within the university for both faculty and students; a
principle that students should be admitted to university regardless of
their class provided only that they are academically qualified; a
principle that philosophy should replace theology as the top faculty; a
principle of combining research with teaching; and a principle (based
on a philosophy of language that Schleiermacher shares with Humboldt
according to which not only is language fundamental to thought but also
oral language is more fundamental than written) that the teaching in
question should be primarily oral in character (for Schleiermacher the
lecture, for Humboldt the seminar). Indeed, Schleiermacher is in
certain ways even more radical and progressive than Humboldt in that
he, for example, explicitly calls for the university to be run on a
democratic model and demands that students from the lower
classes not only be admitted to university but also receive financial
support from the state in order to enable them to attend.
Schleiermacher also gave more general lectures on pedagogy, or the
philosophy of education, in 1813–14, 1820–1, and
1826—among which those from 1826 are most fully developed. But by
the time he delivered this last cycle of lectures his views had become
much more politically conservative and orthodoxly Christian, so that
the radical edge of his earlier work on the subject was blunted, the
interests of the state and the church were now assigned greater weight
as goals of education, and such principles as freedom in education
accordingly underwent heavy qualification.
Schleiermacher’s most radical and important work in the
philosophy of religion is On Religion: Speeches to Its Cultured
Despisers from 1799. (Later editions of this work, and the later
theological treatise The Christian Faith, strive for greater
Christian orthodoxy, and are consequently as a rule less interesting
from a philosophical point of view.)
As its title implies, the project of On Religion is to save
religion from the contempt of enlightenment and especially romantic
skeptics about religion, “its cultured despisers”. At least
where the romantics were concerned, the work was strikingly successful
in this regard, in that several of them, especially Friedrich Schlegel,
did turn to religion following the book’s publication (though
admittedly not to quite the sort of religion that Schleiermacher had
envisaged). Schleiermacher’s later philosophy of religion has a
similar motivation. In his 1829 open letters to Lücke he
especially emphasizes the pressing need to defend religion against the
twin threats posed to it by modern natural science and modern
historical-philological scholarship.
This project of defending religion against educated skeptics is
reminiscent of Kant’s similarly motivated critical philosophy.
Schleiermacher is also sympathetic to Kant’s strategy in
connection with religious matters of “deny[ing] knowledge in
order to make room for faith” (Critique of Pure Reason,
Bxxx), and in particular to Kant’s attack on the traditional
proofs of the existence of God; Schleiermacher himself denies that
religion is a form of knowledge or can be based on metaphysics or
science. However, as can already be seen from his early unpublished
essays On the Highest Good (1789) and On What Gives Value
to Life (1792–3), Schleiermacher’s approach is in
other respects defined more by opposition to than by agreement with
Kant’s. In particular, Schleiermacher sharply rejects
Kant’s alternative moral proof of an otherworldly God
and human immortality (i.e., Kant’s proof of them by showing them
to be necessary presuppositions of morality); for Schleiermacher
religion can no more be based on morality than on metaphysics or
science.
As this stance already suggests, Schleiermacher has a large measure
of sympathy with the skeptics about religion whom he means to answer.
But, at least in his early period, his sympathy with them also goes
much deeper than this. In On Religion he is skeptical about
the ideas of God and human immortality altogether, arguing that the
former is merely optional (to be included in one’s religion or
not depending on the nature of one’s imagination), and that the
latter is downright unacceptable. Moreover, he diagnoses the modern
prevalence of such religious ideas in terms of the deadening influence
that is exerted by modern bourgeois society and state-interference on
religion. He reconciles this rather startling concession to the
skeptics with his ultimate goal of defending religion by claiming that
such ideas are inessential to religion. This stance strikingly
anticipates such later radical religious positions as Fritz
Mauthner’s “godless mysticism”.
(Schleiermacher’s own later religious thought tended to backtrack
on this radicalism, however, restoring God and even human immortality
to a central place in religion.)
This naturally leaves one wondering what the content and the
epistemological basis of religion are for the early
Schleiermacher. As can already be seen from the 1793–4 essays
Spinozism and Brief Presentation of the Spinozistic
System, and then again from On Religion, he follows
Spinoza in believing in a monistic principle that encompasses
everything, a “one and all”. However, he also modifies
Spinoza’s conception in certain ways—partly under the
influence of Herder (whom he mentions by name in the essays on
Spinoza). In particular, whereas Spinoza had conceived his monistic
principle as a substance, Schleiermacher follows Herder in thinking of
it rather as an original force and the unifying source of a
multiplicity of more mundane forces. (Later on Schleiermacher distanced
himself from this neo-Spinozistic position. Indeed, he explicitly
denied that he was a follower of Spinoza. Accordingly, in the
dialectics lectures he argued that there was an even higher
“transcendental ground” beyond the Spinozist
natura naturans or the Herderian highest force. His main
motive behind this change of position seems to have been a desire to
avoid the heavily charged accusations of Spinozism and
pantheism—which is hardly an impressive motive philosophically
speaking.)
So much for the early Schleiermacher’s conception of the
content of religion. What about its epistemological basis? As was
mentioned, for Schleiermacher religion is founded neither on
theoretical knowledge nor on morality. According to On
Religion, it is instead based on an intuition or feeling of the
universe: “Religion’s essence is neither thinking nor
acting, but intuition and feeling. It wishes to intuit the
universe” (OR Second Speech:
22).
The term “intuition” here is both revealing and
problematic. As Kant had defined it, “intuition is that
through which [a mode of knowledge] is in immediate relation to
[objects]” (Critique of Pure Reason, A19). So part of
what Schleiermacher means to convey here is evidently some sort of
immediate cognitive relation to some sort of object, namely, the
universe as a single whole. On the other hand, the term
“intuition” also imported certain implications that
Schleiermacher in fact wanted to avoid. In particular, Kantian pure or
empirical intuition required the addition of concepts in order to
constitute any sort of real insight (“intuitions without concepts
are blind”—Critique of Pure Reason, A51), whereas
Schleiermacher had in mind a sort of insight that is unmediated by
concepts. In the later editions of On Religion he therefore
retreated from speaking of “intuition” in connection with
religion (instead reserving this term for science), and instead spoke
simply of “feeling”. In accordance with this change,
The Christian Faith went on to define religion more
specifically as a feeling of absolute dependence, or what
Schleiermacher also described in his open letters to Lücke as the
immediate consciousness of “an immediate
existence-relationship”.
A further aspect of the “feeling” on which
Schleiermacher bases religion should also be mentioned: its inclusion
of motivating force, its self-manifestation in
actions. The wish to include this aspect was one of
Schleiermacher’s reasons for supplementing religious
“intuition” with “feeling” even in the first
edition of On Religion. And his later work emphasizes this
dimension of religious “feeling” as well.
This whole epistemological position looks suspiciously like
philosophical sleight-of-hand, however. “Feelings” can be
of at least two very different sorts: on the one hand, non-cognitive
“feelings”, such as physical pains and pleasures; on the
other hand, “feelings” that incorporate beliefs, for
example, a feeling that such and such is the case. Whereas the
possession and awareness of non-cognitive feelings such as pains and
pleasures may indeed be conceptually unmediated, beyond mediation by
reasons for or against, and hence in a sense infallible, the possession
and awareness of feelings that incorporate beliefs, for instance, the
feeling that such and such is the case, does require conceptual
mediation, is subject to reasoning for or against, and is fallible. As
can be seen from the neo-Spinozistic content that
Schleiermacher’s religious intuition or feeling was originally
supposed to have, his original characterization of it as an intuition
in the Kantian sense of an immediate cognitive relation to an object,
his later characterization of it as representing “an immediate
existence-relationship”, and so on, he does not mean religious
feeling to be merely non-cognitive, but rather to incorporate some sort
of belief. However, he also helps himself to the apparent
epistemological advantages that belong only to non-cognitive feelings:
non-mediation by concepts, transcendence of reasons for or against, and
infallibility. In short, it looks as though his epistemological
grounding of religion in “feeling” depends on a systematic
confusion of these two crucially different sorts of cases.
Turning more briefly to some additional features of
Schleiermacher’s philosophy of religion in On Religion:
He recognizes a potentially endless multiplicity of valid religions,
and strongly advocates religious toleration. However, he also arranges
the various types of religion in a hierarchy, with animism at the
bottom, polytheism in the middle, and monotheistic or otherwise
monistic religions at the top. This hierarchy is understandable given
his fundamental neo-Spinozism.
More internally problematic, however, is a further elaboration of
this hierarchy that he introduces: he identifies Christianity as the
highest among the monotheistic or monistic religions, and in particular
as higher than Judaism. His rationale for this is that Christianity
introduces “the idea that everything finite requires higher
mediation in order to be connected with the divine” (i.e., the
higher mediation of Christ) (OR Fifth Speech: 120).
But this looks contrived. It is left unclear why “higher
mediation” is supposed to be a good thing. Moreover, even if one
were to grant that it is, why do other monotheistic religions such as
Judaism not share in this putative advantage as well, namely, in the
form of their prophets? And if the answer is that this is because
prophets are not themselves divine, then why is the mediator’s
divinity supposed to be such a great advantage?
In addition, Schleiermacher remarks insightfully on the
distinctively polemical nature of Christianity, the striking
extent to which Christianity’s religious and moral standpoint is
defined by a hostile opposition to other standpoints, and even to other
dissenting positions within Christianity itself. This observation
recalls that of another well-informed and honest Christian, Montaigne,
who had noted in his Apology for Raymond Sebond (1580) that
“there is no hostility quite as perfect as Christian
hostility”. And it is amply borne out by the historical
evidence—for example, the bloody early history of Christianity,
the Crusades, the Inquisition’s treatment of Jews and witches,
the Wars of Religion of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, and
many other, similar horrors (all of which only stopped, or at least
diminished, when Christianity was rendered politically impotent by the
Enlightenment and the American and French Revolutions in the eighteenth
century). Moreover, this striking feature of Christianity has since
received deeper explanations—including Jan Assman’s
observation that Judeo-Christian-Muslim religion was from the start a
sort of “anti-religion [Gegenreligion]”, defined
by its opposition to other religions and cultures, and
Nietzsche’s observation that Christianity and its morality
specifically were from the beginning a reaction against Greek and Roman
culture motivated by resentment against Greek and Roman imperial
oppression in Palestine and elsewhere, so that, for example, (a point
that Nietzsche does not himself make clearly) the Greeks’ most
general word for a god, daimôn, became the Christian
concept of a demon, and (a point that he makes very clearly)
Christian moral values performed a systematic inversion of traditional
Greek and Roman values. So Schleiermacher’s observation is an
insightful one. But then how can a proponent of religious pluralism and
toleration like Schleiermacher consistently see this striking trait of
Christianity as anything but a very serious vice?
On the (flimsy) basis of his perception of Christianity’s
superiority as a religion, Schleiermacher also tries to reconcile his
neo-Spinozism with traditional Christian doctrines as far as possible.
This project already begins in a modest way in On Religion,
where, for example, he tries to salvage the Christian doctrine of
miracles in the modified form of a doctrine that classifies
all events as miracles (insofar as viewed from a religious
perspective). A similar project is pursued more elaborately (and
tediously) in The Christian Faith.
Finally, a more fruitful contribution of Schleiermacher’s to
the study of Christianity was the series of lectures on the life of
Jesus that—under the influence of two late works of
Herder’s: On the Savior of Mankind according to our First
Three Gospels (1796) and On God’s Son, the World’s
Savior, according to John’s Gospel (1797)—he began to
deliver in 1819 and which were published posthumously. Schleiermacher
tried in these lectures to combine an interpretation of Jesus as a mere
human being with a claim that his extraordinary level of awareness of
God nonetheless amounted to a sort of presence of God in him. This
compromise was strained and implausible. But Schleiermacher’s
project nonetheless constituted an important step toward much more
consistently naturalistic and plausible treatments of the life of Jesus
by subsequent scholars, especially David Friedrich Strauss’s
The Life of Jesus, Critically Examined (1835–6).
Berner 1995; Dilthey [1870] 1966–1970; Haym [1870] 1920 (ch.
3); Mariña 2005; Redeker 1973; Scholtz 1984.
Coseriu 2015 (vol. 2, ch. 8) (a detailed, helpful treatment);
Forster 2011b, 2014; Gipper and Schmitter 1985 (92–98) (an
excellent book).
Coseriu 2015 (vol. 2, ch. 8) (Coseriu pays close attention to
Schleiermacher’s lectures on psychology); Sigwart 1857.
Boeckh 1877; Bowie 1997; Dilthey 1860, 1900; Forster 2010b, 2011c;
Frank 1985, 1990 (these two books, especially the former of them, are
arguably the most important secondary literature on
Schleiermacher’s hermeneutics available); Gadamer [1960] 2002
(part 2) (a decidedly hostile but nonetheless important treatment of
Schleiermacher’s hermeneutics); Hirsch 1967 (a significant
Anglophone appropriation of Schleiermacher’s hermeneutics);
Kimmerle 1957 (an important and influential contribution that
counteracts Dilthey’s overemphasis of the psychological, as
opposed to linguistic, side of interpretation in Schleiermacher’s
hermeneutics); Palmer 1969 (ch. 7) (helpful on Schleiermacher as well
as on other figures); Patsch 1966 (a learned and important article that
discusses Schleiermacher’s hermeneutics in relation to Friedrich
Schlegel’s); Ricoeur 1973, 1977 (helpful though dull); Szondi
[1970] 1986 (Szondi’s writings are consistently thoughtful and
helpful); Wach 1926–1933 (learned and informative, though not
exciting). Also helpful are the introductory materials in the two
German editions of Schleiermacher’s hermeneutics
(H, HK) as well as in their English
translations (HHM, HC).
Bréhier 1963; Forster 2012; Geldsetzer 1968; Gueroult 1984
(vol. 2); Zeller 1843.
Berman 1984 (an excellent treatment of the translation theories of
Schleiermacher and some of his contemporaries); Berman and Berner 1999
(very helpful not only for Schleiermacher’s own texts but also
for the editors’ introduction); Cercel and Serban 2015 (an
important and valuable volume of articles on this subject); Forster
2010c, 2015; Huyssen 1969; Thomas 2015 (an excellent treatment of
Schleiermacher’s translation theory that also takes the competing
French tradition of translation theory that preceded it into account);
Venuti 1995 (helpfully touches on, and especially still works in the
spirit of, Schleiermacher’s theory of translation).
Lehnerer 1987; Odebrecht 1932.
Burdorf and Schmücker 1998; Kaulbach 1968; Wagner 1974; Wehrung
1920. Also helpful is Frank’s introduction to his edition of
Schleiermacher’s dialectics (D).
Louden’s introduction to Lectures on Philosophical
Ethics (LPE: vii–xxx); Scholtz 1995.
Faull 1995; Forster 2013 (mainly focuses on Humboldt’s model
of the university, but also contains some discussion of
Schleiermacher’s Occasional Thoughts on Universities in a
German Spirit); Guenther-Gleason 1997. Also helpful are M. Winkler
and J. Brachmann’s introduction and commentary to Texte zur
Pädagogik. Kommentierte Studienausgabe
(TP).
Brandt [1941] 1968; Lamm 1996; Niebuhr 1964. Also helpful is Richard
Crouter’s introduction to On Religion: Speeches to Its
Cultured Despisers (OR: xi–xxxix).