Like his junior contemporary Goethe (1749–1832), Friedrich Heinrich
Jacobi was blessed with a long life, at least as measured by the
standards of the time, and had the good fortune of witnessing in its
course events that radically altered the cultural and political face
of Western
 Europe.[1]
 Jacobi saw the Enlightenment (die Aufklärung) take hold
in the German lands, and reach maturity in a peculiarly German
cultural form. He saw it as it nurtured ideas of subjectivity and
nature, and an interest in history, that were the precursors of later
Romanticism. He saw it also as it was violently, even brutally,
disrupted in the last decade of the eighteenth century by the events
surrounding the French Revolution; and, finally, as it gave way to the
new order of the nineteenth century. Despite long bouts of illness,
Jacobi was deeply involved in these world shaking events, and actively
contributed to them. He may not have had the political and military
engagement of a Goethe, who could combine vast literary activities
with weighty state responsibilities, but he was certainly an
influential cultural and political commentator. Jacobi contributed
enormously, throughout his active life, to the shaping of educated
German public opinion.
Jacobi also had the good fortune of belonging to a privileged segment
of society. The Enlightenment as well as the French revolution
presented him with more than just an intellectual challenge. In their
different ways (which, as will be seen in Section 3, Jacobi however
thought to have much in common), they both threatened the system of
values that justified his social status. In the case of the French
revolution, the threat was physical as well, since the events in
France spilled over across the Rhine and were the cause for a time of
much dislocation in his life. There were, in other words, interests
other than purely intellectual that must have motivated his reaction
to philosophy and philosophers and which would have to come under
close scrutiny in a full study of Jacobi’s life. They can however be
abstracted from when the main interest, as here, is with the internal
logic, or lack of it, of his view of things. A quick review of the
main events and the more influential circumstances of his life is none
the less in order, at least as signposts of his intellectual
career.
Jacobi was born in Düsseldorf, on January 25, 1743, the second
son of a well-to-do merchant. His older brother, Johann Georg, was the
one selected by the family for an intellectual career, and he did
achieve indeed a certain notoriety as a poet in the sentimental style
of Gleim. The task of pursuing the commercial activities of the family
was reserved for the younger Jacobi. There also were two daughters in
the family, half-sisters to Jacobi. Neither of them married, and they
eventually took over the management of Jacobi’s household. According
to his own account, (Jacobi, 1785: 8; 1787, 67ff; 1789, 328ff ) Jacobi
was temperamentally given to extremes of piety from his early youth,
and was constantly troubled by questions concerning the existence of
God and the endlessness of time. After confirmation, he joined a
society of pietists in whose company these tendencies were
reinforced. At sixteen, after a brief and disappointing apprenticeship
in a Frankfurt commercial house, he was sent in 1759 to Geneva to
develop there the social skills required for his appointed
vocation. It is in that city that Jacobi, exposed to French ideas, as
he matured socially, at the same time also formulated the basic
beliefs that were to guide his intellectual career to the end. Under
the tutelage of the famous mathematician G.L. Le Sage, he became
acquainted with traditional scholastic metaphysics. But he also worked
on the writings of Charles de Bonnet, in which he found elements of
psychological sensualism combined (allegedly even harmonized) with
such Christian beliefs as the after-life, and read Rousseau’s
Emile (1761). Appended to the latter was the so titled
‘Profession of Faith of a Savoyard Vicar’, a manifesto
upholding the rights of the ‘heart’ against the religion
of reason popular among the rationalist philosophers of the
day. Jacobi’s resolution, at the time, was never to accept a system of
thought unless it could be tested against actual existence and did not
contradict his yearnings for God.
Back in Germany in 1762, Jacobi continued his philosophical studies.
He eagerly read the essays submitted by Moses Mendelssohn and Kant in
response to the competition sponsored that year by the Berlin Academy
on the theme, ‘Concerning Evidence in the Metaphysical
Sciences’. According to his own account, Jacobi found Kant’s
essay much more convincing than Mendelssohn’s, though first prize was
awarded to the latter (Jacobi, 1787: 74–75). He apparently also
engaged in the study of Spinoza, and was impressed by Kant’s essay on
‘The Only Possible Ground for a Proof of God’s Existence’
(Jacobi, 1787: 78–88). In 1764 he took charge of his father’s business
and — after an affair with a housemaid with whom he conceived a
son, both of whom (housemaid and son) he treated very shabbily by
modern standards (Booy/Mortier, 1966) — married the richly
endowed Betty von Clermont. Together with her, he established the
already mentioned literary salon at Pempelfort.
In 1772 Jacobi entrusted all his business affairs in the hands of his
capable brother-in-law and accepted an invitation to join the
governing body of the Duchy of Julich and Berg. His commission was to
supervise the rationalization of local manufacturing and taxation
practices. In 1779, he was also invited to Munich to conduct a similar
reform in the Bavarian lands. In the same year, however, these
official activities also came abruptly to an end. Jacobi’s liberal
views quickly came under attack in the Court at Munich, and, embroiled
in bitter controversies, Jacobi returned to his native
Düsseldorf. The literary fall out of this episode was the
publication (Jacobi, 1779 (1) & (2)) of two essays in which Jacobi
defended Adam Smith’s economic views. The first essay was published
while Jacobi was still in office in Munich, and was itself a major
cause of his troubles there.
While engaged in these wordily affair, Jacobi had not abandoned his
more humanistic interests. He had already ventured in some minor
literary publications in association with his brother Georg while
still busy with his commercial practice in Düsseldorf. In 1772,
together with Wieland, whom Jacobi had come to know through his
brother, he laid out the plans for a German journal patterned after
the Mercure de France. The Deutcher Merkur made its
appearance soon after, under Wieland’s editorship. Jacobi used the
journal as the vehicle of some of his occasional writings until 1777,
when his collaboration with Wieland came to an end because of a bitter
disagreement between the two men on political issues (Jacobi, 1781,
1782). More significant for Jacobi’s future were two other events that
took place in the following years. The first was Goethe’s visit to
Pempelfort in the company of Basedow and Lavater. The encounter
between the already famous poet and Jacobi that followed was,
according to the reports left by both, of a highly emotionally charged
nature (Prantl, 1881: 579). Each man made a deep impression on the
other. Jacobi’s two novels, Allwill’s Briefsammlung and
Woldemar, owe their origin to that event. They were Jacobi’s
response to Goethe’s ardent request, made during the visit, that he
put in writing all that was closest to his heart. As things turned
out, Goethe quickly cooled towards Jacobi, much to the latter’s
disappointment, and was later (1779) to prove especially cruel towards
him by nailing to a tree (‘crucifying’), to the great
amusement of a large company, a copy of a just published new edition
of the Woldemar (Stockum, 1957; Sudhof, 1959; di Giovanni,
1994: 52–53).
The other event occurred on the occasion of a long journey that took
Jacobi, on July 5, 1780, to Wolfenbüttel, where Lessing was
librarian at the Herzog August’s library. Jacobi immediately paid a
visit to the famous man, and it was there, while a guest at Lessing’s
house, that Jacobi engaged his host in that now famous conversation in
which, according to Jacobi’s report, Lessing declared himself to be a
Spinozist (Jacobi, 1785: 10–45). This alleged revelation, made only a
few months before Lessing’s sudden death (1781), was to be the
occasion of an exchange of letters between Jacobi and Moses
Mendelssohn on the nature of philosophy in general and Spinozism in
particular.  Mendelssohn was well known at the time as Lessing’s great
friend, and as himself an artificer of the German Enlightenment. The
exchange began in 1783 (Jacobi, 1785: 1), and continued in a period of
time when Jacobi was deeply in sorrow because of the premature death
of his beloved Betty (1784) and of a younger son, and was also
suffering from bad health. As the result of an intricate and
unpleasant set of circumstances — one that was to provide fodder
to opposing parties, in the dispute that soon followed, for
questioning the integrity of both Mendelssohn and Jacobi — the
latter published the letters in 1785, complete with commentary, under
the title of Concerning the Doctrine of Spinoza in Letters to Herr
Moses Mendelssohn (Spinoza Letters).
Nobody could have predicted the extent and the fury of the controversy
that the publication of the book caused. The controversy goes in the
literature under the name of the Spinozism or the Pantheism
Dispute (Jacobi, 1916). Mendelssohn responded to Jacobi in writing
(1786) but did not survive to see his reply in print. Already in bad
health, he died (4 January 1786). Jacobi responded to the
reply (1786). Both publications were notable for their bitterly
personal tone. In retrospect, the controversy itself and the personal
tone it assumed made sense, since the issues that Jacobi had raised
had put into question the nature and the value of the new humanism
being sponsored by the Enlightenment. As Goethe was to remark many
years later, the controversy touched everyone in their deepest
 convictions.[2]
 Mendelssohn’s death caused the debate to become even more personal,
for his defenders (notably the Berlin’s Aufklärer led by
Nicolai) used it as an occasion to raise their hero to the status of
martyr. One can gather a detailed account of the events, seen from
Jacobi’s point of view, in the latter’s thick correspondence with
Hamann of those years (Jacobi/Hamann, 1955–1979). Hamann sided with
Jacobi, though his irrepressibly eccentric self could not refrain from
repeatedly poking fun at his friend. Two unforeseen results of the
episode were that Jacobi, until then a peripheral author, was
propelled to the centre of public attention; and Spinoza’s philosophy,
already influential among the literary circles of the Sturm und
Drang but otherwise traditionally rejected by the philosophers of
the schools, became an object of philosophical discussion.
In 1787 Jacobi published David Hume on Faith, or Idealism and
Realism, a Dialogue. In it he tried to clear himself of the
charge of irrationalism brought against him because of his defence of
the primacy of Glaube (‘faith’ or
‘belief’) over reason in the still on-going controversy.
Though appealing to the authority of Hume in this defence, Jacobi
however also forcefully distanced himself from the latter’s scepticism
by declaring the sense in which he was rather a realist. The dialogue
appeared in the wake of the publication of the second edition of
Kant’s Critique of Pure Reason (1787), and included an
appendix in which Kant’s transcendental idealism was severely
criticized. The appendix was to become a locus classicus of
anti-Kantianism.  It eloquently restated all the main objections that
had already been raised against the Critique since its first
publication, and were to be repeated again against it, in a variety of
forms, in the years to come.  It is there that Jacobi made the famous
quip: ‘Without the presupposition [of the “thing in itself,”] I
was unable to enter into [Kant’s] system, but with it I was unable to
stay within it’ (Jacobi, 1787: 223). His point was that, in
presupposing the allegedly unknown ‘thing in itself’, yet
by assigning to it the many functions that it played in his system,
Kant was in fact demonstrating knowledge of it, thereby contradicting
his assumption of critical ignorance. The negative, even antagonistic,
attitude that Jacobi assumed in this appendix overshadowed the fact,
however, that he had always felt close in spirit to Kant. He had felt
deeply hurt when Kant has sided with
 Mendelssohn[3]
 in the still on-going dispute. More important, it also overshadowed
the fact that Jacobi had already developed a much more constructive
critique of transcendental idealism, and had even offered a
sophisticated alternative to it, in the body of the dialogue itself,
while expounding his own realism (see Section 2.2). This is an aspect
of the dialogue that was not lost on some of Kant’s own disciples, and
was a factor in the development of post-Kantian idealism.
In 1789 a second, much enlarged, edition of the Spinoza-Letters
went to press. It reflected the recent publication of Kant’s
Critique of Practical Reason (1788). Among many additions, it
included two prefatory sets of theses, the first denying human
freedom, the second asserting it, together suggesting a resolution of
the antinomy between nature and freedom quite different than the one
proposed by Kant. It also included a number of new appendices, one of
them sharply criticizing Herder, whose idea of God amounted, in
Jacobi’s opinion, to a half-baked
 pantheism.[4]
 (Jacobi, 1789: 349–357) Jacobi’s prefatory theses on human freedom
were to be highly influential in the debate on the subject soon to
break out between K.L Reinhold and C. C. E. Schmid.  (di Giovanni,
2001) The debate quickly implicated many other personalities, Fichte
among them.
The following years were marked by the visits to Pempelfort of Hamann,
Stolberg, Herder, and Goethe (November 1792). Soon, however, political
events were to overtake philosophical discourse. The beheading in
Paris of Louis XVI (1793) shocked German public opinion, and
occasioned Jacobi’s lament in ‘Accidental Outpourings of a
Lonely Thinker’ (Jacobi, 1795). In 1794, as the French
revolutionary armies crossed the Rhine and began bombarding
Düsseldorf, Jacobi abandoned Pempelfort and undertook a long
peregrination in the North, the guest of many friends in whose company
he found comfort (Prantl, 1881: 582). He settled for a time in Eutin.
At this time he began the composition of ‘Of Divine
Things’, a manuscript that he completed and published only
later.  In 1799 he became involved in the so called ‘Atheism
dispute’. This was a controversy surrounding the alleged atheism
of Fichte which Jacobi himself had not initiated but in which he none
the less played a leading role. At the request of Lavater, he wrote an
open letter to Fichte (Jacobi, 1799) in which he restated all his
objections to philosophy in general and the new idealism in
particular, and reaffirmed his commitment to the primacy of faith. He
also singled out Fichte as one who had realized all his misgivings
about philosophy, since he had succeeded in restating Spinozism even
from the standpoint of subjectivity. In a supplement (Supplement II)
to the letter, Jacobi included a long comment on the nature of reason
that he reprinted in the second volume of his collected works (1815)as
an independent essay under the title of ‘On the Inseparability
of the Concept of Freedom and Providence from the Concept of
Reason’ (Jacobi, 1812–1825). In 1802, he published ‘On the
Undertaking of Critique to Reduce Reason to Understanding’
(Jacobi, 1802 (1)) — this latter directed particularly at
Kant.
In 1804, Jacobi suffered a drastic reversal of financial fortunes but
was spared a much reduced life-style by the call from Munich, late in
the same year, to work there at the reorganization of the Academy of
the Sciences. Jacobi accepted the invitation and in the following year
moved to Munich. He remained there until the end of his life. Elected
president of the reformed Academy in 1807, he unfortunately fed the
animosity already felt in Munich against the foreigners recently
invited to the Academy by implying in his inaugural speech a criticism
of Southern Germany culture (Jacobi, 1807). He also antagonized
Schelling, at that time Director of the Munich Academy of the Arts. In
1809, in response to a writing of Schelling on human freedom that
contained pointed criticisms of his understanding of Spinoza, Jacobi
resurrected his unfinished manuscript ‘Of Divine Things’,
completed it as an obvious polemic against the new nature philosophy
that Schelling was promoting, and published it in 1811 under the title
of ‘Of Divine Things and Their Revelation’ (Jacobi, 1811).
The essay provoked a reply from Schelling which, in turn, provoked a
counter reply by Jacobi. Thus arose the third of the major
controversies in which Jacobi was involved — one even more
personal and bitter in tone than the earlier ones.
 In 1812 Jacobi retired and, aided by his disciples
J. F. Köppen and C. J. F. Roth, began the preparation of his
collected works (Jacobi, 1812–25). Since the turn of the
century, he had begun to attract to his side such younger figures as
F. D. E. Schleiermacher, J.  F. Fries, and F. Bouterwek — newly
established academics whose thought he had inspired but who, in turn,
influenced his final definition of the nature of reason. They all
shared a scientific positivism which they combined with a contrasting
moral/religious positivism — this latter based on the assumption
that higher values and the reality of divine things can be intuitively
assessed by way of feeling. This younger generation helped to
popularize some of Jacobi’s ideas and attitudes in the nineteenth
century. Ironically, despite his life long opposition to Roman
Catholicism, Jacobi exercised considerable influence in some German
Catholic theological circles (Weindel, 1950).
 In 1817, Jacobi made reference in a letter to his friend Johann
Neeb to a favourable review of the second volume of his collected
works by Hegel (Jacobi, 1825–27: vol. 2, 467–68; di
Giovanni, 1994: 165–166).  There was no apparent trace left in
his comments of the anger that Hegel’s essay, ‘Glauben und
Wissen’ (‘Faith and Knowledge’), had aroused in him
in 1801 (Jacobi, 1803: 221). Jacobi allowed that Hegel’s
interpretation of his thought might be the correct one, and conceded
that the two men might come to a meeting of minds, were it not for old
age that prevented him from studying Hegel’s philosophy.
Jacobi’s extensive travels took him to London in 1786 and to Paris in
1801 (Prantl, 1881: 581, 582). Though first exposed to philosophy in a
French cultural milieu, Jacobi was an Anglophile throughout his life
and favourably compared British philosophers with the French
philosophes. He credited the British for never having denied
that virtue has value on its own; for never having made it just an
instrument of happiness. The French, on the contrary, the moment their
philosophizing progressed beyond mere common sense, were always all
too prone in moral matters of falling into materialism (Jacobi,
1812–125: vol. 5, 73–74).
Jacobi never saw the completion of the planned edition of his works.
He died on March 10, 1819.
The Spinoza Letters is a cumbersome work, its disjointed composition
indicative of the haste with which it was put together. The first
edition opens with the text of a poem by Goethe that was however
dropped in the second edition. The poem carried the name of its author
but had been mechanically edited by Jacobi to bring out, by printing
certain key phrases in relief, images especially important to
him. Thus edited, the poem conveyed the idea that the pagan gods are
Man writ large, and are therefore to be praised, since they reveal
what is most noble in the human being. Brute nature is without
feelings or discernment, whereas humans can judge, draw distinctions,
and dare the impossible. They transcend nature. This was a humanistic
message with which Jacobi agreed wholeheartedly. After a brief
explanation of how the exchange of letters with Mendelssohn had
originated, the main text goes on with a somewhat abbreviated version
of the correspondence itself. The first letter gave an account of the
conversation Jacobi had had with Lessing on the subject of Spinoza
during his visit to Wolfenbüttel, and included the text of
another poem of Goethe — the Prometheus, one that had
been the occasion of the conversation in the first place. This poem,
hitherto still unpublished, was printed without the author’s name
(some thought it was Jacobi’s own) and conveyed quite a different
image of the gods than was found in the other poem. It suggested that
they, no less than mortal men, are subject to the blind
‘almighty time’ that rules over all.  In a universe thus
ruled by ‘eternal fate’, they are therefore even more
wretched than human beings, for the latter have at least the power to
rebel against the order of things and thereby retain their dignity. At
least as typified by Prometheus, human beings can rejoice in their own
sufferings, and by this defiance uphold their individuality in the
face of Fate.
In the rest of the letters we see Mendelssohn trying to play down the
seriousness of Lessing’s alleged admission to being a Spinozist.
Since Mendelssohn thought at first that Jacobi was himself a
Spinozist, we see him also attacking the basic doctrines of Spinozism
as he understood them, while at the same time suggesting how they
could be reformulated in an internally more consistent form to have
them rejoin the accepted teachings of school metaphysics. Jacobi, for
his part, was intent on displaying his scholarly (and indeed more
accurate) knowledge of Spinoza’s philosophy. In response to
Mendelssohn’s criticisms of Spinoza, he argued that Spinozism
represented, on the contrary, a perfectly self-consistent position. It
was school metaphysics that would logically lead to Spinozism, if its
implications were just fully understood, not the other way
around. Jacobi also gave an explanation for his sudden decision to
publish the letters. Since Mendelssohn had announced the impending
publication of his
 Morgenstunden,[5]
 a book in which, as Mendelssohn said, he would take up the issue of
Spinozism, Jacobi thought that his opponent was unfairly trying to
make a public head start on him in a controversy that was agreed would
have to remain private before being brought to public attention by
mutual consent. Jacobi then concluded the book with rambling extensive
quotations from sundry theologians, and ‘sealed’ it (his
expression) with an excerpt from Lavater.
Mendelssohn was bitterly to complain to Kant that Jacobi’s volume was
like a monster that sported Goethe for head, Spinoza as torso, and
Lavater for feet. There was a point to his complaint. Yet, despite the
many divagations and the pervading preachy tone of the text, there was
a definite philosophical message that Jacobi was conveying.
Philosophers are temperamentally inclined to reconstruct reality
according to the requirements of explanation, in total disregard of
the requirements of existence. They are possessed, as it were, by a
logical fanaticism that leads them to mistake the abstractive
principles of explanation for principles of existence. Since the
individuality of things is the first victim of this confusion, yet
individuality is the necessary condition of all existence, it follows
that in the world as reconstructed by philosophers there is no room
left for truly existing subjects — least of all for agents who
can seriously take responsibility for their actions and relate to one
another as person to person, an ‘I’ to a
‘Thou’. All that is most noble in human nature (as
depicted in Goethe’s first poem, Jacobi implies), notably the ability
to make decisions and transcend brute nature, is thus denied, and
there is no alternative left for human individuals, if they care to
preserve at least a modicum of dignity, except to take pleasure in
their avowedly only delusory sense of freedom (according to Goethe’s
second poem, as Jacobi also seems to imply). The much vaunted
Enlightenment humanism, based as it was on the ideal of pure
rationality was only a sham. It led in fact to ‘nihilism’
(a term, incidentally, that Jacobi made popular).
According to Jacobi’s report of his conversation with Lessing, after a
disquisition on his part regarding the devastating effects of a
thought based on the demands of reason alone, and upon Lessing’s
apparent declaration of sympathy for Spinoza, Jacobi had urged upon
the latter to perform a salto mortale (Jacobi, 1785: 17),
i.e., a kind of jump, heels over head, that would redress his
position.  Enlightened philosopher that he was, Lessing had been
walking on his head. The jump — which Lessing humorously
declined to execute citing old age as excuse (Jacobi: 1785, 33–34)
— would have brought him to his feet, back on the solid soil of
common sense. Jacobi’s obvious agenda, in other words, both at the
time of this meeting with Lessing and later, in the exchange of views
with Mendelssohn, was to attack the rationalism of the
Enlightenment. Also implied, however, was a criticism of Goethe. The
latter had spearheaded the Sturm und Drang reaction against
the same rationalism that Jacobi was now condemning. Jacobi’s veiled
message was that the adepts of this new cultural phenomenon had failed
to escape the rationalism of the philosophers, since the rebellious
new humanism they advocated made sense only on the presupposition that
the philosophers’ conception of reality was the right one. It is the
desire to convey this message that alone explains the otherwise
puzzling presence in Jacobi’s volume of the two poems by Goethe. To
Jacobi’s contemporaries, who lacked the background knowledge of
Jacobi’s special relationship to Goethe, and were even unaware of
Goethe’s authorship of the second poem, their inclusion in the volume
remained a mystery to the end.
At any rate, whether Jacobi’s agenda was directed at the Enlightenment
or the Sturm und Drang, the presence of Spinoza both in his
conversation with Lessing and the later controversy with Mendelssohn
was clear. Quite apart from the fact that he had been the central
object of discussion in Jacobi’s first encounter with Goethe —
another circumstance that Jacobi’s contemporaries could not know
— Spinoza was now being portrayed by Jacobi as the one
philosopher who had had the courage to press the logicism of the
philosophers to its ultimate limit, and to draw from it its inevitable
conclusions. Spinoza had subsumed all reality under the one highest
abstraction of ‘substance’, with the net result that any
real distinction between one presumed individual thing and any other,
and between all things and God, was being denied. True generation, or
anything connected with temporality, equally disappeared, except as
mere illusionary phenomena. This was as nihilistic a conclusion as, in
Jacobi’s opinion, one could possible draw. In his eyes, therefore,
Spinoza stood as the philosopher par excellence (an
attribute, however, which he later conferred on Fichte). According to
the formula that he drew, philosophy equals Spinozism, and Spinozism
in turn equals atheism — this last part of the equation being
based on the assumption that, since Spinoza’s God, viz. Substance,
lacked the attributes of a person, it could not satisfy the
requirements of true religiosity.
One can understand, therefore, why Jacobi’s attitude towards Spinoza
could have been a source of confusion for Mendelssohn and later
critics as well — to the point that Jacobi himself was often
taken to be a Spinozist. On the one hand, Jacobi pointed to Spinoza as
an object lesson of all that is wrong with philosophical reason. On
the other hand, he was praising him for being the most consistent of
all philosophers (Jacobi, 1785: 27–29), and even defended him against
those — Mendelssohn included — who, as he thought,
detracted from his philosophy by their misguided attempts at
‘saving’ it from the consequences of its unmitigated
rationalism. And there was another reason as well for Jacobi’s
otherwise puzzling predilection for Spinoza — the Benedictus, as
he once calls him, the ‘Blessed One’.  (Jacobi, 1799: 41)
Spinoza knew that truth is its own criterion; that ultimately,
therefore, it is not amenable to discursive reason but must be
apprehended immediately on its own, intuitively. This was also
Jacobi’s position. His objection against the rationalism of the
philosophers boiled down to precisely this — that it was the
product of a reason that had lost touch with its intuitive sources,
and was therefore given to mistaking its own productions for the real
thing. On this score, Jacobi thought that he had found a strange ally
in the most rationalist of all philosophers.
Yet there was a serious problem in the Spinoza Letters. Jacobi never
quite gave to understand what he, as contrasted with Spinoza,
meant by ‘intuition’. He says that philosophy must be
‘historical’ — presumably, that it must take its
starting point from the records of human actions and human events;
that it must never abandon experience, or common sense. These, though
vague and hardly the basis for a well defined position, were in
themselves perfectly acceptable claims. But Jacobi then obscured them
with his pious perorations at the end — by citing, among others,
the theologian Jerusalem, who thought that the task of philosophy is
simply to elucidate the content of revealed faith, and Lavater, who
believed in the ever present witness of miracles. He could easily give
the impression, as he in fact did, that, by attacking philosophy and
the philosophers, he was advocating a return to the blind acceptance
of Biblical revelation; that, by ‘intuition’, he meant
religiously inspired ‘faith’. Lessing had suspected that
much at the end of his conversation with Jacobi, according to the
latter’s own report.
The dialogue that Jacobi published in 1787 carried the full title of
David Hume on Faith, or Idealism and Realism, A Dialogue. It
had originally been intended as three separate dialogues, as the
structure of the final product still betrays. It clearly falls into
three parts, with an autobiographical interlude connecting the first
and second which is the source of much of our knowledge about Jacobi’s
early philosophical education. Jacobi uses it as a vehicle for
documenting how much, from the beginning, he had been temperamentally
driven always to give priority to existence, as immediately
apprehended, over any conceptual representation of it, and also for
putting on record that, when still a young man, he had found this
irresistible tendency of his best satisfied in Kant’s two early
essays, one on evidence in metaphysics and the other on the proof of
God’s existence (Jacobi, 1787: 67ff). These autobiographical remarks
come on the heels of a defence, in the first part of the Dialogue,
against the accusation of irrationalism brought against him chiefly
because of his use of the term ‘faith’ (Glaube,
in German) in the Spinoza Letters. Jacobi’s many polemical divagations
apart, the main line of the defence is very simple. Hume also had used
the term ‘belief’ (also translated in German as
Glaube) for the kind of assent which is based on experience
and is expressed in the form of judgement. Such an assent is
immediate, a matter of feeling rather than ratiocination, and all the
more unimpeachable precisely because reason alone would never induce
it on its own. Now, Jacobi argues, in the Spinoza Letters he had used
the term ‘faith’ (also Glaube in German) in the
same sense, in order to claim that judgement of existence must be
immediate. No process of ratiocination could produce the certainty
that accompanies it. There was no ‘irrationalism’,
therefore, either intended or implied. On the contrary, Jacobi had
been forced to use the term, and to oppose it to reason, only because
the philosophers had pre-empted the latter term, and had unduly
restricted it to mean the kind of discursive conceptualization that
abstracts from real things and is ultimately irrelevant to judgments
of existence (Jacobi, 1787: 29ff).
Distilled from the many twists and turns of dialogue style
argumentation, the theory can be summed up as follows:
In making this last point, Jacobi paraphrases Thomas Reid, without
however mentioning him explicitly in this immediate
 context.[6]
 He apparently thought that he was deploying against Hume the same
line of argument already advanced against him by his Scottish
‘common sense’ critic. He was also thereby clarifying what
he meant by ‘intuition’ — that supposed immediate
apprehension of truth that gives rise to belief. It now appears that
the intuition in question is a product of the ‘senses’. It
is not, however, anything blind, for — as understood by Jacobi
in the spirit of Reid, and certainly in contrast to both Hume’s and
Kant’s notion of sensibility — ‘sensations’ are not
passive impressions of the mind but exhibit rather from the start a
complex relation between subject and object that can then be developed
into even more reflective (i.e. representational) forms. Jacobi
actually says that he is dependent on Spinoza for the seminal idea of
his present method of deriving reflective representations from the
senses (Jacobi, 1787: 120, note 25). More significant, however, than
any reference to Hume, Reid, or Spinoza, is that he also refers to
Kant and his transcendental method deliberately, thus betraying that
he (Kant), rather than any of them, had been his main concern
all along (Jacobi, 1787: 119–20, & 120, note 25). Jacobi had been
advancing a theory of knowledge that, in his opinion, could compete
with Kant’s. For it explained the basic facts of experience, and even
explained the factual necessity of certain fundamental concepts
arising in the course of it, without incurring the kind of formalism
that, in his opinion and many of Kant’s contemporary critics, affected
Kant’s own transcendental method. Jacobi’s first representations were
allegedly drawn from experience directly. They were not applied to it
a priori, in the manner of Kant’s categories which Jacobi
regarded rather as nothing more than ‘prejudices of the
intellect’.
But there was a difficulty inherent in Jacobi’s proposed theory. It
came out most poignantly in the third part of the Dialogue — a
part dedicated, for the most part, to an exposition of Leibniz’s
metaphysics (Jacobi, 1787: 144ff). Here Jacobi portrays the German
Leibniz as the champion of individuality, and also tries to show how
it is possible to accept his Monadology if duly modified. The
transition in the Dialogue between second and third part is performed
rhetorically. There was, however, a conceptual basis for it. And it
was in this, in the obvious logical connection between Jacobi’s just
suggested theory of experience and Leibniz’s Monadology, that the
difficulty lay. For the organic conception of rationality that that
theory implied — reason being nothing more than a more
developed, more reflective, form of sensibility — fitted well
indeed with Leibniz’s system. But it also clearly led to Leibnizian
naturalism. And the idea that the ‘self’ cannot be defined
except in terms of an ‘other’, while also well fitted to
the Monadology, also led to the equally Leibnizian position that
everything in the universe is itself by reflecting everything
else. Jacobi had however made his philosophical debut precisely by
combating the assumption that everything can be explained by reference
to everything else — a position that he thought reflected the
philosophers’ logical enthusiasm for explanation and which he opposed
because it ended up undermining human subjectivity.
The much augmented second edition of Jacobi’s first major work
included a fuller documentation of the correspondence with
Mendelssohn, and eight new supplements in which, among other things,
Jacobi offered a more detailed exposition of Spinoza’s philosophy
(Supplements VI, VII) and a lengthy criticism of Herder’s version of
Spinozism (Supplement IV). It was also prefaced with fifty-two
propositions — twenty-three purporting to defend the thesis
‘Man does not have Freedom’; the remaining twenty-nine,
the opposite thesis ‘Man has Freedom’. The argument in
defence of the first thesis is based on the assumption that human
affairs are organized mechanistically, i.e. according to a
concatenation of purely efficient causes that would make the being of
each totally dependent on the external being of everything else. In
defending the thesis Jacobi follows Spinoza closely. The mechanism at
issue applies to the cognitive side of man just as much as to his
bodily side.  Consciousness, or representational being, is only a
mirror of extended being. Whatever happens in the latter is repeated
on the side of thought, though according to thought’s own modality of
existence. Thus, according to Jacobi, syllogistic thinking is
mechanistic in nature, being driven by principles ab ante no
less than any corporeal sequence of events. So far as the opposing
thesis is concerned, Jacobi argues for it by retrieving a theme from
the David Hume. If it is the case that a finite
‘I’ acquires identity only when confronted by an equally
finite ‘Thou’, then, just as for the required interplay
between the two one must assume on each side a source of
‘passivity’ that allows each to be limited by the other,
so one must also equally assume in them a countervailing source of
‘activity’. This source is irreducible. It follows that
‘activity’ and ‘passivity’ must be assumed to
run across the world we know in every part of it. In some parts, the
one element might well display a greater degree of intensity than the
other; nowhere, however, can either element crowd out the other
totally. It also follows that, though mechanism is both possible and
necessary, a totally mechanistic organization of things that would
eo ipso allow no room for individual freedom, i.e. one that
would reduce all things to external relations, is an impossibility,
for it would in fact reduce things to mere nothingness (Jacobi, 1789:
xxxv-xxxvi). It would make them totally passive.
‘Passivity’, however, has no meaning except in relation to
‘activity’. The conceptual basis for denying the reality
of individually attributable human act is thus removed.
The two theses, appearing as they did one year after the publication
of Kant’s Critique of Practical Reason, may be taken as a
tacit criticism of Kant’s strategy of defining the problem of freedom
in the form of an antinomy. Jacobi’s two theses do not constitute an
antinomy because, from their perspective, any apparent opposition
between mechanistic explanation and moral demands is already resolved
in the propositions detailing the second thesis. Presupposed by both
sets of propositions is the assumption, which Jacobi accepts, that
beings (at least, created beings) exist in limiting relationships, and
that such relationships entail an irreducible element of passivity as
well as activity on both the sides entering into them. The difference
between the two sets of propositions is that the second (the one
defending freedom) respects this necessary condition of any
relationship, whereas the first does not. Only the philosopher,
because of his passion for abstractions, is tempted to conceive, on
the one hand, a purely mechanistic relation, one which in fact negates
activity altogether and thus removes the basis for the desired
relationships; on the other hand, one which is purely active,
exclusively spontaneous, and thus attains the same result by the
opposite route. For this last point, Jacobi could have easily
connected Kant’s notion of freedom as purely spontaneous activity with
Spinoza’s causa sui. Only then, when one has thus given way
to the philosopher’s passion for abstractions, is one faced with the
Kantian kind of antinomy — a conflict of opposing yet
conceptually valid views that can be controlled, though never truly
resolved, only by appeal to the unknown.
In other words, the choice with which Jacobi confronted his readers at
the opening of his new edition of the Spinoza Letters was not between
two conceptually valid yet contradictory claims, but between the
anti-humanism of the philosophers — based at it was on an
abstraction — and a humanism that on the contrary stays close to
the facts of experience. In this respect, Jacobi was reaffirming the
point he had already made to Lessing ten years earlier, namely, that
the only way to deal with the irrational results of philosophizing is
to know when to stop philosophizing. Ironically, however, he had used
the same general paradigm of two interacting forces to define, in his
two sets of propositions, both the system of mechanical causes and the
system of freedom. This was a point that did not get lost. Fichte was
soon to use the paradigm as his basis for resolving Kant’s antinomy,
by arguing that freedom requires as its counterpart the kind of
mechanistic organization that scientific explanation demands. Where
Jacobi had tried to circumvent the antinomy altogether by suspending
philosophical reflection at the right moment, Fichte was to try to
resolve it by prompting that same reflection to a higher level of
abstraction instead. So far as Jacobi was concerned, the results of
any such move could only be disastrous. And it was indeed against
Fichte that, ten years later, he felt compelled to repeat in stronger
terms than ever before his original interdiction against
philosophers.
In his Open Letter, Jacobi famously declared Fichte as the true
disciple of Kant — the one who had brought the premises of
Transcendental Idealism to their logical conclusions. He also revised
his prior estimate of Spinoza. He had always portrayed the latter as
the most consistent of all philosophers. He now recognized that the
attribute belonged in truth to Fichte. He was in fact the
philosopher par excellance — the Messias of Reason, as
Jacobi now loudly proclaims him (Jacobi, 1799: 2). For Fichte had
extended the reach of philosophical abstraction, with which Spinoza
had gone only so far as to exclude the possibility of subjectivity, to
retrieve this subjectivity itself within its compass, as if it could
be excogitated a priori out of pure thought. Fichte’s
idealism was a case of inverted Spinozism, of spiritual materialism
(Jacobi, 1799: 2–5). For Spinoza’s substance, which explains all
things by explaining none of them in particular, hence relegates the
determination of individuals to the endless mechanism of external
causes, was now being reintroduced as the product of pure reflection,
as its first objectification. It was as if reflection dissolved all
things in the ether of pure thought, out of sheer freedom, and then
reassembled them again — but now as a game, according to
self-concocted rules (Jacobi, 1799: 24–27).
All this infuriated Jacobi. No piece of his is as overflowing with
religious language as this letter to Fichte. But the rhetoric
exhibited here has none of the pious triumphalism, smacking of
Lavater, that had vitiated his earlier productions. It seems born,
rather, out of genuine fear in the face of what he thought was the
ultimate nihilism of reason. Jacobi conceded that there was no
argument against Fichte, no way of refuting him on his own conceptual
grounds. He stood before him, therefore, as one who gave witness
against the philosophers, forcing the audience to a choice between him
and them. Against the universal norms of either Kant’s or Fichte’s
morality, he stood rather as the champion of the exception — the
one who, for the sake of the individual, would dare profane the sacred
altars, indeed to lie and even murder (Jacobi, 1799: 32–33). This was
a powerful individualistic manifesto that Jacobi was promoting, the
kind not be heard again until Kierkegaard more than half a century
later. But it had nothing to do with the asocial individualism typical
of the Sturm und Drang movement that had been the cause of
Jacobi’s concern in his younger years. On the contrary, even before
this commotion with Fichte, and probably with Goethe in mind, Jacobi
had long been meditating on the place of the individual in society,
and had formulated for himself a definite social theory. To gather an
idea of it, however, we must turn to his more literary works, as we
shall do in due place (see Section 3).
The final period of Jacobi’s life saw, among other things, two major
publications and the undertaking of the editions of his collected
work.  We shall consider this last at the end, in the section
‘Retrospect’ (Section 5). As for the other two pieces, the
first was a renewed and ever sharper attack on Kant’s Transcendental
Idealism, as the title indicated: ‘On Critique’s Attempt to
Reduce Reason to the Understanding’. It was completed by
Jacobi’s disciple Köppen, as clearly indicated in the text
itself; and published in 1802. Reduced to its bare minimum, the attack
was based on three arguments, as follows:
(1) Kant had tried to establish the possibility of synthetic a
priori judgements on the assumption of an object (= x) and of
subject (= x) that we ex hypothesi cannot ever know but upon
which the system of experience based on the said judgements none the
less depends. The two (viz., the subject and object) constitute
transcendental conditions of the possibility of the system of
experience. Kant’s attempt, however, entails an irresoluble
difficulty.  For although the assumed subject and object are factors
that ex hypothesi fall outside the system of the
a priori judgements to be validated (i.e., they are
‘transcendental’), they can only be defined in terms of
the concepts and distinctions that have meaning exclusively
inside that system. Kant thus finds himself in the
embarrassing situation of negating, while at the same time affirming,
the transcendality of the conditions of his system, thereby
undermining the stability that the latter should derive from
them (Jacobi, 1812–25: vol. 2, 85–91).
(2) The same objection can be generalized in terms of the relation
that obtains in Kant’s Critique between ‘reason’ and
‘understanding’. It is the task of reason, according to
Kant, to define the extra-systemic conditions that make the system of
experience possible. But, ex hypothesi, reason has no
knowledge of these conditions. As defined by it, they are empty
conceptual constructs that acquire meaning only to the extent that
they are used by the understanding in its endless work of
systematizing experience. To this extent, reason is totally
subordinated to the understanding. Yet the latter needs
reason. To the extent, therefore, that reason does satisfy this need
with its ideas, it cannot help creating the illusion that, through
them, it yields genuine knowledge — that, logically, its
conceptions are prior to those of the understanding. Now, Jacobi
objected to what he took to be the existentially impossible
requirement thus being imposed on reason, namely, that it should
generate illusions for the sake of the understanding, yet be fully
aware that such illusions are just that (Jacobi, 1812–25:
vol. 2, 81, 100–01, 115).
(3) The third objection, though repeated in a variety of ways,
consists essentially in a criticism of Kant’s analysis of the function
of the understanding in experience. Even granted all the elements of
Kant’s transcendental psychology, notably, that sensations are per
se amorphous mental impressions, that space and time can be at
once intuitions and objects of intuition, that the categories are
a priori concepts of the understanding — assumptions
these, all of which Jacobi in fact rejects, and against which he
strenuously argues in the body of the essay — even granted
these, there still is an internal defect in Kant’s system. The problem
is that the two terms to be synthesized in any presumed a
priori judgement of experience, namely, thought and sensations,
are on their own too indeterminate to provide any clue as to how the
object that should result from the synthesis would look like. So far
as sensibility is concerned, such indetermination applies whether we
take it according to its material content or its a priori
forms of intuition, for ‘space’ and ‘time’, as
defined by Kant, lack per se definite limits (Jacobi,
1812–25: vol. 2, 77–79, 122ff, 134–35, 136–39).
It follows that the determination, in actual experience, must be
provided by the intervention of the imagination, and whether we take
the latter in a psychological or transcendental sense, its
contribution will necessarily entail an element of arbitrariness, and
it will thus render any synthesis thereby attained vulnerable to
sceptical doubt. Kant, in other words, fails to deliver on his promise
of a knowledge, limited indeed to experience, but necessary within
such limits (Jacobi, 1812–25: vol. 2, 95, 97, 115ff, 118ff,
135, 150, 154ff).
The other major work of Jacobi in this last period, Of Divine
Things and Their Revelation, was published in 1811. Jacobi had
actually begun writing the piece ten years earlier, as the review of a
recently published volume by a pietist writer, but had later picked it
up again and completed in a totally different cast as a critique of
Schelling’s ‘System of Identity’ and of the new Philosophy
of Nature connected with it. Evidence of its earlier purpose is still
visible in the final text, beginning as it does with the discussion of
a moral issue, namely, whether morality is to be based on virtue
alone, or on natural happiness, or a combination of both. But then the
text suddenly shifts to a long discussion of Kant’s critical
philosophy, the burden of which is however to demonstrate that
Schelling’s recent idealistic productions were but the logical
consequences of precisely that philosophy. The treatment of Kant in
this context is a strangely qualified one. On the one hand, Jacobi
praises him highly, showing him all the respect due to someone who had
become an icon of German philosophical culture. He praises him because
he had unequivocally recognized that a true God (presumably, such as
morality demands) must be a person; also because he acknowledged that
we have an immediate belief in God, freedom, and immortality, and
‘belief’ for Jacobi of course meant
‘knowledge’; finally, because, just like Jacobi himself,
he had tried to respect and harmonize the interests of reason, which
are directed to God, and those of the understanding, which are
directed to the senses (Jacobi, 1812–25: vol.  3, 341–44;
351–52). Such praises, however, turn out to be hollow —
even a masked form of condemnation. For Jacobi’s main thesis
throughout the otherwise rambling work is that Kant, while upholding
personalistic values, had in fact subverted them conceptually, the net
product being Fichte’s system of ideal materialism and now the openly
naturalistic system of Schelling.
The kernel of Jacobi’s argument was in fact still the same as the one
presented in his earlier Kant essay (1802). The point there was that
Kantian reason, though transcending the understanding, was none the
less restricted in its knowledge to the limits of the latter and even
subservient to it in the exercise of its powers. As a result, reason
found itself in the strange situation of spontaneously generating
belief that we have knowledge of transcendent realities, while at the
same time having to recognize that any such knowledge is
illusionary. Jacobi now further develops this point by arguing that
Kant’s critical system was explicitly intended from the start to serve
the interests of science — where by ‘science’ Kant
meant first and foremost a cognition of the understanding directed at
the objects of the senses. The understanding, however, despite its
earth-bound nature, cannot help falling under the influence of the
higher faculty of reason. It is caught up in reason’s desire to behold
all things under a transcendent single principle. And reason —
as a matter of fact, according to Jacobi — does have an
intuitive knowledge of things transcendent. But since the
understanding cannot allow this knowledge, yet still needs reason as a
higher regulative principle, it substitutes for reason’s knowledge
ideal constructs that are indeed also the products of reason, but are
made up, however, of abstractions derived from the
understanding. These abstractions then hide from the understanding and
reason itself the transcendent knowledge that the latter enjoys de
facto. For since reason naturally begins with the assumption of
such a knowledge, yet cannot recognize it in the abstractions
construed for the sake of the understanding, it ends up treating it as
mere illusion (Jacobi, 1812–25: vol. 3, 372–94).
Fichte’s next obvious step was to remove the ground of the illusion by
declaring the ideal constructs of reason to be themselves the objects
of the transcendent knowledge that reason desires — in effect,
of identifying God with the logical order of things. And Fichte,
according to Jacobi, quite consistently also took as the test of true
personality the capacity on the part of a self to reconstruct the
whole of nature a priori from the principles of that logic,
thus reenacting ideally God’s creative deed. In fact, however, such a
logic was from the start the product of understanding’s
abstractions. It has no content of its own. The idealizing activities
of a self cannot in fact be realized, therefore, except by attending
to the material details of nature. And since, even when idealized,
nature still remains ‘nature’, it follows according to
Jacobi that in practice Fichte’s idealism is but a form of
materialism. Schelling’s naturalism only made this fact explicit. In
sum, the great hoax that according to Jacobi idealism had perpetrated
— starting with Kant and concluding with Schelling — was
to give to believe, not indeed that the human spirit can dispense with
Things Divine, but that these things can be saved and attained in the
impersonal medium of nature.
 Important to note is the new terminology that Jacobi was using in
this last work, and had already begun to use in the previous essay on
Kant. He was now operating on the assumption that there is a
distinction between ‘reason’ and
‘understanding’ — where by ‘reason’ he
meant the capacity for transcendent, unifying, principles; by
‘understanding’, the faculty of abstracting general
representations from more particular ones (Jacobi, 1812–25:
vol. 3, 395ff, 400, 434–35). The distinction was, of course,
Kantian in origin.  The claim, moreover, that Kant had held
‘reason’ hostage to the abstractive requirements of the
‘understanding’ was one widely debated among his
idealistic followers. Jacobi, however, was now using
‘reason’ to mean a faculty of intuitive knowledge of
transcendent things. He was giving to it a positive noetic value. As
used by him, therefore, the distinction between ‘reason’
and ‘understanding’ allowed him to draw what he thought
was the crucial difference between himself and Kant (Jacobi,
1812–25: vol.  3, 369–72). Whereas Kant had tried to
harmonize the two faculties negatively, simply by keeping each within
its appointed limits, Jacobi had revealed their harmony positively, by
bringing to light the knowledge that reason actually contributes to
experience, thus providing the positive matrix within which the
understanding can operate.
In another way as well the distinction helped Jacobi — or so he
thought it did. From the beginning Jacobi had been faced by the
difficulty that, in order to oppose philosophical reflection and the
nihilism that it brought in train, he had had to attack
‘reason’ and to summon ‘faith’ in its
stead. He had thereby made himself vulnerable to the charge of
‘irrationalism’ and ‘blind fideism’, a charge
that he always strenuously rejected. So far as Jacobi was concerned,
the true irrationalists were the philosophers. With the newly adopted
distinction, Jacobi could now specifically direct to the
‘understanding’, or more accurately, to a ‘reason
bound to the understanding’, the kind of criticism earlier
directed quite generally to ‘reason’. He could then summon
‘reason’, with the new meaning attributed to it, to do the
job previously performed by ‘faith’. In this way, he could
more easily dodge the charge of ‘irrationalism’ or
‘fideism’, for it was for the sake of ‘reason’
— that is, ‘true reason’ — that he could now
claim he was waging his campaign against the philosophers. The
problem, of course, was that Jacobi never quite clarified this new
meaning of ‘reason’. He was apparently using the concept
in the same way as he had previously used ‘faith’, namely,
as denoting an intuitive faculty akin to feeling but at the same time
sporting the clarity of a concept. And this was a combination of notes
just as obscure when it went under the name of ‘faith’ as
it did when called ‘reason’. Whether the new distinction,
and the new language that it made possible, in fact ever clarified
Jacobi’s position is a question, therefore, open to debate.
Jacobi’s earliest publications, some done in collaboration with his
brother Georg, were of a purely literary nature. And Jacobi continued
to publish the occasional piece in this vein also later, when
engrossed in philosophical debate. His reputation as a literary figure
is mostly based, however, on his two novels, Edward Allwill’s
Collection of Letters, and Woldemar. Both productions
underwent a long process of development, and were published in
different forms at different times (David, 1913; Jacobi, 1957).
As literary texts, the two pieces belong to the popular Enlightenment
genre of Erziehungsroman, ‘education-novel’. In
both cases the education at issue, as one would expect from the genre,
is that of a Herzensmensch. From what we learn about Allwill,
since early age, out of sheer natural impetuosity, he was given to
some most extraordinary behaviour. Allwill (whose name in German, as
in English, means just that, ‘all will’) did
whatever he did out of sheer impulse — his only norm of action,
the action itself. And later, as a grown-up man, now that he has grown
older, he displays this character trait in the arena of speculative
dispute as well. For the impetuous young man has also become a skilled
dialectician, as we learn from a scene in which we see him deliver a
long disquisition on the nature of knowledge in the course of a social
gathering (Jacobi, 1792: 143ff).
True rationality is social rationality. This is Jacobi’s lesson in
Allwill, and it is repeated in the Woldemar —
though the central character there, Woldemar, while exhibiting the
same propensity to abstract feeling and abstract thought as Allwill,
is treated by Jacobi with much warmth. The character might well have
been intended by him as a self-portrait. The novel itself, in its
final form, was put together from two pieces originally published
independently (Jacobi, 1779 (3) (4)). The synthesis never quite
worked. Woldemar, unrealistic man of feelings
that he is, has construed his whole world around the friendship he has
developed with one of the women in the circle of friends he
frequents. He has invested his whole existence in that friendship.
As it shows from the development of the friendship between the two
main characters, Jacobi was actually harking back to the notion of
reason he had adumbrated even as early as the first edition of the
Spinoza Letters. Rationality is constituted in the relationship
between an ‘I’ and a ‘Thou’, a relationship
that respects the conditions of both its terms. Within the context of
the
Woldemar, this conclusion also brings resolution to a
question discussed in a dialogue (the Waldgespräch)
introduced in the first part of the narration — the question,
namely, of the extent to which virtue depends on either nature or
art. The answer is that it depends on both, provided that each is
tested by the limits of actual human relations. At the conclusion of
the novel, just as in the earlier dialogue, it is also clearly implied
that the mutual respect that such relations demand from the
individuals entering into them is possible only on the assumption of a
‘Thou’ greater than any human ‘I’ — a
‘Thou’ whose transcendent pull forces the human
‘I’ outside its otherwise purely natural
limitations.[7]
Jacobi’s last word, in his novels just as much as in his philosophical
productions, always belongs to God.
All of Jacobi’s publications are polemical in nature. Some, however,
were occasional pieces written with a particular event or situation in
mind. Abstraction made of the perversely polemical tracts surrounding
the Spinoza dispute and the controversy with Schelling (Jacobi, 1916,
1967), all of them are historically as well as conceptually
interesting. Among them, we can single out a few.
In 1777, Jacobi’s friend and literary collaborator C.M. Wieland
(1733–1813) had published an essay arguing that power is the only
source of legitimacy for political authority, hence that the only
adequate form of government is a strictly autocratic
 one.[8]
 Right follows upon the physical ability to enforce obedience. Jacobi
replied with a point-by-point rebuttal that was published only four
years later (Jacobi, 1781). For one thing, Wieland was historically
wrong by misconstruing the actual origin of societies. Even more
important, Wieland was conceptually wrong by not recognizing that
‘moral law’ and ‘natural necessity’ can be
subsumed under the one concept of ‘natural right’ only in
a very broad sense. Moral rights derive their force from the freedom
of individuals, not from any consideration of natural laws.
Jacobi renewed his political polemic in 1782, this time on the
occasion of the publication by the historian Johann von Müller of
a pamphlet entitled The Travels of the
 Popes,[9]
 in which, contrary to current ‘enlightened’ views, a
positive revaluation of the role of the Popes in the Middles Ages was
offered.  Jacobi responded with a pamphlet of his own (Jacobi,
 1782)[10]
in which he defended Müller’s position — not because he had
any sympathy for Catholicism, or because he was opposed to secularism,
but because he thought that the Popes’ spiritual despotism was much
to be preferred to the secular, allegedly enlightened, despotism of
the princes.
In 1788, Jacobi published a piece in dialogue form in the
Deutsches Museum (Jacobi, 1788). He did it in the midst of
the notorious Starck affair, and in response to the campaign being
waged at the time by the Berlin Aufklärer against the
pious religiosity of people like Lavater — a religiosity which
they took as a form of crypto-Catholicism, and as an attack on the
universal religion of reason which they promoted (Blum, 1912). The
dialogue is between a pious believer and an enlightened
philosopher. The believer’s main point is that the philosopher has the
right indeed to criticize faith. But the believer has just as much
right not to accept the philosopher’s portrayal of his faith. The
philosopher, moreover, forgets that his philosophy has a history as
well; that its past is shrouded in a faith on which it still depends
for the meaning of its abstract conceptions. By attacking faith,
therefore, the philosopher risks undermining his own world of
 meaning.[11]
In 1802, Jacobi published a short piece (Jacobi, 1802 (2)) in response
to a prophesy made by G. C. Lichtenberg, a well known science
popularizer of the
 day,[12]
 to the effect that some day, as science progresses in its efforts at
reducing matter to the laws governing it, our world will become so
refined in our eyes that it will be just as laughable to believe in
God as it now is to believe in ghosts. Jacobi replied with a prophesy of
his own, imitating the Gospels’ account of the last days. Jacobi
reproduced the piece at the opening of his Of Divine Things and
their Revelation in 1811, in obvious parody of Schelling’s
philosophy of nature.
The first volume of Jacobi’s collected works was published in 1812;
the second, in 1815. This last is especially important because it
contains, added to the text of the David Hume, a long new
Preface intended by Jacobi, as the title indicates, also as
Introduction to his life long philosophical production (‘Preface
and also Introduction to the Author’s Philosophical Collected
Works’, Jacobi, 1812–25, vol. 2). In the piece, Jacobi
tried to sum up his intellectual odyssey by articulating the interest
that had motivated it from beginning to end, and thereby also to bring
some systematic unity to what might otherwise have appeared a
scattered philosophical production. Jacobi was obviously sensitive to
the charge of irrationalism that had repeatedly been brought against
him over the years, and anxious to disarm it. He appealed to the
distinction between ‘reason’ and
‘understanding’ that he had adopted from around 1800 to
argue, as he had already done in Of Divine Things, that the
kind of knowledge he had earlier presented under the rubric of
‘faith’ should be understood rather as a product of
‘reason’ — a ‘reason’ properly
understood, of course, as an intuitive faculty for the immediate
apprehension of such eternal verities as the Good, the True, and the
Beautiful (Jacobi, 1812–1825, vol. 2, 1815: 59–63 and
passim). He accordingly edited the 1787 text of the David
Hume, attributing what he thought was the inconclusiveness of the
dialogue to his yet unclarified concept of ‘reason’ at the
time of the first edition. He added long footnotes to it, and even
modified some crucial passages of the text itself — a
circumstance, incidentally, for the most part ignored by later
commentators — in an obvious effort to dispel the naturalism
otherwise clearly implied in the original text.[13] While thus
distancing himself from any possible evidence of naturalism, Jacobi
however also tried to deflect the accusation, sometimes brought
against him even by 
friends,[14] 
that he was against science. He tried to
compensate for his past repeatedly made remark that science is but a
game of abstractions (Jacobi, 1799: 22–27) by reasserting now,
as he had already done in Of Divine Things, that, without the
understanding’s power to synthesize in the medium of abstract
representations the content of sensations, reason, just like the
senses, would have no form and hence no cognition of itself (Jacobi,
1812–25: vol. 2, 58, 110). Jacobi also stressed that, however
necessary the functions of the understanding, the latter is none the
less still naturally prone to naturalism and to the atheism consequent
upon it.
A measure of the great influence that Jacobi had in his own lifetime,
and continued to have in the rest of the nineteenth century, is that
he was the first to put in circulation the term
‘nihilism’, and to inaugurate the discourse associated with
it.
Because of Jacobi’s insistence on the primacy of immediate existence
over reflective conceptualization, and of the rights of the
‘exception’, the possibility is there to interpret his
position as case of proto-existentialism, and to treat him, just as
Kierkegaard, as an essentially religious thinker (Beiser, 1987).
Indeed, some of the language Jacobi uses, and the themes he explores,
are to be found in Kierkegaard again. (Whether the latter was himself
an existentialist is, of course, itself an open question.) One must
however keep in mind that the language of the ‘leap of
faith’ does not belong to Jacobi. The salto mortale he
had proposed to Lessing was no leap into the unknown but, according to
his explicit testimony, a jump that would have brought Lessing, who
had been walking on his head in the manner of philosophers, back to
his feet (Jacobi, 1787: 62; 1789: 353).
In sum, Jacobi’s figure, including its place within the Enlightenment,
is much more complex than usually assumed, and still in need of
discussion. In our own times, Leo Strauss did his PhD on
Jacobi. Perhaps this is still another way in which Jacobi is working
his influence on us and still bringing Spinoza centre stage, exactly
where he did not want him to be. It might well be that the secret of
this complexity is that Jacobi, just like Kierkegaard after him, was
motivated by deeply conservative beliefs which he saw threatened by
the culture of the day; but, again like Kierkegaard, in trying to
reassert them, developed a language that was later to be used,
contrary to anything he would have ever imagined, to undermine them
instead.