Schelling was born in Leonberg near Stuttgart on 27 January 1775. He
attended a Protestant seminary in Tübingen from 1790 to 1795,
where he was close friends with both Hegel and the poet and
philosopher Friedrich Hölderlin. He moved to Leipzig in 1797,
then to Jena, where he came into contact with the early Romantic
thinkers, Friedrich Schlegel and Novalis, and, via Goethe’s influence,
took up his first professorship from 1798 to 1803. From 1803 to 1806
he lived in Würzburg, whence he left for Munich, where he mainly
lived from 1806 onwards, with an interruption from 1820 to 1827, when
he lived in Erlangen. He moved to Berlin in 1841 to take up what had,
until Hegel’s death in 1831, been Hegel’s chair of philosophy.
Although his lectures in Berlin were initially attended by such
luminaries as Kierkegaard, Engels, Bakunin, Ranke, Burkhardt, and
Alexander von Humboldt, he soon came to be largely ignored by most of
the leading thinkers of the day. It is clear, however, that his
philosophical thought still influenced many who rejected him on mainly
political grounds. He died on 20 August 1854 in Bad Ragaz,
Switzerland. Schelling’s influence on many directions in modern
philosophy has been seriously underestimated in the English-speaking
world, though sustained new attention to his work in recent years has
increasingly brought him into contemporary debates about naturalism,
freedom, aesthetics, epistemology, and ontology. 
The significance of the work of the early Schelling (1795–1800)
lies in its attempts to give a new account of nature which, while
taking account of the fact that Kant had irrevocably changed the
status of nature in modern philosophy, avoids some of the consequences
of Kant’s theory that were seen as problematic by Kant’s
contemporaries and successors. For the Kant of the Critique of
Pure Reason (1781, 1787) nature is largely seen in the
‘formal’ sense, as that which is subject to necessary
laws. These laws are accessible to us, Kant argues, because cognition
depends on the subject bringing forms of thought, the
categories, to bear on what it perceives. The problem this leads to is
how the subject could fit into a nature conceived of in deterministic
terms, given that the subject’s ability to know is dependent upon its
‘spontaneous’ self-caused ability to judge in terms of the
categories. Kant’s response to this dilemma is to split the
‘sensuous’ realm of nature as law-bound appearance from
the ‘intelligible’ realm of the subject’s cognitive and
ethical self-determination. However, if the subject is part of nature
there would seem to be no way of explaining how a nature which we can
only know as deterministic can give rise to a subject which
seems to transcend determinism in its knowing and in its
self-determined actions. Kant himself sought to bridge the realms of
necessity and spontaneity in the Critique of Judgement
(1790), by suggesting that nature itself could be seen in more than
formal terms: it also produces self-determining organisms and gives
rise to disinterested aesthetic pleasure in the subject that
contemplates its forms. The essential problems remained, however, that
(1) Kant gave no account of the genesis of the subject that transcends
its status as a piece of determined nature, and (2) such an account
would have to be able to bridge the divide between nature and freedom.
The tensions in Schelling’s philosophy of this period, which set the
agenda for most of his subsequent work, derive, then, from the need to
overcome the perceived lack in Kant’s philosophy of a substantial
account of how nature and freedom come to co-exist. Two ways out of
Kantian dualism immediately suggested themselves to thinkers in the
1780s and 90s. On the one hand, Kant’s arguments about the division
between appearances and things in themselves, which gave rise to the
problem of how something ‘in itself’ could give rise to
appearances for the subject, might be overcome by rejecting the notion
of the thing in itself altogether. If what we know of the object is
the product of the spontaneity of the I, an Idealist could argue that
the whole of the world’s intelligibility is therefore the result of
the activity of the subject, and that a new account of subjectivity is
required which would achieve what Kant had failed to achieve. On the
other hand, the fact that nature gives rise to self-determining
subjectivity would seem to suggest that a monist account of a nature
which was more than a concatenation of laws, and was in some sense
inherently ‘subjective’, would offer a different way of
accounting for what Kant’s conception did not provide. Schelling seeks
answers to the Kantian problems in terms that relate to both these
conceptions. Indeed, it is possible to argue that the conceptions are
in one sense potentially identical: if the essence of nature is that
it produces the subjectivity which enables it to understand itself,
nature itself could be construed as a kind of
‘super-subject’. The main thinkers whose work is regarded as exemplifying
these alternatives are J.G. Fichte, and Spinoza.
The source of Schelling’s concern with Spinoza is the ‘Pantheism
controversy’, which brought Spinoza’s monism into the mainstream
of German philosophy. In 1783 the writer and philosopher F.H. Jacobi
became involved in an influential dispute with the Berlin
Enlightenment philosopher Moses Mendelssohn over the claim that G.E.
Lessing had admitted to being a Spinozist, an admission which at that
time was tantamount to the admission of atheism, with all the
dangerous political and other consequences that entailed. In his
On the Doctrine of Spinoza in Letters to Herr Moses
Mendelssohn, (1785, second edition 1789), which was influenced by
his reading of Kant’s first Critique, Jacobi revealed a
problem which would recur in differing ways throughout Schelling’s
work. Jacobi’s interpretation of Spinozism was concerned with the
relationship between the ‘unconditioned’ and the
‘conditioned’, between God as the ground of which the laws
of nature are the consequent, and the linked chains of the
deterministic laws of nature. Cognitive explanation relies, as Kant
claimed, upon finding a thing’s ‘condition’. Jacobi’s
question is how finding a thing’s condition can finally ground its
explanation, given that each explanation leads to a regress in which
each condition depends upon another condition ad infinitum.
Any philosophical system that would ground the explanation of a part
of nature thus “necessarily ends by having to discover
conditions of the unconditioned” (Scholz, ed.,
1916, p. 51). For Jacobi this led to the need for a theological leap
of faith, as the world’s intelligibility otherwise threatened to
become a mere illusion, in which nothing would be finally grounded at
all. In the 1787 Introduction to the first Critique Kant
maintains this problem of cognitive grounding can be overcome by
acknowledging that, while reason must postulate the
“unconditioned (…) in all things in themselves for
everything conditioned, so that the series of conditions should thus
become complete” (Kant, Critique of Pure Reason B, p.
XX), by restricting knowledge to appearances, rather than assuming it
to be of “things in themselves”, the contradiction of
seeking conditions of the unconditioned can be avoided. As we have
already seen, though, this gives rise precisely to the problem of how
a subject which is not conditioned like the nature it comes to know
can emerge as the ground of knowledge from deterministic nature.
The condition of the knowledge of appearances for Kant is the
‘transcendental subject’, but what sort of
‘condition’ is the transcendental subject? The perception
that Kant has no proper answer to this problem initially unites
Schelling and Fichte. Fichte insists in the
Wissenschaftslehre (1794) that the unconditioned status of
the I has to be established if Kant’s system is to legitimate itself.
He asserts that “It is (…) the ground of explanation of
all facts of empirical consciousness that before all positing in the I
the I itself must previously be posited” (Fichte 1971, p. 95),
thereby giving the I the founding role which he thought Kant had
failed adequately to explicate. Fichte does this by extending the
consequences of Kant’s claim that the cognitive activity of the I, via
which it can reflect upon itself, cannot be understood as
part of the causal world of appearances, and must therefore be part of
the noumenal realm, the realm of the ‘unconditioned’. For
Fichte the very existence of philosophy depends upon the free act of
the I which initiates the reflection on its own activity by the I.
Schelling takes up the issues raised by Jacobi and Fichte in two texts
of 1795: Of the I as Principle of Philosophy or on the
Unconditional in Human Knowledge, and Philosophical Letters
on Dogmatism and Criticism. In a move which prefigures aspects of
Heidegger’s questioning of the notion of being, he reinterprets Kant’s
question as to the condition of possibility of synthetic judgements a
priori as a question about why there is a realm of judgements, a
manifest world requiring syntheses by the subject for knowledge to be
produced, at all. In Of the I, Schelling puts Kant’s question
in Fichtean terms: “how is it that the absolute I goes out of
itself and opposes a Not-I to itself?” (Sämmtliche
Werke [SW], I/1, p. 175). He maintains that the condition
of knowledge, the ‘positing’ by the I of that which is
opposed to it, must have a different status from the determined realm
which it posits: “nothing can be posited by itself as a thing,
i.e. an absolute/unconditioned thing (unbedingtes Ding) is a
contradiction” (ibid., p. 116). However, his key worry
about Fichte’s position already becomes apparent in the
Philosophical Letters, where he drops the Fichtean
terminology: “How is it that I step at all out of the
absolute and move towards something opposed (auf ein
Entgegengesetztes)?” (ibid., p. 294). The problem
Schelling confronts was identified by his friend Hölderlin, in
the light of Jacobi’s formulation of the problem of the
‘unconditioned’. Fichte wished to understand the absolute
as an I in order to avoid the problem of nature ‘in
itself’ which creates Kantian dualism. For something to be an I,
though, it must be conscious of an other, and thus in a relationship
to that other. The overall structure of the relationship could not,
therefore, be described from only one side of that relationship.
Hölderlin argued that one has to understand the structure of the
relationship of subject to object in consciousness as grounded in
‘a whole of which subject and object are the parts’, which
he termed ‘being’. This idea will be vital to Schelling at
various times in his philosophy.
In the 1790s, then, Schelling is seeking a way of coming to terms with
the ground of the subject’s relationship to the object world. His aim
is to avoid the fatalist consequences of Spinoza’s system by taking on
key aspects of Kant’s and Fichte’s transcendental philosophy, and yet
not to fall into the trap Hölderlin identified in Fichte’s
conception of an absolute I. In his Naturphilosophie
(philosophy of nature), which emerges in 1797 and develops in the
succeeding years, and in the System of Transcendental
Idealism of 1800, Schelling wavers between a Spinozist and a
Fichtean approach to the ‘unconditioned’. In the
Naturphilosophie the Kantian division between appearing
nature and nature in itself is seen as resulting from the fact that
the nature theorised in cognitive judgements is objectified in
opposition to the knowing subject. This objectification, the result of
the natural sciences’ search for fixed laws, fails to account for the
living dynamic forces in nature, including those in our own organism,
with which Kant himself became concerned in the third
Critique and other late work, and which had played a role in
Leibniz’s account of nature. Nature in itself is thought of by
Schelling as a ‘productivity’: “As the object
[qua ‘conditioned condition’] is never
absolute/unconditioned (unbedingt) then something per se
non-objective must be posited in nature; this absolutely non-objective
postulate is precisely the original productivity of nature” (SW
I/3, p. 284). The Kantian dualism between things in themselves and
appearances is a result of the fact that the productivity can never
appear as itself and can only appear in the form of
‘products’, which are the productivity
‘inhibiting’ itself. The products are never complete in
themselves: they are like the eddies in a stream, which temporarily
keep their shape via the resistance of the movement of the fluid to
itself that creates them, despite the changing material flowing
through them.
Schelling next tries to use the insights of transcendental philosophy,
while still avoiding Kant’s dualism, to explain our knowledge of
nature. The vital point is that things in themselves and
‘representations’ cannot be absolutely different because
we know a world which exists independently of our will, which can yet
be affected by our will:
The Naturphilosophie includes ourselves within nature, as
part of an interrelated whole, which is structured in an ascending
series of ‘potentials’ that contain a polar opposition
within themselves. The model is a magnet, whose opposing poles are
inseparable from each other, even though they are opposites. As
productivity nature cannot be conceived of as an object, since it is
the subject of all possible real ‘predicates’, of the
‘eddies’ of which transient, objective nature consists.
However, nature’s ‘inhibiting’ itself in order to become
something determinate means that the ‘principle of all
explanation of nature’ is ‘universal duality’, an
inherent difference of subject and object which prevents nature ever
finally reaching stasis (SW I/3, p. 277). At the same time this
difference of subject and object must be grounded in an identity which
links them together, otherwise all the problems of dualism would just
reappear. In a decisive move for German Idealism, Schelling parallels
the idea of nature as an absolute producing subject, whose predicates
are appearing objective nature, with the spontaneity of the thinking
subject, which is the condition of the syntheses required for the
constitution of objectivity, thus for the possibility of predication
in judgements. The problem for Schelling lies in explicating how these
two subjects relate to each other.
In the System of Transcendental Idealism Schelling goes back
to Fichtean terminology, though he will soon abandon most of it. He
endeavours to explain the emergence of the thinking subject from
nature in terms of an ‘absolute I’ coming retrospectively
to know itself in a ‘history of self-consciousness’ that
forms the material of the system. The System recounts the
history of which the transcendental subject is the result. A version
of the model Schelling establishes will be adopted by Hegel in the
Phenomenology of Mind. Schelling presents the process in
terms of the initially undivided I splitting itself in order to
articulate itself in the syntheses, the ‘products’, which
constitute the world of knowable nature. The founding stages of this
process, which bring the world of material nature into being, are
‘unconscious’. These stages then lead to organic nature,
and thence to consciousness and self-consciousness. Schelling claims,
in the wake of Fichte, that the resistance of the noumenal realm to
theoretical knowledge results from the fact that “the
[practical] act [of the absolute I] via which all limitation is
posited, as condition of all consciousness, does not itself come to
consciousness” (SW I/3, p. 409). He prophetically attempts to
articulate a theory which comes to terms with the idea that thought is
driven by forces which are not finally transparent to it, of the kind
later to become familiar in psychoanalysis. How, though, does one gain
access by thought to what cannot be an object of consciousness? This
access is crucial to the whole project because without it there can be
no understanding of why the move from determined nature to the freedom
of self-determining thinking takes place at all.
Schelling adopts the idea from the early Romantic thinkers Friedrich
Schlegel and Novalis, whom he knew in Jena at this time, that art is
the route to an understanding of what cannot appear as an object of
knowledge. Philosophy cannot represent nature in itself because access
to the unconscious must be via what appears to
consciousness in the realm of theoretical knowledge. The work of art
is evidently an empirical, appearing object like any other, but if it
is not more than what it is qua determinable object it cannot
be a work of art, because this requires both the free judgement of the
subject and the object’s conveying of something beyond its objective
nature. Although the System’s own very existence depends upon
the transition from theoretical to practical philosophy, which
requires the breaking-off of Jacobi’s chain of
‘conditions’ by something unconditioned, Schelling is
concerned to understand how the highest insight must be into reality
as a product of the interrelation of both the ‘conscious’
and the ‘unconscious’. Reality is not, therefore,
essentially captured by a re-presentation of the objective by the
subjective. Whereas in the System nature begins unconsciously
and ends in conscious philosophical and scientific knowledge, in the
art work: “the I is conscious according to the production,
unconscious with regard to the product” (SW I/3, p. 613). The
product cannot be understood via the intentions of its producer, as
this would mean that it became a ‘conditioned’ object,
something produced in terms of a pre-existing rule, and would
therefore lack what makes mere craft into art. Art is, then,
“the only true and eternal organ and document of philosophy,
which always and continuously documents what philosophy cannot
represent externally” (ibid., p. 627). The particular
sciences can only follow the chain of conditions, via the principle of
sufficient reason, and must determine any object via its place in that
chain, a process which has no necessary end. The art object, on the
other hand, manifests what cannot be understood in terms of its
knowable conditions, because an account of the materials of which it
is made or of its status as object in the world does not constitute it
as art. Art shows what cannot be said. Philosophy cannot positively
represent the absolute because ‘conscious’ thinking
operates from the position where the ‘absolute identity’
of the subjective and the objective has always already been lost in
the emergence of consciousness.
Although Schelling’s early work did not fully satisfy either himself,
or anybody else, it manages to address, in a cogent and illuminating
fashion, many topics which affect subsequent philosophy. The model
presented in the System impresses not least because, at the
same time as establishing the notion of the history of
self-consciousness that would be decisive for Hegel, it offers, in a
manner which goes beyond its sources in Fichte, a model of the
relationship between the subject and its conceptually inaccessible
motivating forces which would affect thinkers from Schopenhauer, to Nietzsche, to Freud, and beyond.
Although the period of Schelling’s ‘identity philosophy’
is usually dated from the 1801 Presentation of My System of
Philosophy until sometime before the 1809 On the Essence of
Human Freedom, the project of that philosophy can be said to be
carried on in differing ways throughout his work. The identity
philosophy derives from Schelling’s conviction that the self-conscious
I must be seen as a result, rather than as the originating act it is
in Fichte, and thus that the I cannot be seen as the generative matrix
of the whole system. This takes him more in the direction of Spinoza,
but the problem is still that of articulating the relationship between
the I and the world of nature, without either reverting to
Kantian dualism or failing to explain how a purely objective nature
could give rise to subjectivity.
Schelling’s mature identity philosophy, which is contained in the
System of the Whole of Philosophy and of Naturphilosophie in
Particular, written in Würzburg in 1804, and in other texts
between 1804 and 1807, breaks with the model of truth as
correspondence. It does so because:
The crucial problem is how to explain the link between the
subject and object world that makes judgements possible, and this
cannot be achieved in terms of how a subject can have thoughts which
correspond to an object essentially separate from it. For there to be
judgements at all what is split and then synthesised in the judgement
must, Schelling contends, in some way already be the same. This has
often been understood as leading Schelling to a philosophy in which,
as Hegel puts it in the Phenomenology, the absolute is the
‘night in which all cows are black’, because it swallows
all differentiated knowledge in the assertion that everything is
ultimately the same, namely an absolute which excludes all relativity
from itself and thus becomes inarticulable. This is not a valid
interpretation of Schelling’s argument. In an early version of the
identity philosophy he had said the following:
In order to try to get over the problem in monism of how the One is
also the many, Schelling, following the idea outlined above from
Hölderlin, introduces a notion of ‘transitive’ being,
which links mind and matter as predicates of itself. Schelling
explains this ‘transitivity’ via the metaphor of the
earth:
‘Absolute identity’ is, then, the link of the two
aspects of being, which, on the one hand, is the universe,
and, on the other, is the changing multiplicity which the
knowable universe also is. Schelling insists now that “The
I think, I am, is, since Descartes, the basic
mistake of all knowledge; thinking is not my thinking, and being is
not my being, for everything is only of God or the totality” (SW
I/7, p. 148), so the I is ‘affirmed’ as a predicate of the
being by which it is preceded. In consequence he already begins to
move away, albeit inconsistently, from the German Idealist model in
which the intelligibility of being is regarded as a result of its
having an essentially mind-like structure.
Schelling is led to this view by his understanding of the changing and
relative status of theoretical knowledge. It is the inherent
incompleteness of all finite determinations which reveals the nature
of the absolute. His description of time makes clear what he means:
“time is itself nothing but the totality appearing in
opposition to the particular life of things”, so that the
totality “posits or intuits itself, by not positing, not
intuiting the particular” (SW I/6, p. 220). The particular is
determined in judgements, but the truth of claims about the totality
cannot be proven because judgements are necessarily conditioned,
whereas the totality is not. Given the relative status of the
particular there must, though, be a ground which enables us to be
aware of that relativity, and this ground must have a
different status from the knowable world of finite particulars. At the
same time, if the ground were wholly different from the world of
relative particulars the problems of dualism would recur. As such the
absolute is the finite, but we do not know this in
the manner we know the finite. Without the presupposition of
‘absolute identity’, therefore, the evident relativity of
particular knowledge becomes inexplicable, since there would be no
reason to claim that a revised judgement is predicated of the same
world as the preceding — now false — judgement.
Schelling summarises his theory of identity as follows:
The link between the ‘real’ and the ‘ideal’
cannot be regarded as a causal link. Although there cannot be mental
events without physical events, the former cannot be reduced to being
the causal results of the latter: “For real and ideal are only
different views of one and the same substance” (SW I/6, p. 501).
Schelling wavers at this time between a ‘reflexive’
position of the kind which Hegel will soon try to articulate, in
which, in Schelling’s terms, “the sameness of the subjective and
the objective is made the same as itself, knows itself, and is the
subject and object of itself” (SW I/6, p. 173), in the
‘identity of identity and difference’, and the sense that
this position cannot finally circumscribe the structure of the
absolute. The structure of reflection, where each aspect reflects
itself and then is reflected in the other, upon which this account of
the identity of subject and object relies, must be grounded in a being
which carries it:
Without this independent basis subject and object would merely be, as
Schelling thinks they are in Fichte, relative negations of each other,
leading to a circle “inside which a nothing gains reality by the
relation to another nothing” (SW I/4, p. 358). Schelling
prophetically distinguishes between the cognitive — reflexive
— ground of finite knowledge and the real — non-reflexive
— ground that sustains the movement of negation from one finite
determination to another. As a two-sided relationship reflection alone
always entails the problem that the subject and the object in a case
of reflection can only be known to be the same via that which
cannot appear in the reflection. If I am to recognise myself
as myself in a mirror, rather than see a random object in the
world, I must already be familiar with myself before
the reflection, in a way which is not part of the reflection. This
means a complete system based on reflection is impossible, because, in
order for the system to be grounded, it must presuppose as external to
itself what it claims is part of itself. Schelling will, in his
philosophy from the 1820s onwards, raise versions of this objection
against Hegel’s system.
Schelling’s own dissatisfaction with his early versions of identity
theory derives from his rejection of Spinozism. Spinoza regards the
move from God to the world of ‘conditions’ as a logical
consequence of the nature of God. Schelling becomes convinced that
such a theory gives no reason why the absolute, the
‘unconditioned’, should manifest itself in a world of
negative ‘conditions’ at all. Schelling is therefore
confronted with explaining why there is a transition from the absolute
to the finite world, a finite world which he comes to see increasingly
in terms of the suffering and tragedy it has to involve. In
Philosophy and Religion, of 1804, he claims, like Jacobi,
that there is no way of mediating between conditioned and
unconditioned, and already makes the distinction between
‘negative’ and ‘positive’ philosophy, which
will form the heart of his late work. Explicating the structure of the
finite world leads to “negative philosophy, but much has already
been gained by the fact that the negative, the realm of nothingness,
has been separated by a sharp limit from the realm of reality and of
what alone is positive” (SW I/6, p. 43). The question which
comes to concern Schelling is how philosophy can come to terms with a
ground which cannot be regarded as the rational explanation of the
finite world, because the finite world involves so much that makes no
rational sense.
Schelling’s work from his middle period (1809–1827) is usually
referred to as the philosophy of the Ages of the World
(WA = Weltalter), after the title of the unfinished
work of that name he worked on in the period 1809–1827. The work
characteristic of this period begins with the 1809 On the Essence
of Human Freedom (FS = Freiheitsschrift) (written
in Stuttgart). The WA philosophy is an attempt to explain the
emergence of an intelligible world at the same time as coming to terms
with mind’s inextricable relation to matter. The initial concern is to
avoid Spinoza’s fatalism, which he thinks renders the human freedom to do good
and evil incomprehensible. Schelling’s crucial objection is
to the idea that evil should be understood as merely another form of
negativity which can be comprehended by insight into the inherent lack
in all finite parts of a totality, rather than as a positive fact
relating to the nature of human freedom. He now sees the fundamental
contradictions of the Naturphilosophie in terms of the
relationship of the intelligibility of nature and ourselves to a
ground without which there could be no intelligibility, but which is
not the explicable cause of intelligibility. In an attempt to get to
grips with the problem of the ground of the finite world Schelling
introduces a Kant-derived conception of ‘willing’ in the
FS which will be influential for Schopenhauer’s conception of the
Will: “In the last and highest instance there is no other being
but willing. Willing is primal being, and all the predicates of primal
being only fit willing: groundlessness, eternity, being independent of
time, self-affirmation” (SW I/7, p. 350). Schelling now
establishes a more conflictual version of the structure of the
identity philosophy. The ‘ground’ is
‘groundless’ — in the sense of
‘uncaused’ — and it must be understood in terms of
freedom if a Spinozist determinism is to be avoided. This means there
cannot be an explanation of why there is the finite world, because
that would entail taking the ground as a cause and thus rendering
freedom non-existent.
At the same time Schelling insists there must be that against which
freedom can be manifest — a being which is not free and is
therefore necessitated — for it to be meaningful freedom at all.
The theory is based on the antagonisms between opposing forces which
constitute the ‘ages of the world’, the past, present, and
future. He argues that the world whose origins the WA wishes to
understand must entail the same conflicting forces which
still act, though not necessarily in the same form, in this
world, of which the mind is an aspect: “Poured from the source
of things and the same as the source, the human soul has a
co-knowledge/con-science (Mitwissenschaft) of creation”
(WA, p. 4). Schelling suggests that there are two principles in us:
“an unconscious, dark principle and a conscious
principle”, which must yet in some way be identical. The same
structure applies to what Schelling means by ‘God’. At
this point his account of the ground is not consistent, but this
inconsistency points to the essential issue Schelling is trying to
understand, namely whether philosophy can give a rational account of
the fact of the manifest world. As that which makes the world
intelligible, God relates to the ground in such a way that the
‘real’, which takes the form of material nature, is
‘in God’ but “is not God seen absolutely, i.e.
insofar as He exists; for it is only the ground of His existence, it
is nature in God; an essence which is inseparable from God,
but different from Him” (SW I/7, p. 358). The point is that God
would be just be some kind of inarticulable, static One if there were
not that which He transcends: without opposition, Schelling argues,
there is no life and no sense of development, which are the highest
aspects of reality. The aim of the move away from Spinoza is to avoid
the sense of a world complete in itself which would render freedom
illusory because freedom’s goal would already be determined as the
goal of the totality. Schelling starts to confront the idea that the
rational reconciliation of freedom and necessity that had been sought
by Kant in the acknowledgement of the necessity of the law, and which
was the aim of German Idealism’s attempt to reconcile mind and nature,
might be intrinsically unattainable.
Wolfram Hogrebe has claimed that the WA philosophy is an ontological
theory of predication. Being, as initially One and enclosed within
itself, is not manifest, and has no reason to be manifest. Hogrebe
terms this ‘pronominal being’. The same being
must also, given that there is now a manifest world, be
‘predicative being’, which “flows out, spreads,
gives itself” (SW I/8, p. 210–211). The contradiction between
the two kinds of being is only apparent. Schelling maintains, in line
with the identity philosophy, that the “properly understood law
of contradiction really only says that the same cannot be as the
same something and also the opposite thereof, but this does not
prevent the same, which is A, being able, as an other, to be not
A” (SW I/8, p. 213–4). One aspect of being, the dark force,
which he sometimes terms ‘gravity’, is contractive, the
other expansive, which he terms ‘light’. Dynamic processes
are the result of the interchange between these ultimately identical
forces. If they were wholly separate there would either be no manifest
universe, because contraction would dominate, or the universe would
dissipate at infinite speed because expansion would dominate. The
result would be the same: there would not be a world. If something is
to be as something it must both be, in the positive sense in
which everything else is, which makes it indeterminately positive,
pronominal, and it must have a relationship to what it is not, in
order to be determinate, which brings it into the realm of predication
by taking it beyond itself. In the WA the One comes into contradiction
with itself and the two forces constantly vie with each other.
Differences must, however, be grounded in unity, as otherwise they
could not be manifest at all as differences. The ground is
now increasingly regarded as the source of the transitory nature of
everything particular, and less and less as the source of tranquil
insight into how we can be reconciled to finite existence. The mood of
the WA is summed up in Schelling’s reference to the “veil of
melancholy which is spread over the whole of nature, the deep
indestructible melancholy of all life” (SW I/7, p. 399). The
source of this melancholy is that everything finite must ‘go to
ground’ and that we are aware of this. Awareness thus both makes sense of things and yet is also what is underpinned by a negativity it must constantly seek to come to terms with.
The abandonment of his residual Spinozism leads Schelling to a growing
concern with the tensions which result from contradictions that are
also embodied in human beings. The ages of the world are constituted
by the development of forms and structures in the material and the
mental world. This development depends upon the expanding force’s
interaction with the contracting force’s slowing of any expansion,
which allows transient but determinate forms to develop. This process
also gives rise to language, which Schelling regards as the model for
the development of the whole world because it manifests how expansion
and the release of tension can lead to intelligibility, rather than
mere dissipation:
Language as ‘contracted’ material signifier, and
‘expanding’ ideal meaning repeats the basic structure of
the WA, and Schelling insists that, like the material world without
the ‘ideal’ capacity for expansion, language can become
‘congealed’. This interaction between what is contained in
itself and what draws something beyond itself is also what gives rise
to consciousness, and thus to an inherent tension within
consciousness, which can only be itself by its relation to an other.
Hegel uses a related model of subjectivity, but Schelling will come to
reject Hegel’s model for its failure to confront the ultimately
irresolvable tension in all subjectivity. Schelling’s later philosophy
will present a subject whose origin prevents it from ever achieving
the ‘self-presence’ that Hegel tries to explicate by
setting out the complete structure of ‘self-reflection’ in
the other. Schelling’s WA philosophy is never completed: its Idealist
aim of systematically unifying subject and object by comprehending the
real development of history from the very origins of being founders on
problems concerning the relationship between philosophical system and
historical contingency which do not admit of solutions. Furthermore,
the structures he develops lead him to ideas which take him beyond
Idealism and make him one of the crucial precursors of existential and
other non-Idealist forms of modern philosophy.
Schelling has often been understood as providing the transitional
‘objective idealist’ link between Fichte and Hegel. By
regarding Hegel’s system as the culmination of German Idealism this
interpretation fails to do justice to Schelling’s real philosophical
ambitions. Many of these insights, particularly in the later
philosophy (1827–1854), directly and indirectly influenced the
ideas of thinkers, like Feuerbach, Kierkegaard, Nietzsche, Heidegger,
and Adorno, who were critical of Hegel’s claim to articulate a
complete philosophical system.
The differences between Hegel and Schelling derive from their
respective approaches to understanding the absolute. For Hegel the
absolute is the result of the self-cancellation of everything
finite, whose mode of being is precisely to change into something
different. Philosophy can therefore articulate the nature of the
absolute by an account of how finite determinations are always
transcended. This takes the form of the ‘negation of the
negation’, in a system whose end comprehends its beginning. For
Hegel the result becomes known when the beginning negates itself as
being ‘in itself’ to becomes being ‘for
itself’ at the end of the system, thus in a process in which it
reflects itself to itself by becoming other to itself. Schelling
already becomes publicly critical of Hegel while working on a later
version of the WA philosophy in Erlangen in the 1820s, but makes his
criticisms fully public in lectures given in Munich in the 1830s, and
in the 1840s and 1850s as professor in Berlin. The aim of the Idealist
systems was for thought to reflect what it is not — being
— as really itself, even as it appears not to be itself, thereby
avoiding Kant’s dualism. The issue between Schelling and Hegel is
whether the grounding of reason by itself is not in fact a sort of
philosophical narcissism, in which reason admires its reflection in
being without being able fully to articulate its relationship to that
reflection. Like Hegel, Schelling argues that it is not the particular
manifestation of knowledge which tells me the truth about the world,
but rather the necessity of moving from one piece of knowledge to the
next. However, a logical reconstruction of the process of knowledge
can, for Schelling, only be a reflection of thought by itself. The
real process cannot be described in philosophy, because the cognitive
ground of knowledge and the real ground, although they are inseparable
from each other, cannot be shown to reflect each other.
Dieter Henrich characterises Hegel’s conception of the absolute as
follows: “The absolute is the finite to the extent to which the
finite is nothing at all but negative relation to itself”
(Henrich 1982, p. 82). Hegel’s system depends upon showing how each
particular way of conceiving of the world has an internal
contradiction. This necessarily leads thought to more comprehensive
ways of grasping the world, until the point where there can be no more
comprehensive way because there is no longer any contradiction to give
rise to it. The very fact of the finite limitations of empirical
thought therefore becomes what gives rise to the infinite, which, in
Hegel’s terms, is thought that is bounded by itself and by nothing
else.
Schelling accepts such a conception, to which he substantially
contributed in his early philosophy, as the way to construct a
‘negative’ system of philosophy, because it explains the
logic of change, once there is a world to be explained. The conception
does not, though, explain why there is a developing world at all, but
merely reconstructs in thought the necessary structure of development
on the basis of necessities in thought. Schelling’s own attempt at
explaining the world’s ontological and historical facticity will lead
him to a ‘philosophical theology’ which traces the
development of mythology and then of Christian revelation in his
Philosophy of Mythology and Philosophy of
Revelation, which, like all his substantial works after 1811, are
not published in his lifetime. The failure of his philosophical
theology does not, though, necessarily invalidate his philosophical
arguments against Hegel. His alternative to the “common mistake
of every philosophy that has existed up to now” — the
“merely logical relationship of God to the world”
(System der Weltalter, p. 57) — Schelling terms
‘positive philosophy’. The ‘merely logical
relationship’ entails a reflexivity, in which the world
necessarily follows from the nature of God, and God and the world are
therefore the ‘other of themselves’. Hegel’s system tries
to obviate the facticity of the world by understanding reason as the
world’s immanent self-articulation. Schelling, in contrast, insists
that human reason cannot explain its own existence, and
therefore cannot encompass itself and its other within a system of
philosophy. We cannot, he maintains, make sense of the manifest world
by beginning with reason, but must instead begin with the contingency
of being and try to make sense of it with the reason which is only one
aspect of it and which cannot be explained in terms of its being a
representation of the true nature of being.
Schelling contends that the identity of thought and being cannot be
articulated within thought, because thought must
presuppose that they are identical in a way which thought, as
one side of a relation, cannot comprehend. By redefining the
‘concept’ in such a way that it is always already both
subject and object, Hegel aims to avoid any presuppositions on either
the subject or the object side, allowing the system to complete itself
as the ‘self-determination of the concept’. Schelling
presents the basic alternative as follows:
Hegel attempts to merge concept and being by making being part of a
structure of self-reflection, rather than the basis of the
interrelation between subject and object. In Schelling’s terms, Hegel
therefore invalidly assumes that ‘essence’, what we know
of things, which is one side of the relationship between being and
essence, can articulate its identity with the other side in the
‘concept’, because the other side is revealed as being
‘nothing’ until it has entered into a relationship which
makes it determinate as a knowable moment of the whole process. For
Hegel, on the other hand, Schelling has to invoke being as something
immediate: this means it must be wholly opaque, and so is equivalent
to nothing.
The problem which Hegel does not overcome is that the identity of
essence and being cannot be known, because, as Schelling
claims of his concept of being, “existing is not here the
consequence of the concept or of essence, but rather existence is here
itself the concept and itself the essence” (SW II/3, p. 167).
The problem of reflection cannot be overcome in Hegel’s manner:
identifying one’s reflection in a mirror as oneself (understood now as
a metaphor for essence) entails, as we saw above, a prior
non-reflexive moment if one is to know that the reflection is
oneself, rather than a random reflected object. How far Schelling
moves from any reflexive version of identity philosophy is evident in
the following from the Introduction to the Philosophy of
Revelation or Foundation of the Positive Philosophy of
1842–3:
Schelling refuses to allow that reason can confirm its status via its
reflection in being:
The contemporary ramifications of the debate between Schelling and
Hegel have been given new significance by the continuing elaboration
of ‘non-metaphysical’ readings of Hegel by Robert Pippin
and others. If Hegel is really the philosopher who insists that
legitimation can only be in terms of the account we can give of how we
came to adopt the forms of legitimation of our society, there being no
extra-mundane perspective on these forms, how far is he from
Schelling’s moves against rationalist metaphysics in his later philosophy? The
difference between Hegel and Schelling seems here to lie above all in
Schelling’s insistence that one cannot reduce the ways in which we
face up to the terrors and irrationality of existence to what can be
achieved by a philosophical system that makes sense of negativity by showing it has a rational basis. His attention to art and the unconscious in his early philosophy already suggests this direction in his later thinking.
Schelling is one of the first philosophers seriously to begin the
critique of the model of metaphysics based on the idea of true
representation, a critique which can be seen as one of the key aspects
of modern philosophy from Heidegger to the later Wittgenstein and
beyond. He is, at the same time, unlike some of his successors,
committed to an account of human reason which does not assume that
reason’s incapacity to ground itself should lead to an abandonment of
rationality or the reduction to reason to the exercise of power, in the
manner of Nietzsche. This is one of the respects in which Schelling
has again become part of contemporary philosophical debate, where the
need to seek means of legitimation which do not rely on the notion of
a rationality inherent in the world remains a major challenge. Above
all, Schelling’s account of mind and world, particularly his
insistence on the need not to limit our conception of nature to what
can be objectified by scientific methods, is, in the light of the
ecological crisis, proving to be more durable than his reception might
until recently have suggested. The question Schelling still poses is how the capacity for expanding human knowledge and control of nature can be reconciled with sustainable ways of inhabiting that nature.