There are many senses in which a thing may be said to be
fundamental—some technical, some relatively intuitive. A very
common way to think about fundamentality is in terms of independence,
whereby for any notion of dependence D, an entity is
D-fundamental if and only if it does not
dependD on anything else (or on anything else that
does not depend on it). This independence-based characterization of
fundamentality will be discussed in sections
 1.1
 and
 1.2.
 There are also other ways to understand fundamentality; these include
fundamentality as a complete description of reality
 (section 1.3)
 and as primitive
 (section 1.4).
 So, there are many ways to understand fundamentality and whether
there is any single idea of fundamentality that these different ways
are trying to capture is a substantial issue. But even if there is no
unified sense of fundamentality, one interesting question is whether
there are any fundamental entities, where “fundamental” is
understood in one of the different ways that will be specified below.
We might also ask whether we need such entities, whether given
theories are committed to their existence, and what the role of
fundamentalia is in explanation. Before we get started, a few
preliminary issues need to be mentioned.
For present purposes, we are interested in the notion of a fundamental
thing, or type of thing. The candidates for fundamentality
may include objects, such as electrons, but they may also include
properties, or facts. The choice regarding the relevant type of entity
may depend on one’s preferred account of fundamentality.
However, there is often an acceptable translation between different
 views.[1]
 For instance, let’s say that we take the fact <electrons
have unit negative charge> to be fundamental. Someone who does not
wish to ascribe fundamentality to facts (e.g., because they do not
have facts in their ontology), could understand this to be saying that
the property unit negative charge is fundamental and
instantiated in electrons. The translation here is from electrons
have unit negative charge to the fundamental property unit
negative charge that is instantiated in electrons (and only
them). So, the disagreement between those who consider fundamentality
to concern facts and those who regard objects and properties as
fundamentalia may not be as serious as it looks.
We should also distinguish between the fundamentality of entities
belonging to a certain ontological category and the fundamentality of
the ontological category itself. It is one thing to say that certain
properties are fundamental; another to say that the category
property is a fundamental category. We are mostly concerned
with the former issue, but the debate about which ontological
categories are fundamental and how many such categories there are has
been lively throughout the history of Western philosophy. For
instance, Aristotle may have thought that substances are the only
category that is separate from and hence more fundamental
than other categories, such as the category universals (Aristotle
Physics 185a31–32; Metaphysics
 1029a27–28).[2]
Since one key task for the notion of fundamentality is to help us
articulate the view that there is a hierarchical structure to
reality, it is usually assumed that the dependence relation we are
dealing with must be asymmetric. Typically, the relation
would also be considered transitive and irreflexive,
hence producing a strict partial ordering. However, each of
these formal characteristics can in fact be questioned, albeit whether
this undermines the layered conception is up for debate (see Rabin
 2018).[3]
We have noted that relative fundamentality is a very important notion,
since the second key task for fundamentality identified above concerns
the hierarchy of fundamentality. Moreover, relative fundamentality
could arguably be used to define absolute fundamentality (some entity
x is absolutely fundamental if and only if it is not relatively
fundamental to any entity y). In contrast, relative
fundamentality cannot be defined in terms of absolute fundamentality,
so there are reasons to think that we should focus on relative
fundamentality, insofar as the notion makes sense. Given this, it is
perhaps surprising that there are relatively few explicit accounts of
relative fundamentality in the literature so far, but we will refer to
it where relevant (see Wilson 2012, 2016; Zylstra 2014; Koslicki 2015;
Bennett 2017: Ch. 6; deRosset 2017; Correia forthcoming).
Finally, the notion of naturalness and the related notion of
sparseness, familiar especially from Lewis’s work (see
Lewis 1986, 2009; Schaffer 2004; Dorr & Hawthorne 2013; McDaniel
2013, 2017; Thompson 2016a) is sometimes connected with
fundamentality. Sider’s (2011) influential notion of
structure is closely related to the notion of naturalness.
Perfectly natural properties might seem to be good candidates for
absolutely fundamental entities. Naturalness is no doubt a close
cousin of fundamentality, but there are some reasons to think that the
two notions cannot do the same jobs (see Bennett 2017: Ch. 5.7). Most
strikingly, there may be perfectly natural entities that are dependent
in ways that are clearly ruled out by many of the definitions of
fundamentality that we will shortly
 consider.[4]
 For further discussion, see the supplement on
 the natural/non-natural distinction
 in the entry on
 David Lewis’s metaphysics.
The first definition of fundamentality to be considered may be labeled
Absolute Independence:
What is included in D? We can give an open-ended list of
candidate relations: grounding, dependence between wholes and their
parts (known as mereological or compositional dependence),
realization, existential dependence, essential dependence, and,
controversially, even causal dependence (on the link to causation, see
Bernstein 2016; Koslicki 2016; Schaffer 2016b; Shaheen 2017). The list
is open-ended partly because there is disagreement about what counts
as a metaphysical dependence relation in the relevant sense and partly
because there may be metaphysical dependence relations that we wish to
rule out. A possible criterion (i.e., the “relevant
sense”) to be included in the list is that the dependence
relations in question must have at least some features in common, such
as, perhaps, transitivity. Furthermore, two philosophers may disagree,
say, about whether compositional dependence is a genuine metaphysical
dependence relation. So, for these two philosophers,
 (AI)
 will produce a different definition of fundamentality, because the
scope of D is different. We will not attempt to give a complete
list or to define all these different kinds of metaphysical
dependence, but for further details on some of them, see the separate
entries on
 ontological dependence
 and
 metaphysical grounding.[5]
What is important is that
 (AI)
 is an attempt to define fundamentality in the most general terms
possible, using a very broad notion of metaphysical dependence. There
is, however, at least one kind of dependence that we will likely wish
to exclude from D, namely, modal dependence. The
reason for this is simple: nothing will be independent in the sense of
(AI) if modal independence is required (cf. Wang 2016). This is
evident if we consider some necessary existents, such as numbers
(assuming that numbers exist necessarily), for it is necessarily the
case that the number 2 exists if Socrates does. Hence, the existence
of Socrates necessitates the existence of the number 2. Moreover, the
number 2 necessitates the existence of the number 3 and the other way
around. This obviously generalizes, resulting in no entity whatsoever
being “absolutely existentially modally free”, as Wang
(2016) puts it.
Even if we rule out modal dependence,
 (AI)
 is a very strong sense of fundamentality, probably much too strong.
Accordingly, it may not be a very popular option. Indeed, it is
difficult to find a direct endorsement of (AI) in the literature. That
being said, there are some potential if controversial candidates for
absolutely independent entities, such as God. Perhaps it is also
possible to think of the universe as a whole as absolutely independent
in this sense. This might reflect something like Georges
Lemaître’s theory of the “primeval atom” or
the “Cosmic Egg” hypothesis—an idea now better known
as the Big Bang theory. Lemaître’s hypothesis was that the
observed expansion of the universe may have started from a single
point, the primeval atom, which would have contained the entire mass
of the universe. Now, one may of course postulate that the primeval
atom itself could depend on something else, such as God, but this
nevertheless gives us an entirely naturalistically motivated idea of
absolute independence. The metaphysical position that comes closest to
this idea would be a type of monism, perhaps motivated by
considerations emerging from quantum holism (Calosi 2013; Ney 2015;
Ismael & Schaffer forthcoming; and the entry on
 monism).
Why does fundamentality defined in terms of
 (AI)
 seem too strong? One major reason for this is that many things that
we might normally regard as fundamental turn out to be dependent on
other things in one sense or another. For instance, let us suppose
that there is a mereologically fundamental level, that is, there are
mereological atoms that do not have any proper parts. If mereological
dependence runs from the wholes to their parts contra priority
monism of the type defended by Schaffer (2010a), these
mereological atoms are clearly independent in a mereological
sense and most philosophers would probably want to regard them as
fundamental. But even if these mereological atoms are mereologically
independent, they could still metaphysically depend on other entities
in another sense.
Consider an example from physics. The Standard Model of particle
physics treats quarks as point-like particles that have no internal
structure; they are mereological atoms. But quarks do not exist
independently; they come in groups of two or three, such as in the
case of mesons, protons, and neutrons. So, you do not get freely
existing quarks, mereological atoms though they may be. There seems to
be at least a weak type of symmetric existential dependence
between the three quarks that compose, say, a given proton. In other
words, the three quarks that compose a proton are symmetrically
dependent on each other for their existence and perhaps even for their
identity or essence, though this is much more
controversial (see the entry on
 ontological dependence
 for discussion on identity-dependence and essential dependence).
In more detail, the strong bond between quarks is known as quark
confinement and it is sometimes illustrated with the “bag
model”. The idea is to think of a quark triplet as if it was
inside a stretchy bag. If you then try to separate one of the quarks
in the triplet, you’ll discover that the bag resists your
efforts with an increasing force. The energy that would be required to
isolate a quark from the triplet is far greater than the pair
production energy of a quark-antiquark pair. So, what happens is that
before the isolation could happen, the energy being directed to the
process produces mesons—quark-antiquark pairs. Instead of
pulling apart a quark from a quark triplet you end up with a
quark-antiquark pair (and the original quark triplet remains intact).
Hence, it appears that the quarks in a triplet are existentially
dependent on each other. It is important to see that this dependence
among the quarks may not be purely causal. If there were independently
existing quarks that sometimes get bagged together, then their mutual
dependence would indeed seem to be merely causal. But given that we
have never observed independently existing quarks, it seems that the
existence of one quark necessitates the existence of another one. This
is already enough for existential
 dependence.[6]
It turns out that many intuitive candidates for fundamentalia would
not be fundamental on the
 (AI)
 definition of fundamentality. One could, however, also consider
allowing the fundamentalia to be symmetrically dependent on each other
(see Priest
 2018).[7]
There are two further issues to note. Firstly, as it is formulated,
 (AI)
 leaves open whether the fundamental entities can depend on
themselves, but this is an issue that the proponent of fundamentality
should ultimately address. In the case of (AI), the definition is
extremely strong already, so it might be reasonable to leave room for
self-dependent entities (as do Bliss & Priest 2018b).
Secondly, there is an interesting class of entities that are
fundamental according to
 (AI),
 but may cause trouble for other views about fundamentality. These
entities are sometimes known as “idlers” (e.g., Lewis
2009: 205; Bennett 2017: 123). For Lewis, idlers are fundamental
properties, which are instantiated in the actual world, but
“play no active role in the workings of nature”. So,
idlers are at least causally isolated. However, we can further
postulate that “absolute idlers” are absolutely isolated:
they depend on nothing, and nothing, at least nothing concrete,
depends on them. Absolute idlers would thus be absolutely independent
in the sense required by (AI). Whether there are any such absolute
idlers is of course another question. If there are any absolute
idlers, they are rather uninteresting entities—indeed, they are
presumably completely beyond our ken given their isolation. Moreover,
for the idea of absolute idlers to have any plausibility, we would
have to restrict their isolation in such a way that they may
participate in abstract constructions such as sets.
The second definition of fundamentality to be considered is much more
versatile and weaker than
 (AI).
 We call it restricted independence. This produces a
relativized sense of fundamentality, where fundamentality is
relative to a certain variety or varieties of metaphysical dependence.
One should not confuse this with relative fundamentality,
which concerns the priority ordering between two (non-fundamental)
entities. So, restricted independence starts from the idea that for
each metaphysical dependence relation there is a corresponding notion
of fundamentality and we must relativize the notion of fundamentality
accordingly:
(RI) is restricted to concern only some specific kinds of metaphysical
dependence, because it is plausible that some metaphysical dependence
relations, such as modal dependence (as we saw in
 section 1.1),
 would immediately rule out fundamental entities. Notice that (RI)
still includes the possibility of including several dependence
relations, but we can easily define a restricted sense of dependence
for each of \(D_{1}\), \(D_{2}\) … \(D_{N}\). We may also
define a much weaker sense of restricted independence, call it
some-independence:
However, even if (SI) does have some use, it is likely to be too weak
to be of much use in defining fundamentality, as it will capture
entities that are independent in radically different ways.
We have already discussed some kinds of metaphysical dependence that
 (RI)
 could apply to, such as grounding and mereological dependence. (RI)
concerns the subset of those metaphysical dependence relations that
are considered relevant to fundamentality, so here two philosophers
could disagree about which dependence relations to include in that
subset. Variations of this conception of fundamentality can be found
throughout the literature and it is probably as close to a standard
conception as we are likely to find (a few examples: Schaffer 2009:
373; Dixon 2016: 442; Bennett 2017: 105; see also Tahko 2015: Ch. 6;
Bliss & Priest 2018b). There are, of course, many differences
between the various accounts. Variations of (RI) are standard enough
to have been picked up by most of those critical towards this
conception of fundamentality as well (Bliss 2013: 413; Morganti 2015:
559; Raven 2016:
 608).[8]
Both
 (AI)
 and
 (RI)
 could be understood as putting forward the idea that fundamental
reality needs a relational underpinning (on the notion of a
relational underpinning, compare Fine 2001: 25). In other words,
whatever fundamentality amounts to, it must be the case that one (or
several) of the various relations of metaphysical dependence may be
used to define fundamentality. But since (RI) leaves completely open
which of the metaphysical dependence relations are in fact relevant to
fundamentality, we should mention some examples. At one point in the
early 2000s, it may have been the case that most philosophers using
the notion of fundamentality had in mind what we might call
mereological fundamentality whereby the relevant kind of
dependence is mereological dependence (see especially Schaffer 2003).
A concise definition of mereological dependence is offered by Kim:
the properties of a whole, or the fact that a whole instantiates a
certain property, may depend on the properties and relations had by
its parts. (2010: 183; see also Markosian 2005; Thalos 2010, 2013)
However, even though mereological dependence is still sometimes
considered to be relevant to fundamentality, it is becoming less
common to view it as the only relevant kind of dependence
(Wilsch 2016; Bennett 2017: 8–9). Be that as it may, there is
certainly an esteemed history for this type of idea, given that
(mereological) atomism of the type defended already by ancient
philosophers such as Leucippus and Democritus would appear to be an
instance of the view (see the separate entry on
 ancient atomism
 for details).
It is important to see that the thesis that some things are
mereologically fundamental does not entail a commitment to atomism.
Here it may be helpful to introduce the distinction between (priority)
pluralism and monism. We have already seen that a
monist might be attracted to a view about fundamentality where there
is just one fundamental entity, such as the cosmos or universe as a
whole (Schaffer 2010a is a good exposition and defense of this
Spinoza-inspired view; see also Newlands 2010). This view does not
directly entail anything about the relative fundamentality relations
among the non-fundamental, but it enables us to better understand that
the converse of mereological dependence, as Kim defines it, might
hold: instead of wholes depending on their parts, the parts could
depend on the whole. This contrasts with the more familiar idea, often
associated with but not entailed by atomism, that mereological
dependence must run from the larger to the smaller, mereological atoms
being the fundamental entities. So, the choice concerning the
direction of the relevant dependence relation is often reflected by
the choice between priority pluralism and monism, although strictly
speaking these issues are independent (Miller 2009; Trogdon 2009;
Cotnoir 2013; Steinberg 2015; Tallant 2015). Two proponents of
 (RI),
 even if they agree on which proper subset of metaphysical dependence
relations is relevant to fundamentality, may disagree on the direction
of the relevant dependence
 relation(s).[9]
Moving on to a different subspecies of
 (RI),
 we see a clear link between grounding and fundamentality, where
grounding is understood as expressing a non-causal connection between
two things. For example, a certain act might be considered evil
because it causes harm. The “because” in this statement
does not express a causal link; instead, it tells us what
grounds the evilness of the act. Similarly, one might think
that mental states hold in virtue of neurophysiological states or that
a substance is prior to its tropes. The notions of “in virtue
of” and “prior to” in these cases may be understood
in terms of grounding. What is likely to be the most common
contemporary understanding of (RI) is that the most important (if not
the only) relation of metaphysical dependence that is relevant to
fundamentality is grounding. Note, however, that grounding as well
could be understood as a family of dependence relations (Trogdon
2013).
On the grounding-based characterization of fundamentality, the
fundamentalia are ungrounded entities: everything is either
ungrounded or ultimately grounded in the fundamental, ungrounded
entities (Schaffer 2009: 353; Audi 2012: 710; Dasgupta 2014a: 536;
Raven 2016: 613). For instance, Audi (2012: 710) explicitly
distinguishes between the explanatorily fundamental and the
compositionally fundamental where the first is associated
with grounding and the second with mereological dependence. As Audi
correctly notes, one would think that often these two notions of
fundamentality would overlap. But recall that we’ve just
observed that the converse of mereological dependence, running from
the smaller to the larger, could hold. For the priority monist, this
dependence relation running from the smaller to the larger is
grounding, so it would also produce a different understanding of
fundamentality.
If explanatory fundamentality and compositional fundamentality are
genuinely two different notions corresponding to two independent
notions of fundamentality, then
 (RI)
 does allow the overlap of explanatory and compositional
fundamentality. But there could certainly be other considerations that
count against this. For instance, if (RI) is understood to mean that
to be fundamental is just to be at the termination point of some
dependence relation, then the debate between monism and pluralism
could just be a debate about the direction of compositional
fundamentality, where compositional fundamentality terminates in the
mereological atoms and its converse terminates in the whole cosmos. In
other words, this could be understood as a debate about whether
explanatory fundamentality aligns with compositional fundamentality or
its converse. Whichever way we go here, we would seem to end up
aligning some notions of fundamentality and misaligning others.
An important question arises: should we indeed postulate several
independent notions of fundamentality, relativized to each of the
metaphysical dependence relations, or should we aim to define only one
sense of fundamentality, either to be defined in terms of just one
relation of metaphysical dependence or in terms of some privileged
proper subset of these relations?
Given that there are good reasons to exclude some notions of
dependence, such as modal dependence and perhaps causal dependence, it
would appear that there is an additional question about why only some
notions of dependence are such that we want to define a corresponding
notion of fundamentality for them. There is an obvious challenge for
the view that we should postulate several relativized notions of
fundamentality. The challenge is simply that the notion of
fundamentality would seem to do little in addition to the various
relativized notions of (in)dependence. Indeed, this is likely to cause
confusion, because the notion of fundamentality is sometimes used in
the literature without any mention of which relativized sense of
independence is in question. Moreover, since different types of
metaphysical dependence have different formal properties (e.g., some
are strict partial orders, but some might be symmetric, reflexive or
non-transitive) and they can perhaps even run in different directions,
it is difficult to see what could unify the different notions
of fundamentality, i.e., the proper subset of those dependence
relations that we consider to be relevant for
 fundamentality.[10]
Those who think that grounding is strongly unified often appeal to its
formal properties (but for a different approach, see Trogdon 2018a).
These properties may be debated, but if grounding is strongly unified,
then one could hold that for a relation to count as grounding, it
should at least fit these properties. Relevant formal properties
include the following: grounding is a strict partial order,
non-monotonic in the sense that we cannot add arbitrary
grounds and expect that grounding still holds (i.e., if A is
grounded in B, then it does not follow that A is
grounded in B and C), and it is thought that grounds
metaphysically necessitate what they ground (although see Leuenberger
2014; Skiles 2015 against necessitation). In contrast, Bennett’s
building relations (see
 note 10)
 do not share all their formal properties. She holds that
they’re all antisymmetric and irreflexive, but not necessarily
transitive (Bennett 2017: 46). Another example of this type of
“multi-dimensional” approach to fundamentality can be
found in Koslicki’s (2012, 2015, 2016)
 work.[11]
It’s important to see that on a multi-dimensional view whereby
the various dependence relations relevant to fundamentality might even
run in different directions, one must be very careful indeed to
specify which relativized notion of fundamentality one has in mind. If
it turns out that some entity is independent in all the relativized
senses of independence relevant to fundamentality, then it would seem
that we are back to absolute independence
 (AI)
 (or independence “full stop”, as Bennett 2017: 106 calls
it).
Here we would do well to systematically distinguish between those
proponents of
 (RI)
 who hold that only one metaphysical dependence relation, e.g.,
mereological dependence or a strongly unified notion of grounding, is
relevant to fundamentality and those who think that a proper subset of
these relations is relevant to fundamentality. Sometimes the labels
monism and pluralism are used to distinguish between
the singular fundamentality view and the multi-dimensional view, but
in the interest of clarity we should introduce different terms, as we
have already used these labels for another
 purpose.[12]
 So, let us use the labels (RI-one) and (RI-many) to distinguish
between those who think that there is only one notion of
fundamentality and those who think that there are several. Typically,
there is an easy translation between these views. Let us say that a
proponent of (RI-one) thinks that only mereological dependence is
relevant to fundamentality. Well, a proponent of (RI-many), provided
that mereological dependence is one of the relations they consider
relevant to fundamentality, can simply translate the (RI-one) notion
of fundamentality into their (RI-many) notion of mereological
fundamentality. Hence the disagreement is that from the (RI-one) point
of view, there is a single notion of fundamentality, and they would
think that (RI-many) mistakenly holds other notions of fundamentality
to be genuine, whereas from the (RI-many) point of view, there are
many relativized notions of fundamentality, and (RI-one) mistakenly
picks just one, or indeed none depending on whether the relevant
(RI-one) relation is
 included.[13]
We conclude this section by posing a further question to all
proponents of
 (RI):
 what is it that privileges the proper subset of metaphysical
dependence relations that are relevant to fundamentality, be there one
or many of them? What makes these dependence relations relevant for
fundamentality? Given that one major task for the notion of
fundamentality is often thought to be related to the idea of the
hierarchical structure of reality, one potential starting point might
be to appeal to asymmetry and transitivity, but we have seen that
there may be relations of dependence that are relevant to
fundamentality that fail to be transitive. At this point, it may be
helpful to move on to the third potential definition of
fundamentality, as something along the lines of this definition is
often used to characterize fundamentality defined in terms of (RI) as
well.
The conception of fundamentality to be considered in this section is
often used to explicate the second key task for the notion of
fundamentality, that of the fundamental entities acting as the basic
building blocks of reality. According to this approach, the
fundamental entities determine everything else. By giving a complete
list of the fundamental entities, we can provide a minimal complete
description of reality. So, we are now shifting our focus from that
which everything else depends on to that which, as it were, supports
everything else. This idea is often invoked to characterize
fundamentality, but not necessarily to define it (Schaffer 2010a:
39n14; Sider 2011: 16–18; Jenkins 2013: 212; Paul 2012: 221;
Tahko 2014: 263; Wilson 2014: 561; Raven 2016: 609; Bennett 2017:
107ff.). The idea is that fundamentality can be understood in terms of
a complete minimal basis:
The idea of a “basis” can be interpreted in several ways.
An obvious candidate is to think of the basis as a set of entities. It
is quite natural to formulate (CMB) in terms of a complete minimal
set and we will continue to do so in what follows (and so does
Bennett 2017: 110). Another notion to be clarified in (CMB) is
“determines”. This should be understood as a placeholder,
which is meant to encompass the various ways in which fundamentalia
may give rise to higher-level phenomena. So, “determines”
could be replaced, e.g., by “grounds”,
“realizes”, “composes”, or
 “builds”.[14]
 Importantly, this type of determination is supposed to be more than
mere necessitation or supervenience, although the idea is closely
related to traditional discussions of a minimal supervenience base
(see Schaffer 2003; compare also with Schaffer’s notion of
“generation” in Schaffer 2016b:
 54).[15]
There are some preliminary issues to be specified before we can move
on to a more general discussion about
 (CMB).
We can now move on to some further
 issues.[18]
 One of these issues concerns how, exactly, we should interpret
 (CMB).
 We can find a common line of interpretation gestured at by Schaffer
(2003: 509), Jenkins (2013: 212), Raven (2016: 609), and Tahko (2018)
whereby the complete minimal basis should be understood as giving a
complete minimal description of reality. This may be compared to
Schaffer’s “fundamental supervenience base”,
Jenkins’s “by appeal to which all the rest can be
explained”, Raven’s “ineliminability”, and
Tahko’s “ontological minimality”; see also Lewis
(1986: 60). On this reading, less emphasis is put on the active role
of the fundamentalia, the focus being instead on making sure to
include a basis for everything in reality.
One consideration in favor of
 (RI)
 instead of
 (CMB)
 can be derived by considering a “flat world”, a world
where everything is independent, either in the sense of
 (AI)
 or (RI), and nothing is built, to use Bennett’s notion (Bennett
2017: 123–124). In a flat world, nothing determines anything
else in the sense of (CMB), since nothing depends on anything else. In
this case, everything is included in the unique minimally complete
set. So, it won’t make a difference which definition of
fundamentality we use here; we can say that everything is fundamental
in the flat world both in the sense of (AI) or (RI) and in the sense
of (CMB). That’s because the independent entities are in the
unique minimally complete set due to their independence, not the other
way around. Notice that for this to go through, the interpretation of
(CMB) along the lines outlined in the previous paragraph is required,
i.e., it’s not crucial that the fundamentalia do any
determining.
Another possible reading (or additional commitment) of
 (CMB)
 could require that the fundamentalia must “actively”
determine something in order to count among the fundamentalia. So,
while (CMB) would seem to be vacuously true in a flat world, the
proponent of this more “active” reading might disagree.
Driven by the flat world example, one might then think that
 (AI)
 and
 (RI)
 are prior to (CMB). But remember that not all philosophers intend to
use (CMB) as a definition of fundamentality. (CMB) just expresses a
consequence of being fundamental. To address this worry, one might
appeal to the fact that (CMB) is compatible with the idea that reality
has an irreducibly plural underpinning. That is, we should think of
(CMB) as defining the plurality of the fundamental entities. On this
view, a flat world—rather than being a world where everything is
fundamental—would be a world where nothing is fundamental (or
derivative), since nothing is “actively” determining
anything. A world which contains no such structure would then turn out
to be a world which contains no priority, hence no fundamentality (cf.
Wilson 2016: 199).
A potentially more substantive reason to prefer
 (CMB)
 over
 (RI)
 is that it may be needed to account for cases such as
metaphysical coherentism, where loops of dependence are
possible (see Bliss 2014, 2018; Barnes 2018; Morganti 2018; Nolan
2018; and Thompson 2018). It should be emphasized that this view
violates asymmetry and hence drops the idea that the structure of
reality is hierarchical. While this requires abandoning one of the key
tasks that the notion of fundamentality is often thought to have, it
does help in accommodating the idea that we should adopt a more
holistic approach whereby entities can be mutually related and form
loops or cycles. Sometimes an analogy from epistemology is offered, as
these loops of dependence could resemble a Quinean web of
belief, so that each entity depends on one or more other
entities. Perhaps the most plausible example of the possibility of
loops of dependence comes from
 ontic structural realism
 (OSR). (OSR) suggests that objects may be reduced to—or more
moderately, are ontologically on a par rather than prior
to—relational structures. If (OSR) is true, we might have to
revise our views about what the fundamentalia could be, as they might
be relations rather than objects (for discussion on OSR and
fundamentality, see Wolff 2012; McKenzie 2014; Morganti 2018; Tahko
2018). What exactly happens to (CMB) on this type of view depends on
the details of the coherentist framework, but one possibility—on
a moderate understanding of (OSR)—is that the fundamentalia
would include mutually dependent relations and objects, which then
determine everything else. Metaphysical coherentism remains one of the
least explored areas in contemporary literature, but future research
may solidify its position among the possible options.
Similarly, some forms of metaphysical infinitism, to be discussed in
more detail in
 section 4,
 could motivate
 (CMB)
 (Bliss 2013; Tahko 2014; Morganti 2014, 2018). On these views, it
could turn out that nothing is independent in the sense of
 (RI),
 but a sense of completeness could nevertheless be retained.
According to primitivism about the fundamental, we cannot define
fundamentality. But we may be able to characterize it, and it is to be
expected that
 (RI)
 and
 (CMB)
 are likely candidates in this regard. This type of view may be what
Fine (2001: 26) gestures towards, when he remarks that it is the
world’s intrinsic structure that is fundamental. One way to
develop the idea is by defining absolute fundamentality in terms of
relative fundamentality and introducing a primitive notion of
“Reality” as it is in itself (Fine 2001; see also Fine
2009). Note however that Fine proposes this notion in connection to
the debate between realism and anti-realism, whereby
“Reality” may be understood as objectivity. So, it is not
entirely clear that we can understand fundamentality in terms of this
notion.
More generally, we may think that the absolute notion of fundamental
reality is not in need of a relational underpinning (Fine
2001; Wilson 2014: 561). This is in contrast to the various
comparative or relational notions of dependence that we have been
discussing (see also Fine 2015). Note that primitivism must also be
contrasted with
 (CMB)
 insofar as it is understood as a definition of fundamentality, even
though it is not uncommon to see primitivist characterizations of
fundamentality that resemble (CMB). For instance, a primitivist who
accepts Fine’s notion of “Reality” would like to
distinguish between what is Real in itself and what may be true (i.e.,
objective) even if it does not concern the way that things are
fundamentally. As Fine puts it, 
even though two nations may be at war, we may deny that this is how
things really or fundamentally are because the entities in question,
the nations, and the relationship between them, are no part of Reality
as it [is] in itself. (Fine 2001: 26)
The idea behind the primitivist view is actually very simple and it
may be prudent to try to capture it without the controversial notion
of “Reality”. One way to do so would be to understand the
entities in the fundamental base to be basic in the sense that they
play a role analogous to axioms in a theory, or that the fundamental
entities are all that God had to bring about to make the world (Wilson
2014: 560; 2016; see also Dorr 2005). We can find several occurrences
of this type of heuristic in the literature on fundamentality, e.g.,
The primary is (as it were) all God would need to create. (Schaffer
2009: 351)
all God had to do when making the world was fix the qualitative facts;
(Dasgupta 2014b: 14) 
We often explain the notion of fundamental reality in intuitive terms
by saying that all God had to do in order to create the world was fix
the fundamental facts. (Glazier 2016: 35) 
To drive the idea home, consider the following passage from
Kripke:
Suppose we imagine God creating the world; what does He need to do to
make the identity of heat and molecular motion obtain? Here it would
seem that all He needs to do is to create the heat, that is, the
molecular motion itself. If the air molecules on this earth are
sufficiently agitated, if there is a burning fire, then the earth will
be hot even if there are no observers to see it. God created light
(and thus created streams of photons, according to present scientific
doctrine) before He created human and animal observers; and the same
presumably holds for heat. How then does it appear to us that the
identity of molecular motion with heat is a substantive scientific
fact, that the mere creation of molecular motion still leaves God with
the additional task of making molecular motion into heat? This feeling
is indeed illusory, but what is a substantive task for the
Deity is the task of making molecular motion felt as heat. To do this
He must create some sentient beings to insure that the molecular
motion produces the sensation S in them. Only after he has done
this will there be beings who can learn that the sentence “Heat
is the motion of molecules” expresses an a posteriori
truth in precisely the same way that we do. (Kripke 1980: 153)
Now, Kripke is of course not trying to put forward an account of
fundamentality here, but rather to specify that the qualitative
experience of feeling heat is something additional to molecular
motion. The idea, however, is strikingly close to the primitivist
account of fundamentality, whereby the important thing is to find a
sufficiently rich basis for everything in the world—this is of
course reminiscent of
 (CMB),
 but here the heuristic is simply used to characterize fundamentality,
not to define it.
Since the primitivist thinks that we cannot define fundamentality, one
might wonder how it is that she can decide on what the fundamental
entities are. In other words, what is our epistemic access to issues
concerning fundamentality? A possible answer is that we proceed the
same way as we do with other primitives in metaphysics. That is, by
asking how the view that x is fundamental fits in our overall
theory. How does it fare with regard to our other commitments? These
are issues where theoretical virtues such as simplicity and
explanatory power might be employed (for a related discussion, see
Schaffer 2014). However, this is not the place to tackle the
admittedly difficult epistemic questions surrounding metaphysical
theories in general, or the criteria that are to be employed in
theory-choice. The primitivist about fundamentality may have one more
primitive in their overall theory, and this, of course, calls for
justification. But conceiving of the fundamental as primitive is no
more mysterious than conceiving of, say, naturalness or grounding as
primitive. This is not to say that postulating naturalness or
grounding as primitives wouldn’t also require some justification
though.
The primitivist about fundamentality does, however, face some
challenges that are specific to fundamentality. Some of these
challenges have been raised by Schaffer (2016a), targeting
Wilson’s proposal. A potentially helpful clarification from
Schaffer is the following: there is something primitive in each of the
theories on offer, but the primitivist about fundamentality takes
being-absolutely-fundamental as that primitive, whereas at
least certain proponents of the relative independence
 (RI)
 view (such as Schaffer himself and, e.g., Rosen 2010) take the
“linking notion” of grounding,
being-relatively-more-fundamental-than-and-linked-to, as the
primitive (Schaffer 2016a: 157). As Schaffer notes, one may also take
both to be primitive, as Fine perhaps does. Schaffer argues that while
absolute fundamentality can be quite easily defined in terms of
grounding, as we’ve seen with (RI), it may not be so easy to
define grounding in terms of absolute fundamentality.
The core of the worry is this: if there is no fundamental level, then
there is no way to account for relative fundamentality, and hence one
of the two key tasks for fundamentality would be lost. In contrast,
the friend of
 (RI)
 can still construct a priority ordering using her favorite notion of
dependence, since no absolutely fundamental level is needed to get the
ordering started (Schaffer 2016a,
 158).[19]
 How can the primitivist reply?
One possibility is to try fixing the direction of priority even in the
absence of an absolutely fundamental level (Wilson 2016: 196ff.).
Drawing on a suggestion from Montero (2006: 179), Wilson proposes that
analogously to an infinite sequence of numbers such as 1/2, 1/3, 1/4
… being still “bounded below” by zero, there could
be an infinite descent of fundamental entities that approaches a limit
whereby the limit acts as the fundamental level even though it is
never reached. Related ideas may be found elsewhere in the literature
(Tahko 2014; Morganti 2015; Raven 2016). One difficulty with this
proposal is that applying the notion of a limit assumes that we can
assign a numerical measure to the descending entities that approach
this limit. So, we would need to be able to construct the hierarchical
structure of relative fundamentality in such a way that this numerical
measure applies to it. Moreover, even if approaching a limit does not
necessarily need to be constructed numerically, the notion of a limit
itself requires postulating the (fundamental) limit, in this case
zero. While zero is not part of the sequence, it does seem to be part
of the ontology.
Another possible strategy to address this challenge to primitivism is
to argue that fixing the fundamental is not (always) enough to fix the
priority ordering. Rather, we should pay close attention to the
various dependence relations that interest us, such as the parthood
relation, and assess the nature of the non-fundamental entities that
these relations relate. Importantly, we might get different answers
depending on which view about these natures is correct (see Wilson
2016: 200ff.).
This concludes our discussion of the different ways to understand
absolute fundamentality. We will now move on to discuss a variety of
important views that are often expressed in terms of fundamentality,
putting the notion into use.
As we noted in the very beginning of this entry, one of the two key
tasks for the notion of fundamentality is to capture the idea that
there is a foundation of being and that everything else depends on the
fundamental entities. This idea about fundamentality is often
expressed in terms of well-foundedness (Morganti 2009: 272;
Orilia 2009: 333; Fine 2010: 100; Schaffer 2010a: 37; Bennett 2011a:
30; Bliss 2013: 416; Trogdon 2013: 108; Tahko 2014: 260; Raven 2016:
614; Bohn 2018; Jago 2018). But the notion of well-foundedness itself
is sometimes used without much further qualification, and there are
many instances where another term is used instead for what is clearly
the same general idea (e.g., Lowe 1998: 158; R. Cameron 2008; Paseau
2010; Rosen 2010). A common formulation of this general idea is as
follows: a priority/dependence chain is well-founded if and only if it
terminates, i.e., has an end constituted by one or more
entities that do not depend on any other entity. But not all the
above-mentioned authors would be happy with this particular
formulation, and it turns out that sometimes philosophers may even
have talked past each other due to having slightly different
formulations of well-foundedness in mind. Fortunately, the literature
has matured, and we now have a number of much more precise accounts of
the various potential formulations of well-foundedness (see especially
Dixon 2016; Rabin & Rabern 2016; Litland 2016b; Wigglesworth
2018).
Let’s start with the origin of the term
“well-foundedness”. The term is familiar from mathematics,
especially set theory; no doubt it was adopted from set theory with
the hope of making the metaphysical idea more precise. A simple
formulation of set-theoretic well-foundedness can be found in Cotnoir
and Bacon (2012: 187): 
An order < on a domain is said to be wellfounded if every
nonempty subset of that domain has a <-minimal element. 
The first thing to notice here is that well-foundedness is relativized
to a giver order, a given relation of dependence, just like
 (RI)
 in
 section 1.2.
 So, strictly speaking, we ought to specify which relation we have in
mind and consider the various complications that this introduces,
which we discussed in
 section 1.
 However, much of the literature on well-foundedness (although not all
of it) focuses on grounding, and for purposes of exposition it is
easiest to focus on this literature, also assuming that grounding
establishes an absolute order of priority.
The set-theoretic formulation of well-foundedness is the sense in
which, e.g., Fine (2010: 100) appears to use the notion. Applied to
chains of grounding, the proposal is that well-foundedness would rule
out infinite, non-terminating grounding chains and entail that
“the grounds of any truth that is grounded will “bottom
out” in truths that are ungrounded”. We can see slightly
different but equivalent formulations in Schaffer (2010a, 37), Bennett
(2011a, 30), Trogdon (2013: 108), Tahko (2014: 260), Dixon (2016:
452), and Jago
 (2018).[20]
 As Dixon (ibid.) puts it, the attraction of using the set-theoretic
notion of well-foundedness is that it is a straightforward application
of the standard mathematical definition of a well-founded relation
(this is also recognized by Morganti 2015: 556fn2). The only problem
is that the standard understanding of well-foundedness may be too
strict for the task at hand. Many authors have considered weakened
versions of the well-foundedness requirement, which may be more
suitable for expressing the desired limits on infinite grounding
chains (R. Cameron 2008: 4; Trogdon 2013: 108; Leuenberger 2014:
170–171). So, to summarize, it might at first seem intuitive to
interpret well-foundedness simply as a ban on infinite chains and
cycles of grounding, in accordance with set-theoretic
well-foundedness. But this would seem to go against the intuition that
there are cases of infinite chaining which are acceptable for the
foundationalist metaphysician (R. Cameron 2008; Bliss 2013). This has
recently been made explicit by Dixon (2016) and Rabin & Rabern
 (2016).[21]
To get us started on the idea that foundationalist metaphysicians
could accept violations of well-foundedness, consider an important
observation by Bliss (2013: 416), which also comes up, e.g., in Rabin
& Rabern (2016: 362). She distinguishes between finite and
well-founded grounding chains where a finite grounding chain not only
terminates in something fundamental, but is also such that we can
reach the fundamental entities in a finite number of steps from
anywhere in the chain. According to this approach, a well-founded
grounding chain is indeed one that is grounded in something
fundamental, but it may itself be infinitely long. So, on this
terminology, finite grounding chains are always well-founded, but a
well-founded grounding chain could be infinite. But note that this
already violates set-theoretic well-foundedness as defined above. To
demonstrate this, consider an infinite chain of dependence \(f <
\ldots d_{3} < d_{2} < d_{1}\), where the chain of dependent
entities \(d_{n}\) terminates in some minimal element f. Now,
if we take a subset of that chain of dependence without the minimal
element f, then we are left with a chain that lacks a
<-minimal element, hence violating the set-theoretic definition of
well-foundedness.
To get clearer on what is at issue here, let us introduce another
notion, being “bounded from below” or “having a
lower bound”. We can say that an order < on a domain is
bounded from below if any subset of that domain has a lower bound.
More precisely, a lower bound of a given set is any element that is
more minimal or equal to all of the elements of the set. For example,
1, 2, and 3 are all lower bounds of the interval [3, 4, 5]. A lower
bound of a set does not need to be an element of the set itself.
Consequently, the chain \(f < \ldots d_{3} < d_{2} < d_{1}\),
is bounded from below. More generally, any finite chain is
set-theoretically well-founded and bounded from below. We’ve
just seen that some infinitely descending chains of dependence may be
bounded from below yet fail to be set-theoretically well-founded. As
Rabin & Rabern (2016: 360) put it, an infinitely descending chain
may or may not have a “limit”, where limit is the greatest
lower bound of a set. In the previous example, 3 is the greatest lower
bound of the interval [3, 4, 5]. So, one might suggest that the
relevant sense of metaphysical well-foundedness is captured either by
this idea of being bounded from below or by having a limit, a greatest
lower bound. But it turns out that even these may be too strong. This
is the key insight in the recent work of Dixon and Rabin & Rabern.
If this is right, then we need to have a sense of a metaphysical
foundation that is not only compatible with infinite chains of
dependence, but also with infinite chains that do not have a lower
bound (i.e., “unbounded”
 chains).[22]
It might be helpful to present a somewhat simplified example of a case
where well-foundedness and being bounded from below come apart. Let us
use a variation of Trogdon’s (2018b) reconstruction of an
example by Rabin & Rabern (2016: 361; this is an example of what
Dixon 2016: 448 calls a “fully pedestalled chain”).
Consider a spherical region of space S, which we divide up in
such a way that each of the proper sub-regions of S has a
proper sub-region, and each of those sub-regions in turn has a proper
sub-region. In principle, we can continue this process infinitely.
Now, let us assume that each region of space derives its being in part
from (or is partially grounded in) its sub-regions. Here we would seem
to have an infinite regress where, to use the familiar phrase, being
is forever deferred, never achieved. But suppose in addition that
there are spatial points and that these points are fundamental. Then
we might like to say that S and indeed each of its infinitely
many proper sub-regions fully derives its being from (or is fully
grounded in) spatial points. In this case, the infinite regress of the
sub-regions would appear to be innocuous since each of them is after
all fully accounted for by the fundamental spatial points. It is worth
noting that this example relies on overdetermination since the
sub-regions are here thought to derive their being partially from
their proper sub-regions and fully from the spatial points. Still, the
case for a sense of fundamentality that is compatible with at least
some kind of non-well-founded infinite descent or other seems to have
been made sufficiently clear in recent work. Metaphysical
foundationalism does not seem to be properly captured by the idea of
set-theoretic well-foundedness. So, what is it about?
We can find numerous formally precise attempts to capture the relevant
sense of a metaphysical foundation in recent work. Dixon’s
(2016: 446) preferred understanding (which he calls “full
foundations”) suggests that every non-fundamental fact is fully
grounded by some fundamental fact(s). Rabin & Rabern (2016: 363)
attempt to capture the idea of a metaphysical foundation with the
phrase “having a foundation”, whereby a grounding
structure has a foundation if and only if there is some set of facts
that (i) together ground all the derivative facts and (ii) are
themselves ungrounded. Raven suggests (2016: 612) that metaphysical
foundationalism could be understood in terms of
ineliminability (to be discussed in
 section 3).
 Tahko (2014: 263) tries to analyze metaphysical foundationalism in
terms of an “ontological” sense of well-foundedness, which
requires that an ontologically well-founded chain terminates in a
fundamental supervenience base. Trogdon (2018b) follows the recent
suggestions for a weaker understanding of metaphysical foundationalism
and defines it as the view that, necessarily, any non-fundamental
entity is fully grounded by fundamental entities. Even though the
terminology varies, it’s quite clear that there are weaker
senses of metaphysical foundationalism than the one defined in terms
of set-theoretic well-foundedness. We arrive at the following
definition of metaphysical foundationalism:
This definition of metaphysical foundationalism is somewhat vague
since it attempts to capture the idea for all the different varieties
of fundamentality that we have discussed, but it may be supplemented
with an appropriate restriction on the type of entities it concerns
(e.g., facts) and the subscripts \(D_{1}\), \(D_{2}\) …
\(D_{N}\) may be replaced with one’s preferred kind or kinds of
dependence, exactly as with the schemas proposed in
 (AI)
 and
 (RI)
 in
 section 1.
 Furthermore, we need to understand “fully account for”
correspondingly, for instance, in the case of grounding it should be
parsed as “fully grounds” and in the case of compositional
dependence it should be parsed as “fully composes” (albeit
in some cases it may not be entirely clear that a full/partial
distinction properly applies). Now that we have a working notion of
metaphysical foundationalism, we may proceed to discuss arguments in
favor and against this view.
Metaphysical foundationalism is the view that reality has a
foundation—that there is a “fundamental level”, in a
sense that needs to be specified. The most common way to specify the
idea of having a foundation is in terms of well-foundedness, but as we
have seen in
 section 2,
 set-theoretical well-foundedness may be too strong to capture
metaphysical foundationalism. Metaphysical foundationalism comes in a
variety of strengths, depending on how much the well-foundedness
requirement is weakened. It seems reasonable to say that until quite
recently metaphysical foundationalism was the default position (R.
Cameron 2008; Schaffer 2009; 2010a; Bennett 2011a). The relevant
intuition is often captured with the much-cited phrase that without a
foundation, “a ground of being”, “[b]eing would be
infinitely deferred, never achieved” (Schaffer 2009: 376; 2010a,
62).
Sometimes the foundationalist intuition is explicitly tied to
composition (i.e., mereological dependence) and the (im)possibility of
gunk, namely, the idea that everything has a proper part:
“the anti-gunk worry is that composition could never have got
off the ground” (R. Cameron 2008: 6). The worry is that complex
objects are not possible in gunky worlds, so given that there is
composition, there must be a foundation. However, we’ve seen
that fundamentality need not be tied to compositional/mereological
dependence. Moreover, others (McKenzie 2011; Bliss 2013; Tahko 2014;
Morganti 2014, 2018; Bohn 2018; Trogdon 2018b) have been suspicious of
the driving intuition behind this sense of metaphysical
foundationalism, and now even some of those who have earlier defended
metaphysical foundationalism opt for agnosticism on the question
(Bennett 2017: 120ff; Rosen 2010: 116). Indeed, there is, perhaps, now
a consensus that it is very difficult to come up with a proper
argument in favor of metaphysical foundationalism, something that
would go beyond the just stated intuition. The idea has a status
closer to a type of metaphysical axiom or law as
Bohn (2018) puts it (see Morganti 2018 for a good overview). This
conclusion seems even more warranted given that defining metaphysical
foundationalism simply in terms of set-theoretical well-foundedness
turned out to be too strict. To establish a clearer sense of
metaphysical foundationalism which is in accordance with the most
recent literature, we shall understand “metaphysical
foundationalism” as it was defined in
 section 2
(MF).
Can we be clearer on the core idea of metaphysical foundationalism? If
we can, then perhaps potential arguments for the view would also be
more easily available. One interesting attempt to do so is
 Raven’s.[23]
 Raven’s version of metaphysical foundationalism relies on the
notions of “eliminability” and
“ineliminability” whereby an entity is eliminable if
reality is described no worse without mentioning it and ineliminable
if reality cannot be completely described without mentioning it. This
seems to come close to fundamentality characterized in terms of a
complete minimal basis
 (CMB),
 discussed in
 section 1.3.
 To demonstrate this, let us take advantage of Raven’s own
terminology (2016: 614–5). Ineliminable entities
“persist” in some fact about them, whereas eliminables
“disappear” from all facts about them. For an entity to
“disappear” is for there to be a bound in the grounds of
some fact about it, a last occurrence of it after which the entity
never recurs. So, for an entity to persist is for some facts about it
to be unbounded. Importantly, there are two ways to be unbounded:
being ungrounded or having grounds but forever recurring. The first
type of persistence is the familiar sense of relative independence
 (RI)
 as defined in
 section 1.2.
 But the second type of persistence, where an entity forever recurs in
the chain of dependence, is
 novel.[24]
A potentially helpful way to illustrate the options available to us
and clarify the relationship between metaphysical foundationalism and
infinite descent is Morganti’s (2015: 562) “emergence
model of being”. This model may be contrasted with the
“transmission model”, which is, perhaps, what the
much-quoted phrase from Schaffer that we led with reflects. According
to the transmission model, the ungrounded entities are the
“ground of being”. But the emergence model suggests that
something may act as a foundation in the absence of ungrounded
entities; the infinite “starts playing an active role, and
progress is made as the chain lengthens” (Morganti 2015: 562).
The emergence model draws inspiration from an analogy with
epistemology where the “emergence of justification” from
an infinite chain of reasons has recently been an area of active
research (Klein 2007; Peijnenburg & Atkinson 2013). Thus, the core
of the emergence model seems to be that there is no privileged
fundamental level of reality that serves as the basis for being.
Instead, we should understand being more holistically, as it were, and
explore the idea that it may emerge gradually. Let us call this
emergentist infinitism. On the face of it, emergentist
infinitism looks like the denial of
 (MF)
 and hence metaphysical foundationalism. However, there is some room
for interpretation here, because the holistic model suggests that the
whole infinite chain could perhaps be considered to ground its
“parts”.
We might compare this line of thinking to Leibniz’s
principle of sufficient reason (PSR), which states that for
every entity that exists, there is an explanation or reason for its
existence (Della Rocca 2010; Guigon 2015; Dasgupta 2016; and the
separate entry on
 principle of sufficient reason).
 In the contemporary literature, we may compare (PSR) with the
inheritance principle discussed in Schaffer (2016b) and Trogdon
(2018b). An open question, although not one that we will pursue here,
is whether emergentist infinitism is compatible with (PSR).
To conclude this section, it should be noted that not all the views
discussed above have been put forward under the label of metaphysical
foundationalism. But once it is made clear that the foundationalist
idea is not tied to the strong, set-theoretic sense of
well-foundedness, the requirement for a foundation is much weaker than
it may once have seemed. If we broaden the scope of metaphysical
foundationalism accordingly, is there still an interesting sense of
metaphysical infinitism to be discussed?
To endorse metaphysical infinitism is to reject metaphysical
foundationalism
 (MF).
 But as we’ve seen, the sense of metaphysical foundationalism
defined at the end of
 section 2
 does not require accepting strong, set-theoretic well-foundedness,
and hence it is compatible with at least some types of infinite
descent. Accordingly, metaphysical infinitism is a somewhat stronger
view than it may first have seemed.
Using the technical notion of being bounded from below or having a
lower bound introduced in
 section 2,
 we can start with the simple idea that, for a given notion of
dependence, a chain has a lower bound only if there is an element that
every element in the chain depends on (Rabin & Rabern 2016: 366).
As we saw earlier, infinitely descending chains of dependence may have
a lower bound, that is, terminate in an independent element that may
or may not be part of the chain itself, yet fail to be
set-theoretically well-founded. But there is an even weaker condition
than having a lower bound that can satisfy
 (MF),
 namely, Rabin & Rabern’s (2016: 363) “having a
foundation” or Dixon’s (2016: 446) equivalent “full
foundations”. Both of these are based on the idea of having an
infinitely large foundation. An example of this type of foundation can
be constructed with the help of infinitary disjunctions, as both Rabin
& Rabern and Dixon demonstrate (Litland 2016b discusses the
problems associated with this and constructs further examples). In
such a case, (MF) is satisfied because every element depends on some
independent element, despite there being no lower bound. There is no
lower bound because the chain does not terminate if the foundation is
infinitely large. In contrast, if the foundation is finite, then the
there is a lower bound and hence the weaker requirement of (MF) is
also entailed. In decreasing order of strength, we have the
requirement of set-theoretical well-foundedness, having a lower bound,
and having a foundation or full foundations. We defined (MF) in terms
of the weakest of these three requirements in
 section 2,
 but a proponent of metaphysical foundationalism may of course make a
stronger requirement as well, such as having a lower bound.
In this section, we are interested in the possibility of the type of
strong metaphysical infinitism that denies all of the three
requirements. The denial of
 (MF)
 entails that there are at least some entities that are
non-fundamental yet do not depend for their being on any fundamental
entity or entities. There may be several ways in which this could
happen, but the most extreme possibility is a type of infinite
complexity whereby there is an infinite descent of different
kinds of entities, each depending on entities further down the chain
but never terminating and never being “fully accounted
for”. We might think of this in terms of a violation of the
principle of sufficient reason (PSR), at least if (PSR) is thought to
require that we must reach an ultimate reason rather than just a
reason at each layer below the previous one. Accordingly, infinite
complexity entails a lack of structure with the type of explanatory
import that (PSR) requires. This type of view would be more radical
than the various, potentially innocuous types of infinite descent
outlined so far. The view might strike many as implausible, at least
when it comes to the actual
 world.[25]
Infinite complexity is a strong version of metaphysical infinitism,
but what if, instead of infinite complexity, we had some kind of
infinite repetition? This type of idea has been discussed under the
label of boring infinite descent (Schaffer 2003: 505, 510;
Tahko 2014). A boring or repetitive structure entails that somewhere
down the chain of dependence we stop encountering novel types of
entities or novel structure. The boring part of the structure that
repeats infinitely could be of any length as long as it starts anew
eventually. A description of the repetitive part only needs to be
supplemented with an instruction to continue as before. For example:
The world stands on four elephants, the four elephants stand on a
turtle, the turtle stands on two camels, the camels stand on four
elephants, the four elephants stand on a turtle … and repeat ad
infinitum. (Tahko 2014: 261) 
The idea is that the boring structure, whatever shape it may take, can
be fully described in terms of the mentioned entities (or types of
entities, and perhaps the “standing” relations between
them): four elephants, a turtle, and two camels. It has been suggested
that this produces a “minimal” description of reality, but
it is debatable whether it satisfies
 (MF)
 or is a case of strong metaphysical infinitism (Raven 2016; Tahko
2018).
It seems that this type of infinite descent is less radical than
infinite complexity, but some open questions remain. For instance, is
the type of infinite regress at hand innocuous or vicious? Can we
capture the difference between metaphysical foundationalism and
metaphysical infinitism in terms of the non-viciousness or viciousness
of the regress (Nolan 2001; Bliss 2013)? We will leave these issues
open, but to improve on the toy example, we might briefly discuss a
more concrete case. Sometimes the Nobel Prize winner Hans
Dehmelt’s (1989) model is mentioned as a potential example
(Schaffer 2003, Morganti 2014, Tahko 2014). Dehmelt speculated that
there could be a quark/lepton substructure beyond the known level of
quarks, based on the model of the triton, the nucleus of
hydrogen’s radioactive isotope tritium: 
I propose to extend the triton substructure scheme to an infinite
number of layers. Below the four layers listed above [up to
subquarks], they contain higher order \(d_N\) subquarks, with \(N = 5
\rightarrow \infty\). In each layer the particles are not identical
but resemble each other in the same way as quarks and leptons do, with
masses varying as much as a factor 108. In an infinite regression to
simpler particles of ever increasing mass, they asymptotically
approach Dirac point particles. (Dehmelt 1989: 8618) 
Up to \(N = 3\), the level of electrons, Dehmelt’s model is
motivated by current physics, but it is speculative from \(N = 4\)
onwards, where electron substructure is postulated. However,
it’s not entirely clear whether Dehmelt’s model is a
genuine case of boring infinite descent, given that the regress
appears to terminate in Dirac point
 particles.[26]
A final argument to be considered in this section challenges the
“transmission model”, whereby derivative entities derive
their “being” from the fundamental entities. Bohn (2018:
170) makes a helpful observation, aimed against the transmission model
(applied to grounding): 
Grounding is like a synchronic, static mathematical relation (like in
arithmetic), not like a diachronic, dynamic physical relation (like in
thermodynamics, or action theory). 
The thought here is that the transmission model illegitimately assumes
a dynamical “starting point” to any grounding chain. If we
abandon the transmission model and the dynamical view, we arrive at
the idea of indefinitely descending ground whereby all facts
have a ground and hence there are no fundamental facts (Bohn 2018).
This violates even the weakest of the three requirements that a
metaphysical foundationalist might impose, so it is a strict denial of
 (MF).
 Note, however, that this concerns only the precisification of (MF) in
terms of grounding. So, this type of metaphysical infinitism targets
the conception of fundamentality as ungroundedness (as specified in
terms of
 (RI)
 in
 section 1.2).
If
 (MF)
 does not require the transmission model, the choice between
foundationalism and infinitism is difficult. There is, perhaps, one
test case: the possibility of gunk (everything has a proper
part), junk (everything is a proper part), and hunk
(everything both is and has a proper part). There is an on-going
debate about the modal status of these scenarios, and one might appeal
to their possibility in defense of indefinitely descending ground (as
Bohn 2018
 does).[27]
 However, these scenarios of course concern only the relation of
proper parthood (mereological dependence), and hence even if
mereological infinitism were coherent, there may be other notions of
dependence for which the corresponding notion of infinitism is
incoherent.
This concludes our discussion of metaphysical infinitism and
fundamentality. This survey has focused on a subset of the growing
literature on fundamentality with the aim of clarifying the various
terminological issues surrounding the key notions and identifying some
common themes. The ideas behind these notions are old as are the
intuitions associated with the various arguments that we’ve seen
for and against metaphysical foundationalism and infinitism. Recent
helpful efforts to systematize some of the central ideas, especially
that of well-foundedness, have made it much easier to have
constructive discussions about the topic of fundamentality. It can be
expected that further attempts to formulate arguments for and against
different strengths of metaphysical foundationalism and infinitism
will emerge in the near future.