Gaṅgeśa lived in the first half of the fourteenth century,
in Mithilā, in northeastern India, where he was a prominent
teacher, both of Nyāya, including logic and critical reasoning,
and of Mīmāṃsā, the school known for Vedic
interpretation and ritual. Gaṅgeśa endorses Nyāya in
his Jewel, but he was also a great master of
Mīmāṃsā. Mīmāṃsā is a
long-running tradition which, like Nyāya, pronounces on almost
every topic imaginable, along with Vedic ritual, the school’s
specialization, as Nyāya’s is critical reasoning.
Gaṅgeśa knew well Mīmāṃsaka positions in
both of its major branches, the Bhāṭṭa (after
Kumārila Bhaṭṭa of the seventh century), and the
Prābhākara (after Kumārila’s renegade student,
Prabhākara). And Gaṅgeśa may be supposed to have
learned the standard curricula in the grammarian literature, the epic
poems, etc., some of which he cites, for example, Pāṇini
(c. 500 BCE), and, in several places, the Bhagavad
Gītā.
Bhattacharya cites data from literary and other sources, and in about
a dozen pages devoted to Gaṅgeśa (1958: 96–109)
provides termini a quo et ad quem—1300 and 1350 for his
period of flourishing—from evidence that has not been corrected
to date. Genealogical records kept in Mithilā suggest that he had
a wife and three sons and a daughter. One child was the famous
Nyāya author, Vardhamāna. Gaṅgeśa apparently
achieved quite some fame during his lifetime, referred to as
“jagad-guru,” which would be the rough equivalent
of “Distinguished University Professor” for the
educational institutions of his time.
About the person little more is known. About
Gaṅgeśa’s reputation, Bhattacharya says (1958: 109):
“The work of Gaṅgeśa became highly popular very soon
and was studied and commented upon in various centers of culture of
India. It not only cast the works of the old school of logic into
oblivion but the neo-logical works of his predecessors also faded into
insignificance and were gradually were forgotten due to its
overwhelming popularity and all-embracing character.” Concerning
the part on inference, the learned sanskritist writes (1958: 107,
108): “The second part on Anumāna (Inference) is by far the
most popular, though the most intricate of the whole book. …
The latest phase of Navyanyāya studies in India for about two
centuries flowed through a large number of channels cut by single
sentences or phrases of this part of Gaṅgeśa’s work
and by far the widest channel emerged from the general definition of
Fallacy. It has now assumed proportions through the efforts of all the
best Indian brains in Navyanyāya, which is a world’s wonder
in the field of intellectual feats … .”
The Jewel has four chapters, each devoted to a source of
knowledge: perception, inference, analogy, and testimony. Within a
chapter are clearly delineated sections on various subtopics including
long reflections, mainly in the first chapter, concerning knowledge in
general and how it is known. Gaṅgeśa is lucid and precise,
leading the reader into a preferred position by careful examination of
alternatives.
Gaṅgeśa’s central focus is epistemology, not ontology
or metaphysics, but his analyses rely on a centuries-old ontological
system. In all four chapters of the Jewel, he addresses
ontological issues, especially the topics of universals and of the
ontological relation of qualification that is reflected in knowledge
of something as qualified by a qualifier, “That’s a
cow,” for instance, which would be an instance of knowledge of
something qualified by the universal being-a-cow.
The system that Gaṅgeśa takes over is inherited in
particular from his “teacher” Udayana. In a dozen
treatises, Udayana merges the separate literature and worldview of
Vaiśeṣika—its advocates sometimes called
“Atomists” —with Nyāya’s. Udayana also
added the category of absence to the
Vaiśeṣika-sūtra’s six, so that there
are seven basic types of things possibly referred to in technical
works as in everyday life:
There are also properties and entities that do not fit very well into
the typology. Some philosophers after Gaṅgeśa rework the
system, but Gaṅgeśa himself is ontologically conservative,
presenting arguments for its expansion in various ways without
endorsement.
Gaṅgeśa also inherits a causal schema that is crucial to
his causal theory of knowledge. Perception and the other sources
generate knowledge instances, in the sense of being the
“chief instrumental cause.” To understand this, we have to
know that there are most generally three varieties of cause-effect
relationship:
Gaṅgeśa, like other Naiyāyikas, also works with the
distinction between the necessary and the sufficient, sufficient
causality being a whole bundle of causal conditions, including general
ones such as time and space. A source of knowledge is a process of
knowledge generation, and each has a distinct “trigger.” A
trigger is that instrumental cause which, when all the other causal
conditions necessary for an effect are in place, brings it about. The
trigger of perceptual knowledge is said to be connection of a sensory
organ with an object to be known. The trigger of knowledge by
inference is said to be reflection on a property of an object as
pervaded by—invariably associated with—another property,
the former called the prover—the pervaded—and the latter
the probandum—the pervader. The trigger of testimonial knowledge
is said to be the statement of a trustworthy expert as comprehended by
the hearer, a trustworthy expert being defined as someone who knows
the truth and wants to communicate it faithfully, without lying or
deceiving. Causal relations are especially important because knowledge
of the occurrence of an effect allows the knower to infer any one or
more of its necessary conditions, as perception of smoke rising from a
mountain allows one to infer fire. Furthermore, recognizing a
particular knowledge source by its trigger is one way to certify a
result, an instance of testimonial knowledge for instance.
Gaṅgeśa often utilizes a simpler ontological schema in his
analyses of the generation of knowledge: an instance of knowledge is
about, at a minimum, a qualifier-qualificandum, the hyphen
standing for the qualificative relation, also discussed, with
qualificanda as property-bearers, anything we can talk about,
including universals and supervenient properties such as similarity,
and qualifiers as qualities or universals or even mind-imposed
properties that, as suggested, do not seem to have a place in the
traditional layout. No matter, we can deal with these later, seems to
be Gaṅgeśa’s attitude, as he proceeds to focus on
knowledge and its generators.
Gaṅgeśa’s Nyāya embraces realism along several
dimensions, realism in the sense of commitment to entities that exist
independently of consciousness. There are, however, exceptions in the
properties of a self along with some others that do require
consciousness to occur. Knowledge itself and other mental phenomena
are counted as reals and knowable intersubjectively, for instance.
Realism leads Naiyāyikas to embrace fallibilism from very early,
because the transcendence, so to say, of a physical object to the
instruments of knowledge is seen to mean that the possibility of error
cannot be ruled out—except in the case of apperception,
according to Gaṅgeśa (see below). The Jewel is
filled out with numerous definitional projects where the definienda
(instances of knowledge, for example, as well as physical objects),
are realities. And all individuals of whatever fundamental type
(substance, quality, motion, universal, inherence, individuator, and
absence) are viewed as reals, although the mind can create fictions.
Against Buddhist subjectivists, it is argued that the components of
false and fictional awarenesses themselves indicate reals. Gold and
mountains are real but maybe not a gold mountain. More about illusion
and other instances of non-knowledge in practically every subsection
below.
The target of epistemological evaluations in classical India is not
belief but rather cognition, which, however, like belief in the West,
is viewed as propositional. Buddhists, Naiyāyikas,
Mīmāṃsakas, and others address the issue of how a
proposition-laden cognition is known to be true, or false, for that
matter. Against Mīmāṃsakas in particular,
Gaṅgeśa advances an “extrinsicality” position.
Although presumptive presentations of “fresh news” through
any of the sources—perception and the others—are naturally
and automatically taken to be veridical, according to
Gaṅgeśa’s Nyāya, it takes a separate cognitive
act to determine whether a cognition is knowledge or
“non-knowledge.” An awareness, an “experience”
(anubhava, a term used technically in the system), defined as
what a person takes to be presentation of news—i.e., takes
automatically to be new information—is presumptively knowledge
but on occasion is either false or not produced by a genuine knowledge
source, perception, inference, or testimony (analogy is, for
Gaṅgeśa, restricted to learning the meaning of words).
According to Mīmāṃsā, certification is intrinsic
to the apparent presentation. Gaṅgeśa’s refutation
centers on an alleged phenomenology of doubt and knowing that one
knows. If the Mīmāṃsaka position were correct, it
would not be possible to doubt the veridicality of, for example, a
perception that is indeed an instance of knowledge, both veridical and
produced in the right way. But it is possible, he says.
Certification happens through source identification, and the sources
are known mainly by inference from certain tell-tale signs called
“merits,” guṇa, while falsification occurs
through recognizing tell-tale signs of pseudo-sources called
“flaws,” doṣa. Various fallacies, for
example, are flaws with respective to putative knowledge as determined
by way of inference. In certain cases, however, in contrast to the
norm, there is practically self-certification, as the
Mīmāṃsakas claim. For example, perception is like that
with knowing that there is a small piece of āmalaka
fruit in the palm of your hand. Much discussion throughout the
Jewel centers on certification conditions, some of which
figure in the definitions of the several sources. There is also much
concern with specification of the trigger, or triggers, of the
workings of the sources, which not only can serve to define them but
whose identification is one way certification proceeds.
The processes of perception, inference, analogy, and testimony
generate “awareness,” anubhava, a technical term,
as mentioned, meaning “presentation of fresh news.” No
non-veridical awarenesses are produced from the sources, but there are
of course occasions when we are fooled. There are pseudo-sources,
processes closely resembling the true ones, but flawed in some way and
generating wrong results. Consonantly, there are awarenesses that at
the time we take to be telling us something true in the usual
fashions—by perception and the rest—but are actually false
or not produced correctly. These are instances of
“non-knowledge,” apramā, contrasting with
pramā, “knowledge,” entailing truth and
right production.
Pragmatic considerations reinforce our natural tendency to take the
deliverances of the sources to be veridical. We couldn’t get
along in the world without knowledge, as Naiyāyikas as early as
Vātsyāyana stress (1996: 2). This is a recurrent theme.
Gaṅgeśa relies on “pragmatic contradiction” to
refute a skeptic about inference in the Jewel’s
“Hypothetical Reasoning” section (2020: 647–51):
When there is doubt, there is no regular pattern of behavior. When
there is a regular pattern, doubt does not occur. Thus it has been
said (by Udayana): “That is doubted concerning which as doubted
there occurs no contradiction with the doubter’s
action.”
For it is not possible at once to resort regularly to fire and the
like for smoke and the like and to doubt that fire causes it. This is
how we should understand the saying.
Thus we may reject the argument that contradiction—understood as
natural opposition (virodha), governing precisely which F
cannot occur along with precisely which G—cannot block an
infinite regress. It is the doubter’s own behavior that proves
the lie to the doubt, that blocks it (pratibandhaka).
It may be true that repeated observation (“even hundreds of
times”) is insufficient to guarantee knowledge of a pervasion
(pervasions underpin the natural entailments on which inference
depends). Not all things made out of earth are scratchable by iron;
diamonds, recently discovered, are a counterexample. Defending
pervasion-knowledge nevertheless, Gaṅgeśa cites this case
in admitting that the possibility of a counterexample cannot be
eliminated, at least generally speaking. But we do grasp pervasions,
and often meaningful doubt can be done away with. Absolute freedom
from doubt is not required to have knowledge. And knowledge guides
action. We may be wrong in any particular case, but we act on the
basis of the regularities in nature we take ourselves to be aware of,
automatically making inferences producing knowledge.
The same goes for perception, analogy, and testimony. With testimony,
for example, we may be aware of a defeater, a speaker’s being a
liar, for instance, but in such a case we do not take ourselves to be
presented with news. Perceptual and other awarenesses do not occur
when blocked, when defeated in this way. A good example is the fallacy
called bādhita, “defeated in advance.” No
inference purporting to show that fire is cold can be successful
because we already know it’s hot. But of course some defeaters
occur to us only later, and for a time we are fooled. In the market,
we learn that the piece of shell we thought was silver is really only
mother-of-pearl. Awarenesses are presumptively knowledge, but are also
defeasible. The exception concerns certain matters known by
apperception (see below), which, Gaṅgeśa argues, are known
without the possibility of being wrong.
In sum, the defeasibility character of Gaṅgeśa’s
theory of knowledge centers on the fact that apparently trustworthy
sources of information at times mislead. But in those cases it is not
really the knowledge sources, perception, and the rest, that are at
work but rather close imitators. Knowledge sources
(pramāṇa) themselves are inerrant. This makes the
concept of the apparent source central
(pramāṇâbhāsa): “You can't really
see John from this distance.” Awareness naturally taken
to be informative is presumptively true but the presumption can be
defeated. It can also be certified. Defeating and certifying belong to
a second-level of knowing where we are self-conscious about
justification. But there, too, we give the benefit of the doubt,
bādhakam vinā, “unless there is a
defeater.” In this way there is no justification regress as
feared by Western foundationalists and alleged by the second-century
Buddhist Nāgārjuna (1978).
It is difficult to appreciate Gaṅgeśa’s reflection on
certification without knowing something about the
Mīmāṃsaka positions, called in general
“self-certification,” which he attacks. Self-certification
is embraced also by Yogācāra Buddhist philosophers, but
Gaṅgeśa focuses mainly on the arguments of
Prābhākaras as voiced in particular by the ninth-century
author Śālikanātha (1961). It seems that
Mīmāṃsakas would secure the authority of Vedic
testimony for rituals and various rules of everyday life effortlessly,
one suspects in overview, by maintaining that knowledge is
self-certifying. Gaṅgeśa focuses, however, on perceptual
knowledge, which, he maintains, can, in certain circumstances, both be
doubted and later certified as knowledge. “I wouldn’t now
be drinking water, if the awareness had not been knowledge. But I am
now drinking, satisfying my thirst, and the awareness was knowledge
indeed” (translator’s comments, Jewel 2020: 109).
In this case, the certification comes by way of an inference. Source
identification is another way of capturing the point. It is by
inference that one determines that an awareness-generating process is
indeeed perception, perception that is factively conceived. A genuine
source never misleads. Only “pseudo-sources” do.
There are different signs whereby one knows that an instance of
inferential knowledge is both true and produced in the right way. Do
we really know the premises, in particular the alleged
“pervasion,” vyāpti? For testimony,
certification conditions are the speaker’s being a trustworthy
expert along with conditions governing what it is to be a proper
statement and of course certain hearer conditions (such as knowing the
language). And in certain cases there is, admittedly,
self-certification. But the Mīmāṃsakas are wrong to
take that to be the general rule.
As with the English word ‘perception’, the Sanskrit
‘pratyakṣa’ so translated is used for both
the process of sensory connection with an object perceived and as the
resultant awareness. In common Sanskrit, the word
‘pratyakṣa’, etymologically “before
the eyes,” means something like “experientially
evident” when used as an adjective and “immediate
experience” or “sense experience” as a noun.
Internal perceptions as of thought and emotion, pleasure and pain, and
indeed of a “self,” ātman, are considered in
Nyāya to be mediated by a “mind” or, in a better
translation, an “internal organ,” manas. A
perception that targets a preceding perception or another cognition or
mental event is given a special word,
‘anuvyayasāya’, “apperception,”
literally an “after-cognition,” a type of perception that
is especially important in cross-school controversy. The internal
organ, manas, also serves the function of channeling
information from sense organs and bringing it together in perceptual
knowledge for a self. Such a mental organ is denied by Buddhist
adversaries and others in other schools, and is hotly debated within
Nyāya.
The processes of production of sensory awarness vary with modality and
with the type of thing perceived, earthen, watery, etc., universal or
particular, a group of things, something external or internal, and in
ways peculiar to perceivers. Neverthelesss, there are commonalities,
especially when it comes to the questions of epistemology, most
prominently that innumerable instances of knowledge are sensorily
produced. But awareness produced by the senses is not how
Gaṅgeśa defines perceptual knowledge. If what was
considered an instance of knowledge is discovered to be in fact a
false belief, then we say in English that there was no knowledge in
the first place, only a belief that was considered true and warranted.
The same logic holds for Gaṅgeśa’s
‘pratyakṣa’: if what was considered a
perceptual awareness is discovered to be in fact non-veridical, then
it is said that there was no perception in the first place, only an
awareness that was considered veridical and produced by an organ of
sense.
Thus there may be here only a verbal unity achieved cheaply, but it is
important to know that Gaṅgeśa works with this
understanding of the term. Perhaps this is why he spends section after
section in his “perception” chapter examining particular
problems with objects known such as air, the sound of one’s own
son’s voice in a “tumultuous racket,” universals and
the types of sensory relation occurrent in knowledge thereof, apparent
simultaneous perception, and perception of perception itself. His
chapter is full of phenomenological insights, but the science he
relies on to understand the operations of the several sense organs is
obviously antiquated. Epistemologically, however, the goal is to
separate the pseudo-source that generates non-knowledge (awareness
that appears to to be true but is not or is not produced in the
assumed way) from the genuine, and the science is often not relevant
considering the signs of knowledge and non-knowledge. The longest
section of the chapter is devoted to a general account of illusion as
“appearance of something as other than as it is,”
anyathā-khyāti-vāda.
In illusion, Gaṅgeśa says, the presentation of
F-hood—silverhood, for example, in the illusion of
“seeing” a piece of shell as silver, and saying,
“Silver,” when it’s really
mother-of-pearl—originates in things’ really being F,
through previous knowledge of F-hood, real bits of silver in the
world. The silverhood predication in the verbalization of the
perception-like experience is available to become illusory predication
content through previous experience of silver. It gets fused into a
current perception-like event by means of a foul-up in the normal
causal process through the arousing of a silverhood memory-disposition
(saṃskāra) formed by previous experience of
silver, or, possibly, by testimony. The content or intentionality of
an illusion is to be explained causally as generated by real features
of real things just as is genuine perception although they are
distinct cognitive types. To repeat, genuine perception is factive;
illusion is a perception-imitator (“You don’t really see
Maitra because that’s Chaitra”).
Perception gets content not only from the object in connection with
the sense organ but also from the classificational power of the mind
or self. With the perceptual awareness, “That’s a
pot,” for instance, the pot as an individual in connection with
a sensory faculty is responsible for the cognition of a
property-bearer, for what is called the qualificandum portion of the
perception, without admixture of memory, but the sensory connection is
not by itself responsible for the qualifier portion, the pothood, also
identified as the “predication content”
(prakāra, the verbalizable “way” something
appears), the thing’s classification as a pot. The
classificational power of the mind should not, however, be understood
as innate so much as the product of experience over the course of a
lifetime. Repeatable features of reality get impressed on the mind or
self in the form of memory dispositions. That is, in perceiving
a as an F, normally an F-saṃskāra formed
by previous knowledge-source-produced bits of awareness of things F
would be a causal factor. The perception’s own content includes
the repeatable nature of the qualifier through the operation of this
factor. We see the tree as a tree, and it is a tree in fact.
The idea of indeterminate perception is a latecomer in Nyāya
tradition. Gautama, Vātsyānana, and Uddyotakara, whose
writings form the core of the early school, do not recognize an
indeterminate type of perception. The tenth-century author
Vācaspati introduces the notion into the system (1996: 111).
Gaṅgeśa is clearly aware of this history, for he opens his
discussion by echoing Vācaspati's commentary on
Nyāya-sūtra 1.1.4 where, in considering the
Nyāya-sūtra’s definition of perception,
Vācaspati takes the two words
‘avyapadeśya’ (“non-verbal”) and
‘vyavasāyâtmaka’
(“definite”) as indicating two types of perception,
indeterminate and determinate. Udayana and Gaṅgeśa follow
him, but there seems to have been some dissension among later
Naiyāyikas (Sibajiban Bhattacharyya 1990: 172–6).
Determinate perception, i.e., perceptual knowledge, is concept-laden,
a cognizing of a qualificandum through a qualifier. Things
have multiple properties some of which normally go undetected on any
given occasion of experience. One can see Devadatta without seeing his
back. Wholes are implicit in their parts, the very notion of which
makes no sense cut off from that of the whole: parts are parts of a
whole. If the ontological layering of things having qualifiers were
not reflected in a causal ordering of an indeterminate perception
feeding, so to say, the determinate, then perception of a
qualificandum should entail that the “thick” particular be
presented, i.e., the thing with all its properties, and, as
Gaṅgeśa argues, a blind person in touching a yellow piece
of cloth would know its color as yellow (2020: 359–60). The idea
of indeterminate perception picking up just one or another feature of
things is thus tied to Nyāya realism. The idea historically,
however, was taken over from Buddhists, it seems (Perrett: 2016).
In a thought experiment, Gaṅgeśa imagines a child
encountering a cow for the very first time (2020: 560). He argues that
the child can grasp the concept of cowhood and, had she the right
words, could say, correctly, “That’s a cow,” even
though she has had no previous experience of cows. The cowhood
predication content is supplied by what is called
“indeterminate” cognition of the qualifier, a first stage,
so to say, of the sensory information flow. According to
Gaṅgeśa, such indeterminate cognition has to be positied to
understand how we have, on the whole, workable concepts of things. The
argument is that in a typical case of a first-time perceptual
awareness of, for instance, a cow, there is a prior stage in the
causal process that is an indeterminate cognition, indeterminate in
that cowness is cognized but not as related to the particular cow, the
qualificandum of the ensuing determinate perception. All other cases
of cognition of an entity as qualified have a prior cognition of the
qualifier as a causal factor. It is thus reasonable that the case of a
first-time perception does as well. But since here clearly we do not
have a mental disposition (saṃskāra) at work,
indeterminate cognition has to be posited.
Something like indeterminate perception is posited by moderate
foundationalists in analytic epistemology as helping to solve the
problem of a justification regress, it seems (Phillips 2012: 50). A
mental state not embedding an assertion and so immune to questions
whether it is true or false is proposed. BonJour (2003: 20): “
… such a state is, as it were, semi-assertive or
semi-judgmental in character: it has a kind of content or cognitive
significance, but not in a way that would raise a further issue of
justification.” Such a comparison could be misleading, however.
Perception, according to Gaṅgeśa, is a doxastic justifier.
The foundations of our worldly beliefs are doxastic in that
determinate perceptions embed propositions that say at a minimum that
something is some way or another. Concept-free perception may be
thought of as Nyāya’s way of rendering our ability to form
concepts merely from perception’s phenomenological side. It is a
theoretical posit made to explain how our concepts originate in
reality—a problem that is epitomized in cases of a first-time
perception of something as an F, the concept F-hood being previously
unavailable to the perceiver.
“Apperception,” anuvyavasāya, is defined as
a perception taking a preceding cognition or another psychological
property as its object, typically a scoping cognition in relation to
another scoped (Phillips 2012: 48–50). Efforts and desires can
be similarly targeted. Through apperception, Gaṅgeśa
claims, one knows infallibly the intentionality, the
“objecthood,” viṣayatā, of the
cognition scoped, in its qualificandum, qualifier, and relational
portions. One knows, in other words, what the scoped purports to be
about, and one knows this independently of a determination of the
target’s being knowledge or not. Gaṅgeśa argues that
since the sensory connection in this case is not mediated by a
material organ, apperception is infallible about the contents of the
scoped, but not of course about its truth. He devotes a long section
of his perception chapter to defending this and other views about
apperception in the face of opponents claiming he is giving up central
planks of his theory.
Apperception makes certification possible because it sets up the item
to be certified, showing the type of cognition the scoped is. Our
apperceptive ability to determine whether the scoped cognition is
putatively perceptual, inferential, analogical, testimonial, or of
another character has epistemic relevance, since, as with all
perception, there would be a presumption in favor of its correctness.
Thus there would also be restoration of a presumption of the truth for
a scoped cognition that had been brought into doubt were it judged to
be perceptual, inferential, analogical, or testimonial in character,
although further examination might prove the identification wong. Note
that if further examination were called for, its direction would be
determined by the apperception of cognitive type. For, the criteria of
genuine perception, inference, and the rest vary according to origin.
The characteristic epistemic merits and flaws (guṇa and
doṣa) are very different for each knowledge source and
there are also significant differences within species of perception in
particular. Thus apperceptive judgment of putative type directs
inquiry, telling us what to check.
Corollary to Gaṅgeśa’s thesis of the apperceptibility
of cognitive types is his view that illusion can be scoped such that
there too we find, abstractly, a cognition of an object as qualified
by a qualifier, for example, of a piece of tin appearing to be silver.
He also presents the argument that the fact that we can later see the
same thing as really the tin it is shows that the illusion is a single
cognition and not, contra the Prābhākara, two cognitions, a
perception and a remembering along with a failure to notice their
difference. But scoping an illusory awareness is supposed to show
this, too, and in a particularly dramatic way when one knows that the
cognition is illusory while it continues, such as apparent sight of a
double moon or a person with hepatitis seeing a wall she knows is
white as yellow. Although apperception is said not in itself to be
able to determine the veridicality of an awareness, in such a case the
subject practically sees one thing (the wall) appearing to be
something it is not (yellow), anyathā-khyāti.
Gaṅgeśa’s contributions to understanding the
knowledge source called “inference,”
anumāna, and “inferential knolwedge,”
anumiti, come on top of a long history of advances both
within Nyāya and outside, from Yogācāra Buddhist
logicians and epistemologists, in particular, but also others.
Gaṅgeśa was a great student of philosophy. Most of the
technical system can be found in his near predecessor,
Maṇikaṇṭha Miśra (1953), and discussions of
fallacies echo the seventh-century Buddhist Dharmakīrti (1993)
and others. However, his treatment of inference is, arguably, more
elaborate than that of any predecessor, and, as is his ususal
practice, he examines a host of similar definitions of key items, such
as “pervasion,” as well as many opponent positions before
defending one or more of his own.
Considering the development of logic in the West, it important to keep
in mind that inference throughout Nyāya is part of epistemology.
Something about the world is known by any veritable inference. An
inference must have premises that are themselves known. Nyāya
philosophers do not distinguish between a formally valid deductive
argument (which may or may not have false premises) and deductive
arguments that are “cogent” (with no unjustified premises
and no errors).
A set of logical terms is standard across Nyāya and most of the
other classical schools, and Gaṅgeśa both uses them and
provides his own precise definitions:
For example, he characterizes an inferential subject,
pakṣa (2020: 734):
An inferential subject (pakṣa) occurs where there is no
knowledge source that has positively established something in
coördination with an absence of a desire to know. Thus, that is
not an inferential subject if there is a knowledge source that has
already positively established whatever and no desire to know
(it by inference). … This is what it is to be an inferential
subject (as a factor in the generation of inferential knowledge).
Admittedly, this definition does not differentiate it from anything,
since to be an inferential subject is a property with universal scope
(anything can be an inferential subject, qualities as well as
substances, universals as well as particulars, and so on).
Nevertheless, the way the word ‛pakṣa’ is
used has been explained.
A stock example of an inference:
Gaṅgeśa devotes several long sections of the chapter to
issues surrounding the inductive support that inferential knowledge
presumes, a basis for the proper formation of the inference-informing
saṃskāra or “mental disposition”
responsible for a subject’s being able to remember (in a crucial
mental event called “reflection,”
parāmarśa) a vyāpti or inclusion of
all things \(H\) as also things \(S\). This is the
“example.”
Inference-grounding “pervasions,” vyāpti,
are of different sorts, but they all obtain in nature, such as that
between smokiness and fieriness. Gaṅgeśa and all
Naiyāyikas are much occupied with pervasions, their nature and
how they are known.
After rejecting twenty-four attempts—close attempts—to
define the natural relation of pervasion such that the presence of a
pervaded property at a location proves that another, the pervader, is
there, too, Gaṅgeśa endorses the following characterization
(2020: 623):
Pervasion, vyāpti, is a prover \(H\)’s having its
locations shared by a probandum \(S\) so long as \(S\) when specified
as the counterpositive of an absolute absence (i.e., as \(\neg S\))
has shared locations, shared with the absence of the prover (i.e.,
with \(\neg H\): no \(\neg S\) occurs on anything that is not also a
\(\neg H\)), and if shared with something that is the counterpositive
of such an absence (\(H\)) also does not share it there (in the case
of a non-locus-pervading property).
All \(H\) are \(S\) so long as there are no \(\neg S\) that share a
location with something that is not a \(\neg H\). That is, there will
be pervasion given co-locatedness so long as what the \(S\) is,
according to the definition, is not something that in serving as the
counterpositive of an absence—specifically a counterpositive
having shared locations, a universal, a class character, a repeatable
property and not a particular instance (firehood as opposed to, say,
kitchen fire)—does not share any location that does not also
house a \(\neg H\). Goekoop (1967: 111) has a nice paraphrase that
makes the point a little clearer: “There is a pervasion of \(H\)
by \(S\) if and only if \(H\) has a common locus with \(S\) in such a
way that \(S\) is none of the things that qua class are completely
absent from some locus of \(H\).”
Gaṅgeśa’s definition is supposed to solve a problem
concerning inferences about non-locus-pervading properties, such as a
monkey-conjunction in a tree, a case on which many of the rejected
definitions floundered. “This tree possesses a
monkey-conjunction, since it is this tree (which always has
monkeys)” is a good inference even though the tree at its roots
has the ruled-out sort of counterpositive according to the definition.
Inferences involving conjunctions are ruled in if the \(S\) is a
property that while not present at \(l\) along with the \(H\) in some
specified portion of \(l\) is not so overall, that is, at or in all
portions of \(l\). The location \(l\) would be something that is
indeed \(S\) in some portion, as a tree does have a monkey in its
branches though not at its roots.
Inferences put forth for others (parârtha) make plain
the conditions that work with oneself (svârtha)
automatically, and in texts of philosophy little is automatic. Thus
built into the conception of the operation of inference are the
inductive procedures whereby a pervasion is known. Putatively similar
instances, sapakṣa, are defined as cases known to
possess the probandum and thus should also, at least in one (as first
insisted by the Buddhist Dignāga), exhibit the prover (e.g.,
\(Hb\) and \(Sb\))—while putatively dissimilar instances,
vipakṣa, are defined as cases known not to possess the
probandum and thus should lack the prover, too (e.g., \(\neg Sc\) and
\(\neg Hc\)). The example, dṛṣṭānta,
is normally a single instance of sapakṣa where the
prover also occurs (\(Hb\) and \(Sb\)), its citing thus indicating
that there is inductive support. In other words, by reference to cases
that are sapakṣa —i.e., known instances of the
probandum—where the prover is also found, positive evidence is
marshalled to support an inference-underpinning pervasion
(anvaya, “positive correlation”). And by
reference to cases that are vipakṣa —i.e., known
instances of the absence of the probandum—further support is
garnered by our not finding the prover (vyatireka,
“negative correlation”). Citing an example is shorthand to
indicate that such a procedure supports assertion of a
vyāpti, “pervasion” or general rule.
Gaṅgeśa devotes several sections of the
Jewel’s inference chapter to elucidating inferences
based on both sapakṣa and vipakṣa, as
well as those based exclusively on sapakṣa
(“positive-only inference”) and exclusively on
vipakṣa (“negative-only inference”). In
general, it is “wide experience,”
bhūyo-darśana, that is responsible for
pervasion-knowledge. But this term, championed by Udayana, and others,
is vague, and Gaṅgeśa devotes several sections to inductive
method.
There is also “hypothetical reasoning,” tarka,
which, although not itself a knowledge source, is said to be able to
shift the balance of what it is rational to accept. Its main role is
to help people grasp pervasions, and is an important supplement to the
inferences that are central to philosophic controversies.
Gaṅgeśa explains tarka as a hypothetical argument
revealing a fallacy or defeater with respect to a position
∼p opposed to another position p that is to be
accepted so long as p has independent evidence in its favor,
technically called, pratikūla-tarka. There is, however,
also anukūla-tarka, “supportive reasoning,”
such as economy of conception, that is positive in character. The
types of tarka that Gaṅgeśa recognizes are: (1)
ātmâśraya, “self-dependence”
(begging the question), (2) anyonyâśraya,
“mutual dependence” (mutual presupposition), (3)
cakraka, “circularity” (reasoning in a circle),
(4) anavasthā “infinite regress,” (5)
aniṣṭa-prasaṅga, “unwanted
consequence” (contradiction), (6)
prathama-upasthitatva, “being presupposed by the
other,” the “first established” (a form of
anukūla, “favorable,” tarka), (7)
utsarga, “hasty generalization,” (8)
vinigamanā-viraha, “differentiation
failure,” (9) lāghava, “economy of
conception,” “theoretic lightness” (another form of
favorable tarka), and (10) gaurava, “lack of
economy of conception,” “theoretic heaviness”
(Bagchi 1951: 151).
Gaṅgeśa devotes a section of his inference chapter to
tarka where he shows “pragmatic contradiction”
also to be included, which was mentioned above in connection with his
rejection of skepticism and defense of knowledge as the default for
awareness. That passage begins (2020: 649):
As an example, consider the particular doubt about smoke as pervaded
by fire. If smoke is not produced from a set of causes excluding fire,
then smoke, as not produced from a causal complex including fire,
would not be produced (a conclusion in contradiction, presumably, with
the doubter’s belief that smoke is produced). Now doubt (against
this hypothetical reasoning): Could the smoke come to be from
something that is not fire? Or just in some instances could it come to
be without fire? Or could it come to be simply by chance
(ahetuka, “without a cause”)?
Were a subject \(M\) who has ascertained thoroughgoing positive
correlations (\(S\) where \(H\)) and negative correlations (where no
\(S\), no \(H\)), to doubt that an effect might arise without a cause,
then—to take up the example of smoke and fire—why should
\(M\), as \(M\) does in a rulewise manner, resort to fire for smoke,
to food to allay hunger, and to speech to communicate to another
person?
Gaṅgeśa argues that tarka is useful for—as
we might say these days—reëstablishing a presumption of
truth in favor of one or another thesis brought into doubt. For
example, by supposing the truth of an opponent’s thesis and
showing how it leads to unacceptable consequences, one repossesses a
presumption of truth, provided one’s own thesis is supported by
at least the appearance of a knowledge source and, further, that it
has not itself been ruled out. Thus tarka comprises arguments
that are not in themselves knowledge-generators but capable
nonetheless of showing what we should and should not believe. In
particular, reasoning can show “untoward ramifications”
(prasaṅga) of not accepting a conclusion that is
evidenced, Gaṅgeśa says. Forms of tarka such as
self-contradiction, infinite regress, and circular reasoning are
employed in the dialogic exchanges constructed in the Jewel
and other works of later and indeed early Nyāya philosophy and,
for that matter, all the philosophic schools.
Inferential awareness, like the other types, is defeasible, and while
we have every right to accept, and act on, undefeated inferences, we
are sometimes wrong. In particular, knowledge and justification do not
pass from premises to conclusion if we become aware of an
upādhi, an “additional condition,” which
would be a blocker of “reflection” through undermining the
generalization on which such reflection depends. Thus awareness of an
upādhi is a preventer of inferential knowledge, a
“defeater,” leading to belief relinquishment by someone
who has hitherto not noticed the condition and who has erroneously
arrived at a conclusion on the basis of a falsely induced,
pseudo-pervasion. A rough (and non-classical) example: I know that Al
has a temper that will flare up in certain circumstances from having
witnessed many tantrums such that I expect that Al will explode by
making an inference when I see that the circumstances obtain, but
having overlooked that it is only with Belle that Al is so irascible
and Belle not being present in the circumstances where I expect, by
pseudo-inference, Al’s temper to flare, Belle would be the
upādhi, the “additional condition.”
Discussion of the concept occupies more than a tenth of
Gaṅgeśa’s long inference chapter.
The upādhi (\(U\)) has a negative character, serving, at
least in the first place, to undermine a putative inferential
conclusion by showing that the pervasion—all \(H\) as \(S\), a
prover (\(H\)) as pervaded by a probandum (\(S\))—on which it
depends does not hold. But an upādhi may also serve as
positive restorer of knowledge in that when it occurs together
with an original prover (\(H\)) that it undercuts (thus \(H \
\&\ U\)), the inferential conclusion is reestablished.
According to a traditional definition which, although refined by
Gaṅgeśa, suits most purposes, an upādhi is a
property \(U\) such that
It follows then that there is “deviation” (the prover is
said to “deviate,” being somewhere the probandum is not)
and no relation of pervasion.
There are lots of other fallacies that Gaṅgeśa discusses.
The Nyāya-sūtra lists five
“pseudo-provers,” hetv-ābhāsa, which
Gaṅgeśa examines at length:
These “flaws of the prover,” hetu-doṣa, are
also called “constant flaws,” nitya-doṣa,
as opposed to puruṣa-doṣa, “flaws of a
person,” which are anitya-doṣa, “occasional
flaws.” Admittedly, Gaṅgeśa contends that sometimes
even “failure to grasp a pervasion is (not a logical flaw but) a
flaw belonging to a person or subject” (2020: 884).
Nevertheless, the five pseudo-provers are separated out from other
defeaters called clinchers from the Nyāya-sūtra on,
because they highlight logical—or in the case of (3)
epistemological—rules as opposed to personal failures such as
failing to pay attention. The upādhi fallacy, too,
entails a counterexample and so is a “constant flaw,”
although failure to notice one on occasion can be a personal
error.
Two further types of defeater or pseudo-defeater identified in the
Nyāya-sūtra are, first, jāti,
“false analogies,” which seem dismissed by
Gaṅgeśa (in the voice of an opponent) saying that they are
not good responses in a debate or controversy (2020: 949), in contrast
with, second, “clinchers,” nigraha-sthāna,
whose importance in debate is acknowledged but not in any detail taken
up (perhaps Gaṅgeśa sees the
Nyāya-sūtra’s list, as explained by
Vātsyāyana, as satisfactory). But jāti are
dismissed because, it seems, however they may have been conceived in
early years (Prets 2001), long before Gaṅgeśa they come to
be understood as misleading analogies and classified as
tricks of debate or philosophic conundra, not really worthy
of inquiry. A jāti is a pseudo-defeater in the broad
sense of a misleading analogy, and there is less agreement about them
across school than about pseudo-provers, clinchers, and, we must add,
types of tarka, “hypothetical reasoning,” which
were reviewed above.
Gańgeśa advances three contentious inferences in his
inference chapter, two of them—a theistic inference and one
about the possibility of “liberation,”
mukti—defended at considerable length (all three are
reconstructed and examined in Phillips 2012: 65–71). As much as
supporting longstanding positions of Nyāya on (a)
“self,” ātman, (b) “Lord,”
īśvara, and (c) mukti, his treatments
illustrate his inferential system including defeating and hypothetical
reasoning. Indeed, illustration of the system sometimes seems to be
the main goal.
Although Gaṅgeśa accepts the position of early
Naiyāyika Uddyotakara (c. 600) that one knows oneself
perceptually as expressed by the word ‘I’ in perceptual
judgments such as “I am seeing a pot” (Taber 2012),
presumably he sees proving a self by inference as useful because
Buddhists, for one, deny it (famously). And at least in
Yogācāra Buddhism perception is accepted as a knowledge
source, with the insistence that no self is known by it or indeed by
any other means.
The Nyāya-sūtra has two arguments: diachronic
synthesis and synchronic. The former is illustrated by the
recognition, “This is that Devadatta I saw yesterday,”
which could not be an expression of knowledge (and of course it is) if
the self of the recognizer had not endured (the recognition is fed by
a memory of Devadata as seen the day before, and one person does not
have another’s memories). The latter is illustrated by, “I
am touching what I see” (a self is needed to bring together the
information across sensory modality). In the Jewel’s
perception chapter, Gaṅgeśa at times refers to or echoes
these arguments, but the argument for a self in the inference chapter
is different.
Gaṅgeśa follows Vātsyāyana under
Nyāya-sūtra 1.1.5 (the “inference
sūtra”): “Every living body (the inferential subject)
has a self (the probandum), since every living body has
breath (the prover), unlike a pot (the example, a pot being
qualified by both absence-of-self and absence-of-breath).” My
sense is that here the main point is as much to illustrate
“negative-only” inference as to endorse
Vātsyāyana’s reasoning, but it is endorsed. The
inferential subject includes all living bodies, and so there is no
sapakṣa, no examples of the probandum known outside the
set of things that are living bodies. Thus the inference has to be
negative-only, based solely on correlations of absences,
“unlike a pot,” a pot having neither breath nor self.
Fundamental truths of things (tattva), which are captured by
philosophical definitions, seem accessible only through fundamental
distinctions being known through negative-only inferences, for
example, this inference to self (ātman) as a fundamental
category of substance.
In a slightly more more elaborate version, Gaṅgeśa puts
forth two steps. First, desires and the like are proved to have a
locus, like all qualities. In step two, self is proved to be that
locus, a distinct substance, different from earth, water,
tejas, and so on down the traditional list, by eliminative
argument. Defeaters for the proposition that desire and the like
belong to earth or any of the rest of the items on the ontological
list consists of hypothetical reasoning such as the following. If
desire were a property of earth (or water and so on), then like the
color that exists in earthen things, it, too, would be perceived.
Surveying pots and the like, we find that nothing material has desire,
cognition, etc., outside of living bodies. He writes (2020: 803):
Given that desire has been proved to have an inherent cause (by the
inference previously stated, “Desire has origins in an inherent
cause, since it is an effect,” we formulate a second
inference), being-a-desire occurs in that (namely, desire) which has
as emergent cause a connection, since being-a-desire is a
universal directly pervaded by the
qualityhood-that-occurs-in-specific-qualities-grasped-by-an-eternal-organ
(i.e., manas or the organ of hearing), like
being-a-sound (soundhood, the universal of sound). And this emergent
cause, which is a connection, is specified by something, since it is a
connection. (That “something” is the living body.) If
merely connection with a self were the origins of desire (without
requiring something else delimiting it), then ramifications would
overextend. Therefore, having-a-self, which is the specifier of the
connection that gives rise to desire, is proved with respect to the
living body. (That is, every living body is
“enselved.”)
The inference for positing an īśvara, the
“Lord,” is a little less system-bound than this one for an
ātman, but its history stretches through several earlier
Nyāya efforts, in particular by Vācaspati (c. 950). It is an
inference to a creator based on both positive and negative
correlations: “Earth and the like have a conscious agent as an
instrumental cause, since they are effects, like a pot and
unlike an atom (whatever is an effect has a conscious agent as an
instrumental cause).” Buddhists point to counterexamples, such
as growing grass. Growing grass has the prover property,
being-an-effect, but not the probandum,
having-an-agent-as-an-instrumental cause. The Nyāya reply is to
point out that growing grass and all such examples are in dispute,
that is to say, fall within the domain of the inferential subject
(pakṣa), here “earth and the like,” to wit,
anything that is an effect but whose agential cause is not apparent,
unlike the comparison class, a pot, for instance, which is clearly
both an effect and has an agent as an instrumental cause. Nothing that
falls within the domain of the subject can be used either as an
example supporting the rule of vyāpti inclusion or as a
counterexample, since that would beg the question. The whole point of
inference is to make something known that was not known previously,
and here, as with the existence of atoms, the conclusion could not be
known perceptually. The theological inference has the purpose of
showing that things like the earth and growing grass have an
agent within the causal complex that brings them about. This is not
something that we know without making the inference.
So, by the rules governing proper inference, the putative
counterexample is rejected, and the proof looks pretty good. For,
cleverly it divides all things into three categories, as
Vācaspati remarks (1996: 563). There are uncreated things, atoms,
for instance, created things that clearly have an agential cause, such
as pots, and things such as the earth and growing grass that do not
clearly have an agential cause. This last set becoming the inferential
subject is bracketed such that no examples can be pulled from it.
However, another refutation refined by Buddhist philosophers over the
centuries is not dismissed so easily (Mokṣākāragupta
1998: 98; Patil 2009). The Nyāya argument falls to an
upādhi, in this case the property,
having-a-perceptible-body. As we have seen, an upādhi is
defined as a property that pervades the probandum while failing to
pervade the prover, that is to say, that is entailed by the presence
of the probandum while not being instanced in at least one case of the
prover. Having-an-agent-as-an-instrumental-cause, which is the \(S\)
or probandum property of the target inference, is pervaded by the
agent’s-having-a-perceptible-body, which is the \(U\) or
upādhi property: all agents have bodies. But there is
something that is an \(H\) but not a \(U\); something that is an
effect but does not have within its causal complex an agent with a
perceptible body, e.g., growing grass. The two conditions being met,
it would follow that there is something that is an \(H\) but not an
\(S\), something that is an effect but does not have an agent as an
instrumental cause. Thus the upādhi defeats the apparent
inference by showing that the required pervasion and entailment do not
hold.
Gaṅgeśa’s response is to deny that the putative
upādhi, an-agent’s-having-a-perceptible-body,
pervades the probandum of the target inference,
having-an-agent-as-an-instrumental-cause, and several rounds of
objection and response centering on Nyāya’s conception of
the Lord as an agent without a body are aired. The Lord’s
creative activity requires, like that of any agent, familiarity with
the material to be shaped, like the potter’s knowledge of clay
and of what to do to make a pot. The Lord’s knowledge is to be
conceived as appropriate to the tasks to be undertaken, such as
originally combining atoms, and if the Lord, like us, had to have a
body to have knowledge, including the knowledge required to combine
atoms, then, since bodies are combinations of atoms, there would have
to be some earlier Creator to make the necessary
combinations—ad infinitum. Simpler than this conception
is that of a bodiless Creator whose knowledge is appropriate to the
material forming earth and the like but, unlike our knowledge, is not
generated. This seems to be the core of Gaṅgeśa’s
reasoning, which is complex tarka targeting simplicity and
following Vācaspati in particular.
An inference to the possibility of “liberation,”
mukti, brings the Jewel’s inference chapter to
a close. It is particularly dense (2020: 1142) and cannot be unpacked
in a short space, but its central analogy is noteworthy.
Then the justification (the inference to the conclusion that suffering
can come to an end for an individual), well, it is that suffering in
general, or the suffering in general of Devadatta (i.e., of any
individual), is the counterpositive of a non-simultaneous destruction
existing in the same locus, since it is a property that
occurs only as an effect, or since it is continuous until its
end, like the light of a lamp. This continuity is its being a
property that occurs only as an effect at distinct times. And in this
way the probandum, the property to be proved (viz., being the
counterpositive of a non-simultaneous destruction existing in the same
locus), is also applicable to pleasure in general and the like:
liberation is the breaking up of the causal chain along with its
source.
Translator’s comments (2020: 1142) bring out that the crucial
point seems to be that something destroyed has no causal power,
existing only as an effect, in connection with the destruction for
which it is the counterpositive. The destruction that is
mukti is not of current but of future suffering, thus a
“non-simultaneous” destruction. The destruction exists in
the same locus as the suffering that would occur were it not blocked.
The suffering does not really occur—it never comes
about—and so its ontological status is problematic. Clearly, it
does not cause anything. It comes about only as an effect in
connection with the bringing about of the destruction in relation to
which it is the counterpositive. And any destruction is of something
(the counterpositive) at a place or locus: \(cDl\). Note that the
example appears to work only with the second of the two provers
mentioned: like a lamp’s stream of light that can cease
absolutely, the suffering of an individual goes on continuously
(through life, death, and rebirth)—in the sense of regularly if
not without occasional spells of pleasure—until its absolute
end. Pleasure is similar.
Different schools of classical philosophy have very different
understandings of “analogy,” upamāna, and,
unlike with perception, inference, and testimony, cross-school
controversies seem often at cross-purposes. For example,
Mīmāṃsakas, worried about the criteria for substitutes
for materials enjoined to carry out rituals, talk about similarities
as objective, whereas Naiyāyikas are concerned principally with
word meanings, although Vātsyāyana (1997: 170–1) does
show the usefulness of analogy to indicate something new, a medicinal
plant, for instance, similar to one with which an interlocutor is
familiar. Gaṅgeśa sees the working of analogy to result
solely in learning the meaning of words. Nevertheless, appreciation of
similarity, which he sees as a supervenient property, is, he says,
crucial in the operation of the knowledge source. The
Jewel’s chapter on analogy is quite short and lacks
subsections, hardly a “chapter” in comparison with the
other three.
What comes to be a stock example of analogical knowledge according to
Nyāya is elaborated in Nyāya-sūtra
commentaries and textbooks preceding Gaṅgeśa, who fills in
details. A subject \(S\) inquires of a forester about a
gavaya, which is a kind of buffalo, having heard the word
‘gavaya’ used among her schoolmates but not
knowing what it means, i.e., not knowing to what
‘gavaya’ refers. Questioned by \(S\), the
forester replies that a gavaya is like a cow, mentioning
certain specifics as also some dissimilarities. To simplify,
Nyāya philosophers say that the forester makes an analogical
statement (“A gavaya is like a cow”), whereby,
according to Gaṅgeśa, our subject \(S\) now knows in
general what the word means. But \(S\) does not yet know its
reference, which he deems its principal meaning. Later encountering a
gavaya buffalo, \(S\) says, “This, which is similar to
a cow, is the meaning of the word
‘gavaya’,” a statement which expresses
\(S\)’s new knowledge. Every instance of knowledge has a source,
and this one has been generated by upamāna,
“analogy.” Gaṅgeśa writes (2020: 1207):
Objection:

The question [of the subject to the forester] concerns only the cause
of her (eventual) knowledge (qua qualificandum). The answer gives its
qualifiers.
Gaṅgeśa: No. Since she does not know the particulars
(that would ground use of the word), she would be answered by the
forester also with reference to a need for a sensory
encounter: “If you go into the forest, you will see.”
Therefore, \(S\)’s questions would concern only the distinct
grounds of employment: “What is a gavaya like? On what
grounds does one employ the word ‘gavaya’?”
Since the one asked (viz., the forester) would not be able to show
immediately, directly (sākṣāt), what it is to
be a gavaya buffalo, he would talk about similarity,
indirectly indicating it (i.e., indicating what it is to be a
gavaya buffalo). And then later, when an individual has been
seen by \(S\) who remembers the meaning of the analogical statement,
she acquires the knowledge: “This thing qualified by what it is
to be a gavaya is the referent of the word
‘gavaya’.” \(S\)’s knowledge is of a
particular that is the grounds for the employment of the word. It is
the result of analogy (as a knowledge source).
Gaṅgeśa begins his final chapter of the Jewel with
a defense of the integrity of testimony as a knowledge source,
following a long tradition beginning with an extended
Nyāya-sūtra passage (2.1.49–56) that elicited
much commentary. Like his predecessors, he resists an opponent’s
contention that “testimonial” knowledge results from
inference of a certain sort such that supposing an additional
knowledge source is unnecessary. Gaṅgeśa’s response
is to argue that testimony works uniquely through language, that
without testimony the inferentialist’s premises in the
substitute inference could not be understood. Furthermore, the
certification conditions for testimony are different. The chapter
includes much reflection on linguistic meaning, including sections on
grammar near the end. How to understand reference is a chief concern,
reference being viewed as the primary mode of meaning. But there is
also “indirect indication,”
lakṣaṇā, which works by way of a referent
indicating something else, as when a poet says, “The
moon,” meaning the face of the beloved. All these are standard
topics in Nyāya literature. Injunctions, which are also talked
about from the earliest by Naiyāyikas as well as their
Mīmāṃsaka champions (the Veda is injunctive in
character), command a lot of attention. Their supposed ethical force
is wrestled with, as Gaṅgeśa shows his mastery of
Mīmāṃsā and resists its view of a moral
universe.
Nyāya and Mīmāṃsā are referentialist allies
with similar agendas when it comes to knowledge from testimony, both
opposed to a Yogācāra pragmatic theory of meaning. Although
concerned mainly with Vedic hermeneutics, Mīmāṃsaka
philosophers pioneer many of the best arguments and counterarguments
against Buddhists and others who attack Vedic authority. But
Gaṅgeśa does not accept the Mīmāṃsaka
contention that the overall purport of a statement or sentence can in
general, even in cases of secondary meaning,
lakṣaṇā, be understood without an idea of
the speaker’s intention. We do not have to understand the
speaker’s intention to grasp a statement in all cases, although
sometimes we do, for example, when multiple meanings are possible and
with some statements employing lakṣaṇā. But
the Mīmāṃsaka view that Vedic sentences have no author
is false.
Gaṅgeśa apparently accepts the
Nyāya-sūtra’s definition, 1.1.7:
“Testimony is the (true) statement of an trustworthy
expert” (Vātsyāyana 1997: 14), which indicates
certification conditions centering on the speaker. He focuses,
however, on the conditions wrapped up in what it is to be a (true)
statement from the hearer’s point of view. The condition known
as yogyatā, usually rendered “semantic fit,”
is given by him a broad interpretation, where not only infelicitous
statements such as “The gardener is watering the plants with
fire,” are violations, as is commonly pointed out, but also the
hearer’s knowing that the speaker is not an āpta,
that the sounds are, for example, from a parrot.
Yogācāra Buddhists have a pragmatic theory of
concept-formation and view language as at best helping us get what we
want and avoid what we want to avoid. The Buddha’s words are to
be trusted because of his special experience and superior capacity as
a reasoner as well as his compassion motivating his most excellent
advice. Gaṅgeśa imagines an attack on testimonial knowledge
from Buddhist skeptical quarters such that, in fact, there is no
knowledge but only helpful or unhelpful advice because there is no
truth, no veridicality. Statements do not correspond to facts.
Gaṅgeśa’s rebuttal centers on knowledge production
through words. Any instance of knowledge has a mode of production
distinct from one that fails so to produce. The argument that
erroneous utterances fail to generate knowledge cuts no ice, since
erroneous utterances are not veritable testimony as we Naiyāyikas
understand it, he says (2020: 1215). We are able to distinguish
erroneous and true utterances by the processes that produce them, and
thus meet the skeptical challenge.
A different line of rejection of testimony is attributed to the
Vaiśeṣika school, which is said to admit testimonial
knowledge but to see its generation as coming from inference of a
certain sort. A hearer reasons: (1) Speaker \(S\) states p,
(2) \(S\) is a “trustworthy authority,”
āpta, (3) what such authorities state is true, and so,
therefore, (4) \(p\) is true. And if challenged, S could say that she
knows \(p\) because of the inference. Gaṅgeśa’s
rebuttal centers on how premise (1) could be known. Testimony has to
be admitted as a separate knowledge source to understand how the
reductionist’s inference could get started. Just what is the
knowledge source for (1)?
In the long chapter on testimony, one would expect speaker
certification conditions to be taken up, but they are not. Perhaps
Gaṅgeśa sees them as satisfactorily elucidated by
Vātsyāyana on Nyāya-sūtra 1.1.7 along
with the later commentaries. In any case, the Jewel’s
focus is on sentential conditions such as grammaticality and semantic
fitness as remarked. Three conditions prominent in the grammatical
literature are addressed, “expectation,”
ākāṅkṣā, “semantic
fit,” yogyatā, and “contiguity,”
āsatti. Gaṅgeśa also takes up
tātparya, “(speaker’s) intention,”
disputing the views of Mīmāṃsakas and championing
common sense. Throughout the chapter, two views of sentence meaning
are in view, (a) a “Bhāṭṭa” radically
referentialist theory (due to Kumārila) that a word refers
independently of sentential context, and (b) a
“Prābhākara” holistic view that has the sentence
as a whole as informational, not words independently of sentential
context. Although Gaṅgeśa endorses the
Bhāṭṭa view that a factual relation, not directly
expressed, accounts for sentential unity, often he frames a point
using the Prābhākara theory.
Vātsyāyana and company discuss word meaning in terms of
possible referents (Nyāya-sūtra 2.2.59–69),
(i) the individual, for example, ‘cow’ used for a
particular cow, (ii) the universal, cowhood, what all cows have in
common, and (iii) “shape,” ākṛti, as
with a cow-shaped pastry. The settled view is that all three are
generally meant in a single usage, with predominance varying with
context. Against this background, Vācaspati (1979) explores five
views of sentential meaning including both (a) the “theory of
the connection of the referents,” the radically, incrementally
referentialist view espoused by Bhāṭṭas and
Naiyāyikas, abhihitânvaya-vāda, and (b) the
“theory of reference of the connected,” “holistic
reference,” the Prābhākara view of reference as
occurring at the level of the sentence,
anvītâbhidhāna-vāda. In his
Nyāya-sūtra work (1996), Vācaspati imports the
Bhāṭṭa view, according to which sentence meaning is
derivative from the reference of individual words and other semantic
elements taken together, with the overall connection, anvaya,
provided by the fact (if the statement is true) of the words’
referents being in relation, the “truth-maker.” Later
Naiyāyikas such as Gaṅgeśa follow him, although, to
repeat, Gaṅgeśa often talks about sentential unity
presupposing the Prābhākara view that the component words do
not individually have referential power but only as connected
grammatically, with a complex object or fact as that which is referred
to by the unifying sentence.
“Expectation,”
ākāṅkṣā, “(verbal)
expectation,” is the first of three sentential conditions taken
up. After rejecting four attempts to define the phenomenon in its
relevance for the epistemology of testimony, Gaṅgeśa
endorses the following (2020: 1259):
Expectation amounts to incompleteness of reference, specifically, an
incompleteness of \(Y\) with respect to \(X\); that is to say, without
\(Y\) there would be, with respect to \(X\), no generation of
awareness of an overall connection among the meanings of words and
other factors taken in their native senses. Words (and other semantic
units) used as nouns, case endings, verbal roots, verbal endings,
finite verbs, and words in declension are such that, in a particular
instance, without the one or the other, there would not be awareness
generated of an overall connection among all the referents mutually,
taking everything in its native sense.
Lists of words do not fulfill the “expectation” condition,
for example, “Cow, being-the-object-of-an-action (as designated
by a word in the accusative case), bringing.” Gaṅgeśa
admits that it “could be an instance of knowledge of verbal
meaning, but it would not produce knowledge of an overall
connection” (2020: 1547). Nevertheless, with him the expectation
is also something felt by a hearer, whose grasping the
reference of one word with its case ending (which also refers,
according to him) leads to expectation not just of another word but of
its referent. Thus expectation is a psychological property mediated by
words in reference to a fact. It is embedded in a subject’s
understanding of words as united by their references comprising the
fact that is captured by a statement. Sometimes
Gaṅgeśa’s dialectic, particularly in several sections
on verbal compounds and the like at the end of the chapter, trades on
the difficulty of finding a factual item to which a word would
correspond in its real-world relationality as implicated in the
incorporation of the word grammatically into a declarative sentence.
Thus while the “expectation” seems to work as a matter of
grammar, the “grammar” is thought to reflect a fact that
the words pick out.
Gaṅgeśa often refers to the problem of the word list that
is not unified, several times appearing to reinstate a grammatical
understanding of “expectation” as opposed to how
objects—referents—are related in fact. And once (2020:
1547) this comes right at the heart of his endorsement of
“incremental referentialism” as opposed to the
connectivist, “holistic” variety of the
Prābhākara. He says, “ … a word endowed with
expectation and meeting the other requirements is what brings about a
particular presentation of an overall connection.” This seems to
be the answer to the problem of the list whose items do not show
grammatical connections although they are just what the things
themselves demand to constitute a fact, a truth-maker: “Pot,
being-the-object-of-an-action (as designated by the accusative case),
bringing, action.” The endings on the words in the list do not
refer to relations that connect up the other things properly. This is
the difference. Each item listed appears incomplete because, for
example, reference to bringing demands not only the meaning of a word
as something that could be brought but a word in the accusative case
with the case ending indicating that it is in the right kind of
relation objectively. Every base word is by itself
“unsaturated,” to use the Fregean term, referring to
something in the world that has to hook up with something else
referred to, if there is to be a sentence and statement,
abhihitânvaya.
In addition to a section devoted to a second sentential condition,
“semantic fit,” yogyatā, Gaṅgeśa
provides a brief definition in other places in part because its
violation is commonly taken to be the trigger to take a word in a
secondary way, not directing us to a “native” referent (he
also advances a slightly different view of the trigger which
we’ll review later). For example (2020: 1228):
Semantic fit (yogyatā) amounts to there being no
legitimate block to understanding a statement.
Included in this is the “Gettier case” of a parrot’s
saying something that a hearer \(H\) would take as true if \(H\) did
not know the sounds were from a parrot. In the scenario, \(H\) fails
to put together the sounds as words and as a sentence and does not
acquire testimonial knowledge. Knowing that the sounds are from a
parrot is a block. The yogyatā condition is defined
negatively and is commonly invoked as a kind a coherence check. And
here Gaṅgeśa concurs.
He resists, however, the application of the principle to a Vedic
injunction to perform a sacrifice whose result is supposed to be in
the distant future, going to heaven, say, which wouldn’t make
sense, the ritualists reason, without elliptical reference to
apūrva, a magical “Unseen Force,”
adṛṣṭa, that connects the completion of the
sacrifice with its goal. According to Gaṅgeśa, no
apūrva is thereby referenced (etymologically that which
is “not understood before” comprehension of an injunction
as applying to oneself, say Mīmāṃsakas) and if there
is “Unseen Force” created by a sacrifice or another good
work it, like all karma, inheres in the self of the performer,
affecting, in particular, his or her next incarnation. Thus again he
endorses a doctrine of the Nyāya-sūtra, which also
rejects apūrva but accepts karma as popularly
understood.
The Jewel’s section on “contiguity” is
short, and special topics such as ellipsis, etymology versus
reconventionalization (only lotuses are referred to in Sanskrit by the
compound ‘paṅka-ja’,
“mud-born,” although plants like the water-lily are also
born in mud), homonymy, and others are treated more or less briefly.
But the topic of injuction looms large in the chapter overall along
with a concern with Mīmāṃsaka views of moral authority
as fundamenally a matter of Vedic injunction.
Injunctions are commonly formed in Sanskrit through use of the
optative verbal form, and a central question is just what does the
optative affix mean. That one should do such and such seems to be the
core meaning about which everyone agrees, but different analyses are
given of the idea that one should do such and such. A central thesis
is that a certain kind of knowledge both prompts and guides any action
that is voluntary, pravṛtti, whether in everyday life
or with a ritual. So now since rituals are actions, some of these
action-prompting thoughts are prompted by comprehending Vedic
sentences. Gaṅgeśa’s effort is often directed to
integrating our understanding of Vedic and everyday language, and he
uses his criticisms of Mīmāṃsā analyses of ritual
actions to illumine the voluntary in general along with “desire
to do,” effort, and the knowledge that directs action,
including, especially, knowledge of a “means to what’s
wanted,” iṣṭa-sādhanatā, an idea
hotly debated by all factions of Mīmāṃsā. A basic
division in the school occurs on the issue whether means of
accomplishing what is enjoined, or contemplated because desired,
iṣṭa-sādhanatā, is part of the content
of an injunction (as itself implicated in any “desire to
do” as the desire’s cognitive content).
Bhāṭṭas insist that it is, but Prābhākaras
demur, claiming that such is known by a separate intellectual act of
“presumption,” arthâpatti. For
Prābhākaras, it is simply that something “ought to be
done,” its kāryatā, that is the meaning of an
injunction, with the means to what’s wanted known by
presumption. Gaṅgeśa rehearses extensive arguments on both
sides, and seems generally to favor the positions of the
Prābhākaras.
In the end, Gaṅgeśa champions an understanding of the
injunction as expressing a certain kind of knowledge-prompting action,
especially “what one ought to do,”
kāryatā, which he sees, agreeing with the
Prābhākara, as the meaning of an injunction. That is to say,
for him, “what one ought to do” is the meaning in part.
But he also agrees with the Bhāṭṭa that a means has
to be known or made known, and he adds another factor, effort, and the
requirement that the action be known as accomplishable by one’s
own effort.
An ethical view centered on Vedic injunctions is embedded in
Mīmāṃsaka attitudes, and Gaṅgeśa shows
sympathy for the life regulated by ritual, in particular daily rituals
that require no special qualifications. But his own ethical outlook is
nowhere explicitly stated. At places he shows affinity for a
soteriological ethics implicit in a mystical way of knowing the
“truth” concerning the “self,”
ātman, a self as experienced in a special kind of yogic
meditation. At several places, he quotes the Bhagavad
Gītā, apparently endorsing its karma-yoga teaching of
benevolent action. Despite sympathy for Mīmāṃsaka
positions, when it comes to the striking and longlasting conflicts,
ethical and otherwise, between ritualists and mystics/yogins in the
subcontinent, Gaṅgeśa seems to line up with the
yogins—like, it should be noted, Gautama, the author of the
Nyāya-sūtra and his commentators. Indeed, although
airing Mīmāṃsā opinion apparently with much
sympathy, Gaṅgeśa sees injunctions to perform rituals as
trumped by yogic teachings of the way to self-discovery. But also like
many Naiyāyikas before him, Gaṅgeśa appears to try to
find middle ground in ethics as in other areas of theory. Surely, he
is not a radical critic of the ritualists’ moral codes, more
likely one of their number trying to nudge colleagues into broader
points of view.
The longest section in the testimony chapter and indeed in the
entirety of the Jewel is devoted to
lakṣaṇā, which is a second mode of meaning
dependent on the first or primary called “denotation,”
abhidhāna, i.e. reference. Nyāya-sutra
2.2.62 gives about a dozen examples of semantic transference, for
example, “The stands are shouting,” where it is not the
stands but the people in them who are shouting. And with “Usher
in the sticks,” it is ascetics who carry walking sticks who are
to be ushered in. In this example, the primary, denotative meaning is
not entirely transferred since the ascetics would carry their sticks
in with them into the dining room, it is presumed. The most common
example in the Jewel is “The village is
in-the-Gaṅgā,” where we understand the village to be
on the river’s bank (the indicated) because we know
that no village is actually built in the Gaṅgā,
which is very deep.
The inherited view is that a violation of yogyatā,
“semantic fit,” triggers a hearer to understand a
secondary sense. But one of the first comments Gaṅgeśa
makes about lakṣaṇā rejects this view,
bringing up the phenomenon’s relevance to the debate about
sentential unity, anvaya. He writes (2020: 1250):
… [lakṣaṇā] is not triggered by a
violation of semantic fit (as is commonly held) but rather by a
violation of anvaya itself, of the overall connection of
words, the overall construction. For example, by force of context we
understand from a violation of anvaya with the word
‘stick’ in connection with ‘usher in’
(“Usher in the sticks”) that the speaker’s purpose
is to feed certain ascetics (who typically carry walking sticks) who
would be ushered in along with their sticks.
In a case where a secondary usage does not involve entire
relinquishment of the primary meaning but retains it in part, as (with
the previous example but also) in “The umbrella-holders are
coming,” it is precisely the context that tells us that the
coming is on the part of an umbrella-holder and also
those who are not umbrella-holders (important people over
whose heads a large umbrella is being held). Because of the violation,
the agency of the movement is understood. There would be a violation
of anvaya in taking the meaning to apply only to a
holder.
Since it is entirely possible that several umbrella-holders are
coming, it must be something broader than “semantic fit”
that is violated in this and similar cases.
“Indirect indication” does a lot of work for
referentialism, since there are many, many examples where no direct
referent is meant but a hearer comprehends a statement and acquires
testimonial knowledge. And although Gaṅgeśa resists
overemployment of the notion, he uses it extensively. Further examples
concern the meaning of certain Sanskrit compounds and grammatical
number, when, for instance, a plural form is used while what is meant
is a single something or other.
Naiyāyikas are hardly the only theorists who employ the tool.
Some Mīmāṃsakas argue that reference is to the
universal, the individual being indicated by
lakṣaṇā. Gaṅgeśa considers the
view that it is the universal that is known by
lakṣaṇā, not the individual, the universal
as specifying the character of the individual. On the dispute about
reference to universals or individuals, Naiyāyikas want to agree
with all parties, it seems. Importantly, Gaṅgeśa sees
reference to an individual as invariably to an individual of a kind,
for example “(A) cow,” would be to one qualified by
cowhood: “the referent is an entity as qualified by a
universal” (2020: 1576). To focus just on the cowhood would be
“indirect indication,” he says, with the indicator being
the individual cow referred to. Prābhākaras tend to find no
use for lakṣaṇā, since according to them
reference is holistic, a matter of the entire sentence, and the
meanings of the individual words are united in the hearer’s
mind. Thus it is the radical referentialists who seem to need it
most.
In a remarkable passage, Gaṅgeśa puts forth a core argument
for lakṣaṇā (2020: 1631):
Objection:

Reference (śakti = abhidhā) is alone
sufficient (with no need to posit an additional mode of meaning),
since the conventional practice that supports anyone's understanding
meaning is common to both (what you call) primary and indicated
senses. For, the words (that make up a sentence and statement) having
been put together, an etymological analysis can inform us of the
overall connection because śakti, the power of
reference, has accomplished a setting in mind, or settings in mind,
produced by the words. Otherwise, there could be neither testimony as
a knowledge source nor speaker’s intention, since this power
governs and regulates them both.
Moreover, if the speaker’s intention is understood (by anyone
hearing “The village is in-the-Gaṅgā”), then
only reference need be imagined as accounting for the communication
(no indirect meaning, lakṣaṇā), since that
is the economical position. Like homonyms such as
‘akṣa’ (“eye/dice”) and
company, multiplicity of meaning is alone the right view. No
uneconomical additional mode need be supposed.
Gaṅgeśa:

We answer. If we had to imagine that the word
‘Gaṅgā’ is used (as you claim) for the
thousands of things that could be indicated by using the word for such
a thing as a bank, then in order to understand a usage we would have
to be familiar with another conventional practice of older persons
(who have taught us the conventions of language) in each case among
all the innumerable things that could be indicated. And so this view
is uneconomical, and it is not borne out by experience.
Indirect meaning (lakṣaṇā), on the other
hand, is single, unitary, by nature to be related to what is picked
out. And it does not require us to be familiar with another
conventional practice of of older persons having the indicated as
intentional object. Thus to have an economical position, it alone is
appropriately posited.
Without lakṣaṇā, reference would have to do
too much work and could not tie use of a word to a certain type of
thing. It is to save the fixity of the referential tie that
lakṣaṇā has to be posited. Its usefulness as
a concept depends on its flexibility.
Gaṅgeśa also swims against the mainstream by eschewing
knowledge of speaker’s intention to explain the triggering of
lakṣaṇā. He points out that typically one
has to understand a statement before knowing the speaker’s
intention in making it. A hearer’s knowing the speaker’s
intention is not a necessary factor in the generation of the
hearer’s testimonial knowledge through indirect indication, he
says, but he admits that knowing a speaker’s intention could be
sufficient.
About the principles of transference, he has little to say other than
to point to “relevant context” and “being set in
mind quickly.” Indirect indication is preceded by comprehension
of conventional meaning and is directed toward something that is
related to the conventional meaning. But some cases,
“frozen metaphors,” are reconventionalizations where the
primary, original meaning has been forgotten. A “windfall”
seems to be a good example in modern English. There is a long and
intricate discussion of this. Can we refer to a water-lily by using
the word ‘mud-born’? No, says Gaṅgeśa. The word
has been reconventionalized to mean in a primary way only lotuses and
if used for a water-lily we would have a case of
lakṣaṇā.