George Herbert Mead was born on February 27, 1863, in South Hadley,
Massachusetts. His father, Hiram Mead, a minister in the
Congregational Church, moved his family from Massachusetts to Ohio in
1869 in order to join the faculty of The Oberlin Theological
Seminary. At Oberlin he taught homiletics and held the chair in Sacred
Rhetoric and Pastoral Theology. Mead would attend Oberlin College from
1879–1883, and matriculate at Harvard from 1887–1888. At Harvard he
studied with Josiah Royce, a philosopher deeply indebted to
G.W.F. Hegel, who also left a lasting impression on Mead. (Mead met
William James at Harvard, although he did not study with him. Almost
immediately after graduation, Mead resided in William James's summer
home tutoring his son Harry.)  Mead's mother, Elizabeth Storrs
Billings, was a devoutly religious woman, who taught at Oberlin for
two years after the death of her husband in 1881, and served as
president of Mount Holyoke College from 1890–1900. After his college
years, Mead became a committed naturalist and non-believer, but he had
struggled for years with the religious convictions that he had
inherited from his family and community. For a period of time after
college he even considered Christian Social Work as a career, but 1884
he explained in a letter to his friend Henry Castle why this career
path would be problematic.
Mead did indeed move away from his earlier religious roots, but the
activist spirit remained with him. Mead marched in support of
women's suffrage, served as a treasurer for the Settlement House
movement, immersed himself in civic matters in Chicago, and generally
supported progressive causes. Jane Addams was a close
friend. In terms of his transformation into a naturalist,
no doubt Darwin played a significant role. As a matter of fact,
one can understand much of Mead's work as an attempt to
synthesize Darwin, Hegel, Dewey's functionalist turn in
psychology, and insights gleaned from James. Mead taught with Dewey at
the University of Michigan from 1891–1894, and when Dewey was made
chair at the University of Chicago in 1894, he requested that Mead
receive an appointment. Mead spent the rest of his career at
Chicago. But before he began teaching at Michigan, Mead was
directly exposed to major currents of European thought when he studied
in Germany from 1888–1891, taking a course from Wilhelm Dilthey and
immersing himself in Wilhelm Wundt's research.
Dewey and Mead were not only very close friends, they shared similar
intellectual trajectories. Both went through a period in
which Hegel was the most significant philosophical figure for them, and
both democratized and de-essentialized Hegelian ideas about the self
and community. Nevertheless, neo-hegelian organic metaphors and
notions of negation and conflict, reinterpreted as the problematic
situation, remain central to their positions. The teleological
also remains important in their thought, but it is reduced in scale
from the world historical and localized in terms of anticipatory
experiences and goal oriented activities.
For Mead, the development of the self is intimately tied to the
development of language. To demonstrate this connection, Mead
begins by articulating what he learned about the gesture from
Wundt. Gestures are to be understood in terms of the
behavioral responses of animals to stimuli from other organisms.
For example, a dog barks, and a second dog either barks back or runs
away. The “meaning” of the “barking
gesture” is found in the response of the second organism to the
first. But dogs do not understand the “meaning” of
their gestures. They simply respond, that is, they use symbols
without what Mead refers to as “significance.” For a
gesture to have significance, it must call out in a second organism a
response that is functionally identical to the response that the first
organism anticipates. In other words, for a gesture to be
significant it must “mean” the same thing to both
organisms, and “meaning” involves the capacity to
consciously anticipate how other organisms will respond to symbols or
gestures. How does this capacity arise? It does so through
the vocal gesture.
A vocal gesture can be thought of as a word or phrase. When a
vocal gesture is used the individual making the gesture responds
(implicitly) in the same manner as the individual hearing it. If
you are about to walk across a busy street during rush hour, I might
shout out, “Don't walk!” As I shout, I hear my
gesture the way in which you hear it, that is, I hear the same words,
and I might feel myself pulling back, stopping in my tracks because I
hear these words. But, of course, I don't hear them exactly
as you do, because I am aware of directing them to you. According
to Mead, “Gestures become significant symbols when they
implicitly arouse in the individual making them the same responses
which the explicitly arouse, or are supposed to arouse, in other
individuals” (MSS, 47). He also tells us that, “the
critical importance of language in the development of human experience
lies in this fact that the stimulus is one that can react upon the
speaking individual as it reacts upon the other” (MSS,
69).
As noted, Mead was indebted to Hegel's work, and the
notion of reflexivity plays a fundamental role in Mead's theory
of mind. Vocal gestures—which depend on sufficiently
sophisticated nervous systems to process them—allow individuals to
hear their own gestures in the way that others hear them. If I
shout “Boo” at you, I might not only scare you, I might
scare myself. Or, to put this in other terms, vocal gestures
allow one to speak to oneself when others are not present. I
make certain vocal gestures and anticipate how they would be responded
to by others, even when they are not present. The responses
of others have been internalized and have become part of an accessible
repertoire. (Mead would agree with Ludwig Wittgenstein that
there are no private languages. Language is social all the way
down.) According to Mead, through the use of vocal gestures
one can turn “experience” back on itself through the loop
of speaking and hearing at relatively the same instant. And when
one is part of a complex network of language users, Mead argues that
this reflexivity, the “turning back” of experience on
itself, allows mind to develop.
Mentality on our approach simply comes in when the organism is able
to point out meanings to others and to himself. This is the
point at which mind appears, or if you like, emerges…. It is
absurd to look at the mind simply from the standpoint of the
individual human organism; for, although it has its focus there, it is
essentially a social phenomenon; even its biological functions are
primarily social. (MSS, 132–133)
It is by means of reflexiveness—the turning back of the experience
of the individual upon himself—that the whole social process is
thus brought into the experience of the individuals involved in it; it
is by such means, which enable the individual to take the attitude
of the other toward himself, that the individual is able consciously to
adjust himself to that process, and to modify the resultant of that
process in any given social act in terms of his adjustment to it.
Reflexiveness, then, is the essential condition, within the social
process, for the development of mind. (MSS, 134)
Mind is developed not only through the use of vocal gestures, but
through the taking of roles, which will be addressed below. Here it is
worth noting that although we often employ our capacity for
reflexivity to engage in reflection or deliberation, both Dewey and
Mead argue that habitual, non-deliberative, experience constitutes the
most common way that we engage the world.  The habitual involves a
host of background beliefs and assumptions that are not raised to the
level of (self) conscious reflection unless problems occur that
warrant addressing. For Dewey, this background is described as “funded
experience.” For Mead, it is the world that this there and
the “biologic individual.”
One of the most noteworthy features of Mead's account of the
significant symbol is that it assumes that anticipatory experiences are
fundamental to the development of language. We have the ability place
ourselves in the positions of others—that is, to anticipate their
responses—with regard to our linguistic gestures. This ability
is also crucial for the development of the self and
self-consciousness. For Mead, as for Hegel, the self is
fundamentally social and cognitive. It should be distinguished from the
individual, who also has non-cognitive attributes. The self, then,
is not identical to the individual and is linked to
self-consciousness. It begins to develop when individuals
interact with others and play roles. What are roles? They
are constellations of behaviors that are responses to sets of behaviors
of other human beings. The notions of role-taking and role playing are
familiar from sociological and social-psychological literature. For
example, the child plays at being a doctor by having another child play
at being a patient. To play at being a doctor, however, requires
being able to anticipate what a patient might say, and vice
versa. Role playing involves taking the attitudes or perspectives of 
others. It is worth noting in this context that while Mead
studied physiological psychology, his work on role-taking can be viewed
as combining features of the work of the Scottish sympathy theorists
(which James appealed to in The Principles of
Psychology), with Hegel's dialectic of self and other.
As we will discover shortly, perspective-taking is associated not 
only with roles, but with far more complex behaviors.
For Mead, if we were simply to take the roles of others, we would
never develop selves or self-consciousness. We would have a
nascent form of self-consciousness that parallels the sort of reflexive
awareness that is required for the use of significant symbols. A
role-taking (self) consciousness of this sort makes possible what might
be called a proto-self, but not a self, because it doesn't have
the complexity necessary to give rise to a self. How then does a
self arise? Here Mead introduces his well-known neologism, the
generalized other. When children or adults take
roles, they can be said to be playing these roles in dyads.
However, this sort of exchange is quite different from the more complex
sets of behaviors that are required to participate in games. In
the latter, we are required to learn not only the responses of specific
others, but behaviors associated with every position on the
field. These can be internalized, and when we succeed in doing so
we come to “view” our own behaviors from the perspective of
the game as a whole, which is a system of organized actions.
For Mead, although these communities can take different forms, they
should be thought of as systems; for example, a family can be thought
of systemically and can therefore give rise to a generalized other and
a self that corresponds to it. Generalized others can also be
found in
In his Principles of Psychology, a book Mead knew well,
William James discusses various types of empirical selves, namely, the
material, the social, and the spiritual. In addressing the social
self, James notes how it is possible to have multiple selves.
From Mead's vantage point, James was on the right track.  However, the
notion of audience is left undeveloped in James, as is the manner in
which language is utilized in the genesis of the self and
self-consciousness. For Mead, James's audiences should be thought of
in terms of systemically organized groups, such as we find in certain
games, which give rise to generalized others. Further, we need an
account of how we come to view ourselves from the perspective of these
groups that goes beyond the concept of “sympathetic
attachments.” Such an account involves reflexivity, which
originates with the vocal gesture and is essential to taking roles and
the perspective of the generalized other.  In addition, reflexivity
helps make possible the capacity to “see” ourselves from
ever wider or more “universal” communities. Mead relates
the latter capacity to cosmopolitan political and cultural
orientations. It's worth noting that for Mead a full account of the
self should address the phylogenetic as well as the ontogenetic.
One of Mead's most significant contributions to social psychology is
his distinction between the “I” and the “Me.”
It's worth emphasizing that while this distinction is utilized in
sociological circles, it is grounded philosophically for Mead. His
target, in part, is no less than the idea of the transcendental ego,
especially in its Kantian incarnation. It is also important to note
that the “I” and “Me” are functional
distinctions for Mead, not metaphysical ones. He refers to them as
phases of the self (MSS 178, 200), although he more typically uses the
word self to refer to the “Me” (Aboulafia 2016).
The self that arises in relationship to a specific generalized other
is referred to as the “Me.” The “Me” is a
cognitive object, which is only known retrospectively, that is, on
reflection. When we act in habitual ways we are not typically
self-conscious. We are engaged in actions at a non-reflective
level. However, when we take the perspective of the generalized
other, we are both “watching” and forming a self in
relationship to the system of behaviors that constitute this
generalized other. So, for example, if I am playing second base,
I may reflect on my position as a second baseman, but to do so I have
to be able to think of “myself” in relationship to the
whole game, namely, the other actors and the rules of the
game. We might refer to this cognitive object as my (second
baseman) baseball self or “Me.” Perhaps a
better example might be to think of the self in relationship to
one's family of origin. In this situation, one views oneself from
the perspective of the various sets of behaviors that constitute the
family system.
To return to the baseball example, one may have a self, a
“Me,” that corresponds to a particular position that one
plays, which is nested within the game as an organized totality.  This
self, however, doesn't tell us how any particular play may be
made. When a ball is grounded to a second baseman, how he or she
reacts is not predetermined. He reacts, and how he reacts is always to
some degree different from how he has reacted in the past.  These
reactions or actions of the individual, whether in response to others
or self-initiated, fall within the “sphere” of the
“I.” Every response that the “I” makes is
somewhat novel. Its responses may differ only in small ways from
previous responses, making them functionally equivalent, but they will
never be exactly the same.  No catch in a ball game is ever identical
to a previous catch.  Mead declares that, “The ‘I’
gives the sense of freedom, of initiative. The situation is there for
us to act in a self-conscious fashion. We are aware of ourselves, and
of what the situation is, but exactly how we will act never gets into
experience until after the action takes place” (MSS,
177–178). The “I” is a “source” of both
spontaneity and creativity. For Mead, however, the “I” is
not a noumenal ego. Nor is it a substance. It is a way of designating
a locus of activity.
The responses of the “I” are non-reflective.
How the “I” reacts is known only on reflection, that is,
after we retrospect.
In other words, once the actions of the “I” have become
objectified and known, by definition they have become a
“Me.” The status of the “I” is interesting in
Mead. In trying to differentiate it from the empirical, knowable,
“Me,” he states, “The ‘I’ is the
transcendental self of Kant, the soul that James conceived behind the
scene holding on to the skirts of an idea to give it an added
increment of emphasis” (MSC in SW, 141). However, this statement
should not to be interpreted as endorsing the notion of a
transcendental ego. Mead is seeking to emphasize that the
“I” is not available to us in our acts, that is, it is
only knowable in its objectified form as a “Me.” This
point is clarified by a remark that directly follows the statement
just cited. “The self-conscious, actual self in social
intercourse is the objective ‘me’ or ‘me's’
with the process of response continually going on and implying a
fictitious ‘I’ always out of sight of himself” (MSC
in SW, 141). A transcendental ego is not fictitious. But for Mead,
since we are dealing with a functional distinction here, it is quite
acceptable to refer to the “I” as fictitious in
a metaphysical sense.
Why, then, do we seem to experience what Mead refers to as a
“running current of awareness,” that is, an ego that
appears to be aware of itself as it acts and thinks, if the
“I” is not immediately aware of itself (SS in SW, 144)?
William James sought to explain this phenomenon in terms of
proprioception and the relationship between “parts” of the
stream of consciousness. (James 1890, 296–307; James 1904, 169–183;
James 1905, 184–194). Mead developed a unique explanation based
on the relationship of the “I” to the
“Me.” As we have seen, the “I” reacts and
initiates action, but the actions taken are comprehended, objectified,
as a “Me.” However, the “Me” is not simply 
confined to the objectifications of the immediate actions of the
“I.” The “Me” carries with it
internalized responses that serve as a commentary on the
“I's” actions. Mead states, “The action
with reference to the others calls out responses in the individual
himself—there is then another ‘me’ criticizing,
approving, and suggesting, and consciously planning, i.e., the
reflective self” (SS in SW, 145). The running current of
awareness, then, is not due to the “I” being immediately
aware of itself. It is due to the running commentary of the
“Me” on the actions of the “I.” The
“Me” follows the “I” so closely in time that it
appears as if the “I” is the source of the “running
current of awareness.”
Freud's super-ego could be conscious or unconscious. One might think
of the “Me” as similar to the conscious super-ego in the
commentary that it provides, but one would have to be careful not to
carry this analogy too far. For Mead, the “Me” arises in
relationship to systems of behaviors, generalized others, and,
therefore, is by definition multiple, although the behaviors of
various “Me's” can overlap.  Further, Freud's model
assumes a determinism that is not inherent in the relationship of the
“I” to the “Me.” Not only does the
“I” initiate novel responses, its new behaviors can become
part of a “Me.” In other words, “Me's” are not
static. They are systems that often undergo transformation. This will
become more apparent in the next section when we discuss Mead's ideas
regarding emergence. In this context it is enough to suggest the
following: when a ballplayer makes a catch in a manner that has never
been made before—that is, makes a play that is significantly
different from prior catches—the new play may become part of the
repertoire of the team's behaviors. In other words, the play may alter
the existing generalized other by modifying existing behavioral
patterns. In so doing, it gives rise to a modified or new self because
the game as a whole has been changed. Once again, this may be easier
to see in terms of the transformations that take place in families
when new reactions occur as children and adults interact over time.
New selves are generated as family systems are transformed.
We have seen that the “I” introduces novelty in actions
and in the interactions between human beings. For Mead, novelty
is not a phenomenon that can be accounted for in terms of human
ignorance, as it can for a determinist such as Spinoza. In the
Spinozistic framework, even though everything in nature is determined,
as finite modes we must remain ignorant of the totality of causes.
In principle, however, an infinite Mind could predict every
event. Mead, following in the footsteps of Darwin, argues that
novelty is in fact an aspect of the natural world, and that there are
events that are not only unpredictable due to ignorance, but are in
principle impossible to predict. In the latter category, for example,
we find mutations that help to give rise to new species, as well as the
creative responses of baseball players, musicians, composers, dancers,
scientists, etc.
In The Philosophy of the Present—a compilation based on
the Carus Lectures delivered in late 1930 in Berkeley—Mead
outlines his thoughts on nature and time. Mead did not have the
opportunity to develop his ideas into a book. (He passed away early in
1931.) In spite of the fact that these lectures were hurriedly written
due to obligations that he had as chair of the University of Chicago's
philosophy department, they contain ideas that illuminate his earlier
work and indicate the direction of his thought. On the first page of
the lectures we are told that “reality exists in a
present” and that we do not live in a Parmenidean cosmos (PP,
1). “For a Parmenidean reality does not exist. Existence
involves non-existence: it does take place. The world is a world of
events” (PP, 1). Our world is one in which change is real and
not merely a subjective, perceptual, phenomenon. 
The universe doesn't just spin its wheels and offer motion without real
novelty. Part of the impetus behind The Philosophy of the
Present was to argue against an interpretation of space-time, such
as Hermann Minkowski's, which eliminates the truly novel or the
emergent. Emergence involves not only biological organisms, but
matter and energy; for example, there is a sense in which water can be
spoken of as emerging from the combination of hydrogen and
 oxygen.[1]
Nevertheless,
biological examples appear best suited to Mead's approach.
It's worth noting at this juncture that Mead had always been
keenly interested in science and the scientific method. However,
as a pragmatist, the test of a scientific hypothesis for him is whether
it can illuminate the world that is there. He certainly was
never a positivist.
As mentioned, Mead is a systemic thinker who speaks of taking the
perspectives of others and of generalized others. These perspectives
are not “subjective” for Mead. They are
“objective” in the sense that they provide frames of
reference and shared patterns of behavior for members of
communities. (This is not to say that every human community has an
equally viable account of the natural world. This is in part why we
have science for Mead.)  However, it is not only human perspectives
that are objective for Mead. While it is true that only human beings
share perspectives in a manner that allows them to be (self) conscious
about the perspectives of others, there is an objective reality to
non-human perspectives. How can a non-human perspective be objective?
In order to answer this question, a few general remarks about Mead's
notion of “perspective” are in order. First, it is important to note
that perspectives are not primarily visual for Mead. They are ways of
speaking about how organisms act and interact in environments. In the
words of David Miller,
Mead has been referred to as a tactile philosopher, as opposed
to a visual one, because of the importance of contact experience in his
thought. Perspectives involve contact and interaction between
organisms and their environments. For example, a fish living in a certain
pond can be thought of as inhabiting an ecosystem. The way in which it
navigates the pond, finds food to eat, captures its food, etc., can be
spoken of as the fish's perspective on the pond, and it is
objective, that is, its interactions are not a matter of the subjective
perceptions of the fish. Its interactions in its environment
shape and give form to its perspective, which is different from the
snail's perspective, although it lives in the same waters. In
other words, organisms stratify environments in different ways as they
seek to meet their needs (Miller 1973, 207–217). The pond, in fact, is
not one system but many systems in the sense that its inhabitants
engage in different, interlaced interactions, and therefore have
different objective perspectives. The fish, of course, does not
comprehend its perspective or localized environment as a system, but
this doesn't make its perspective subjective. Human beings,
given our capacity to discuss systems in language, can describe the
ecology of a pond (or better, the ecologies of a pond depending on what
organisms we are studying). We can describe, with varying degrees
of accuracy, what it is like to be a fish living in a particular pond,
as opposed to a snail. Through study we learn about the
perspectives of other creatures, although we cannot share them as we
can the perspectives of the language bearing members of our own
species.
For Mead, as noted, systems are not static. This is especially evident
in the biological world. New forms of life arise, and some of them are
due to the efforts of human beings, for example, the botanists who
create hybrids. Mead argues that if a new form of life emerges from
another form, then there is a time when the new organism has not fully
developed, and therefore has not yet modified its environmental
niche. In this situation the older order, the old environment, has not
disappeared but neither has the new one been born. Mead refers to this
state of betwixt and between as
sociality.
 Sociality is a key idea for Mead and it has implications for his
sociology and social psychology. If we think of the “Me”
as a system, then there are times when the “I” initiates
new responses that may or may not be integrated into an existing
“Me.” But if they come to be integrated, then there is a
time betwixt and between the old and new “Me” system. What
makes this all the more interesting is that human beings have a
capacity for reflection. We can become aware of changes that are
taking place as we “stand” betwixt and between, which
allows for the possibility of influencing the development of a future
self. We can even set up conditions to promote changes that we believe
may transform us in certain ways. Or to put this in another light, new
problems are bound to arise in the world, and because of our capacity
for sociality, we can get some purchase on the courses of action
available to us as we reflect on the novel problems confronting us. Of
course, because the problems are novel means that we do not have ready
solutions. However, the capacity to stand betwixt and between old and
(possible) new orders, as we do between old and new social roles,
provides us with some opportunity for anticipating alternatives and
integrating new responses. As a matter of fact, Mead links moral
development with our capacity for moving beyond old values, old
selves, in order to integrate new values into our personalities when
new situations call for them.
It's worth noting here that Mead did not develop an ethics, at
least not one that was systematically presented. But his position
bears a kinship to theorists of moral sentiment, if we understand
“the taking the perspectives of others” as a more
sophisticated statement of sympathetic attachments. It is
important to emphasize that for pragmatic reasons Mead does not think
that the idea of compassion is sufficient for grounding an
ethics. He argues for a notion of obligation that is tied to
transforming social conditions that generate pain and
 suffering.[2]
Returning to Mead's notion of sociality, we can see that he is
seeking to emphasize transitions and change between systems. This
emphasis on change has repercussions for his view of the present, which
is not to be understood as a knife-edge present. In human
experience, the present arises from a past and spreads into the
future. In a manner reminiscent of James's account of
the stream of thought, Mead argues that the present entails
duration (James 1890, 237–283). It retains the receding past and
anticipates the imminent future. Yet because reality ultimately
exists in the present, Mead argues that the historical past, insofar as
it is capable of being experienced, is transformed by novel
events. History is not written on an unchanging scroll.
Novelty gives lie to this way of seeing the past. By virtue of
its originality, the novel event, the emergent, can not be explained or understood in
terms of prior interpretations of the past. The past, which by
definition can only exist in the present, changes to accommodate
novel events.
Mead's account of the “Me” and the generalized
other has often led commentators to assume that he is a
determinist. It is certainly the case that if one were to
emphasize Mead's concern with social systems and the social
development of the self, one might be led to conclude that Mead is a
theorist of the processes of socialization. And the latter,
nested as they are within social systems, are beyond the control of
individuals. However, when one considers the role of the
“I” and novelty in his thinking, it becomes more difficult
to view him as a determinist. But his emphasis on novelty only
seems to counter determinism with spontaneity. This counter to
determinism in itself doesn't supply a notion of
autonomy—self-governance and self-determination—which is often viewed
as crucial to the modern Western notion of the
subject. However, Mead was a firm booster of the scientific
method, which he viewed as an activity that was at its heart
democratic. For him, science is tied to the manner in which human
beings have managed from pre-recorded times to solve problems and
transform their worlds. We have just learned to be more
methodical about the ways in which we solve problems in modern
science. If one considers his discussions of science and problem
solving behavior, which entail anticipatory experience, the reflexivity
of consciousness, the sharing of perspectives and their objective
reality, and the creativity of the “I,” then one begins to
see how Mead thought that our biological endowments coupled with our
social skills could assist us in shaping our own futures, as well aid
us in making moral decisions. He did not work out the details of
this process, especially with regard to moral autonomy and the
“I's” role in
 it.[3]
There is, however, little doubt
that he thought autonomy possible, but the condition for its
possibility depends on the nature of the self's genesis and the
type of society in which it develops.