Géraud (or Gerauld) de Cordemoy was born in October of 1626,
the son of a University of Paris professor. He was the third of four
children born to Géraud and Nicole de Cordemoy, and the only
son. His father died when he was nine years old, and other than this,
almost nothing is known of Cordemoy’s early years. While there is not a
record of the date of his marriage (to Marie de Chazelles), the first
of his five children is known to have been born on December 7, 1651,
when Cordemoy was twenty-five.
Cordemoy earned a living as a lawyer, but was very active in
Parisian philosophical circles. He attended various philosophy salons,
and was acquainted with the Minim Emmanuel Maignan and the physicist
Jacques Rohault, both organizers of philosophical conferences. In 1664,
Cordemoy’s essay Discours de l’áction des corps (A Discourse
on the action of bodies) was included, along with a discourse by
Rohault, in the posthumous publication of Descartes’ Le Monde (The
World) by Claude Clerselier. That essay would later become the
second of the six discourses which make up one of Cordemoy’s two most
important works, Le Discernement du corps et de l’âme en six
discours pour servir à l’éclaircissement de la physique
(The Distinction of the body and the soul in six discourses, in order
to be useful for the clarification of physics) (1666). In this
work, Cordemoy presents his atomism, his arguments for occasionalism,
and his accounts of the distinction of and the interaction between the
mind and the body.
Cordemoy’s other important work, the Discours physique de la
parole (A Physical discourse on speech), appeared in 1668, as did
his Copie d’une lettre ecrite à un sçavant religieux de la
Compagnie de Jésus (A Copy of a letter written to a learned
religious of the Company of Jesus). The latter is Cordemoy’s
attempt to reconcile Cartesian philosophy with the story of creation as
found in the Book of Genesis. The former is an account of speech
production, and its popularity led to Cordemoy’s being recognized as
one of the more important French philosophers of his time. He was even
the model for the character of the Master of Philosophy in
Molière’s play Le Bourgeois Gentilhomme.
Other, shorter works by Cordemoy include his Traitez de
Metaphysique (Treatise on Metaphysics) and his Traitez sur
l’Histoire et la Politique (Treatise on History and Politics). At
the time of his death, Cordemoy was working on a history of France,
which would be completed by his eldest son Louis-Géraud and
which appeared in two volumes, in 1685 and 1689. In addition to his
philosophical and historical publications, Cordemoy served briefly as
the director of l’Academie Français (having been
elected a member in 1675) and was for a time the tutor to the Dauphin,
the future King Louis XV. Shortly after his 58th birthday,
Cordemoy suffered a brief illness and died, on October 15, 1684.
Descartes had held that the essence of body is extension, and that as
a result matter can be divided without end. If it is the nature of a
body to take up space in three dimensions, that is, to have width,
length, and height, then we can always conceive of that width, length,
or height being divided. Further, according to Cartesian metaphysics,
extension is the principle attribute of body, and as such cannot exist
independently of body (nor can body exist independently of it). Thus
according to Descartes, anywhere there is extended space, there is
body occupying that space, making the existence of a void
impossible. And so it is surprising to find Cordemoy, whose
metaphysics is in most other respects quite Cartesian, arguing at the
beginning of the Discernement for the existence of both
indivisible atoms and empty space.
The First Discourse of the Discernement opens with five
claims about bodies which lay the ground for Cordemoy’s physics (which
he goes on to discuss in Discourses Two and Three). He tells us that
bodies are: (1) limited in their extension, and this limit is called
the ‘figure’ of the body; (2) inasmuch as each body is a
substance, bodies are not divisible into smaller bodies, nor are bodies
penetrable by other bodies; (3) the relation a body has to other bodies
is called its ‘place’; (4) a change in this relation is the
motion of the body; and (5) when the relation continues unchanged, the
body is at rest. Cordemoy then declares that matter is clearly and
distinctly understood as an assembly of bodies. Properly considered,
bodies are parts of matter, and depending how these bodies are related
to each other determines what sort of portion of matter the collection
is: if they are very near each other, it is a heap (un tas);
if they are “changing their position incessantly” (1968,
96), it is a fluid (une liqueur); and if the bodies are not
moving and cannot be separated from each other, it is a mass (une
masse).
While not stated explicitly, Cordemoy’s reason for accepting atomism
seems to be based on his understanding of the concept of substance.
Following Descartes, Cordemoy takes substance to be that which requires
nothing else for its existence. Strictly speaking, this would make God
the only substance, but in the created world, Descartes held that we
may consider minds and body to be substances in a qualified sense. Each
of these substances has a principle attribute distinguishable from it
only by reason. It is this attribute through which we conceive the
substance, and it is that to which all of the substance’s other
properties are referred. For minds this attribute is thought, and for
body it is, as mentioned above, extension.
With regard to body, Cordemoy warns that we must be careful to avoid
the mistake made by other Cartesians, who have conflated what are in
fact two distinct things, namely, ‘bodies’ and
‘matter’. The former are, according to Cordemoy, the true
extended substances, while the latter are assemblages, or
collections, of the former. The key point is that as substances,
bodies must be simple: if bodies had parts, they would depend on those
parts to be what they are, and in this way the parts would threaten a
body’s very status as a substance. Thus we are led to atomism on
strictly a priori grounds: in positing bodies as substances, we are
precluded from attributing parts to them, for if we did, they would no
longer be substances. Matter on this account is divisible not because
its nature is extension and any extension can always be divided, but
rather because it is composed of bodies which can be separated from
each other, though each one is itself indivisible.
The reason for this confusion between body and matter is due, says
Cordemoy, to an over-reliance on the senses: “we have a very
clear idea of body, and as we know that they are extended substances,
without thinking clearly we join this notion which we have of body to
that which we have of matter. Taking a mass for a body, we consider it
as a substance, believing that all that we see is only the same
extension. And because all that we see as extended is divisible, we
thus join the notion of that which is extended to the notion of that
which is divisible, such that we believe divisible all that is
extended” (1968, 97). The bodies being too small to be perceived,
we can be misled into thinking that a collection of bodies, that is,
matter, is the true extended substance, and from matter’s divisibility
wrongly conclude that material substance can therefore be divided.
Cordemoy also maintains the possibility of a void, that is, space
which is truly empty, and as before, his argument is based on his
understanding of the concept of substance. If we have three contiguous
bodies and the one in the middle is destroyed in an instant, we will,
Cordemoy claims, be left with an empty space between the two remaining
bodies (that is, the two would not instantaneously rush together).
These two bodies, being substances, possess a metaphysical
independence from what happens to other bodies. For Cordemoy, to hold
otherwise would disqualify bodies (atoms) from being substances, on
his understanding of the concept of substance. Likewise, if one could
remove all of the matter filling a vase, the sides of the vase,
pace Descartes and others, would not collapse, according to
Cordemoy. The bodies that compose the sides are each themselves
substances, and as such are ontologically independent of what happens
to other bodies (for again, if they were not, they would not qualify
as a substance).
Cordemoy concludes the First Discourse with a discussion of three
inconveniens, problems with which Descartes’ plenum theory
must deal but which Cordemoy’s atomism escapes. The first involves a
distinction between two concepts, ‘indefinite’ and
‘infinite’, which Cordemoy claims amount to the same
thing: “When I ask [the Cartesians] if this substance, which
they believe to be divisible, is divisible to infinity, as it seems to
me their supposition would give them to understand, they respond that
it is not, but that it is divisible indefinitely. When I begged them
to explain this indefinite division to me, I was led to understand it
in the same way that the whole world understands the infinite”
(1968, 99). Descartes was (usually) careful to distinguish between
that to which we cannot see or comprehend an end, which he termed
‘indefinite’, and that which we know in a positive way to
be without limit, which he termed ‘infinite’. The
divisibility of matter is for Descartes indefinite, while only God can
properly be said to be infinite. Cordemoy’s complaint is that if
‘indefinite’ and ‘infinite’ really amount to
the same thing—and he thinks according to the Cartesians’ own
account they do—then “there is something
inconceivable” (ibid.) in claiming that bodies are
divisible ad infinitum, since this would threaten their
status as substances. (Clearly, though, this objection goes through
only given a prior acceptance of Cordemoy’s atomism.)
The second and third inconveniens both deal with Descartes
theory of the individuation of physical bodies. For Descartes, bodies
are individuated in terms of motion: an individual body is that portion
of matter which moves together, that is, which changes place with
respect to the bodies which are its neighbors. Cordemoy’s first
question is how, on this account, can we individuate a body at rest:
“According to their doctrine, we cannot conceive of a body at
rest between other bodies, because supposing that it is touching them,
this doctrine teaches that together with them it makes only one body.
Yet it seems to me that we have a very clear and very natural idea of a
body perfectly at rest between other bodies, where nothing is in
motion, and what I say of each body accords perfectly well with this
idea” (1968, 99). It is, then, our clear conception of a body at
rest between other bodies but at the same time distinct from them which
signals trouble for the Cartesians theory. Cordemoy, on the other hand,
faces no such problem, since for him the only true physical
individuals are bodies/atoms; all other ‘bodies’ are rightly
called matter, and are individuals only in a loose sense of the
word.
The third problem raised by Cordemoy concerns a body which has its
different parts in motion in different directions, such as a tree and
its branches being blown in the wind. According to Descartes’ own
definition of a physical individual, we would seem to have a problem,
since the different parts are changing differently with respect to the
other individuals which would be considered its neighbors. In such
cases, it would seem to “follow that when neighboring bodies push
it in different spots along opposing lines, they will divide it in as
many ways as it is pushed” (ibid.). As with the second
complaint, this violates the clear idea we have of the object as one
thing. And as before, Cordemoy notes that no such problem arises for
his atomism.
Cordemoy was, as mentioned previously, alone among Descartes’
followers in his acceptance of atomism. One of his harshest critics was
his fellow Cartesian Dom Robert Desgabets, who accused Cordemoy of
giving ammunition to the enemies of Descartes, namely the Gassendists,
themselves atomists. Desgabets had been sent a copy of the
Discernement by Clerselier, and quickly responded to it with
his Lettre écrite a M. Clerselier touchant les nouveaux
raisonnements pour les atomes et le vide contenus dans le livre du
discernement du corps et de l’âme (A Letter written to M.
Clerselier concerning the new arguments for atoms and the void
contained in the book on the distinction of the body and the
soul). In addition to his accusation of betraying the true
philosophy, Desgabets defends the intelligibility of the
indefinite/infinite distinction and offers several criticisms of
Cordemoy’s position. He notes that in Cartesian terms, as distance is a
mode, it can only exist as a mode of a substance. Thus wherever we have
a distance, it must be a distance of something, and as
distance is expressed quantitatively, that something can always be
divided, even if only by God. The same line of thinking shows the
impossibility of the void: if it is claimed that between two points
there is only empty space, there is nothing there which could posses
any properties, including length. So of what is the length between the
two points a property? Cordemoy did not respond to Desgabets in print,
but the Benedictine would seem to have raised some important questions
for anyone holding atomism grounded upon a Cartesian metaphysics.
Cordemoy was one of the first, if not the first, to argue that
Cartesian metaphysics leads to occasionalism, the doctrine that God is
the one true cause active in the world. (Louis de La Forge’s
Traité de l’esprit de l’homme et de ses facultez et
fonctions, et de son union avec le corps (Treatise on the mind of man
and its faculties and functions, and on its union with the body),
which also argued for occasionalism on Cartesian grounds, appeared just
months before the Discernement, though Cordemoy claims to have
accepted occasionalism as early as 1658 (1968, 145). It is unlikely
that either Cordemoy or de La Forge influenced the other.)
Cordemoy’s argument for occasionalism with regard to body-body
interaction appears in the Fourth Discourse of the
Discernement (he will later expand his occasionalism to cover
all ‘interaction’ in the created world). There we are given
a series of definitions and axioms, and conclusions derived from these.
Cordemoy begins by asserting as axioms (1) a thing does not have of
itself (de soy) that which can be lost without ceasing to be
what it is, and (2) bodies are able to lose their motion without
ceasing to be bodies. The conclusion drawn is that bodies do not have
motion of themselves (that is, they do not possess the property of
motion essentially), since they continue to be bodies when not in
motion. Nor can one body give motion to another. This is not stated as
one of Cordemoy’s axioms, but rather follows from Cartesian
metaphysics, which holds motion to be a mode or state of a body, and
not a quality distinct from the body. As such, a mode—that is,
the very same mode—cannot be transferred from one body to
another.
As for the first mover, it could not itself be a body, since if it
were, it would have to have motion of itself (for as first mover, where
else would it get it?), and this has been shown to be impossible for
bodies. Thus we may also conclude that the first mover is not a body.
But there being only two kinds of substances (Cordemoy’s third axiom),
bodies and minds, only a mind remains as a candidate for the first
mover. Further, it is clear that our (finite) minds are not the source of motion
in bodies. In the first place, our minds cannot effect our bodies in
certain ways, either because they are immune to such influence (e.g., I
cannot will the cells in my liver to cease dividing) or because of old
age or injury (e.g., a crippled man cannot will himself to walk).
Second—and noteworthy in that it anticipates both Malebranche and
Hume—if we restrict ourselves to what we observe, we never
experience a causal connection but only temporal succession between our
volitions at one moment and our body’s actions the next. Third, if we
could produce motion in bodies at will, it would, says Cordemoy, upset
God’s plan for the quantity of motion which God conserves in the world.
Thus he concludes that an infinite will must be the first mover.
 It is Cordemoy’s fourth and fifth axioms which, together with this
conclusion, get us occasionalism. The fourth axiom states that to move
is an action, and the fifth claims that an action can only be
continued by the agent which initiated it. Therefore, the mind which
initiates the motion of bodies, God, is the same agent who continues
their motion in the present. As with those who fail to distinguish
bodies from matter, the fault of those who posit finite causes are
guilty of making an unsupported inference from their sense
experience. Making a point that Malebranche and Hume would later echo,
Cordemoy says: “When we say, for example, that body B drives
body A away from its place, if we examine well what is acknowledged
for certain in this case, we will only see that body B was moved, that
it encountered C, which was at rest, and that since this encounter,
the first ceased to be moved [and] the second commenced to be
moved. But if we recognize that B gave some of its motion to C, that
is truly only a prejudice which comes from what we do not see.”
In good Cartesian spirit, Cordemoy is claiming that it is reason which
points out the way the world must be, and that uncritical acceptance
of the deliverances of the senses will only lead to error.
Like Descartes’ Meditations, the Discernement
contains six sections, and also like the Meditations, it
concludes with discussions of the union of and the distinction between
the mind and the body (though while Cordemoy addresses them in this
order, Descartes, in the 6th Meditation, first tackles the
distinction, and later the nature of the union). But unlike Descartes,
who had gone to some length to argue that the nature of the mind is to
think, Cordemoy’s Fifth Discourse accepts this as a given. Further,
Cordemoy does not provide an argument that the mind and body form a
substantial union, but gives an example to show that they are united,
that of the body moving when the mind wills that it do so. In fact,
the union is defined in terms of this sort of interaction: to say that
the mind and body are united simply is to say that they
interact. (Thus the question of whether the problem of the mind-body
union is distinct from that of mind-body interaction, which has been
much discussed in Descartes scholarship, does not arise for Cordemoy.)
The Fifth Discourse also contains Cordemoy’s expansion of his
occasionalism to cover interaction between the mind and the
body. God’s activity is required here on the grounds that as the union
is defined in terms of the interaction of essentially distinct
substances with mutually exclusive essences, we must go outside that
union to account for the ability of one substance to effect change in
the other.
The final of the six discourses which make up the
Discernement addresses the question of the distinction between
the mind and the body, as well as an argument that the existence of the
mind is better known than the existence of the body (but note: not that
the nature of the former is better known than the
nature of the latter, as Descartes had claimed) and a glossary
of the affects of the mind, the body, and the mind-body union.
Cordemoy’s first argument for the distinction begins by listing a
number of features of bodies, and contrasts this with a list of
features of minds. Seeing that what is most fundamental to body is
absent from the list of properties of the mind, and vice versa, he
concludes that we thus “have reason to judge that they are two
completely different things” (1968, 153).
Cordemoy employs a second argument for the distinction, one which,
while much less rigorous than Descartes’, follows in spirit the
argument from the Discourse on Method by appealing to doubt:
“I even see that when I wish to doubt everything that I know
when I think of bodies, I am not able at the same time to doubt my
thought.  For let it be false, if you will, that there are any bodies
in the world; it cannot be that there are no thoughts, inasmuch as I
would be thinking. How could I believe that my thought might be the
same thing that I call ‘body’? I can suppose that there
aren’t any bodies, and I cannot suppose that I do not think, the
supposition itself being a thought. Thus I know firstly that the soul,
or that which thinks, is different from the body” (1968,
153). Cordemoy goes on to argue along similar lines that he can be
assured of the existence of his mind, but that the existence of his
body, and all other bodies, must be taken as an article of faith.
Though it is in the Discernement that we find the basics of
Cordemoy’s philosophy, it was his Discours physique de la
parole which was most identified with him. (Unlike the
Discernement, the Discours was translated into
English during Cordemoy’s lifetime.) The Discours opens with
the question of other minds: while I know that I am a thinking thing,
how can I be certain that other humans are—might not they be
mindless automata who only behave as if there were clever
thoughts behind their behavior?  Following Descartes, Cordemoy claims
that it is other humans’ use of language—both in its complexity
and its creativity—which assures me that they have minds, in
that such communication cannot be explained on mechanical principles
alone. Cordemoy then concludes this discussion, saying: “Now
that it is no longer possible for me to doubt that the bodies which
resemble mine are united to souls, and since I am sure that there are
other men than me, I think that I ought to look with care at what
remains to be known about speech” (1968, 209). The remainder of
the Discours is taken up with this investigation.
 ‘True’ language use, as opposed to the mere production
of sound, is according to Cordemoy a matter of “giving signs to
one’s thoughts” (1968 196). Language is on his account an
artificial system of signs, the purpose of which is to communicate our
thoughts, the words standing as their representatives, to one another.
It is the creative aspect of language which demands the presence of a
rational soul. True speech requires two things, says Cordemoy:
“the formation of the voice, which can only come from the body,
and the signification or idea that is joined with it, which can only
come from the soul” (1968, 198). Yet while there is a need for a
soul in order to engage in what would rightly be called genuine
language use, the ability to make sounds can be explained on entirely
mechanistic grounds (the explanation being for Cordemoy very similar
to how musical instruments produce sound). In this way sound
production is like nutrition, circulation, and respiration, none of
which, as Descartes had also believed, require a soul, but which
result instead from a proper disposition of one’s organs. As for
animals such as parrots which not only make sounds, but utter words,
Cordemoy claims that ‘returning words’ is not a sign of a
soul in such creatures, any more than a canyon’s echo requires rocks
to have souls.  As a testament to the significance of Cordemoy’s study
of language, one scholar has written that Cordemoy “picked up
one of Descartes’ arguments—based on the lack of true speech
among animals—and developed it fully; so fully, in fact, that
after Cordemoy the point was given very little attention, as if
subsequent authors considered this the last word on the subject”
(Rosenfield 1968, 40).