She was born in Limerick, Ireland 18 March 1919 to Allen Wells
Anscombe and Gertrude Elizabeth Anscombe (née Thomas). At
the time of her birth her father was serving in the British Army.
The family later returned to England where Allen Anscombe resumed his
career as a schoolmaster.
Anscombe attended the Sydenham School, graduating in 1937, and went
on to St. Hugh’s College, Oxford. She received a First in
Literae Humaniores (Classics and Philosophy) in 1941. After her
graduation in 1941 she remained for a while at St. Hugh’s as a
research student, later moving to Newnham College, Cambridge in
1942. In 1946 she was offered a Research Fellowship at Somerville
College, Oxford and then was appointed to a teaching Fellowship there
in 1964. She moved from Oxford to Cambridge in 1970 when she was
awarded a Chair of Philosophy at Cambridge—the Chair formerly
occupied by Ludwig Wittgenstein. She remained at Cambridge until
her retirement in 1986.
In 1938, at Oxford, she met the philosopher Peter Geach. They
were both receiving instruction from the same Dominican priest. They
were married in 1941. They had three sons and four daughters.
Anscombe did not avoid controversy. In 1956 she publicly
opposed Oxford University’s decision to award an honorary degree
to Harry Truman, whom she considered a mass murderer for his decision
to use atomic weapons against the cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki,
Japan. She also courted controversy with some of her colleagues
by coming out in print against contraception (see below).
Anscombe continued to produce original work beyond her
retirement. Peter Geach, for example, reported in
Analysis that she had constructed a novel paradox (Geach
2006, 266–7).
Anscombe died in Cambridge on 5 January 2001.
Anscombe met Wittgenstein at Cambridge, after her graduation from
Oxford. She attended his lectures and became one of his most
devoted students. She believed that it was Wittgenstein’s
lectures, for example, that freed her from the trap of phenomenalism
(MPM, ix). When she returned to Oxford she continued to travel to
Cambridge to study with Wittgenstein.
Anscombe also became one of Wittgenstein’s good friends and then,
after his death in 1951, one of the executors of his literary
work. Ray Monk wrote that Anscombe was “…one of
Wittgenstein’s closest friends and one of his most trusted students,
an exception to his general dislike of academic women and especially
of female philosophers. She became, in fact, an honorary male,
addressed by him affectionately as ‘old man’.” (Monk
1991, 498).
Anscombe translated Wittgenstein’s Philosophical
Investigations (1953), and wrote an introduction to the
Tractatus in 1959 (the work had originally been published in
1921). She organized major publications of Wittgenstein’s
later work in, for example, Remarks on Color and
Zettel. She also translated a number of his other works.
Some of Anscombe’s most influential work was on the nature of
causation. The relation between cause and effect has been
notoriously difficult to analyze. Anscombe’s work in
“Causality and Determination” challenged some of the
empiricist orthodoxy of Hume’s account. For example, she
challenged the view that the causal relation is characterized by
constant conjunction in discussing Feynman’s Geiger counter
case:
And yet, if the bomb explodes it was caused by the Geiger counter
arrangement. Causation does not involve determination, or
necessity. Since the radioactive decay was not sufficient for
this effect, the case tells against viewing causes as sufficient
conditions. There is no general causal connection between cause
and effect.
This challenge to the Humean account would turn out to be very
influential—it helped push philosophers towards the development
of probabilistic accounts of causation to account for the above type of
case.
In terms of categorization, she falls into the singularist camp on
causation, since she further rejected the Humean view that causation is
not observable in a single instance. On her view the particular cause
produces the particular effect. Anscombe produced examples from
ordinary language that seemed to show that we do perceive
causation. Such examples are abundant. “I saw her
clean the dishes” reports the perception of a causal
process. The critic could point out that when we utter
expressions such as this we are speaking loosely. Hume certainly
wouldn’t deny that we say things like this. Rather, the
close, probing, examination of a process alone cannot account for
causation.
Her work on causation demonstrated reliance on ordinary language
methodology. Anscombe also directly contributed to the development of
key themes in ordinary language philosophy itself—she influenced
its content, not simply reliance on it methodologically. This is
evident in her work on first-person expression. In her paper
“The First Person” she focuses on Descartes’ use of
‘I’ in developing his philosophical arguments regarding
the existence of the self. On the same grounds as Descartes argues
that he can doubt ‘I have a body’ but cannot doubt
‘I exist’ he can doubt ‘I am Descartes’ but
not ‘I exist.’ ‘I am Descartes’, then, is not
an identity statement.  ‘I’ does not refer like a
name. In doubting “I am Descartes” he must have
the thought “I am not Descartes.” So, in using
“I,” in this context he is not referring to himself.
We do tend to think of ‘I’ as simply being that
expression people use to refer to themselves. However,
again,
The problem with the reference view of ‘I’ is that when
someone is ignorant of his or her own identity, ‘I’ does
not capture what the person has in mind. When a person
‘speaks of himself’ when he says ‘John drank the
poison’ not knowing that he himself is John, then he speaks of
himself in a purely external way, devoid of self-consciousness that we
associate with ‘I’ utterances. So ‘John drank
the poison’ does not come off as the same as ‘I drank the
poison’—John would affirm the first but not the
second.
Again, this discussion of self-expression would have a great deal of
influence in philosophy of language and mind. How indexicals work
and function in language, the nature of self-knowledge and
self-consciousness, and self-identity.
Anscombe’s Intention (1957) is one of the classics of
20th century philosophy. Indeed, it continues to be a
standard point of reference for those working in action theory and
philosophical psychology. Like Wittgenstein, Anscombe presented her
ideas in succinct points and numbered sections. However, Anscombe
developed her own distinctive approach to philosophical analysis.
Her writing is more direct and argumentative than
Wittgenstein’s.
Intention is a work on the nature of agency through an
understanding of intention. John Haldane reports that Anscombe wrote
Intention after puzzling over supporters of Truman:
 Anscombe notes that ‘intention’ figures into our
language in a variety of ways, through different locutions. The three
she notes are:
Locution (3) has to do with intention, and one of Anscombe’s concerns
was to articulate the distinction between intention
“simpliciter” and acting intentionally. One of
the really interesting questions she considers has to do with the
difference between intentions and predictions. Both are future
directed. Both seem to require a belief that a future state
of affairs will occur. Yet, a crucial difference, it seems, is that
when we justify a prediction—such as “It will rain
tomorrow” we use evidence. On the other hand when we justify an
intention, such as “I will go to the ice cream shop
tomorrow,” we give reasons, i.e., “…reasons why it
would be useful or attractive if the description came true, not by
evidence that it is true.” (Intention, 6)
This passage raises some very deep issues regarding the nature of
intention. For example, Anscombe seems to indicate that one kind
of reason relates to the agent’s desires for a certain
state of affairs. If I intend to do y must it be the case that I,
all things considered, want y to come about; or merely that I all
things considered want to do y? Michael Bratman (1987) would
query this by noting that the belief/desire model of intention fails to
adequately model the organizational role intentions play in practical
deliberation.
Another of her insights is that when we describe intentional action
we are pointing to something for which reasons can be given, and by
‘reasons’ we do not mean ‘causes.’ So,
her example is that when someone knocks a glass off of a table he may
give an explanation that he saw a face in the window and that made him
jump. This provides a causal explanation for why he knocked the
glass off the table, but it doesn’t give a reason. The
knocking of the glass off the table was not intentional, though it was
caused by his being startled.
On Anscombe’s view a particular action can be intentional
under one description, but not intentional under
another. When I turn on the coffee machine in the
morning it is intentional under the description of ‘turn on the
coffee machine’ that’s what I intend to do. I will
also, let’s say, as a side effect, get my husband to come into
the kitchen when he hears the coffee machine go on. That is not
intentional though. The movement of my hand that turns on
the coffee machine is not intentional under the description ‘get
husband to come into the kitchen.’ For a bodily movement to
be an action it must be intentional under some description.
Further, on her view intentional action is prior to
intention to act. That is, to understand what it is to
intend to act one must understand intentional action. In
performing an intentional act we act on reasons (specified by
‘why?’ questions, as described above). Anscombe herself
uses the example of someone who is sawing a plank. In sawing the
plank his action is intentional under one description, that of
‘sawing the plank,’ though not under the description
‘making noise.’ So, he is intentionally sawing
the plank, though not intentionally making noise since he has no
intention to make the noise (his reasons for performing the action have
nothing to do with making noise). We get the claim that
intentions are necessary for intentional action.
Nonetheless there can be unintentional action, but it will be
intentional under some other description.
Anscombe’s account of intention and intentional
action has informed much of the subsequent literature on the
topic. Donald Davidson (1980) expanded on her claims regarding
act identification and agreed that:
This is known as the Davidson/Anscombe thesis (Wilson, 1989; see also
the entry on action).  Davidson, however,
disagreed with Anscombe on the issue of reasons as causes. Davidson,
unlike Anscombe, argued that reason explanation of an action is also a
kind of causal explanation of the action.  When one explains an action
one cites the belief and the desire that caused the action. The
reason, in the sense cited by Anscombe, corresponds to what the agent
desired. When I go to the ice cream shop to get an ice cream cone I
desire an ice cream cone and I believe that I can get one at the ice
cream shop. This is what causes the intentional action of going to the
ice cream shop.
George Wilson follows Anscombe in that he too believes that an
explanation of an action in terms of the reasons for the action is
grounded in the intention behind the action (Wilson 1989). This will
prove problematic when we look at the connection between philosophy of
psychology and moral psychology.
One of the most significant ideas elaborated on in
Intention is ‘direction of fit.’ Though the
notion seems to have originated with J.L. Austin, Anscombe is credited
with a clear explication of it. ‘Direction of fit’ was how
John Searle referred to Anscombe’s idea that there are two things
that we can do with words—sometimes we try to get the
words to match, or fit with, what’s in the world, and other times
we try to get the world to fit with the words. This turned out to
be important in speech act theory since speech acts exemplify one
direction of fit. When one utters a command, for example, one is
not trying to describe the world or make an assertion that is supposed
to match with what is in the world. Rather, the point is to bring
about a state of affairs in the
 world.[1]
Consider this famous passage from Intention:
‘Direction-of-fit’ has proven useful to understanding the difference
between mental states like belief and desire. Beliefs describe the
world, desires are not descriptive. Desires effect change in the
world. Thus, desires themselves are not true or false, though they may
be based on beliefs which are true or false.  Thus intuitive way of
demarcating the function of belief and desire helps to clarify
different theories of normativity and what is at stake between those
theories. A desire based theory, for example, might not be committed
to truth or falsity of moral claims.  This is important, too, in
accounting for differences between speculative, or theoretical,
knowledge and reasoning and practical knowledge and reasoning.
Anscombe applied her views on intention to clarify her own
positions on controversial claims, such as the condemnation of
contraception. One puzzle in Catholic doctrine condemning
contraception, and yet allowing for the ‘rhythm method’ of
avoiding pregnancy, is to reconcile the rationales in a consistent
way. Many charged the Church with inconsistency, since the
intention to not get pregnant during intercourse is present in both
cases. Anscombe claims the intentions differ.
Her claim is that the further intentions that accompany these actions
are the same, but that the kind of intentional act one is performing
in each case differs in a very significant way. Her claim is that use
of contraception, unlike timing intercourse to coincide with infertile
periods, is a bad sort of action because in the case of sexual
intercourse “…to intend such an act is not to intend a
marriage act at all, whether or no we’re married” (CC, 136). When one
engages in sexual intercourse using contraceptives one has the
intention of rendering oneself infertile, one is not acting with the
intention of engaging in normal sexual intercourse, just at an
infertile time. Even though both types of action have the further aim
of limiting family size, the basic intentions are different. That is,
the intentions that define the acts themselves are different. The
perversion of the sex act in marriage is, in this one way, like
writing a forged check for a good cause, she claims. The further
intention of, let’s say, helping the needy is a worthy one but does
not vindicate the action of forging the check. Needless to say, this
view was enormously controversial.
Bernard Williams and Michael Tanner criticized her argument
for failing to consider one of her own theses—that actions,
including sorts of actions, can fall under a variety of
descriptions. On their view, she is picking and choosing
descriptions of actions in order to get the outcome she wants—a
distinction between rhythm method and contraception that isn’t
just a trivial distinction. But, they argue, she cannot do this
convincingly. They argue that couples who employ the rhythm
method are taking steps to achieve infertility just as those who take
contraception are. Those steps are central to understanding the
acts themselves, not simply the further purpose of the acts. (Williams
and Tanner 1972)
Anscombe’s views on intention also figured largely in her defense and
articulation of the Doctrine of Double Effect, which will be discussed
in more detail below.
Anscombe’s article “Modern Moral Philosophy”
stimulated the development of virtue ethics as an alternative to
Utilitarianism, Kantian Ethics, and Social Contract theories. Her
primary charge in the article is that, as secular approaches to moral
theory, they are without foundation. They use concepts such as
‘morally ought,’ ‘morally obligated,’
‘morally right,’ and so forth that are legalistic and
require a legislator as the source of moral authority. In the
past God occupied that role, but systems that dispense with God as part
of the theory are lacking the proper foundation for meaningful
employment of those concepts.
There are two ways to read this article. The first is to read it
straightforwardly as an indictment of the moral theories prevalent in
the 1950s and a subsequent argument for the development of an
alternative theory of morality that does not postulate a legislator,
but then also does not try to keep the defunct legislative structure
that naturally falls out of religiously based ethics. On this view we
need to develop an alternative that is based on moral psychology,
moral virtue, facts of human nature, and an account of the good for
humans based on this approach. A major mistake made by modern moral
philosophers is that they try to provide an account of ‘morally
right or morally wrong’ that really has no content outside of
the legislative arena provided by the divine. Anscombe writes:
“It would be most reasonable to drop it. It has no reasonable
sense outside a law conception of ethics; they are not going to
maintain such a conception; and you can do ethics without it, as is
shown by the example of Aristotle. It would be great improvement if,
instead of ‘morally wrong,’ one always named a genus such
as ‘untruthful’, ‘unchaste’,
‘unjust’ ” (MMP, 8–9).
Thus, many take her to be arguing for this alternative—the
alternative that, like Aristotle’s account, relies on richer, or
‘thick’ concepts such as ‘just’ as opposed to
‘thin’ concepts such as ‘morally wrong’
which—outside of a certain metaphysical perspective—lacks
content.
This quite naturally then leads to an emphasis on developing a
virtue ethics that would be distinct from the modern approaches
Anscombe attacks in MMP.
This is the prevalent reading of MMP and the reason why it is widely
interpreted as encouraging a virtue ethical approach to moral
theory. For example, Crisp and Slote note that Anscombe suggests
the alternative that “…ethics can be based, instead, on
the idea of a virtue…”, but, as they also note, this idea
itself is also not clear and that what we need to be doing is some
basic moral psychology to get clarity on notions such as
‘intention,’ ‘desire,’ ‘action,’
and so forth (1997, 4). Yet another crucial notion, for the sake
of understanding virtue, is ‘human flourishing.’
Anscombe is doubtful we will be able to reach a satisfactory
understanding of this notion.
An alternative reading is as a modus tollens argument
intended to establish the superiority of a religious based ethics. (For
more on a skeptical reading of MMP, see Crisp 2004.) Assume for the
sake of argument there is no God, and religiously based moral theory is
incorrect. On Anscombe’s view modern theories such as
Kantian ethics, Utilitarianism, and social contract theory are sorely
inadequate for a variety of reasons, but one major worry is that they
try to adopt the legalistic framework without the right background
assumptions to ground it. An alternative would be to develop a
kind of naturalized approach where we carefully consider moral
psychology as it relates to the human good. However, this
approach itself is problematic. The prospect of articulating a
complete and plausible account of the human good along these lines is
dim.
Here is the straightforward interpretation in simple modus
ponens form:
But one person’s modus ponens is another
person’s modus tollens:
Thus, according to the alternative reading, one can conclude that
Anscombe is arguing that the only suitable and really viable
alternative is the religiously based moral theory that keeps the
legalistic framework and the associated concepts of
‘obligation.’ This interpretation is more in keeping with
Anscombe’s religious views and with her other ethical views
regarding absolute prohibitions. There were plenty of actions she
took to be morally wrong, so it seems clear—as Simon Blackburn
noted—that she herself was not out to jettison these
terms. But one can defend an even stronger claim. MMP is a
carefully crafted argument intended to show the absurdity of rejecting
the religious framework—along with it’s metaphysical
underpinnings—when it comes to moral
 authority.[2]
But many readers simply
stuck to the straightforward modus ponens reading of the
argument. Support for (2b) is provided by her doubts that
virtue ethics can really get off the ground as a normative theory using
a distinctly ‘moral’ ought. In MMP she writes about
pursuing the project of ethics as Plato and Aristotle pursued it, along
virtue ethical lines:
But, by and large, MMP was read against a backdrop in which a
religious basis for ethics had been discredited. Thus many
writers took up the challenge to develop a psychologically rich virtue
ethics rather than abandon secular morality.
The article has clearly had an impact on the development of virtue
ethics. Part of its influence can be traced to its negative
assessment of the leading theories of the day, particularly
Utilitarianism and Kantian Ethics. On her view,
Utilitarianism commits one to endorsing evil deeds, and Kantian ethics,
with its notion of ‘self-legislation’ is just
incoherent. If the main choices are either evil or incoherent,
that’s a serious problem and calls for the development of some
alternative approach. Unfortunately, perhaps, for
Anscombe’s overall project, her audience regarded the
supernaturalized approach as more problematic than the naturalized . If
we are to go back to very early approaches, such as Aristotle’s,
then the natural approach to developing the alternatives is as a
‘virtue ethics’ and digging into the messy issue of human
flourishing and good.
MMP also touched a nerve with philosophers who advocated one or the
other of the condemned views. One reason for this was the rather
dismissive or moralistic tone she took in some of her criticisms.
Perhaps one of the more well known is given in the following passage
when she condemns Utilitarianism—or, more
generally—Consequentialism, for leaving open the possibility
that it may be morally right in some context to advocate the execution
of an innocent person.
She wrote:
Anscombe is not making a subtle point here, and this comment prodded
philosophers such as Jonathan Bennett to defend the view that
consequences certainly mattered in determining the moral
quality of an action—indeed, he questions the adequacy of
accounts that rely on a dubious act/consequence distinction. This does
not by itself get one to Consequentialism. Indeed, Anscombe’s comment
here goes beyond a mere condemnation of Consequentialism to a further
condemnation of any view in which consequences are weighed in
determining moral rightness or wrongness. She is a moral
absolutist. Some things are wrong and ought not to be done, whatever
the consequences. So, for example, Bennett was concerned to undercut a
popular distinction between killing versus letting die which was made
on the basis that killing is just the sort of act that is wrong,
period, no matter what the consequences, whereas letting die is not as
bad as killing, even if the consequences were the same and were known
to be the same.
Thus, a person’s doing a results in an upshot x and
at one end of the action scale a is the one action that can
result in x; refraining from a is compatible with a whole
range of alternative actions—walking to the grocery store,
weeding in the garden, reading a book—all of which
have x as a result.  But there is no morally relevant
difference, here. There is nothing in the ‘act itself’ of
killing that distinguishes it, in a morally relevant way, from letting
die when things like immediacy, intention, and so forth are held
constant.
Anscombe’s comment on Bennett’s criticism comprises one of the
briefest philosophical essays, which I quote in its entirety here:
Aside from the profound problem of commending vicious acts, Anscombe
also believed that consequentialism failed to capture, indeed, must
fail to capture, crucial elements of moral psychology.  The theory
cannot account for backward looking justifications, or reasons, for
performing certain actions. Teichmann notes, in his work on Anscombe,
that, though it seems superficially intuitive that reasons are
understood in causal terms, this does not, in Anscombe’s opinion,
withstand scrutiny. In response to “Why did you kill him?”
(using Anscombe’s own example), Teichmann holds that though one
intuitive reason might be “In order to get revenge”, it is
also the case, in Anscombe’s view, “…the sense of
‘In order to get revenge’ in fact presupposes the force of
such reasons as ‘Because he killed my brother’, and
not vice versa” (Teichmann, 124).
The absolutist stance informed a good deal of her other work in moral
philosophy. In her famous pamphlet Mr. Truman’s Degree
(1958), Anscombe protested Oxford’s decision to award Harry Truman an
honorary doctorate. Her view was that Truman murdered large numbers of
innocent persons, civilians, with nuclear weapons in order to get
Japan to surrender. On her view, the end does not justify the
means. It is not permissible to kill innocents for the sake of some
greater good to be realized as a consequence of such action. Some,
though it is worth pointing out not all, consequentialists will
disagree that such cases are just out of the question (and many
straightforward consequentialists could well agree that Truman was not
an example of someone using means/end reasoning in a justifiable way).
Anscombe’s discussion, though, informed later discussions of absolute
prohibitions in wartime such as Thomas Nagel’s discussion of the
attractive features of the absolutist position in “War and
Massacre” (1972).
 Anscombe’s work in ethics dovetailed, in many ways, with the
work of contemporaries Philippa Foot and Iris Murdoch.  All were
opposed to Utilitarianism, and were suspicious of the
’thin’ evaluative terms that were adopted by the
theory. Of course, this criticism was not restricted to
Utilitarianism.  Any theory predominantly employing thin moral
concepts such as ’right’ and ’wrong’ were
subject to this line of criticism.  Thin moral concepts are opposed to
’thick’ ones.  Bernard Williams famously characterized
thick concepts this way:
 Virtue terms are thick. To describe an action as
’cowardly’ provides much more information than to describe
it as ’wrong’. Further, thin terms can lead us astray. In
MMP, after describing the Utilitarian commitment to be open, in
principle, to “… judicially punishing a man for what he is
clearly understood not to have done …”, which is clearly
’unjust’, she writes:
Anscombe also defended a version of the doctrine of double effect, and
her commitment to this Doctrine provided a principle she used to try
to show what was corrupt about Truman’s action. The basic idea is that
there is a morally relevant distinction between intended versus merely
foreseen outcomes. To intend harm is worse than to merely foresee harm
as a result of one’s action.  This can sometimes be combined with a
kind of absolutism to hold that intended harms are forbidden whereas
the merely foreseen may not be. It is frequently used to try to
underwrite a moral distinction between a strategic bomber and a terror
bomber. What a strategic bomber does in dropping a bomb may be
permissible because he does not intend to kill innocent civilians even
though he foresees that they will die as a result of the bombing. A
terror bomber, on the other hand, does intend to kill innocent
civilians as a way to achieve his aims.
Anscombe’s own position varied somewhat over the course of her
career.
In “War and Murder,” published in 1961, Anscombe notes that
the moral permissibility of coercive authority requires a principle
that can be used to differentiate the just imposition of harms from
the unjust. The Doctrine of Double Effect is one such principle. At
the root of the principle is the distinction between intended and
foreseen consequences of an action. While there is some debate on the
correct specification of the Doctrine, the basic idea is that it is
worse to intend harm than to merely foresee it. In Anscombe’s opinion,
some actions are absolutely forbidden because they involve intentions
to harm whereas if the harm in question was merely foreseen the action
would not be forbidden.
But she was also concerned that the Doctrine of Double Effect was
often abused. For example, one constraint on the Doctrine holds
that one cannot intend the means to the desired end. So, a doctor
may administer a drug to alleviate pain though knowing that another
effect of the drug will be the death of the patient. This is
permitted. One way to understand how this works is by employing a
counterfactual test—if the doctor could alleviate the pain of
the patient without administering such strong medication she
would. What is not permitted by Double Effect is using the bad
effect as a means to achieving one’s goal.
Some have held the view that one can direct one’s intentions a certain
way to achieve the desired result with moral impunity. If, for
example, one tells oneself that one is only intending x by
doing y, then one is off the hook even if y is
immoral—and this strikes Anscombe as quite absurd. Her example
is that of a servant who holds the ladder for his master who is a
thief and justifies it by telling himself that his intention is simply
to avoid getting fired. Holding the ladder is his means of avoiding
the loss of his job. It is still immoral. Because of the means/end
constraint on Double Effect, holding the ladder is not justified. And
this misunderstanding of Double Effect was at the basis of Anscombe’s
problem with wartime bombing and the flagrant misuse of Double Effect
to justify it.
Again, in order to employ DDE one needs the distinction between
intended and merely foreseen consequences of the ‘act
itself.’ On Anscombe’s view some actions are in and of
themselves immoral, regardless of the consequences one intends to bring
about in the performance of the action, and certainly regardless of
what one foresees as a result of the action. But many
consequentialists don’t recognize a morally relevant
distinction between intention and foresight. Jonathan Bennett,
for example, was highly critical of this distinction.
There’s no doubt that it can be extremely difficult to parse
double effect. It is often presented in the following way.
There is an action that the agent performs which has two effects, one
good, one bad. The action may still be permissible given that the
intended effect that is desired by the agent is good, and given that
the bad effect is merely foreseen, and not intended. It appears
that the agent voluntarily chooses both effects, but is only fully
accountable for one. And this strikes some as odd, since it just
seems obvious that foreseen consequences have to be weighed—it
would be irresponsible not to weigh them. So surely they count
too?
But Joseph Boyle makes a maneuver that might help Anscombe
here. He argues that the unintended effect is not voluntarily
chosen (in the morally relevant sense of ‘chosen’
for which we hold people responsible) even though the agent knows that
it will occur as a result of his actions.  The reason for Boyle is
that the foreseen consequences—though definitely factored into
deliberation—are not factored in the right way to count as
voluntarily chosen. The foreseen effects are not reasons for
action; rather, as Boyle notes, “…they are sometimes
conditions in spite of which one acts” (1980,
535). We can consider another of Anscombe’s famous cases to
illustrate this. Anscombe publicly protested Oxford University’s
awarding to an honorary degree to Harry Truman. Truman, on her view,
was a mass murderer. As we noted earlier, she was disgusted by the
attempts of some individuals to excuse Truman by using double
effect. Truman, she argued, dropped the bomb on those
cities, not in spite of the civilian population, but at least
in part because of that population. He could have chosen an isolated
location for a demonstration. There was evidence that the Japanese did
want to negotiate. On Anscombe’s view Truman was using the innocent
civilians of Hiroshima and Nagasaki to achieve his ends. She believed
that their presence entered into his deliberation as a positive
factor, not as a detracting factor. This, then, would be a case of
terror bombing, and of outright murder.
While it is true that there is a big difference between terror bombing
and strategic bombing, some question, however, that DDE accounts for
that difference. One might argue that to the extent Truman desired the
evil outcome of the deaths of innocent civilians what he did was
murder. This does not rely on acceptance of DDE to account for a
difference. Jonathan Bennett points out that it can be really
difficult to parse a meaningful difference using DDE. For example, the
counterfactual test so many proponents of DDE use doesn’t work to
distinguish the terror from the strategic cases. As Bennett notes,
“The tactical bomber’s wish for the civilian deaths is a
reluctant one: if he could, he would destroy the factory without
killing civilians. But the terror bomber too, if he could, would drop
his bombs in such a way as to lower enemy morale without killing
civilians” (Bennett 1995, 222).  If Truman wanted to kill
civilians, what he did was wrong, but not
because of a violation of DDE. It was wrong because he
intentionally and knowingly caused immense suffering that could have
been avoided through an alternative course of action. Of course, one
could still argue that DDE is a very useful heuristic—it tracks
justification even if it doesn’t itself underwrite that
justification. However, even this picture of DDE has been attacked by
researchers studying our reactions to moral dilemma cases, who hold
that we do not consciously employ anything like DDE in making moral
decisions (Greene, et al., 2009).
G. E. M. Anscombe’s work ranged over many years and many
different areas in philosophy. The breadth of her work is
impressive. She was systematic in her thinking, seeing and
developing connections between metaphysics, moral psychology, and
ethics that exhibited not simply a grasp of one particular
problem, but a world view. Her legacy is one of the broadest and
deepest left by a 20th century philosopher.