Giovanni Battista Vico was born in Naples, Italy, June 23 1668, to a
bookseller and daughter of a carriage maker. He received his formal
education at local grammar schools, from various Jesuit tutors, and at
the University of Naples from which he graduated in 1694 as Doctor of
Civil and Canon Law. As he reports in his autobiography (Vita di
Giambattista Vico), however, Vico considered himself as “teacher
of himself,”[1]
 a habit he developed under the direction of
his father, after a fall at the age of 7 caused a three year absence
from school. Vico reports that “as a result of this mischance he grew
up with a melancholy and irritable temperament such as belongs to men
of ingenuity and depth” (Vita, 111). Vico left Naples in 1686 for
Vatolla where, with occasional returns to his home city, he remained
for the next nine years as tutor to the sons of Domenico Rocca. Vico
returned to Naples in 1695 and four years later married Teresa Caterina
Destito with whom he had eight children. Of his surviving children
(three of them died), his younger son Gennaro was a favorite and went
on to an academic career; his daughter Lusia achieved success as a
singer and minor poet, and Ignazio is known to have been a source of
disappointment to him. Of the others (Angela Teresa and Filippo)
little is known. Vico was never rich, though he made a living, and the
legend of his poverty derives from Villarosa’s embellishment of the
autobiography.  He did, however, suffer bouts of ill-health, and
failed in his life-long ambition of succeeding to the chair of
Jurisprudence at the University of Naples, having to settle instead
for a lower and poorly paid professorship in Rhetoric. He retained
this position until 1741 at which time he was succeeded by his son
Gennaro. Vico died in Naples on January 22–23, 1744, aged 75.
In his own time Vico’s work was largely neglected and generally
misunderstood-he describes himself living as a “stranger”
and “quite unknown” in his native city (Vita, 134)-and it
was not until the nineteenth century that his thought began to make a
significant impression on the philosophical world. However, Vico’s
thought never suffered from complete obscurity and its influence can
be discerned in various traditions of European thought from the
mid-eighteenth century
 onwards.[2]
 In Italy, Vico’s impact on aesthetic and
literary criticism is evident in the writings of Francesco De Sanctis
and Benedetto Croce, and in jurisprudence, economics, and political
theory, his influence can be traced from Antonio Genovesi (one of
Vico’s own pupils), Ferdinando Galiani, and Gaetano Filangieri. In
Germany, Vico’s ideas were known to Johann-George Hamman and, via his
disciple J.G. von Herder, to Johann Wolfgang von Goethe and Friedrich
Heinrich Jacobi. Vico’s ideas were sufficiently familiar to Friedrich
August Wolf to inspire his article “G.B. Vico on Homer.” In France,
Vico’s thought was likely known to Charles de Secondat, baron de
Montesquieu, and Jean-Jacques Rousseau, and some have seen his
influence in the writings of Denis Diderot, Etienne Bonnot, abbé
de Condillac, and Joseph Marie, comte de Maistre. In Great Britain,
although Vichian themes are intimated in the philosophical writings of
the Empiricists and thinkers of the Scottish Enlightenment, there is no
direct evidence that they knew of his writings. The earliest known
disseminator of Vico’s views in the English-speaking world is Samuel
Taylor Coleridge, who was responsible for much of the interest in Vico
in the second half of the nineteenth century.
Vico’s ideas reached a wider audience with a German translation of
The New Science by W.E. Weber which appeared in 1822, and,
more significantly, through a French version by Jules Michelet in 1824,
which was reissued in 1835. Michelet’s translation was widely read and
was responsible for a new appreciation of Vico’s work in France.
Subsequently, Vico’s views impacted the work of Wilhelm Dilthey, Karl
Marx, R.G. Collingwood, and James Joyce, who used The New
Science to structure Finnegans Wake. Twentieth century
scholarship has established illuminating comparisons with the tradition
of Hegelian idealism, and taken up the relationship between Vico’s
thought and that of philosophers in the western tradition and beyond,
including Plato, Aristotle, Ibn Khaldun, Thomas Hobbes, Benedict de
Spinoza, David Hume, Immanuel Kant, and Friedrich Nietzsche.
Comparisons and connections have also been drawn between Vichean themes
and the work of various modern and contemporary thinkers, inter
alia W.B. Yeats, Friedrich Froebel, Max Horkheimer, Walter
Benjamin, Martin Heidegger, Hans-Georg Gadamer, Jürgen Habermas,
Paul Ricoeur, Jean-Francois Lyotard, and Alisdair MacIntyre. As a
review of recent and current literature demonstrates, an appreciation
of Vico’s thought has spread far beyond philosophy, and his ideas have
been taken up by scholars within a range of contemporary disciplines,
including anthropology, cultural theory, education, hermeneutics,
history, literary criticism, psychology, and sociology. Thus despite
obscure beginnings, Vico is now widely regarded as a highly original
thinker who anticipated central currents in later philosophy and the
human sciences.
Vico’s earliest publications were in poetry rather than philosophy-the
Lucretian poem “Affetti di un disperato” (“The
Feelings of One in Despair”) (composed in 1692) and
“Canzone in morte di Antonio Carafa” (“Ode on the
Death of Antonio Carafa”) both published in 1693. After his
appointment to Professor of Rhetoric in 1699, Vico began to address
philosophical themes in the first of six Orazioni Inaugurali
(Inaugural Orations). In 1707 Vico gave a seventh
oration-intended as an augmentation of the philosophy of Bacon that he
subsequently revised and published in 1709 under the title De
nostri temporis studiorum ratione (On the Study Methods of
Our Time). Two years later his projected but uncompleted
statement on metaphysics appeared, De antiquissima Italorum
sapientia ex linguae latinae originibus eruenda libri tres
(On the Most Ancient Wisdom of the Italians Unearthed from the
Origins of the Latin Language).  The years that followed saw the
publication of various works, including two replies to critical
reviews of De antiquissima (1711 and 1712), a work of royal
historiography-De rebus gestis Antonii Caraphaei libri
quattuor (The Life of Antonio Caraffa) (1716)-Il
diritto universale (Universal Right) (1720–22), and in
1725 and 1731 the two parts of his autobiography which together
compose the Vita di Giambattista Vico scritta da se medesimo
(Life of Giambattista Vico Written by Himself).  Over the
course of his professional career, Vico also composed and delivered
lectures on rhetoric to students preparing to enter into the study of
jurisprudence. These survive as student transcriptions or copies of
the original lectures, and are collected under the title
Institutiones Oratoriae (1711–1741) (translated as The Art
of Rhetoric) in which Vico’s develops his views on rhetoric or
eloquence, “the faculty of speaking appropriate to the purpose of
persuading” through which the orator aims to “bend the spirit by his
speech.”[3]
Although these early writings are increasingly studied as
significant works in their right, they have generally been regarded as
important for tracing the development of various themes and ideas which
Vico came to refine and express fully in his major and influential
work, The New Science. In De nostri temporis studiorum
ratione, for example, Vico takes up the theme of modernity and
raises the question of “which study method is finer or better, ours or
the Ancients?” and illustrates “by examples the advantages and
drawbacks of the respective
 methods.”[4]
 Vico observes that the Moderns are equipped with the
“instruments” of “philosophical
‘critique’” and “analytic geometry”
(especially in the form of Cartesian logic) (DN, 7–9), and that these
open realms of natural scientific inquiry (chemistry, pharmacology,
astronomy, geographical exploration, and mechanics) and artistic
production (realism in poetry, oratory, and sculpture) which were
unknown and unavailable to the Ancients (DN, 11–12). Although these
bring significant benefits, Vico argues, modern education suffers
unnecessarily from ignoring the
ars topica (art of topics) which encourage the use of
imagination and memory in organizing speech into eloquent persuasion.
The result, Vico argues, is an undue attention to the “geometrical
method” modeled on the discipline of physics (DN, 21ff.), and an
emphasis on abstract philosophical criticism over poetry. This
undermines the importance of exposition, persuasion, and pleasure in
learning; it “benumbs...[the] imagination and stupefies...[the] memory”
(DN, 42), both of which are central to learning, complex reasoning, and
the discovery of truth. Combining the methods of both Ancients and
Moderns, Vico argues that education should aim ideally at cultivating
the “total life of the body politic” (DN, 36): students “should be
taught the totality of the sciences and arts, and their intellectual
powers should be developed to the full” so that they “would become
exact in science, clever in practical matters, fluent in eloquence,
imaginative in understanding poetry or painting, and strong in
memorizing what they have learned in their legal studies” (DN, 19).
This defense of humanistic education is expanded in the
Orations, directed “to the flower and stock of well-born young
manhood,”[5]
 where Vico makes a case for modern
humanistic education and focuses on a certain kind of “practical
wisdom” or prudentia which the human mind, with the
appropriate discipline and diligence, is able to attain. This theme is
continued in De Antiquissima, where Vico traces the
consequences of his insight that language can be treated as a source of
historical knowledge. Many words of the Latin language, Vico observes,
appear to be “derived from some inward learning rather than from the
vernacular usage of the
 people.”[6]
 Treated as a repository
of the past, Latin might be investigated as a way of “seek[ing] out the
ancient wisdom of the Italians from the very wisdom of their
words.”(DA, 40).
In the course of pursuing this task, Vico also develops two central
themes of his mature philosophy: the outlines of a philosophical system
in contrast to the then dominant philosophy of Descartes already
criticized in De nostri temporis studiorum ratione, and his
statement of the principle that verum et factum convertuntur,
that “the true and the made are...convertible,” or that “the true is
precisely what is made” (verum esse ipsum factum). Vico
emphasizes that science should be conceived as the “genus or mode by
which a thing is made” so that human science in general is a matter of
dissecting the “anatomy of nature’s works” (DA, 48), albeit through the
“vice” of human beings that they are limited to “abstraction” as
opposed to the power of “construction” which is found in God alone (DA,
50–52). Given that “the norm of the truth is to have made it” (DA, 52),
Vico reasons, Descartes’ famous first principle that clear and distinct
ideas are the source of truth must be rejected: “For the mind does not
make itself as it gets to know itself,” Vico observes, “and since it
does not make itself, it does not know the genus or mode by which it
makes itself” (DA, 52). Thus the truths of morality, natural science,
and mathematics do not require “metaphysical justification” as the
Cartesians held, but demand an analysis of the causes-the
“activity”-through which things are made (DA, 64).
Vico’s Vita di Giambattista Vico is of particular interest,
not only as a source of insight into the influences on his intellectual
development, but as one of the earliest and most sophisticated examples
of philosophical autobiography. Vico composed the work in response (and
indeed the only response) to a proposal published by Count Gian Artico
di Porcía to Italian scholars to write their biographies for the
edification of students. Referring to himself in the third person, Vico
records the course of his life and the influence of various thinkers
which led him to develop the concepts central to his mature work.
Vico reports on the importance of reading Plato, Aristotle, the
Hellenics, Scotus, Suarez, and the Classical poets, and traces his
growing interest in jurisprudence and the Latin language (Vita, 116ff.
passim). Vico describes how he came to “meditate a principle of the
natural law, which should be apt for the explanation of the origins of
Roman law and every other gentile civil law in respect of history”
(Vita, 119) and how he discovered that “an ideal eternal law...should
be observed in a universal city after the idea or design of providence”
(Vita, 122). According to Vico’s own account, his studies culminated in
a distinction between ideas and languages. The first, he says,
“discovers new historical principles of geography and chronology, the
two ideas of history, and thence the principles of universal history
lacking hitherto” (Vita, 167), while the latter “discovers new
principles of poetry, both of song and verse, and shows that both it
and they sprang up by the same natural necessity in all the first
nations” (Vita, 168). Taken together, these form the central doctrine of
The New Science, namely, that there is a “philosophy and
philology of the human race” which produces “an ideal eternal history
based on the idea of...providence...[and] traversed in time by all the
particular histories of the nations, each with its rise, development,
acme, decline and fall” (Vita, 169).
Many themes of these early works-language, wisdom, history, truth,
causality, philology, rhetoric, philosophy, poetry, and the relative
strengths and weaknesses of ancient and modern learning-are
incorporated into and receive their fullest treatment in Vico’s major
work, The New Science, first published in 1725 (an edition
subsequently known as the Scienza Nuova Prima or First
New Science) and again in a second and largely rewritten version
five years later. Vico published a third edition in 1744, which was
later edited by Fausto Nicolini and appeared in 1928. Nicoloni is
responsible for updating Vico’s punctuation and breaking the work up
into its current structure of chapters, sections, and numbered
paragraphs (1112 in all), not originally supplied by Vico himself,
which have been reproduced in many though not all subsequent
editions. Nicolini referred to his edition as the Scienza Nuova
seconda-Second New Science (or simply The New
Science), under which title the definitive version is known
today. 
The text consists of an overview (“Idea of the Work”)
couched as an explication of a frontispiece depicting a female figure
(Metaphysics), standing on a globe of the Earth and contemplating a
luminous triangle containing the eye of God, or Providence. Below
stands a statue of Homer representing the origins of human society in
“poetic wisdom.” This is followed by five Books and a
Conclusion, the first of which (“Establishment of
Principles”) establishes the method upon which Vico constructs a
history of civil society from its earliest beginnings in the state of
nature (stato di natura) to its contemporary manifestation in
seventeenth century Europe.
In the work, Vico consciously develops his notion of
scienza (science or knowledge) in opposition to the then
dominant philosophy of Descartes with its emphasis on clear and
distinct ideas, the most simple elements of thought from which all
knowledge, the Cartesians held, could be derived a priori by way of
deductive rules. As Vico had already argued, one consequence and
drawback of this hypothetico-deductive method is that it renders
phenomena which cannot be expressed logically or mathematically as
illusions of one sort or another. This applies not only most obviously
to the data of sense and psychological experience, but also to the
non-quantifiable evidence that makes up the human sciences. Drawing on
the verum factum principle first described in De
Antiquissima, Vico argues against Cartesian philosophy that full
knowledge of any thing involves discovering how it came to be
what it is as a product of human action and the “principal
property” of human beings, viz., “of being social”
(“Idea of the Work,” §2,
 p.3).[7]
The reduction of all facts to the ostensibly paradigmatic form of
mathematical knowledge is a form of “conceit,” Vico
maintains, which arises from the fact that “man makes himself
the measure of all things” (Element I, §120, p.60) and that
“whenever men can form no idea of distant and unknown things,
they judge them by what is familiar and at hand” (Element II,
§122, p.60).  Recognizing this limitation, Vico argues, is at
once to grasp that phenomena can only be known via their origins, or
per caussas (through causes). For “Doctrines must take their
beginning from that of the matters of which they treat” (Element
CVI, §314, p.92), he says, and it is one “great labor
of...Science to recover...[the] grounds of truth-truth which, with the
passage of years and the changes in language and customs, has come
down to us enveloped in falsehood” (Element XVI, §150,
pp.64–5). Unveiling this falsehood leads to “wisdom,”
which is “nothing but the science of making such use of things
as their nature dictates” (Element CXIV, §326, p.94). Given
that verum ipsum factum-“the true is the made,”
or something is true because it is made-scienzia
both sets knowledge per caussas as its task and as the method for
attaining it; or, expressed in other terms, the content
of scienza is identical with the development of
that scienza itself.
The challenge, however, is to develop this science in such a way as to
understand the facts of the human world without either reducing them
to mere contingency or explaining their order by way of speculative
principles of the sort generated by traditional metaphysics. They must
be rendered intelligible, that is, without reducing them, as did the
Cartesians, to the status of ephemera. Vico satisfies this demand by
distinguishing at the outset of The New Science
between il vero and il certo, “the true”
and “the certain.” The former is the object of knowledge
(scienza) since it is universal and eternal, whereas the
latter, related as it is to human consciousness (coscienza),
is particular and individuated.  This produces two pairs of
terms-il vero/scienza and
il certo/coscienza-which constitute, in turn, the
explananda of philosophy and philology (“history” broadly conceived),
respectively. As Vico says, “philosophy contemplates reason, whence
comes knowledge of the true; philology observes that of which human
choice is author, whence comes consciousness of the certain” (Element
X, §138, p.63). These two disciplines combine in a method or “new
critical art” (nuova’arte critica) where philosophy aims at
articulating the universal forms of intelligibility common to all
experience, while philology adumbrates the empirical phenomena of the
world which arise from human choice: the languages, customs, and
actions of people which make up civil society. Understood as mutually
exclusive disciplines-a tendency evident, according to Vico, in the
history of philosophy up to his time-philosophy and philology appear as
empty and abstract (as in the rational certainty of Cartesian
metaphysics) and merely empirical and contingent, respectively. Once
combined, however, they form a doctrine which yields a full knowledge
of facts where “knowledge” in the Vichean sense means to have grasped
both the necessity of human affairs (manifest in the causal connections
between otherwise random events) and the contingency of the events
which form the content of the causal chains. Philosophy yields the
universally true and philology the individually certain.
The text of The New Science then constitutes Vico’s attempt
to develop a method which itself comes to be in the course of applying
it to human experience, and this takes the form of a history of civil
society and its development through the progress of war and peace,
law, social order, commerce, and government. “Thus our
Science,” Vico says near the beginning of the work, “comes
to be at once a history of the ideas, the customs, the deeds of
mankind. From these three we shall derive the principles of the
history of human nature, which we shall show to be the principles of
universal history, which principles it seems hitherto to have
lacked” (“Poetic Wisdom,” §368, p.112).
Accomplishing this task involves tracing human society back to its
origins in order to reveal a common human nature and a genetic,
universal pattern through which all nations run. Vico sees this common
nature reflected in language, conceived as a store-house of customs,
in which the wisdom of successive ages accumulates and is presupposed
in the form of a sensus communis or “mental
dictionary” by subsequent generations. Vico defines this common
sense as “judgment without reflection, shared by an entire
class, an entire people, and entire nation, or the entire human
race” (Element XII, §145, pp.63–4). It is also available to
the philosopher who, by deciphering and thus recovering its content,
can discover an “ideal eternal history traversed in time by the
histories of all nations” (Proposition XLII, §114,
p.57).
The result of this, in Vico’s view, is to appreciate history as at
once “ideal”-since it is never perfectly actualized-and
“eternal,” because it reflects the presence of a divine
order or Providence guiding the development of human
institutions. Nations need not develop at the same pace-less developed
ones can and do coexist with those in a more advanced phase-but they
all pass through the same distinct stages (corsi): the ages
of gods, heroes, and men. Nations “develop in conformity to this
division,” Vico says, “by a constant and uninterrupted
order of causes and effects present in every nation” (“The
Course the Nations Run,” §915, p.335). Each stage, and thus
the history of any nation, is characterized by the manifestation of
natural law peculiar to it, and the distinct languages (signs,
metaphors, and words), governments (divine, aristocratic
commonwealths, and popular commonwealths and monarchies), as well as
systems of jurisprudence (mystic theology, heroic jurisprudence, and
the natural equity of free commonwealths) that define them.
In addition to specifying the distinct stages through which social,
civil, and political order develops, Vico draws on his earlier
writings to trace the origin of nations back to two distinct features
of human nature: the ages of gods and heroes result from memory and
creative acts of “imagination” (fantasia), while
the age of men stems from the faculty of “reflection”
(riflessione). Vico thus claims to have discovered two kinds
of wisdom-“poetic” and
“philosophical”-corresponding to the dual nature of human
beings (sense and intellect), represented in the creations of
theological poets and philosophers, respectively (“Poetic
Wisdom,” §779, p.297).  Institutions arise first from the
immediacy of sense-experience, pure feeling, curiosity, wonder, fear,
superstition, and the child-like capacity of human beings to imitate
and anthropomorphize the world around them. Since “in the
world’s childhood men were by nature sublime poets” (Element
XXXVII, §187, p.71), Vico reasons, nations must be “poetic
in their beginnings” (Element XLIV, §200, p.73), so that
their origin and course can be discovered by recreating or remembering
the “poetic” or “metaphysical truth” which
underlies them (Element XLVII, §205, p.74). This is manifest
primarily in fable, myth, the structure of early languages, and the
formations of polytheistic religion. The belief systems of early
societies are thus characterized by “poetic metaphysics”
which “seeks its proofs not in the external world but within the
modifications of the mind of him who meditates it”
(“Poetic Wisdom,” §374, p.116), and “poetic
logic,” through which the creations of this metaphysics are
signified. Metaphysics of this sort is “not rational and
abstract like that of learned men now,” Vico emphasizes,
“but felt and imagined [by men] without power of
ratiocination...This metaphysics was their poetry, a faculty born with
them...born of their ignorance of causes, for ignorance, the mother of
wonder, made everything wonderful to men who were ignorant of
everything” (“Poetic Wisdom,” §375,
p.116). Incapable of forming “intelligible class concepts of
things”-a feature of human mind realized only in the age of
men-people “had a natural need to create poetic characters; that
is, imaginative class concepts or universals, to which, as to certain
models or ideal portraits, to reduce all the particular species which
resembled them” (Element XLIX, §209, p.74).
From this genus of poetic metaphysics, Vico then extrapolates the
various species of wisdom born of it. “Poetic morals” have
their source in piety and shame (“Poetic Wisdom,”
§502, p.170), he argues, while “poetic economy”
arises from the feral equality of human beings and the family
relationships into which they were forced by need (“Poetic
Wisdom,” §523, p.180). Similarly, “poetic
cosmography” grows from the seeing “the world as composed
of gods of the sky, of the underworld...and gods intermediate between
earth and sky” (“Poetic Wisdom,” §710, p.269),
“poetic astronomy” from raising the gods “to the
planets and [assigning] the heroes to the constellations”
(“Poetic Wisdom,” §728, p.277), “poetic
chronology” out of the cycles of harvest and the seasons
(“Poetic Wisdom,” §732, p.279), and “poetic
geography” from naming the natural world through “the
semblances of things known or near at hand” (“Poetic
Wisdom,” §741, p.285). As the faculty of reason develops
and grows, however, the power of imagination from which the earliest
forms of human society grew weakens and gives way finally to the power
of reflection; the cognitive powers of human beings gain ascendance
over their creative capacity, and reason replaces poetry as the
primary way of understanding the world. This defines the age of men
which makes philosophy, Vico reasons, a relatively recent development
in history, appearing as it did “some two thousand years after
the gentile nations were founded” (Element CV, §313,
p.92).
Since history itself, in Vico’s view, is the manifestation of
Providence in the world, the transition from one stage to the next and
the steady ascendance of reason over imagination represent a gradual
progress of civilization, a qualitative improvement from simpler to
more complex forms of social organization. Vico characterizes this
movement as a “necessity of nature” (“Idea of the
Work,” §34, p.21) which means that, with the passage of
time, human beings and societies tend increasingly towards realizing
their full potential.  From rude beginnings undirected passion is
transformed into virtue, the bestial state of early society is
subordinated to the rule of law, and philosophy replaces sentiments of
religion. “Out of ferocity, avarice, and ambition, the three
vices which run throughout the human race,” Vico says,
“legislation creates the military, merchant, and governing
classes, and thus the strength, riches, and wisdom of commonwealths.
Out of these three great vices, which could certainly destroy all
mankind on the face of the earth, it makes civil happiness”
(Element VII, §132, p.62). In addition, the transition from
poetic to rational consciousness enables reflective individuals-the
philosopher, that is, in the shape of Vico-to recover the body of
universal history from the particularity of apparently random
events. This is a fact attested to by the form and content of The
New Science itself.
Although from a general point of view history reveals a progress of
civilization through actualizing the potential of human nature, Vico
also emphasizes the cyclical feature of historical
development. Society progresses towards perfection, but without
reaching it (thus history is “ideal”), interrupted as it
is by a break or return (ricorso) to a relatively more
primitive condition. Out of this reversal, history begins its course
anew, albeit from the irreversibly higher point to which it has
already attained. Vico observes that in the latter part of the age of
men (manifest in the institutions and customs of medieval feudalism)
the “barbarism” which marks the first stages of civil
society returns as a “civil disease” to corrupt the body
politic from within. This development is marked by the decline of
popular commonwealths into bureaucratic monarchies, and, by the force
of unrestrained passions, the return of corrupt manners which had
characterized the earlier societies of gods and heroes. Out of this
“second barbarism,” however, either through the appearance
of wise legislators, the rise of the fittest, or a the last vestiges
of civilization, society returns to the “primitive simplicity of
the first world of peoples,” and individuals are again
“religious, truthful, and faithful” (“Conclusion of
the Work,” §1104–1106, pp.423–4). From this begins a
new corso which Vico saw manifest in his own time as the
“second age of men” characterized by the
“true” Christian religion and the monarchical government
of seventeenth century Europe.
In addition to his account of the origins and history of civil society
developed in The New Science, Vico also advances a highly
original thesis about the origin and character of Homeric poetry,
which he refers to as “The Discovery of the New Homer.”
Vico observes that the “vulgar feelings and vulgar customs
provide the poets with their proper materials” (“Discovery
of the True Homer,” §781, p.301), and, given that in the
age of heroes these customs constituted a “savage” and
“unreasonable” state of human nature, the poetry of Homer
cannot be the esoteric wisdom or creative act of a single individual,
as scholars have assumed, but represents the imaginative universals of
the Greek people themselves. Homeric poetry thus contains the
“models or ideal portraits” which form the mental
dictionary of the Ancients, and explains the place Vico assigns to
Homer in the frontispiece where his statue represents the origins of
human society in poetic wisdom. Vico thus applies his doctrine of the
imaginative universal to the case of Homer and concludes that though
it “marks a famous epoch in history it never in the world took
place.” The historical Homer was “quite simply a man of
the people” (“Discovery of the True Homer, §806,
p.308) and quite distinct from the ostensible author of the Odyssey
and Iliad who was actually a ”purely ideal poet who never
existed in the world of nature...but was an idea or a heroic character
of Grecian men insofar as they told their histories in song“
(”Discovery of the True Homer, §873, p.323).