Deleuze was born in Paris to conservative, middle-class parents, who
sent him to public schools for his elementary education; except for
one year of school in Normandy during the Occupation, he lived in the
same section of Paris his entire life. His personal life was
unremarkable; he remained married to the same woman he wed at age 31,
Fanny (Denise Paul) Grandjouan, a French translator of D. H. Lawrence,
and raised two children with her. He rarely traveled abroad, although
he did take a trip to the United States in 1975; for the most part he
minimized his attendance at academic conferences and colloquia,
insisting that the activity of thought took place primarily in
writing, and not in dialogue and discussion. The most dramatic event
in his life occurred early, when, during the Occupation, Deleuze’s
older brother was arrested by the Nazis for resistance activities and
deported; he died on the train to Auschwitz.
When the Germans began their occupation of France in June 1940,
Deleuze’s family was on vacation in Normandy, and he spent a year
being schooled there. Deleuze traced his initiation into literature
and philosophy to his encounter with a teacher at Deauville named
Pierre Halbwachs (son of the sociologist Maurice Halbwachs), who
introduced him to writers such as Gide and Baudelaire. Early on, he
recalled, philosophical concepts struck him with the same force as
literary characters, having their own autonomy and style. After the
Liberation, Deleuze returned to Paris and undertook his
khâgne (an intensive year of preparatory studies) at
the well-known Lycée Henri IV, and then studied the history of
philosophy at the Sorbonne.  He was taught by Jean Hippolyte and
Ferdinand Alquié, whom he “loved and admired
enormously,” as well as by Georges Canguilheim and Maurice de
Gandillac. Like many of his peers he was as influenced by the writings
of Jean-Paul Sartre as he was by the work of his academic mentors.
Deleuze’s historically oriented study at the Sorbonne led him to
devote his first book, Empiricism and Subjectivity (1953), to
Hume. In an era in which peers like Foucault and Derrida, students at
the Ecole Normale Supérieure, concentrated on “the three
‘H’s” (Hegel, Husserl, Heidegger), Deleuze’s
decision to write on empiricism and Hume was already a provocation,
early evidence of the heterodox tendencies of his thought. From 1953
to 1962—which he later referred to as “a hole in my
life”—Deleuze published little, moving among various
teaching positions in Paris and the provinces. It was also during this
time that he contracted the recurring respiratory ailment that would
plague him for the rest of his life. In 1962, Nietzsche and
Philosophywas published to considerable acclaim, cementing
Deleuze’s reputation in academic circles. He followed this
initial success with Kant’s Critical Philosophy (1963);
Proust and Signs (1964); and Bergsonism (1966). In
1968 he published Difference and Repetition as his primary
thesis for the doctorat d’Etat, with Spinoza and
the Problem of Expression as the secondary thesis. The next year,
1969, proved to be an important one for Deleuze. First, he found a
permanent teaching position in Paris, at the experimental campus of
the University of Paris VIII in Vincennes (which later moved to its
current location in St. Denis); he gave weekly seminars at this
institution until his retirement in 1987. Second, he published another
major text in his own name, Logic of Sense. But most
importantly, it was then that he met Félix Guattari, a radical
psychoanalyst and political militant, with whom he began a long
collaboration. Their first joint volume, Anti-Oedipus (1972),
was a best seller in France, a veritable succès de
scandale, and thrust Deleuze into the limelight as a public
intellectual. They followed this with Kafka: Toward a Minor
Literature (1975), and then a book which, at least in the eyes of
some, rivals Difference and Repetition for the title of
Deleuze’s masterwork, A Thousand Plateaus (1980).
The 1980s were a decade of independent works for Deleuze: Francis
Bacon: Logic of Sensation (1981); Cinema I: The
Movement-Image (1983); Cinema II: The Time-Image (1985);
Foucault (1986); and The Fold: Leibniz and the
Baroque (1988). He then resumed his collaboration with Guattari
for their final joint work, What is Philosophy? (1991). His
final years were spent in very ill health, although he did manage to
publish a remarkable short essay, “Immanence: A Life” in
1995, before taking his own life on November 4, 1995.
Before he ever wrote “in his own name” in Difference
and Repetition and Logic of Sense, Deleuze wrote a
series of works on figures in the history of philosophy (Hume,
Bergson, Nietzsche, Kant, and Spinoza). In writing these works,
Deleuze sought to unearth the presuppositions he absorbed in his
education; chief among them, he felt, was a deep-seated privilege of
identity over difference. Deleuze thus set about trying to accelerate
however he could a departure from Hegel, whom he saw as emblematic of
that privilege. Deleuze attacks Hegel and others in what we can
call—though Deleuze did not—the “identitarian”
tradition first of all by means of a radicalized reading of Kant,
whose genius, as Deleuze explains in Kant’s Critical
Philosophy (1963), was to have conceived of a purely
immanent critique of reason—a critique that did not
seek “errors” of reason produced by external causes, but
rather “illusions” that arise from within reason itself by
the illegitimate (transcendent) uses of the syntheses of
consciousness. Deleuze characterized his own work as a philosophy of
immanence, arguing that Kant himself had failed to realize fully the
ambitions of his critique, for at least two reasons: first, the
failure to pursue a fully immanent critique, and second, the failure
to propose a genetic account of real experience, resting content with
the account of the conditions of possible experience.
First, Kant made the field of consciousness immanent to a
transcendental subject, thereby reintroducing an element of identity
that is transcendent (that is, external) to the field itself, and
reserving all power of synthesis (that is, identity-formation) in the
field to the activity of the always already unified and transcendent
subject. (Deleuze was influenced in this regard by his reading of
Sartre’s 1937 essay “The Transcendence of the Ego.”)
Already in his Hume book, Empiricism and Subjectivity (1953),
Deleuze had pointed to an empiricist reversal of Kant. Where Kant’s
question had been “How can the given be given to a
subject?” Hume’s question had been “How is the subject
(human nature) constituted within the given?” In his mature
work, Deleuze argues for an “impersonal and
pre-individual” transcendental field in which the subject as
identity pole which produces empirical identities by active synthesis
is itself the result or product of differential passive
syntheses (for instance, in what Deleuze calls the syntheses of
habit, we find bodily, desiring, and unconscious
“contractions” which unify a series of experiences,
extracting that which it to be retained in the habit and allowing the
rest to be “forgotten”). The passive syntheses responsible
for subject formation must be qualified as “differential,”
for three reasons. Each passive synthesis is serial, never singular
(there is never one synthesis by itself, but always a series of
“contractions,” that is to say, experience is ongoing and
so our habits require constant “updating”); each series is
related to other series in the same body (at the most basic level, for
instance, the series of taste contractions is related to those of
smell, sight, touch, hearing and proprioception); and each body is
related to other bodies, which are themselves similarly differential
(the series of syntheses of bodies can resonate or clash). Together
the passive syntheses at all these levels form a differential field
within which subject formation takes place as an integration or
resolution of that field; in other words, subjects are roughly
speaking the patterns of these multiple and serial syntheses which
fold in on themselves producing a site of self-awareness. Of course,
Deleuze never simply proclaims this as a bald thesis, but develops a
genetic account of subjectivity in many of his books. Taking all this
into account, Deleuze summarized his differential, immanent and
genetic position by the at first glance odd phrase of
“transcendental empiricism.” This is cashed out in terms
of two characteristics: (1) the abstract (e.g., “subject,”
“object,” “State,” the “whole,”
and so on) does not explain, but must itself be explained; and (2) the
aim of philosophy is not to rediscover the eternal or the universal,
but to find the singular conditions under which something new is
produced. In other words—and this is a pragmatic perspective
from which Deleuze never deviated—philosophy aims not at stating
the conditions of knowledge qua representation, but at finding and
fostering the conditions of creative production.
Deleuze’s second criticism of Kant claims that he had simply presumed
the existence of knowledge and morality as “facts” and
then sought their conditions of possibility in the transcendental. But
already in 1789, Salomon Maimon, whose early critiques of Kant helped
generate the post-Kantian tradition, had argued that Kant’s critical
project required a method of genesis—and not merely a method of
conditioning—that would account for the production of knowledge,
morality, and indeed reason itself. In other words, Maimon called for
a genetic method that would be able to reach the conditions of real
and not merely possible experience. Maimon found a solution to this
problem in a principle of difference: whereas identity is the
condition of possibility of thought in general, it is difference that
constitutes the genetic and productive principle of real
thought. These two Maimonian exigencies—the search for the
genetic conditions of real experience and the positing of a
principle of difference—appear in almost every one of
Deleuze’s early monographs. Nietzsche and Philosophy (1962),
for instance, suggests that Nietzsche completed and inverted
Kantianism by bringing critique to bear, not simply on false claims to
knowledge or morality, but on true knowledge and true morality, and
indeed on truth itself: “genealogy” constituted
Nietzsche’s genetic method, and the will-to-power was his principle of
difference. Deleuze’s anti-Hegelianism is shown in his focus on the
productivity of the non-dialectical (“affirmative”)
differential forces termed by Nietzsche “noble.” These
forces affirm themselves, and thereby differentiate themselves first,
and only secondarily consider that from which they have differentiated
themselves.
In Bergsonism (1966), Deleuze develops the ideas of
virtuality and multiplicity that will serve as the backbone of his
later work. From Maimon’s reading of Kant, we know that Deleuze needs
to substitute the notion of the condition of the genesis of the real
for the notion of conditions of possibility of representational
knowledge. The positive name for that genetic condition is the
virtual, which Deleuze adopts from the following Bergsonian
argument. The notion of the possible, Bergson holds in Creative
Evolution, is derived from a false problem that confuses the
“more” with the “less” and ignores differences
in kind; there is not less but more in the idea of the possible than
in the real, just as there is more in the idea of nonbeing than in
that of being, or more in the idea of disorder than in that of
order. When we think of the possible as somehow
“pre-existing” the real, we think of the real, then we add
to it the negation of its existence, and then we project the
“image” of the possible into the past. We then reverse the
procedure and think of the real as something more than possible, that
is, as the possible with existence added to it. We then say that the
possible has been “realized” in the real. By contrast,
Deleuze will reject the notion of the possible in favor of that of the
virtual. Rather than awaiting realization, the virtual is fully real;
what happens in genesis is that the virtual is actualized.
The fundamental characteristic of the virtual, that which means it
must be actualized rather than realized, is its differential makeup.
Deleuze always held the critical axiom that the ground cannot resemble
that which it grounds; he constantly critiques the
“tracing” operation by which identities in real experience
are said to be conditioned by identities in the transcendental. For
instance, Deleuze criticizes Kant for copying the transcendental field
in the image of the empirical field. That is, empirical experience is
personal, identitarian and centripetal; there is a central focus, the
subject, in which all our experiences are tagged as belonging to
us. Kant says this empirical identity is only possible if we can posit
the Transcendental Unity of Apperception, that is, the possibility of
adding “I think” to all our judgments. Instead of this
smuggled-in or “traced” identity, Deleuze will want to
have the transcendental field be differential. Deleuze still wants to
work back from experience, but since the condition cannot resemble the
conditioned, and since the empirical is personal and individuated, the
transcendental must be impersonal and pre-individual. The virtual is
the condition for real experience, but it has no identity; identities
of the subject and the object are products of processes that resolve,
integrate, or actualize (the three terms are synonymous for Deleuze) a
differential field. The Deleuzean virtual is thus not the condition of
possibility of any rational experience, but the condition of genesis
of real experience.
As we have seen, the virtual, as genetic ground of the actual, cannot
resemble that which it grounds; thus, if we are confronted with actual
identities in experience, then the virtual ground of those identities
must be purely differential. Deleuze adopts “multiplicity”
from Bergson as the name for such a purely differential field. In this
usage, Deleuze later clarifies, “multiplicity” designates
the multiple as a substantive, rather than as a predicate. The
multiple as predicate generates a set of philosophical problems under
the rubric of “the one and the many” (a thing is one or
multiple, one and multiple, and so on). With multiplicity, or the
multiple as substantive, the question of the relation between the
predicates one/multiple is replaced by the question of distinguishing
types of multiplicities (as with Bergson’s distinction of qualitative
and quantitative multiplicities in Time and Free Will). A
typological difference between substantive multiplicities, in short,
is substituted for the dialectical opposition of the one and the
multiple.
In sum, then, against the “major” post-Kantian tradition
of Fichte, Schelling, and Hegel, Deleuze in effect posited his own
“minor” post-Kantian trio of Maimon, Nietzsche, and
Bergson. To these he added a trio of pre-Kantians, Spinoza, Leibniz
and Hume, but read through a post-Kantian lens. We have already
touched on Deleuze’s reading of Hume. Let us now turn to Spinoza, for
whom Deleuze’s admiration was seemingly limitless; for Deleuze,
Spinoza was the “prince” or even the “Christ”
of philosophers. There are many Spinozist inheritances in Deleuze, but
one of the most important is certainly the notion of univocity in
ontology. Univocity—as opposed to its great rivals, equivocity
and analogy—is the key to developing a “philosophy of
difference” (Deleuze’s term for his project in Difference
and Repetition), in which difference would no longer be
subordinated to identity. The result is a Spinozism minus substance, a
purely modal or differential universe. In univocity, as Deleuze reads
Spinoza, the single sense of Being frees a charge of difference
throughout all that is. In univocal ontology being is said in a single
sense of all of which it is said, but it is said of difference
itself. What is that difference? Difference is difference in degrees
of “power”; in interpreting this term we must distinguish
the two French words puissance and pouvoir. In
social terms, puissance is immanent power, power to act
rather than power to dominate another; we could say that
puissance is praxis (in which equals clash or act
together) rather than poiesis (in which others are matter to
be formed by the command of a superior, a sense of transcendent power
that matches what pouvoir indicates for Deleuze). In the most
general terms Deleuze develops throughout his career,
puissance is the ability to affect and to be affected, to
form assemblages or consistencies, that is, to form emergent unities
that nonetheless respect the heterogeneity of their components. (Here
we see the empiricist theme of the “externality of
relations”: in an assemblage or consistency, the
“becoming” or relation of the terms attains its own
independent ontological status. In Deleuze’s favorite example, the
wasp and orchid create a “becoming” or symbiotic emergent
unit.)
Although Deleuze wrote a touching and certainly important book in
tribute to his friend Foucault after the latter’s death in 1984, the
final important figure in Deleuze’s readings of other philosophers is
Leibniz, to whom, it must be recalled, Maimon appealed in his
criticism of Kant. In 1988, Deleuze published a book on Leibniz
entitled The Fold: Leibniz and the Baroque, which added new
elements to the reading of Leibniz that appeared in Deleuze’s earlier
books: an interpretation centered on the concept of the fold, a
development of a concept of the Baroque, and a attempt to define a
neo-Leibnizianism in terms of contemporary artistic and scientific
practices. While The Fold is a fascinating work, we will
concentrate here on Deleuze’s early reading of Leibniz, which plays an
important role in Difference and Repetition.
Deleuze pushes Leibniz’s thought to a point where Leibniz could never
have taken it, given his theological presuppositions. This is the
point where one begins to consider the virtual domain on its own
account, freed from its actualization in a world and its individuals.
On this score, Deleuze often likes to cite Jorge Luis Borges’s famous
story, “The Garden of the Forking Paths,” in which such a
virtual world is described in the labyrinthine book of a Chinese
philosopher named Ts’ui Pên: “In all fiction, when a man
is faced with alternatives, he chooses one at the expense of
others. In the almost unfathomable Ts’ui Pên, he
chooses—simultaneously—all of them… In Ts’ui
Pên’s work, all the possible solutions occur, each one being the
point of departure for other bifurcations.” Leibniz had in fact
given a similar presentation of the world at the conclusion of the
Theodicy. In Deleuze’s transformation of the Leibnizian /
Borgesian image, the three Kantian transcendent Ideas of God, World,
and Self all take on a completely different demeanor. First, God is no
longer a Being who compares and chooses the richest compossible world;
he has now become a pure Process that affirms incompossibilities and
passes through them. (As the notion of “process” here
attests, Deleuze’s relation to Whitehead is one of the most important
contemporary issues for students of his thought; although the points
of comparison are many, Deleuze himself rarely discussed Whitehead,
save for several important pages in The Fold.) Second, the
world is no longer a continuous world defined by its pre-established
harmony; instead, divergences, bifurcations, and incompossibles must
now be seen to belong to one and the same universe, a chaotic universe
in which divergent series trace endlessly bifurcating paths, and give
rise to violent discords and dissonances that are never resolved into
a harmonic tonality: a “chaosmos,” as Deleuze puts it
(borrowing a word from Joyce) and no longer a world. In contrast,
Leibniz could only save the “harmony” of this world by
relegating discordances and disharmonies to other possible
worlds—this was his theological sleight of hand.  Third, selves
or individuals, rather than being closed upon the compossible and
convergent world they express from within, are now torn open, and kept
open through the divergent series and incompossible ensembles that
continually pull them outside themselves. The “monadic”
subject, as Deleuze puts it, becomes the “nomadic”
subject. In other words, if Deleuze is Leibnizian, it is only by
eliminating the idea of a God who chooses the best of all possible
worlds, with its pre-established harmony and well-established selves;
in Deleuze, incompossibilities and dissonances belong to one and the
same world, the only world, our world. But they belong to our world as
its virtual register; developing the thought of the virtual is one of
the great challenges of Deleuze’s masterpiece, Difference and
Repetition, to which we now turn.
Deleuze’s historical monographs were, in a sense, preliminary sketches
for the great canvas of Difference and Repetition (1968),
which marshaled these resources from the history of philosophy in an
ambitious project to construct a “philosophy of
difference.” Following Maimon’s critique, Difference and
Repetition produces a two-fold shift from the Kantian project of
providing the universal and necessary conditions for possible
experience. First, rather than seeking the conditions
for possible experience, Deleuze wants to provide an account
of the genesis of real experience, that is, the experience of
this concretely existing individual here and now. Second, to respect
the demands of the philosophy of difference, the genetic principle
must itself be a differential principle. 
However, despite these departures, Deleuze maintains a crucial
alignment with Kant; Difference and Repetition is still a
transcendental approach. Here we should remind ourselves that the
terms “transcendent” and “transcendental” have
opposing significations. Transcendental philosophy in fact critiques
the pretensions of other philosophies to transcend experience by
providing strict criteria for the use of syntheses immanent to
experience. On this score, at least, Deleuze aligns himself with
Kant’s critical philosophy.
Three further preliminary notes are in order here. First, as we will
discuss in section 4 below, the Capitalism and Schizophrenia
project of Deleuze and Guattari will bring to the fore naturalist
tendencies that are only implicitly present in the still-Kantian
framework of Difference and Repetition. So, although there is
some risk of reading backwards in this formulation, we can say that
the “of” in the phrase “the experience of this
concretely existing individual here and now” is both subjective
and objective. It is the experience by human subjects of this
individual object in front of it, and it is the experience enjoyed by
the concretely existing individual itself, even when that individual
is non-human or even non-living. (Deleuze’s panpsychism is treated
briefly in Protevi 2011.) Second, then, in the demand for genetic
principles to account for the real experience of concrete individuals,
Deleuze is working in the tradition of the Principle of Sufficient
Reason. Third, the notion of “genesis” is itself double;
in Chapter 3, Deleuze lays out a dynamic genesis that moves from an
encounter with intensity in sensation to the thinking of virtual
Ideas, while Chapters 4 and 5 lay out a static genesis that moves from
the virtual Idea through an intensive individuation process to an
actual entity. 
We are now ready to discuss the book itself. Murphy 1992 suggests that
the first part of the book (the Introduction and Chapters 1 and 2)
constitutes Deleuze’s treatment of the history of philosophy, while in
the second part of the book (Chapters 4 and 5) Deleuze is doing
philosophy in his own name. From this point of view, Chapter 3, on the
“image of thought,” plays a pivotal role, leading us into
Deleuze’s own philosophy. This transitional role of Chapter 3 is
confirmed elsewhere when Deleuze says that the study of the image of
thought is the “prolegomena to philosophy”
(Negotiations, 149).
In Chapters 1 and 2, to find a differential genetic principle, Deleuze
works through the history of philosophy to isolate the concepts of
“difference in itself” and “repetition for
itself” that the assumptions of previous philosophies had
prevented from being formulated. “Difference in itself” is
difference that is freed from identities seen as metaphysically
primary. Normally, difference is conceived of as an empirical relation
between two terms which each has a prior identity of its own (“x
is different from y”). Deleuze inverts this priority: identity
persists, but is now a something produced by a prior relation between
differentials (dx rather than not-x). Difference is no longer
an empirical relation but becomes a transcendental principle that
constitutes the sufficient reason of empirical diversity (for example,
it is the difference of electrical potential between cloud and ground
that constitutes the sufficient reason of the phenomenon of
lightning).
In Chapter 2, the concept of “repetition for itself” is
produced as repetition that is freed from being repetition of an
original self-identical thing so that it can be the repetition of
difference. Following the formula of Deleuze’s reading of Nietzsche’s
eternal return, repetition is the return of the differential genetic
condition of real experience each time there is an indviduation of a
concrete entity. Ultimately, then, Difference and Repetition
will show that the individuation of entities is produced by the
actualization, integration, or resolution (the terms are synonymous
for Deleuze) of a differentiated virtual field of Ideas or
“multiplicities” that are themselves changed, via
“counter-effectuation,” in each individuating event.
Chapter 3 lays out 8 postulates of the “dogmatic image of
thought.” Between the first four and last four postulates we
find a theory of the faculties, which is thus at the crossroads of
both the chapter and the book.
Let us take up the first four postulates. The first postulate concerns
our supposed natural disposition to think; the denial of this is what
necessitates our being forced to think. The second and third
postulates concern subjective and objective unity. Subjective unity is
captured by the notion of “common sense” such that our
faculties of sensation, memory, imagination, and thought work in
harmony, while objective unity is captured by the notion of
“recognition” such that it is the same object that is
sensed, remembered, imagined, and thought. The fourth postulate
concerns “representation”, a key target of Deleuze’s
critique. Here difference is submitted to a fourfold structure that
renders difference subordinate to identity: 1) identity in the
concept; 2) opposition of predicates; 3) analogy in judgment; and 4)
resemblance in perception. A good way to approach Deleuze’s notion of
representation is via Aristotle and Porphyry. Specific differences are
the opposed predicates that function on a horizon of identity in the
concept under division; thus animal is the genus that is divided into
rational and irrational as specific differences that enable the
isolation of the species “human.” Then, we find that the
difference between individuals of the same species is infra-conceptual
and can only be made via the perception of resemblances; Theaetetus
looks like Socrates but not so much that they cannot be
distinguished. Finally, the relation of substance to the other
categories is analogical, such that being is said in many ways, but
with substance as the primary way in which it is said.
After the first four postulates, we find the theory of the faculties,
which will be Deleuze’s account of what it means to be
“forced” to think in differential rather than identitarian
terms. To free a notion of “difference in itself” such
that difference need not be thought on the basis of a prior horizon of
identity, Deleuze looks for an “encounter,” a sensation
that cannot be thought, that cannot find the empirical category under
which an object can be recognized, and thus forces the
“transcendent exercise” of the faculty of sensibility,
when something can only be sensed.
Here we see the dynamic genesis from intensity in sensation to the
thinking of virtual Ideas. Each step here has a distinct Kantian
echo. The faculties are linked in order; here Deleuze as well as Kant
looks to the privilege of sensibility as the origin of
knowledge—the “truth of empiricism.” With
sensibility, pure difference in intensity is grasped immediately in
the encounter as the sentiendum, that which can only be
sensed. In the differential theory of the faculties, sensibility,
imagination, memory, and thought all “communicate a
violence” from one to the other—here Deleuze works with
the Kantian notion of the sublime as discordant accord of the
faculties. The “free form of difference” in intensity
moves each faculty and communicates its violence to the next, though
in this case there is no supernatural vocation that will redeem the
conflict of imagination and reason, as there is in the resolution to
the discussion of the sublime in the Critique of
Judgment. Rather than a reconciliation of the faculties, with
thought, a “fractured self”—here Deleuze takes up
Kant’s notion of the split between the empirical ego and the
Transcendental subject—is constrained to think “difference
in itself” in Ideas.
We won’t discuss the last four postulates in detail, as they concern
the theory of Ideas, the topic of Chapter 4, which we will shortly
discuss. For now, let us note that two of Deleuze’s technical terms,
intensity and virtuality, occupy two different places on this line of
dynamic genesis. Intensity is the characteristic of the encounter, and
sets off the process of thinking, while virtuality is the
characteristic of the Idea.
With the notions of intensive and extensive we come upon a crucial
distinction for Deleuze that is explored in Chapters 4 and 5
of Difference and Repetition. Extensive differences, such as
length, area or volume, are intrinsically divisible. A volume of
matter divided into two equal halves produces two volumes, each having
half the extent of the original one. Intensive differences, by
contrast, refer to properties such as temperature or pressure that
cannot be so divided. If a volume of water whose temperature is
90º is divided in half, the result is two volumes at the original
temperature, not two volumes at 45º. However, the important
property of intensity is not that it is indivisible, but that it is a
property that cannot be divided without involving a change in
kind. The temperature of a volume of water, for instance, can be
“divided” by heating the container from below, causing a
temperature difference between the top and the bottom. In so doing,
however, we change the system qualitatively; moreover, if the
temperature differences reach a certain threshold (if they attain a
certain “intensity” in Deleuze’s terms), the system will
undergo a “phase transition,” losing symmetry and changing
its dynamics, entering into a periodic pattern of
motion—convection—which displays extensive properties of
size: X centimeters of length and breadth. Drawing on these kinds of
analyses, Deleuze will assign a transcendental status to the
intensive: intensity, he argues, constitutes the genetic condition of
extensive space. Intensive processes are themselves in turn structured
by Ideas or multiplicities.
An Idea or multiplicity is really a process of progressive
determination of differential elements, differential relations, and
singularities. Let us take these step-by-step. “Elements”
must have no independent existence from the system in which they
inhere; phonemes as the elements of the virtual linguistic Idea are an
example Deleuze uses in Difference and Repetition. When
phonemes are actualized they enter into differential relations that
determine the patterns of individual languages; thus the English
phoneme /p/ is reciprocally determined by its differences from /t/,
/b/, /d/, and so on. Finally, these differential relations of an
individual language determine singularities or remarkable points at
which the pattern of that language can shift: the Great Vowel Shift of
Middle English being an example, or more prosaically, dialect
pronunciation shifts.
For another example—and here, in the applicability of his schema
to widely divergent registers, is one of the aspects of Deleuze as
metaphysician—let us try to construct the Idea of
hurricanes. The differential elements would be material
“flows” driven by intensive differences in temperature and
pressure but undetermined in form (neither smooth nor turbulent,
neither big nor small) and function (neither forming nor destroying of
weather events). These flows qua differential elements enter into
relations of reciprocal determination linking changes in any one
element to changes in the others; thus temperature and pressure
differences will link changes in air and water currents to each other:
updrafts are related to downdrafts even if the exact relations (the
tightness of the links, the velocity of the flows) are not yet
determined. Finally, at singular points in these relations
singularities are determined that mark qualitative shifts in the
system, such as the formation of thunderstorm cells, the eye wall, and
so on. But this is still the virtual Idea of hurricanes; real existent
hurricanes will have measurable values of these variables so that we
can move from the philosophical realm of sufficient reason to that of
scientific causation. A hurricane is explained by its Idea, but it is
caused by real wind currents driven by real temperature supplied by
the sun to tropical waters.
To see how Ideas are transcendental and immanent, we have to
appreciate that an Idea is a concrete universal. In an early article
on Bergson (“The Conception of Difference in Bergson”
[1956]), Deleuze gave a particularly helpful example of this
notion. In La Pensée et le Mouvant, Bergson had shown
that there are two ways of determining what the spectrum of
“colors” have in common. (1) You can extract from
particular colors an abstract and general idea of color (“by
removing from the red that which makes it red, from the blue what
makes it blue, from the green what makes it green”). Or, (2) you
can make all these colors “pass through a convergent lens,
bringing them to a single point,” in which case a “pure
white light” is obtained that “makes the differences
between the shades stand out.” The former case defines a single
generic “concept” with a plurality of objects; the
relation between concept and object is one of subsumption; and the
state of difference remains exterior to the thing. The second case, on
the contrary, defines a differential Idea in the Deleuzean sense: the
different colors are no longer objects under a concept, but constitute
an order of mixture in coexistence and succession within the Idea; the
relation between the Idea and a given color is not one of subsumption,
but one of actualization and differenciation; and the state of
difference between the concept and the object is internalized in the
Idea itself, so that the concept itself has become the object. White
light is still a universal, but it is a concrete universal, and not a
genus or generality.
The Idea of color is thus like white light, which
“perplexes” within itself the genetic elements and
relations of all the colors, but which is actualized in the diverse
colors and their respective spaces. (Like the word
“problem,” Deleuze uses the word “perplexion”
to signify, not a coefficient of doubt, hesitation, or astonishment,
but the multiple and virtual state of Ideas. Indeed, Deleuze adopts a
number of neoplatonic notions to indicate the structure of Ideas, all
of which are derived from the root word pli [fold]:
perplication, complication, implication, explication, and
replication.) Similarly, the Idea of sound could be conceived of as a
white noise, just as there is also a white society or a white
language, which contains in its virtuality all the phonemes and
relations destined to be actualized in the diverse languages and in
the remarkable parts of a same language.
We can now move to discuss Chapter 5, on the individuation of
concretely existing real entities as the actualization of a virtual
Idea. In isolating the conditions of genesis, Deleuze sets up a
tripartite ontological scheme, positing three interdependent
registers: the virtual, intensive, and actual. Deleuze’s basic notion
is that in all realms of being intensive morphogenetic processes
follow differential virtual multiplicities to produce localized and
individuated actual substances with extensive properties. Simply put,
the actualization of the virtual proceeds by way of intensive
processes. Beneath the actual (any one state of a system), we find
“impersonal individuations” or intensive morphogenetic
processes that produce system states and beneath these we find
“pre-individual singularities” (that is, the key elements
in virtual fields, marking system thresholds that structure the
intensive morphogenetic processes). We thus have to distinguish the
intense “impersonal” field of individuation and its
processes from the virtual “pre-individual” field of
differential relations and singularities that make up an Idea or
multiplicity.
Tying together the themes of difference, multiplicity, virtuality and
intensity, at the heart of Difference and Repetition we find
a theory of Ideas (dialectics) based neither on an essential model of
identity (Plato), nor a regulative model of unity (Kant), nor a
dialectical model of contradiction (Hegel), but rather on a
problematic and genetic model of difference. Ideas define the being of
a thing, but one cannot attain an Idea through the Socratic question
“What is … ?” (which posits Ideas as transcendent
and eternal), but rather through “minor” questions such as
“Which one?” “Where?” “When?”
“How?” “How many?” “In which
case?” “From which viewpoint?”—all of which
allow one to define the differential Ideas immanent in the intensive
processes they structure.
From these examples we can see that Ideas structure the intensive
processes that give rise to the behavior patterns of systems, and
their singularities mark the thresholds at which systems change
behavior patterns. In a word, the virtual Idea is the transformation
matrix for material systems or bodies. Bodies are determined
“solutions” to the “problem” that lays out the
manifold options for incarnating bodies of that nature. Ideas then
respond to the question “who?” (who is it that incarnates
the Idea in this case?) rather than the essentialist “what
is?” (what are the properties of the substance that provide the
necessary and sufficient conditions for membership in the class of
which the object is a member?)
 

For orientation purposes, it’s useful to consider Gilbert Simondon’s
theory of individuation as a very simple model for what Deleuze calls
“actualization.” For Simondon, crystallization is a
paradigm of individuation: a supersaturated solution is metastable;
from that pre-individuated field, replete with gradients of density
that are only implicit “forms” or “potential
functions,” individual crystals precipitate out. The crucial
difference is that crystals form in homogenous solutions, while the
Deleuzean virtual is composed of “Ideas” or
“multiplicities” involving differential relations among
heterogeneous components, whose rates of change are connected with
each other. For an example of such heterogeneity, let us return to
hurricane formation, the Idea of which we sketched above. Here it
should be intuitively clear that there is no central command, but a
self-organization of multiple processes of air and water movement
propelled by temperature and pressure differences. All hurricanes form
when intensive processes of wind and ocean currents reach singular
points. These singular points, however, are not unique to any one
hurricane, but are virtual for each actual hurricane, just as the
boiling point of water is virtual for each actual pot of tea on the
stove. In other words, all hurricanes share the same virtual structure
even as they are singular individuations or actualizations of that
structure.
In this treatment, we have concentrated on only some of the
metaphysics in Difference and Repetition; much more could be
said about the role that Nietzsche’s thought of the eternal return
plays therein, in addition to Deleuze’s remarks on a dizzying array of
figures from Plato and Scotus to Freud and Artaud. In the interests of
space, however, let us move to a brief treatment of Deleuze’s second
major work of the late 1960s, Logic of Sense.
While Difference and Repetition ranges over a wide field of
philosophical topics, Logic of Sense focuses on two aspects
of a single issue, the structure and genesis of sense. The genius of
Frege and Russell was to have discovered that the condition of truth
(denotation) lies in the domain of sense. In order for a proposition
to be true (or false) it must have a sense; a nonsensical proposition
can be neither true nor false. Yet they betrayed this insight, Deleuze
argues, because they—like Kant before them—remained
content with establishing the condition of truth rather than its
genesis. In Logic of Sense, Deleuze attacks this problem,
first developing the paradoxes that result from the structure of sense
and then sketching a theory of its genesis. He does this using
resources from analytic philosophy and the Stoics in the course of a
reading of Lewis Carroll—a typically innovative, if not quirky,
set of Deleuzean references.
In the first part of the book, Deleuze analyzes the structure of
sense. He begins by identifying three types of relation within
propositions:
Propositions, in other words, can be related either to the objects to
which they refer, or to the subjects who utter them, or to other
propositions. But each of these relations, in turn, can be taken to be
primary. (1) In the domain of speech, it is the “I” that
begins: manifestation not only makes denotation possible (Hume), but
is also prior to signification (Descartes’ cogito). (2) In
the domain of language, however, it is signification that is primary,
since one is always born into a preexisting language, and signified
concepts are always primary in relation to the self as a manifested
person or to things as designated objects. (3) Yet in the domain of
logic we see the primacy of designation: as shown by the hypothetical
mode of implications, the logical value of demonstration is not the
truth, but rather the conditions of truth (the conditions of
possibility under which the proposition would be true); the premises
must thus be posited as effectively true, which forces one to leave
the pure order of implication in order to relate the premises to a
denoted state of affairs. Logical designation, in other words, cannot
fulfill its putative role as foundation, since it presupposes an
irreducible denotation.
The theory of the proposition is thus caught in a circle, with each
condition in turn being conditioned by what it supposedly conditions.
“For the condition of truth to avoid this defect,” Deleuze
argues, “it would have to have something unconditioned capable
of assuring a real genesis of designation and the other dimensions of
the proposition: the condition of truth would then be defined, no
longer as the form of conceptual possibility, but as an ideal matter
or ‘medium’ [matière ou ‘couche’
idéelle], that is, no longer as signification, but as
sense” (LS 19). Sense, then, would be a fourth dimension of
propositions, for which Deleuze reserves the term expression. For
Deleuze as for Frege, sense is what is expressed in a proposition; the
two senses of “morning star” and “evening
star” are two ways in which the same denotatum may be
expressed in propositions.
Deleuze’s contribution to the philosophy of sense really begins to
take off when he shows that the attempt to make this fourth dimension
evident is akin to Lewis Carroll’s Hunt for the Snark, or to
unraveling a Möbius strip, since sense has neither a physical nor
a mental existence. Deleuze suggests that it was the Stoics who first
discovered the dimension of sense when they distinguished between
corporeal mixtures and incorporeal events. I can attribute the proper
name “Battle of Waterloo” to a particular state of
affairs, but the battle itself is an incorporeal event (or sense) with
no other reality than that of the expression of my proposition; what
we find in the state of affairs are bodies mixing with one
another—spears stabbing flesh, bullets flying through the air,
cannons firing, bodies being ripped apart—and the battle itself
is the effect or the result of this intermingling of
bodies. Sense thus has a complex status. On the one hand, it does not
exist outside the proposition that expresses it, but it cannot be
confused with the proposition, since it has a distinct
“objectity” of its own (it does not exist, but rather
“subsists” or “insists”). On the other hand,
it is attributed to states of affairs or things, but it cannot be
confused or identified with state of affairs, nor with a quality or
relation of these states. “Sense is both the expressible or the
expressed of the proposition, and the attribute of the state of
affairs. It turns one side toward things, and another side toward
propositions. But it cannot be confused with the proposition which
expressed it any more than with the state of affairs or the quality
which the proposition denotes. It is exactly the boundary between
propositions and things” (LS 22).
The structure of sense generates a number of paradoxes, which Deleuze
distinguishes from the paradoxes of signification discovered by
Russell in set theory (the set of all sets, and the “barber of
the regiment”). The first is the paradox of regress, or
indefinite proliferation: I can never state the sense of what I am
saying, but I can take the sense of what I am saying as the object of
another proposition, whose sense in turn I cannot state, ad
infinitum. This first paradox points both to the impotence of the
speaker (my inability to state the sense of what I am saying) and to
the highest power of language (its infinite capability to speak about
words). The second paradox is that of sterile reiteration or doubling:
one can avoid the infinite regress by extracting sense as the mere
double of a proposition, but at the price of catapulting us into a
third paradox of neutrality or sterility—sense is necessarily
neutral with regard to the various modes of the proposition: quality
(affirmation, negation), quantity (all, some, none), relation, and
modality (possibility, reality, necessity).
Thus extracted from the proposition, Deleuze argues that sense has the
status of a pure ideational event, irreducible to
propositions and their three dimensions: (1) the states of affairs the
propositions denote; (2) the experiences or mental activities
(beliefs, desires, images, representations) of persons who express
themselves in the proposition; and (3) universals or general concepts.
But how can sense be said to engender the other dimension of the
proposition? This is the second task of a logic of sense: “to
combine the sterility of sense in relation to the proposition from
which it was extracted with its power of genesis in relation to the
dimensions of the proposition” (LS 32).
In the second half of Logic of Sense, Deleuze analyzes what
he calls the dynamic genesis of language, drawing in part from texts
in developmental psychology and psychoanalysis. “What renders
language possible,” he writes, “is that which separates
sounds from bodies and organizes them into propositions, freeing them
for the expressive function” (LS 181). Deleuze distinguishes
three stages in the dynamic genesis, which at the same time constitute
three dimensions of language: (1) the primary order is the noise
produced in the depths of the body; (2) the secondary organization
constitutes the surface of sense (and non-sense); and (3) the tertiary
arrangement [ordonnance] is found in fully-formed
propositions, with their functions of denotation, manifestation, and
signification.
The first stage of the dynamic genesis of sense, the primary order of
language, is found in the newborn infant. Deleuze draws from a
tradition of developmental psychology whose insights are expressed in
the vivid image of Daniel N. Stern: the infant’s experience is a kind
of human “weatherscape,” made up entirely of sequences of
risings and fallings of intensity—the jolting of a bright light
or a sharp noise, the calming of a voice, or the explosive breakout of
a storm of hunger (The Interpersonal World of the Infant,
1985). Deleuze will draw upon the writings of the French writer
Antonin Artaud and call this life of intensities-in-motion the
“body without organs.” This primary order of language
(pure Noise as a dimension of the body) constitutes a first type of
nonsense. But in the midst of this world of intensities, there also
appears a particular noise: the sound of the child’s parents, or other
adults. Long before the infant can understand words and sentences, it
grasps language as something that pre-exists itself, as something
always-already there, like a Voice on high. But for the child the
Voice has the dimensions of language without having its
condition. (Adults have the same experience when they hear a foreign
language being spoken.) For the infant to accede to the tertiary
arrangement of language (denotation, manifestation, signification), it
must pass through its secondary organization, which is the production
of the surface dimension of sense. How does this construction take
place? From the flow of the Voice, the child will extract differential
elements of various orders (phonemes, morphemes, semantemes) and begin
to synthesize them into diverse series.
At this point, Deleuze isolates three series or syntheses: connective,
conjunctive, and disjunctive. In the first, the child connects
phonemes in a concatenation of successive entities
(“mama,” “dada”); in the second, there is the
construction of esoteric words out of these phonemes through their
integration and conjunction (“your royal highness” is
contracted into “y’reince”); in the third, the child
starts making these esoteric words ramify and enter into relation with
other divergent and independent series. We can clearly see that the
constructions of this secondary organization of sense are not yet the
fully formed units of the tertiary arrangement of language on high,
but they are no longer merely the bodily noises of the primary order.
Before the child has any understanding of linguistic units, it
undertakes a vast apprenticeship in their formative elements. This is
why the domain of sense is the condition or ground of propositions,
not as their form of possibility, but as their “ideal matter or
‘medium’”: we are positioned immediately within
sense whenever we denote, manifest, or signify. Moreover, since sense
lies at the frontier of words and things—it is expressed in
propositions and attributed to states of affairs, but it cannot be
confused with either propositions or states of affairs—it
engenders both the determinate dimensions of the proposition
(denotation, manifestation, signification) as well as its objective
correlates (the denoted, the manifested, and the signified).
The domain of sense is necessarily subject to a fundamental fragility,
capable of toppling over into nonsense: the ground gives way to a
groundlessness, a sans-fond. The reason for this is
clear. Sense is never a principle or an origin; rather, it is an
effect, it is produced, and it is produced out of elements that do
not, in themselves, have a sense. Sense, in other words, has a
determinate relation with nonsense. Deleuze, however, distinguishes
between two very different types of nonsense. The first is that of
Lewis Carroll, who remains at the surface of sense and, like children,
makes use of the non-signifying elements of language in order to
construct the portmanteau words (snark = shark + snake; frumious =
furious + fuming) and nonsensical phrases (“’Twas brillig, and
the slithy toves did gyre and gimble in the wabe”) that populate
his writing. If Logic of Sense is in part a reading of
Carroll’s work, it is because no one knew better than Carroll about
the conditions for the production of sense, which Deleuze elucidates
in detail: the extraction of differential elements or pure event,
their organization in multiple series, and most importantly, the
aleatory point or paradoxical element that links the series (the ideal
“quasi-cause” that produces the effect of sense out of
nonsense).
But there is a second type of nonsense, which is more profound than
the surface nonsense found in Lewis Carroll. This is the terrifying
nonsense of the primary order, which found expression in the writings
of Antonin Artaud. Sense is what prevents the sonorous language from
being confused with the physical body (noise). But in the primary
order of schizophrenia experienced by Artaud, there is no longer
anything to prevent propositions from falling back onto bodies, which
mingle their sonorous elements with the olfactory, gustatory, and
digestive effects of the body (Artaud’s cris-souffles:
“ratara ratara ratara Atara tatara rana Otara otara
katara”).
Deleuze will develop his theory of the body-without-organs in his
collaboration with Félix Guattari, to which we now turn. As we
shall see, the concept of the body-without-organs is put to work in a
complex naturalistic philosophy of “desiring-production”
that moves far beyond the question of sense into the realms of nature,
history, and politics. In other words, if Logic of Sense
represents Deleuze’s confrontation with the “linguistic
turn” that was so important for twentieth-century philosophy, it
is a confrontation that he quickly put behind him as he came to
embrace fully his materialist and naturalistic leanings.
Following his work in the philosophy of difference, Deleuze meets
Guattari in the aftermath of May 1968. These famous
“events,” which have marked French culture and politics
ever since, brought together students and workers, to the befuddlement
of the established guardians of the revolution, the French Communist
Party. Days of general strikes and standoffs with the police led the
French President Charles de Gaulle to call a general election. De
Gaulle’s call for a parliamentary solution to the crisis was backed by
the Communists, who were evidently as scared of any revolution from
below—which by definition would lack the party discipline they
so craved—as were the official holders of State power, to whose
position they aspired. The worker-student movement eventually
collapsed, leaving memories of non-scripted social interactions and
revealing the investments of the Party, lampooned thereafter as
“bureaucrats of the revolution,” in Foucault’s words in
his Preface to the English translation of Anti-Oedipus. The
French Communist Party’s agreement with De Gaulle to allow a
parliamentary solution to the social crisis was a glaring example of
the horizon of identity (the desire that someone be in control of a
central State bureaucracy) that allowed an opposition (of the
Gaullists and the Communists as rivals for control of the State) to
shackle difference. The government response to May 1968 changed French
academic life in two ways. First, institutionally, by the creation of
Paris VIII (Vincennes) where Deleuze taught; and second, in the
direction of the philosophy of difference, which became explicitly
political post-1968.  It became, in fact, a politics of philosophy
dedicated to exposing the historical force relations producing
identity in all its ontological and epistemological forms. In other
words, the philosophy of difference now set out to show how the
unified objects of the world, the unified subjects who know and hence
control them, the unified bodies of knowledge that codify this
knowledge, and the unified institution of philosophy that polices the
whole affair, are products of historical, political forces in combat
with other forces.
In purely philosophical terms, the works with Guattari naturalize the
still-Kantian framework of Difference and Repetition. By the
time of Anti-Oedipus and A Thousand Plateaus Deleuze
and Guattari explicitly thematize that the syntheses they investigate
are fully material syntheses, syntheses of nature in geological as
well as biological, social, and psychological registers (Welchman
2009). Not just organic syntheses, but inorganic ones as well, are
“spatio-temporal dynamisms.” With this full naturalization
of syntheses, the question of panpsychism is brought into full relief
(Protevi 2011), since material syntheses are as much syntheses of
experience as they are syntheses of things, as we see in the title of
Chapter 3 of A Thousand Plateaus: “The Geology of
Morals: Who does the earth think it is?”
In considering Anti-Oedipus we should first discuss its
performative effect, which attempts to “force us to
think,” that is, to fight against a tendency to
cliché. Reading Anti-Oedipus can indeed be shocking
experience. First, we find a bizarre collection of sources; for
example, the schizophrenic ranting of Antonin Artaud provides one of
the basic concepts of the work, the “body without organs.”
Second is the book’s vulgarity, as in the infamous opening lines about
the unconscious (the Id): “It is at work everywhere, functioning
smoothly at times, at other times in fits and starts. It breathes, it
heats, it eats. It shits and fucks [Ça chie, ça
baise]. What a mistake to have ever said the id”
(7 / 1). A third performative effect is humor, as in the mocking of
Melanie Klein’s analysis of children: “Say it’s Oedipus, or I’ll
slap you upside the head [sinon t’auras un gifle]” (54
/ 45; trans. modified). There are many more passages like this; it’s
safe to say very few philosophy books contain as many jokes, puns, and
double entendres as Anti-Oedipus. A fourth element
is the gleeful coarseness of the polemics. Among many other examples,
thinkers of the signifier are associated with the lap dogs of tyrants,
members of the French Communist Party are said to have fascist
libidinal investments, and Freud is described as a “masked Al
Capone.” All in all, the performative effect of reading
Anti-Oedipus is unforgettable.
Passing to the conceptual structure of the book, the key term of
Anti-Oedipus is “desiring-production,” which
crisscrosses Marx and Freud, putting desire in the eco-social realm of
production and production in the unconscious realm of desire. Rather
than attempting to synthesize Marx and Freud in the usual way, that
is, by a reductionist strategy that either (1) operates in favor of
Freud, by positing that the libidinal investment of social figures and
patterns requires sublimating an original investment in family figures
and patterns, or (2) operates in favor of Marx by positing neuroses
and psychoses as mere super-structural by-products of unjust social
structures, Deleuze and Guattari will call desiring-production a
“universal primary process” underlying the seemingly
separate natural, social and psychological realms. Desiring-production
is thus not anthropocentric; it is the very heart of the
world. Besides its universal scope, we need to realize two things
about desiring-production right away: (1) there is no subject that
lies behind the production, that performs the production; and (2) the
“desire” in desiring-production is not oriented to making
up a lack, but is purely positive. Desiring-production is autonomous,
self-constituting, and creative: it is the natura naturans of
Spinoza or the will-to-power of Nietzsche.
Anti-Oedipus is, along with its conceptual and terminological
innovation, a work of grand ambitions: among them, (1) an eco-social
theory of production, encompassing both sides of the nature/culture
split, which functions as an ontology of change, transformation, or
“becoming”; (2) a “universal history” of
social formations—the “savage” or tribal, the
“barbarian” or imperial, and the capitalist—which
functions as a synthetic social science; (3) and to clear the ground
for these functions, a critique of the received versions of Marx and
Freud—and the attempts to synthesize them by analogizing their
realms of application. In pursuing its ambitions,
Anti-Oedipus has the virtues and the faults of the tour
de force: unimagined connections between disparate elements are
made possible, but at the cost of a somewhat strained conceptual
scheme.
Anti-Oedipus identifies two primary registers of
desiring-production, the natural or “metaphysical” and the
social or “historical.” They are related in the following
way: natural desiring-production is that which social machines
repress, but also that which is revealed in capitalism, at the end of
history (a contingent history, that is, one that avoids dialectical
laws of history). Capitalism sets free desiring-production even as it
attempts to rein it in with the institution of private property and
the familial or “Oedipal” patterning of desire;
schizophrenics are propelled by the charge of desiring-production thus
set free but fail at the limits capitalist society proposes, thus
providing a clue to the workings of desiring-production.
It’s important at the start to realize that Deleuze and Guattari do
not advocate schizophrenia as a “lifestyle” or as the
model for a political program. The schizophrenic, as a clinical
entity, is the result of the interruption or the blocking of the
process of desiring-production, its having been taken out of nature
and society and restricted to the body of an individual where it spins
in the void rather than make the connections that constitute reality.
Desiring-production does not connect “with” reality, as in
escaping a subjective prison to touch the objective, but it makes
reality, it is the Real, in a twisting of the Lacanian sense of the
term. In Lacan, the real is produced as an illusory and retrojected
remainder to a signifying system; for Deleuze and Guattari, the Real
is reality itself in its process of self-making. The schizophrenic is
a sick person in need of help, but schizophrenia is an avenue into the
unconscious, the unconscious not of an individual, but the
“transcendental unconscious,” an unconscious that is
social, historical, and natural all at once.
In studying the schizophrenic process, Deleuze and Guattari posit that
in both the natural and social registers desiring-production is
composed of three syntheses, the connective, disjunctive, and
conjunctive; the syntheses perform three functions: production,
recording, and enjoyment. We can associate production with the
physiological, recording with the semiotic, and enjoyment with the
psychological registers. While it is important to catch the Kantian
resonance of “synthesis,” it is equally important to note,
in keeping with the post-structuralist angle we discussed above, that
there is no subject performing the syntheses; instead, subjects are
themselves one of the products of the syntheses. The syntheses have no
underlying subject; they just are the immanent process of
desiring-production.  Positing a subject behind the syntheses would be
a transcendent use of the syntheses. Here we see another reference to
the Kantian principle of immanence. Deleuze and Guattari propose to
study the immanent use of the synthesis in a “materialist
psychoanalysis,” or “schizoanalysis”; by contrast,
psychoanalysis is transcendent use of the syntheses, producing five
“paralogisms” or “transcendental illusions,”
all of which involve assigning the characteristics of the extensive
properties of actual products to the intensive production process, or,
to put it in the terms of the philosophy of difference, all the
paralogisms subordinate differential processes to identities derived
from products.
According to the “universal history” undertaken in
Anti-Oedipus, social life has three forms of
“socius,” the social body that takes credit for
production: the earth for the tribe, the body of the despot for the
empire, and capital for capitalism.  According to Deleuze and
Guattari’s reading of the anthropological literature, tribal societies
mark bodies in initiation ceremonies, so that the products of an organ
are traced to a clan, which is mythically traced to the earth or, more
precisely, one of its enchanted regions, which function as the organs
on the full body of the earth. Material flows are thus
“territorialized,” that is, traced onto the earth, which
is credited as the source of all production. The signs in tribal
inscription are not signifiers: they do not map onto a voice, but
enact a “savage triangle forming … a theater of cruelty
that implies the triple independence of the articulated voice, the
graphic hand and the appreciative eye” (189). Empires overcode
these tribal meaning codes, tracing production back to the despot, the
divine father of his people. Material flows in despotic empires are
thus “deterritorialized” (they are no longer credited to
the earth), and then immediately “reterritorialized” on
the body of the despot, who assumes credit for all production. When
tribal signs are overcoded, the signifier is formed as a
“deterritorialized sign” allowing for communication
between the conquered and the conquerors. Signifiers are a
“flattening” or “bi-univocalization”: two
chains are lined up, one to one, the written and the spoken (205–6;
cf. Derrida’s notion of “phonocentrism”). The body of the
despot as imperial socius means that workers are the
“hands” of the emperor, spies are his “eyes,”
and so on.
Capitalism is the radical decoding and deterritorialization of the
material flows that previous social machines had zealously coded on
the earth or the body of the despot. Production is credited to the
“body” of capital, but this form of recording works by the
substitution of an “axiomatic” for a code: in this context
an “axiomatic” means a set of simple principles for the
quantitative calculation of the difference between flows (of
deterritorialized labor and capital) rather than elaborate rules for
the qualitative judgments that map flows onto the socius. Capitalism’s
command is utterly simple: connect deterritorialized flows of labor
and capital and extract a surplus from that connection. Thus
capitalism sets loose an enormous productive charge—connect
those flows! Faster, faster!—the surpluses of which the
institutions of private property try to register as belonging to
individuals. Now those individuals are primarily social (as figures of
capitalist or laborer) and only secondarily private (family
members). Whereas organs of bodies were socially marked in previous
regimes (as belonging to the clan and earth, or as belonging to the
emperor, as in the jus primae noctis), body organs are
privatized under capitalism and attached to persons as members of the
family. In Deleuze and Guattari’s terms, capitalism’s decoded flows
are reterritorialized on “persons,” that is, on family
members as figures in the Oedipal triangle.
Three differences between this work and its predecessor are
immediately apparent. First, A Thousand Plateaus has a much
wider range of registers than Anti-Oedipus: cosmic, geologic,
evolutionary, developmental, ethological, anthropological,
mythological, historical, economic, political, literary, musical, and
even more. Second, the results of the paralogisms of
Anti-Oedipus become “strata” in A Thousand
Plateaus: the organism (the unification and totalization of the
connective synthesis of production, or the physiological register),
the signifying totality or signifiance, which we can perhaps render as
“signifier-ness” (the flattening or
“bi-univocalizing” of the disjunctive synthesis of
recording, the semiotic register), and the subject (the reification of
the conjunctive synthesis of consummation, the psychological
register). Finally, while Anti-Oedipus has a classical
conceptual architecture, that is, chapters that develop a single
argument, A Thousand Plateaus is written as a
“rhizome,” that is, as allowing immediate connections
between any of its points. Because of this rhizomatic structure, a
traditional summary of the “theses” and arguments of A
Thousand Plateaus is either downright impossible, or at best,
would be much too complex to attempt in an encyclopedia article. We
will therefore have to limit ourselves to the following remarks.
In fourteen plateaus, or planes of intensity—productive
connections between immanently arrayed material systems without
reference to an external governing source—Deleuze and Guattari
develop a new materialism in which a politicized philosophy of
difference joins forces with the sciences explored in Difference and
Repetition. A Thousand Plateaus is a book of strange new
questions: “Who Does the Earth Think It Is?,” “How
Do You make Yourself a Body Without Organs?,” “How does
the war-machine ward off the apparatus of capture of the State?”
and so on. To over-simplify, Deleuze and Guattari take up the insights
of dynamical systems theory, which explores the various thresholds at
which material systems self-organize (that is, reduce their degrees of
freedom, as in our previous example of convection currents). Deleuze
and Guattari then extend the notion of self-organizing material
systems—those with no need of transcendent organizing agents
such as gods, leaders, capital, or subjects—to the social,
linguistic, political-economic, and psychological realms. The
resultant “rhizome” or de-centered network that is A
Thousand Plateaus provides hints for experimentation with the
more and more de-regulated flows of energy and matter, ideas and
actions—and the attendant attempts at binding them—that
make up the contemporary world.
A Thousand Plateaus maintains the tripartite ontological
scheme of all of Deleuze’s work, but, as the title indicates, with
geological terms of reference. Deleuze and Guattari call the virtual
“the Earth,” the intensive is called
“consistency,” and the actual is called “the system
of the strata.” As the latter term indicates, one of the foci of
their investigations is the tendency of some systems to head toward
congealment or stratification. More precisely put, any concrete system
is composed of intensive processes tending toward the (virtual) plane
of consistency and/or toward (actual) stratification.  We can say that
all that exists is the intensive, tending towards the limits of
virtuality and actuality; these last two ontological registers do not
“exist,” but they do “insist,” to use one of
Deleuze’s terms. Nothing ever instantiates the sheer frozen stasis of
the actual nor the sheer differential dispersion of the virtual;
rather, natural or worldly processes are always and only
actualizations, that is, they are processes of actualization
structured by virtual multiplicities and heading toward an actual
state they never quite attain. More precisely, systems also contain
tendencies moving in the other direction, toward virtuality; systems
are more or less stable sets of processes moving in different
directions, toward actuality and toward virtuality. In still other
words, Deleuze and Guattari are process philosophers; neither the
structures of such processes nor their completed products merit the
same ontological status as processes themselves. With this
perspective, Deleuze and Guattari offer a detailed and complex
“open system” which is extraordinarily rich and complex. A
useful way into it is to follow the concepts of coding, stratification
and territorialization. They are related in the following
manner. Coding is the process of ordering matter as it is drawn into a
body; by contrast, stratification is the process of creating
hierarchal bodies, while territorialization is the ordering of those
bodies in “assemblages,” that is to say, an emergent unity
joining together heterogeneous bodies in a
“consistency.”
These concepts, and several other networks of concepts considerations
of space preclude us from considering, are put to work in addressing
the following topics. After a discussion of the notion of
“rhizome” in the first chapter (or “plateau”
as they call it), Deleuze and Guattari quickly dismiss psychoanalysis
in the second. In the third chapter they discuss the process of
stratification in physical, organic, and social strata, with special
attention to questions in population genetics, where speciation can be
thought to stratify or channel the flow of genes. In chapters 4 and 5
they intervene in debates in linguistics in favor of pragmatics, that
is to say, highlighting the “incorporeal transformations”
(labels that prompt a different form of action to be applied to a
body: “I now pronounce you man and wife”) that socially
sanctioned “order words” bring about (Deleuze and Guattari
also refer to speech act theory in this regard).  They also lay out
the theory of “territories” or sets of environmentally
embedded triggers of self-organizing processes, and the concomitant
processes of deterritorialization (breaking of habits) and
reterritorialization (formation of habits). Chapters 6 and 7 discuss
methods of experimenting with the strata in which we found ourselves.
Chapter 6 deals with the organic stratum or the
“organism”; the notorious term of art “Body without
Organs” can be at least partially glossed as the reservoir of
potentials for different patterns of bodily affect. Chapter 7 deals
with the intersection of signifiance
(“signifier-ness”) and subjectification in
“faciality”; the face arrests the drift of signification
by tying meaning to the expressive gestures of a subject. Chapters 8
and 9 deal with the social organizing practices they name
“lines” and “segments”; of particular interest
here is their treatment of fascism. Chapter 10 returns to the question
of intensive experimentation, now discussed in terms of
“becoming,” in which (at least) two systems come together
to form an emergent system or “assemblage.” Chapter 11
discusses the “refrain” or rhythm as a means of escaping
from and forming new territories, or even existing in a process of
continual deterritorialization, what they call
“consistency.” Chapters 12 and 13 discuss the relation of
the “war machine” and the State; the former is a form of
social organization that fosters creativity (it
“reterritorializes on deterritorialization itself”), while
the latter is an “apparatus of capture” living
vampirically off of labor (here Deleuze and Guattari’s basically
Marxist perspective is apparent). Finally, Chapter 14 discusses types
of social constitution of space, primarily the “smooth”
space of war machines and the “striated” space of
States.
After a long period in which each pursued his own interests, Deleuze
and Guattari published a last collaboration in 1991, What Is
Philosophy? In answering
their title question, Deleuze and Guattari seek to place philosophy in
relation to science and art, all three being modes of thought, with no
subordination among them. Thought, in all its modes, struggles with
chaos against opinion. Philosophy is the creation or construction of
concepts; a concept is an intensive multiplicity, inscribed on a plane
of immanence, and peopled by “conceptual personae” which
operate the conceptual machinery. A conceptual persona is not a
subject, for thinking is not subjective, but takes place in the
relationship of territory and earth. Science creates functions on a
plane of reference.  Art creates “a bloc of sensation, that is
to say, a compound of percepts and affects” (WP, 164).
We will deal with Deleuze and the arts in some detail below. In
discussing What is Philosophy?, let us concentrate on the
treatment of the relation of philosophy and science. We should
remember at the outset that the nomad or minor science evoked in A
Thousand Plateaus is not the Royal or major science that makes up
the entirety of what Deleuze and Guattari call ‘science’
in What is Philosophy?. The motives for this conflation are
unclear; in the eyes of some, this change considerably weakens the
value of the latter work. Be that as it may, in What is
Philosophy? Deleuze and Guattari vigorously deny that philosophy
is needed to help science think about its own presuppositions
(“no one needs philosophy to reflect on anything” [WP
6]). Instead, they emphasize the complementary nature of the two.
First, they point out a number of similarities between philosophy and
science: both are approaches to “chaos” that attempt to
bring order to it, both are creative modes of thought, and both are
complementary to each other, as well as to a third mode of creative
thought, art. Beyond these similarities, Deleuze and Guattari
distinguish between philosophy as the creation of concepts on a plane
of immanence and science as the creation of functions on a plane of
reference. Both relate to the virtual, the differential field of
potential transformations of material systems, but in different
ways. Philosophy gives consistency to the virtual, mapping the forces
composing a system as pure potentials, what the system is capable
of. Meanwhile, science gives it reference, determining the conditions
by which systems behave the way they actually do. Philosophy is the
“counter-effectuation of the event,” abstracting an event
or change of pattern from bodies and states of affairs and thereby
laying out the transformative potentials inherent in things, the roads
not taken that coexist as compossibles or as inclusive disjunctions
(differentiation, in the terms of Difference and Repetition),
while science tracks the actualization of the virtual, explaining why
this one road was chosen in a divergent series or exclusive
disjunction (differenciation, according to Difference and
Repetition). Functions predict the behavior of constituted
systems, laying out their patterns and predicting change based on
causal chains, while concepts “speak the event” (WP 21),
mapping out the multiplicity structuring the possible patterns of
behavior of a system—and the points at which the system can
change its habits and develop new ones. For Deleuze and Guattari in
What is Philosophy?, then, science deals with properties of
constituted things, while philosophy deals with the constitution of
events. Roughly speaking, philosophy explores the plane of immanence
composed of constellations of constitutive forces that can be
abstracted from bodies and states of affairs. It thus maps the range
of connections a thing is capable of, its “becomings” or
“affects.” Science, on the other hand, explores the
concretization of these forces into bodies and states of affairs,
tracking the behavior of things in relation to already constituted
things in a certain delimited region of space and time (the
“plane of reference”). How do concepts relate to
functions? Just as there is a “concept of concept” there
are also “concepts of functions,” but these are purely
philosophical creations “without the least scientific
value” (WP 117). Thus concrete concepts like that of
“deterritorialization” are philosophical concepts, not
scientific functions, even though they might resonate with, or echo,
scientific functions. Nor are they metaphors, as Deleuze and Guattari
repeatedly insist:
Of course, we realize the dangers of citing scientific propositions
outside their own sphere. It is the danger of arbitrary metaphor or of
forced application. But perhaps these dangers are averted if we
restrict ourselves to taking from scientific operators a particular
conceptualizable character which itself refers to non-scientific
areas, and converges with science without applying it or making it a
metaphor (Deleuze 1989: 129).
Deleuze and Guattari’s refusal to recognize that their work contains
metaphors is due to their struggle against the
“imperialism” of the signifying regime, a major theme in
both Anti-Oedipus and A Thousand Plateaus: not every
relation between different intellectual fields can be grasped by the
most common notions of “metaphor,” reliant as they are on
the notion of a transfer of sense from primary to secondary
signification.
Kant had dissociated aesthetics into two halves: the theory of
sensibility as the form of possible experience (the
“Transcendental Aesthetic” of the Critique of Pure
Reason), and the theory of art as a reflection on real experience
(the “Critique of Aesthetic Judgment” in the Critique
of Judgment). In Deleuze’s work, these two halves of aesthetics
are reunited: if the most general aim of art is to “produce a
sensation,” then the genetic principles of sensation are at the
same time the principles of composition for works of art; conversely,
it is works of art that are best capable of revealing these conditions
of sensibility. Deleuze therefore writes on the arts not as a critic
but as a philosopher, and his books and essays on the various
arts—including the cinema (Cinema I and II), literature
(Essays Critical and Clinical), and painting (Francis
Bacon: The Logic of Sensation)—must be read as
philosophical explorations of this transcendental domain of
sensibility. The cinema, for instance, produces images that move, and
that move in time, and it is these two aspects of film that Deleuze
set out to analyze in The Movement-Image and The
Time-Image: “What exactly does the cinema show us about
space and time that the other arts don’t show?” Deleuze thus
describes his two-volume Cinema as “a book of logic, a
logic of the cinema” that sets out “to isolate certain
cinematographic concepts,” concepts which are specific to the
cinema, but which can only be formed philosophically. Francis
Bacon: The Logic of Sensation likewise creates a series of
philosophical concepts, each of which relates to a particular aspect
of Bacon’s paintings, but which also find a place in “a general
logic of sensation.” In general, Deleuze will locate the
conditions of sensibility in an intensive conception of space and a
virtual conception of time, which are necessarily actualized in a
plurality of spaces and a complex rhythm of times (for instance, in
the non-extended spaces and non-linear times of modern mathematics and
physics).
For Deleuze, the task of art is to produce “signs” that
will push us out of our habits of perception into the conditions of
creation. When we perceive via the re-cognition of the properties of
substances, we see with a stale eye pre-loaded with clichés; we
order the world in what Deleuze calls “representation.” In
this regard, Deleuze cites Francis Bacon: we’re after an artwork that
produces an effect on the nervous system, not on the brain. What he
means by this figure of speech is that in an art encounter we are
forced to experience the “being of the sensible.” We get
something that we cannot re-cognize, something that is
“imperceptible”—it doesn’t fit the hylomorphic
production model of perception in which sense data, the
“matter” or hyle of sensation, is ordered by
submission to conceptual form. Art however cannot be re-cognized, but
can only be sensed; in other words, art splits perceptual processing,
forbidding the move to conceptual ordering. This is exactly what Kant
in the Third Critique called reflective judgment: when the concept is
not immediately given in the presentation of art. With art we reach
“sensation,” or the “being of the sensible,”
the sentiendum.
Deleuze talks about this effect of sensation as the
“transcendent exercise” of the faculty of sensibility;
here we could refer to the third chapter of Difference and
Repetition, where Deleuze lays out a non-Kantian
“differential theory of the faculties.” In this remarkable
theory, intensity is “difference in itself,” that which
carries the faculties to their limits. The faculties are linked in
order; here we see what Deleuze calls the privilege of sensibility as
origin of knowledge—the “truth of empiricism.” In
the differential theory of the faculties, sensibility, imagination,
memory, and thought all “communicate a violence” from one
to the other. With sensibility, pure difference in intensity is
grasped immediately in the encounter as the sentiendum; with
imagination, the disparity in the phantasm is that which can only be
imagined. With memory, in turn, the memorandum is the
dissimilar in the pure form of time, or the immemorial of transcendent
memory. With thought, a fractured self is constrained to think
“difference in itself” in Ideas. Thus the “free form
of difference” moves each faculty and communicates its violence
to the next. You have to be forced to think, starting with an art
encounter in which intensity is transmitted in signs or sensation.
Rather than a “common sense” in which all the faculties
agree in recognizing the “same” object, we find in this
communicated violence a “discordant harmony” (compare the
Kantian sublime) that tears apart the subject (here we find the notion of
“cruelty” Deleuze picks up from Artaud).
The writings of Deleuze have provoked a large literature of
explication and introduction in both French and English; more
recently, works in German, Italian, and other European languages have
appeared.  There have also been noteworthy critiques. Rather than
attempt a complete survey of the voluminous secondary literature, we
will concentrate on a few of the major critiques.
An early wave of criticism was directed in the 1980s at Deleuze’s
collaborations with Guattari by feminists such as Alice Jardine and
Luce Irigaray. Jardine 1985 criticized the concept of
“becoming-woman” in A Thousand Plateaus, which
Deleuze and Guattari position as the first step towards a
de-subjectivizing “becoming-indiscernible.” Jardine argued
that Deleuze and Guattari’s claim that even women must undergo a
“becoming-woman” amounts to a threat to the hard-fought
victories of concrete feminist struggle that allowed women to claim a
subjectivity in the first place. According to Grosz 1994’s survey of
the early feminist critiques, Irigaray argued that the use of
“becoming-woman” as a figure of change incumbent upon all,
including men, amounts to a masculinist and desexualizing
appropriation of feminist struggle. In the 1990s and now into the
2000s, a number of feminists associated with the “corporeal
feminism” movement have attempted positive connections with
Deleuze in the name of an open and experimental attitude toward bodily
potentials, in both the singular and political registers, as in the
phrase “body politic.” See among others Braidotti 1994 and
2002; Gatens 1996; Grosz 1994 and 1995; Olkowski 1999; Lorraine 1999;
and the essays in Buchanan and Colebrook 2002.
One of the most important criticisms of Deleuze was put forth in
Badiou 1997. Badiou claimed, contrary to the dominant perception, that
Deleuze is not so much a philosopher of the multiple as of the
One. Conducted in the highly technical idiom for which he is known,
Badiou criticizes Deleuze for a certain vitalism, which in Badiou’s
eyes falls short of the axiomatic austerity demanded of
philosophy. Whereas Badiou merely ignored the collaborative works with
Guattari, Zizek 2003 conducts a polemic against the Guattari
collaborations in favor of a Deleuzean logic of Being characterized as
an “immaterial affect generated by interacting bodies as a
sterile surface of pure Becoming” (as in Logic of
Sense). A third critical work in this vein is Hallward 2005. For
Hallward, the singular logic of Deleuze’s thought is analogous to the
tradition of theophantic thinkers, whereby the divine spark of
creation is entombed in creatures; the task of the creature is to
redeem that divine spark from its creatural prison. But this
redemption is not annihilation; Deleuze’s philosophy is not that of
Lacanian-Zizekian “renunciation-extinction.”
In response to the Badiouan critique, we can note that one of the most
promising leads for future research in discussing the relation of
Badiou and Deleuze is to concentrate on the type of mathematics each
thinker prefers. Rather than accepting Badiou’s characterization of
Deleuze as a thinker of reality in biological term (as opposed to
Badiou’s mathematical orientation), we should see Deleuze as proposing
a “problematic” version of mathematics, versus Badiou’s
axiomatic conception. This tack has been taken by Smith 2003.
Deleuze was one of the targets of the polemic in Sokal and Bricmont
1999. As much of their chapter on Deleuze consists of exasperated
exclamations of incomprehension, it is hard to say what it is that
Sokal and Bricmont think they have accomplished. One thing is clear
though: Deleuze was perfectly aware of the finitist revolution in the
history of the differential calculus, despite Sokal and Bricmont’s
intimations otherwise. He writes in Difference and
Repetition, “it is a mistake to tie the value of the symbol
dx to the existence of infinitesimals; but it is also a
mistake to refuse it any ontological or gnoseological value in the
name of a refusal of the latter. In fact, there is a treasure buried
within the old so-called barbaric or pre-scientific interpretations of
the differential calculus, which must be separated from its
infinitesimal matrix. A great deal of heart and a great deal of truly
philosophical naivety is needed in order to take the symbol
dx seriously …” (170). It seems obvious here
that Deleuze’s treatment of early forms of the differential calculus
is not meant as an intervention into the history of mathematics, or an
attempt at a philosophy of mathematics, but as an investigation
seeking to form a properly philosophical concept of difference by
means of extracting certain forms of thought from what he clearly
labels as antiquated mathematical methods. (For positive views of
Deleuze’s use of mathematics as provocations for the formation of his
philosophical concepts, see the essays in Duffy 2006.)
Another and perhaps more effective response to Sokal and Bricmont
would be to point to the positive work done on Deleuze and science.
Massumi 1992 and DeLanda 2003 attempt to show that Deleuze’s
epistemology and ontology can be brought together with the results of
contemporary dynamical systems theory (popularly known as
“chaos” and “complexity” theory). Bell 2006
follows up on this work. Protevi 2001 looks at the accompanying
notions of hylomorphism and self-organization in the history of
philosophy; Bonta and Protevi 2004 treat Deleuze and dynamic systems
theory with regard to its potentials for geographical work. For other
issues on Deleuze and science, see the essays in Marks 2006. Finally,
Ansell Pearson 1999 brought attention to Deleuze and biology; see also
Toscano 2006 in this regard.
As the interest in Deleuze continues to grow, three of its effects
are of interest to us, one of which is sociological and the other two
of which are philosophical.
The sociological effect is the globalization of institutions
devoted to the study of Deleuze’s thought and its application in
various fields. A noteworthy institutional initiative is the series of
conferences sponsored by the journal Deleuze and Guattari
Studies (see Other Internet Resources) under the leadership of
Ian Buchanan. In addition to some 10 conferences in Europe and North
America, an index of Deleuze’s widespread impact is the success of a
number of conferences in Asia (to date, Taiwan, India, Singapore, and
South Korea).
The two philosophical effects are that of reviving interest in
those whom Deleuze discusses explicitly or those whose influence on
Deleuze can be discerned, and that of providing a foil or counterpoint
or reference point in readings of other philosophers.
The most prominent example of the revivifying effect is Bergson,
relatively forgotten at the time of Deleuze’s Bergsonism (1966), but
now the subject of a growing philosophical literature. Of course, we
cannot attribute all this interest to Deleuze’s book and to the
subsequent secondary literature on Deleuze that stresses the
contribution of Bergson to Deleuze’s system (as we ourselves do above
on the concept of the virtual and the critique of the possible), but
it is not implausible to consider the counterfactual whereby without
Deleuze’s work the interest in Bergson would not be as strong as it
currently is. Among the Bergson commentaries Mullarkey 1999, Guerlac
2006, Moulard-Leonard 2009, and Grosz 2017 all link the two thinkers
in their works.
The post-Kantian Salomon Maimon has been for some time now a
subject of specialist interest by historians of philosophy; see the
entry on Maimon; see also the recent English
translation of his major work [Maimon 1790 [2010]).  Maimon’s
relation to Deleuze is explored in Jones & Roffe (eds.) 2009,
Smith 2010, and Voss 2011.
Another example of thinker whose current level of interest was
arguably catalyzed by being noticed as an influence on Deleuze is the
mid-20th century French philosopher Gilbert Simondon, whose notions of
the “pre-individual” and of “crystallization”
were influential in the development of Deleuze’s notions of the
virtual and actualization, respectively. Among others, see Toscano
2006 and 2009, Scott 2014, Sauvagnargues 2016, Swan 2016, Alloa and
Michalet 2017 for treatments of the Deleuze-Simondon relation.
Yet another would be the early 20th century French sociologist
Gabriel Tarde, whose notion of microsociology is referred to
approvingly in Deleuze and Guattari’s development of their
notion of “micropolitics” (Deleuze and Guattari 1980
[1987, 216-219]). For Deleuze-inspired treatments, see Alliez 2001,
Brighenti 2010, Read 2015, Tonkonoff 2017.
More recently and to a still muted extent is the revival of
interest in mid-20th century French thinker Raymond Ruyer, whose
notion of survol or “self-survey” is mentioned by Deleuze
and Guattari in their brief remarks on the consistency of the concept
in its neural instantiation in What is Philosophy (Deleuze and
Guattari 1991 [1994, 210]). English translations of Ruyer’s works are
Ruyer 2016 and 2018. Ruyer’s relation to Deleuze is explored in Bains
2002, Bogue 2009 and 2017, and Roffe 2017. Other treatments of Ruyer
that are relevant would be Massumi 2014 and Grosz 2017.
Finally, while it’s certainly the case that Whitehead has garnered
continuous interest, a good bit of current Whitehead scholarship
includes reference to Deleuze as a leitmotif, as in Stengers 2011. A
noteworthy new work influenced by both Deleuze and Whitehead is
Williams 2016. See also Shaviro 2009, Robinson 2010, and Bell 2011 and
2012, on the Deleuze and Whitehead connection.