Girolamo Cardano was born in Pavia in 1501 from Fazio and Chiara
Micheri. Chiara delivered her baby in Pavia, in the house of family
friends, and not in Milan, to defuse a possible scandal concerning the
illegitimate birth. Fazio would marry Chiara and recognize Girolamo
only later in 1524, just before his death. After a difficult childhood,
saddened by frequent illnesses and the harsh upbringing by his
overbearing father, Cardano enrolled at the University of Pavia to
study medicine in 1520 against his father’s wish. Fazio
(1445–1524), a jurist and an accomplished practitioner of mathematics
and natural philosophy (in 1480 he had published an edition of John
Peckham’s Perspectiva communis (“General
Optics”), written around 1265), wanted his son to undertake
studies of law, but Girolamo felt more attracted to philosophy and
science. When, due to the ongoing war between France and Spain, the
authorities in Pavia were forced to close the university, Cardano
resumed his studies at the University of Padua, where he graduated in
medicine in 1526. For about six years, he practised as a physician in
Saccolungo, a village close to Padua, where he met and married Lucia
Bandareni (1531). Three children were born from this marriage: Giovanni
Battista (1534), Chiara (1537) and Aldo (1543). In the meantime,
Cardano had been trying several times to become a member of the College
of Physicians in Milan, but his applications had always been turned
down, adding to his professional frustration and disappointment.
Rejections notwithstanding, he moved back to Milan with his family in
1532. He divided his time between practising medicine in Gallarate, a
town nearby Milan, and teaching mathematics in the Piattine schools of
Milan, a charitable institution founded by the nobleman Tommaso Piatti
in 1501 to improve knowledge of Greek, logic, astronomy, and mathematics
among Milanese students from a poor background. Fazio, too, had
previously taught in this school. In the meantime, his reputation as a
successful practitioner in medicine began to spread among the important
families of Milan. In 1539 his application to become a member of the
College of Physicians was finally accepted. Discontinuously, from 1543
to 1551, he taught medicine at the University of Pavia, until 1552,
when he went to Scotland to treat the Archbishop of Edinburgh, John
Hamilton, who was suffering from a particularly severe form of asthma.
Back to Milan in 1553, he resumed teaching in Pavia in 1559. In 1560
his son Giovanni Battista was executed charged with the murder of his
wife, Brandona Seroni, whom, against his father’s will, he had
married in 1557. This tragic event represented a turning point in
Cardano’s life and intellectual career. In 1562, he decided to
leave Pavia, whose academic environment had become increasingly
hostile, to teach medicine in Bologna. As a result of mounting
suspicions that he was actively spreading heretical views, he was
arrested on 6 October 1570 and remained in prison until 22 December of
the same year. In February 1571, before the Sacred Congregation led by
Antonio Baldinucci, Cardano was required to acknowledge and reject his
serious crimes against the faith (abiura de
vehementi), having been declared “vehemently suspect of
heresy.” He solemnly swore that he would no longer teach and
publish books until his death. In 1571 he went to Rome to serve as
personal physician to Pope Pius V and then Pope Gregory XIII. After
having been admitted to the College of Physicians in 1575, he died in
Rome, on 20 September 1576, devoting his last energies (from September
1575 to May 1576) to write his autobiography, De vita propria,
published posthumously by Gabriel Naudé in 1643.
Cardano wrote and published a vast amount of works, in the most
disparate fields of knowledge, especially medicine, mathematics,
astrology and natural history. His strictly philosophical treatises
include: De arcanis aeternitatis (“The Mysteries of
Eternity”, began at the end of the 1530s and published partially
in the posthumous
Opera omnia in 1663); De consolatione (“On
Consolation”, 1543); De sapientia (“On
Wisdom”, 1544); De animi immortalitate (“On the
Immortality of the Soul”, 1545); De subtilitate
(“On Subtlety”, 1550, 1554, 1560), and its twin book De
rerum varietate (“On the Variety of Things”, 1557);
Theonoston (“Divine Knowledge”, written in the
middle of 1550s and published posthumously in 1617 and 1663); De
utilitate ex adversis capienda (“On Gaining Advantage from
Misfortunes”, 1561); Encomium Neronis (“Praise of
Nero”); Dialectica (“Dialectic”), De
uno (“On the One”), Tetim seu de humana
conditione (“Tetim, or On the Human Condition”),
De minimis et propinquis (“On Those Things which are
Smallest and Closest to Hand”), De summo bono (“On
the Highest Good”) and Guglielmus, sive de
morte (“William, or On Death”), all published in 1562;
Antigorgias dialogus sive de recta vivendi ratione
(“Anti-Gorgias, or On the Right Way to Live”),
Hyperchen (“Being”) and De Socratis
studio (“On the Earnestness of Socrates”), published
in 1566; Proxeneta, seu de prudentia civili
(“The Mediator, or Civic Prudence”, published posthumously
in 1627 and 1663); Paralipomena (“Supplements”,
begun in 1561 and published posthumously in 1663). Other works were
published posthumously in the Opera omnia edited by the French
physician Charles Spon (1609–1684) in 1666: Hymnus, seu
canticum ad Deum (“A Hymn, or a Canticle to God”);
Mnemosynon (“Memorial”); Norma vitae
consarcinata (“A Patched-Up Rule of Life”); De
optimo vitae genere (“On the Noblest Kind of Life”);
Dialogus Hieronymi Cardani et Facii Cardani ipsius
patris (“Dialogue between Girolamo Cardano and His Father
Fazio”); De natura liber unicus (“A Single Book on
Nature”).
Generally speaking, Cardano’s philosophy is heavily influenced
by characteristic trends of late scholastic Aristotelianism, with a
strong penchant for Averroist interpretations. Cardano shows a great
interest in Averroes’ opinion that one intellect would perform
intellective functions for all human beings. However, he tends to
provide a historicized version of this radical view, in that he looks
at the one intellect as the varying amount of learning accumulated by
mankind throughout the centuries rather than simply justifying it from
a purely epistemological point of view (seen as the one intellective
power that actualizes the life and knowledge of the sublunary world as
a whole). Cardano’s philosophy also displays clear traces of
Platonic influences, absorbed through the reading of Marsilio
Ficino’s recent translations and commentaries, especially
Plotinus and Iamblichus. Together with his impressive knowledge of
astrological and medical literature, both scholasticism and Platonism
give a characteristically vitalistic slant to his cosmological views.
Cardano’s philosophy has often been described as suggestive and
rich in original intuitions, but cluttered and inconsistent as a whole.
In fact, his philosophical work is yet another example, common during
the Renaissance, of how different philosophical traditions (including
not only Aristotelianism and Platonism, but also Epicureanism and
Stoicism, and not only Graeco-Roman, but also Christian and Arabic
views) could converge into one composite but coherent picture.
Throughout his life, from his early endeavours in the 1540s (De
animi immortalitate) to the last philosophical attempt
(Dialogus Hieronymi Cardani et Facii Cardani and
De propria vita), Cardano demonstrated a distinctive
commitment to a certain number of philosophical issues: the
relationship between oneness and multiplicity, with the notable
corollaries dealing with order and disorder, determinism and chance,
life and decay; the view of the intellect as the ultimate principle of
reality and knowledge; a general theory of celestial heat, described as
the main formative agent in nature; the interplay of nature and the
soul in the organization of the universe; a general doctrine of the
immortality of the soul, seen as the foundation of both cognitive
clarity and moral certitude. As a whole, the originality of
Cardano’s eclecticism lies in the unique way in which he
characterizes the interdependence of life, knowledge and matter, in
which a pronounced sense of reality and truth is constantly being
questioned and jeopardized by a realistic view of human nature,
mercilessly presented as prone to fear, delusion and
deceit.
Cardano’s cosmological views belong to a long-established
system of astro-biological doctrines whose origins go back to
Aristotelian physics, Hippocratic vitalism, and fundamental assumptions
underlying the tradition of astrological and meteorological learning,
reshaped through a series of Hebrew and Arabic mediations. His account
of the supralunary world combines elements from Neoplatonic philosophy
and Christian theology. In line with many of his contemporaries,
Cardano maintains that there is a clear division between the
supralunary and sublunary world. The life of the universe is the result
of varying degrees of celestial energy overflowing from the One, i.e.,
God. From God to matter, cohorts of the most disparate souls mediate
between these two extremes. From a material point of view, the
connective element between heaven and earth is celestial heat. The
principal constituents of the sublunary world are matter (earth, water
and air), celestial heat, and a wide variety of souls (spanning from
demonic minds to substantial forms understood as specific principles of
life).
In line with the principles of Greek ontology (and showing an
evident interest in the Renaissance recovery of Parmenides’
philosophy), Cardano maintains that nothing comes out of nothing;
rather, all things derive from something, and this something cannot be
infinite (Hyperchen, OO, I, 284b; De natura, OO, II,
284a). Aristotle called this something “hyle or prime
matter,” but Cardano prefers to discard this notion of an
intermediate entity between being and non being, replacing it with the
view of the elements (earth, water and air) as the material starting
point and celestial heat as the efficient active principle, “for
otherwise the elements would be completely redundant if there were
prime matter” (De natura, OO, II, 284b). The elements,
which represent the first level of organization in matter, are three
(and not four as demanded by Aristotelian and scholastic physics):
earth, water and air (De arcanis aeternitatis, OO, X, 9a). As
for fire, Cardano considers this to be a product of celestial heat,
which is one of the various streams of vital energy flowing from the
supralunary sources of life and knowledge and which pervade the
universe as one living organism. Innate heat of a celestial origin is
the active element that mediates between the state of utter immobility
which characterizes intelligible substances and the incessant mobility
that defines the life of material beings. Through an exercise in
introspective analysis, Cardano enumerates three principles that
regulate both our inner life and the life of all created things: one
“is moved and does not move, resulting from the heavy
elements;” another “moves, and it is not moved, that is,
the soul;” the third, finally, “is moved by the soul”
and moves the body, i.e., the innate heat (Theonoston, OO, II,
304b). To the question of whether the soul can be identified with
celestial heat, Cardano replies that, unlike the latter, the former is
incorporeal, does not occupy any place and therefore is never in
motion. Also, that which is in motion does not have that level of
self-stability that is necessary for a being to be able to perceive
(sentire) or to think (intelligere)
(Theonoston, OO, II, 304b).
In Cardano’s metaphysics, matter and form are complementary,
in that in nature there cannot be matter without form, and forms are
always with a body. Forms represent the primordial stage in the process
through which the created universe becomes one living being. The
difference between souls and forms is that souls, albeit involved in
the animation of bodies, remain nevertheless unaffected by corporeal
reality. Up on a higher level, minds are souls that are completely
independent of matter, bodies and motion. However, even within the
ontological sphere of the minds, there are varying degrees of
embodiment. While the highest celestial intelligences are wholly
separated from the material cosmos, demonic substances, albeit
incorporeal, can affect the corporeal world through forces
(vires) and influences (influxus) of various kind.
One of these is “that force which is connected to demons,
regardless of whether this power is corporeal and depends on humours,
or it is incorporeal.” Cardano maintains that it is through
forces of this nature that “the parts of the universe are aroused
by demons, stars or some other hidden cause”
(Paralipomena, in OO, X, 446b–447a. See also De
subtilitate, OO, III, 670a). The principle that in a way collects
and administers all these currents of celestial energy is the soul of
the world (anima mundi). In Cardano’s system of
astro-biological determinism, the universal soul keeps the whole cosmos
together and performs paramount operations in accordance with the
original plan devised by God and implemented by the planetary
intelligences, for “all things are influenced by the higher
heaven and are moved at the command of the soul of the world.”
The soul of the world, which “cannot be understood without
God,” directs the work of nature, and, “in the process of
generating things, produces supercelestial lives and
multiplicity” (De arcanis aeternitatis, OO, X, 6a). In
the sublunary world, the major operations of life and generation are
performed by nature, understood as a source of teleological activity
supervised by the intellect and the soul of the world (De
subtilitate, OO, III, 360a; ed. Nenci, 63). The complex
relationship between soul and nature, and the role played by celestial
forces, is a crucial point in Cardano’s philosophy (On
Cardano’s cosmological views, see Ingegno 1980, 1–78, 209–271;
Maclean 1984; Grafton 1999).
Regarding the hierarchical arrangement of the ontological
principles, there is a certain oscillation in the way Cardano
distributes them along the various degrees of being, but by and large
we can say that God understood as the One represents the ultimate
source of order and activity in the universe, and all the rest emanates
from it in the form of increasingly more plural and less integrated
entities, from intellects to souls, from the soul of the world to
individual souls, from the soul to nature, from celestial to earthly
animals, from forms to scattered matter. In De arcanis
aeternitatis, Cardano lists fourteen genera of beings, a number
that, in his opinion, “matches the structure of the
universe:” three elements (earth, water, air), celestial heat,
stones, plants, living creatures generated from putrescent matter
(animantia ex putredine), quadrupeds, birds, fish,
reptiles, human beings, demons, and God (De arcanis
aeternitatis, OO, X, 8b).
Higher animals are divided into four main classes: quadrupeds,
birds, fish and reptiles. In the diagram he attaches to his discussion,
“the nature of the animals is connected to the human one only in
one point,” which is located in the area corresponding to the
quadrupeds. See Figure 1:
Figure 1.
However, the margin of interaction between human beings and the
rest of living creatures is ampler. In keeping with a number of
Renaissance philosophers, Cardano maintains that man is at the centre
of micro- and macro-cosmic exchanges within the universe: “since
the human circle corresponds to each single part of the whole domain
of living beings, all the properties and natures that can be found in
living beings will also be present in human beings” (De
arcanis aeternitatis, OO, X, 8a). In
Paralipomena, Cardano defines the human species as an amalgam
of forms (tota humana species congeries quaedam est),
a “mass” that is in constant evolution (succrescit
atque decrescit):
Human nature includes all the forms of nonhuman nature, but they lie
dormant, as it were, in a state of virtual energy. Cardano always pays
special attention to those aspects of human nature that seem to
indicate a close link with animals and lower forms of life.
Unsurprisingly, comparative analyses between humans and animals abound
in his works. Among the questions dealing with the relationships
between human and nonhuman animals, Cardano is particularly interested
in exploring whether reason is an exclusive prerogative of human beings
or it should rather be seen as the result of biological development
(De natura, OO, II, 283b–284a).
Above nonhuman and human animals, Cardano posits a universe teeming
with the most diverse kinds of incorporeal minds. He acknowledges that
to count the number of celestial substances populating the supralunary
world would go way beyond the power of reason; and yet Denis the
Pseudo-Areopagite, “relying on Platonic arguments and the visions
of St Paul” divided them into nine orders. Within these orders
Cardano identifies “seven natures.” The first nature is the
“the infinite, or God,” eternal in itself. The second
nature is “the soul of all things or lives,” which
represents the first breaking up of the original unity; then comes the
already mentioned soul of the world, whose loss of ontological unity
and independence begins to manifest itself, being “one principle
resulting out of many and eternal ones because of something
else’s intervention.” The fourth nature is the soul which
moves the universe, the primum movens, not eternal in itself,
but through eternal temporal succession. The fifth nature, the souls of
the various planets, derives from the combined action of this primary
mover and the soul of the world. Various orders of souls emanates from
the fifth nature: “heroic” souls, minds that are capable of
having sense perceptions (mentes sensiles) and the
soul that presides over all sentient lives (communis
sensilis). This last type of soul divides itself not only into
individual beings, but also into parts, “for everything is
alive.” The next nature, therefore, the sixth one – the
“common and vital soul” (anima communis atque
vitalis) – belongs to plants, lower animals and the
elements. The last order is “the soul conceived in matter,”
which “Plato called idea,” and Cardano simply characterizes
as “life.” Relying on later Platonic authors, from
Iamblichus to Denis the Pseudo-Areopagite, Cardano describes the
universe as one single entity, seamlessly interrelated throughout its
vital expanse, placed between the two extremes of God, absolute
eternity and unity, and matter, the domain of absolute transience and
multiplicity (De arcanis aeternitatis, OO, X,
6ab).
One of the most complex questions in Cardano’s philosophy as a
whole concerns the relationship between nature and the soul. This is a
point where Cardano’s multiple allegiances (scholastic
Aristotelianism, Plotinian Platonism, medicine and astrology) come to
the fore. Inevitably, it is also an area where not a few frictions
among different traditions come to the fore. Among Cardano’s
desiderata there was the plan to devote a specific philosophical
treatise to the notion of nature. It is an unfinished work that in all
likelihood he sketched at the beginning of the 1560s, De natura
liber unicus. It can be seen as part of a series of treatises
devoted to the exploration of the most recondite aspects of the
natural, supernatural and moral worlds (De libris propriis,
OO, I, 119; ed. Maclean, 293). De natura demonstrates
Cardano’s lifelong engagement with notions of naturalism,
universal animation, and teleology. The discussion is opaque at times
because of the topic’s difficulty, the characteristic obscurity
of Cardano’s disjointed and elliptical writing, and the
precarious condition of the text, left unfinished, with several gaps
and marks of typographical sloppiness (typos, mistakes, and missing
words). On the other hand, being a monographic treatment of the meaning
of nature, the treatise holds great significance, all the more so
because, as Cardano explains, the investigation of nature
(inquisitio naturae) sheds light on the very origin
of things, including human beings (De natura, OO, II, 283a).
In this sense, fragmentary as it may be, Cardano’s De
natura is an attempt to outline the ultimate principles of reality
(on the relationship between natural and supernatural phenomena in
Cardano, see Siraisi 1997, 149–173).
Cardano’s notion of order has strong Platonic overtones. Unity
is a mark of perfection, for all things rejoice in unity and they are
in a better condition when they reach that level of unity that
actualizes their potential nature. Unity gives structure and purpose
to all the elements that make up the system of nature: “order
and fate, since they are one, and exist with respect to the One, are
good; disorder and luck are bad, for they do not strive towards
unity” (De uno, OO, I, 277b; ed. García
Valverde, 4). As an expression of unity and goodness, order is so
pervasive that in fact accounts for even the most haphazard and
disorderly aspects of reality.  Cardano maintains that multiplicity
and diversity can always be brought back to potentially ordered series
of individual elements (multitudo ordinata)
(De uno, OO, I, 281ab; ed. García Valverde, 24; De
natura, OO, II, 283a). What we perceive as beauty (decus)
and elegance (ornamentum) in nature is not due to scattered
variety (multitudo), but to a principle of ordered unity,
“the one in the many,” which produces feelings of harmony
and symmetry in us (De uno, OO, 280a; ed. García
Valverde, 20). The same principle of order and unity applies to
knowledge: we can say that we really know something when we manage to
relate all the aspects and properties of this thing to one cause.
According to Cardano, Plotinus followed the same approach in moral
philosophy, for he described his notion of happiness as a return to the
One (De uno, OO, I, 281b; ed. García Valverde, 24).
Among the sources of unity and order in the universe, souls play a
most significant role. As we have seen in the previous section, souls
are at the center of Cardano’s cosmos. Being immaterial, they are
“a unitary principle that is not continuous, nor contiguous, but
exists of its own, not in a place, nor in a time.” Unlike life
(vita), which is diffused everywhere and therefore cannot be
said to be a real principium, souls have no spatial and
temporal limitation and are nowhere (nullibi) to be found
because of their incorporeal nature (De uno, OO, I, 279a;
García Valverde, 12). While souls are one and individual
everywhere (“our soul is no less here than in the sky, no less in
Italy than in India”), bodies are different and manifold
depending on material circumstances and vital urges, for
“division of bodies is determined by the needs of life (vitae
commodum)” (Paralipomenon, OO, X, 446a). Given the
central role assigned to the soul, in all its forms, Cardano’s
philosophy of nature is inevitably exposed to charges of animism and
anthropomorphism. The issue is accentuated by the fact that the human
being represents for Cardano a model of rationality and teleological
activity.
For Cardano, human souls are individual principles of
self-awareness. Selfhood is the principal argument in favour of their
immortality. However, in defending the immortal character of human
souls, Cardano also relies on proofs of a more pragmatic and
theological nature. Hope in “the immortality of the soul”
was implanted in human beings by God, therefore it cannot be considered
as a deluded expectation. In common people God instilled this hope
“through religions (leges),” in wise people,
“through the hidden truths (arcana) of
philosophy.” However, when God provided human beings with hope
for immortal life, He decided to give them a feeble certainty, always
in need of confirmation. The reason, according to Cardano, is that a
firm belief in the immortality of the soul would have created too wide
a gap between humans and animals, while leading man into arrogant
delusions of grandeur. There has always been and – “as long
as there is a world” – there always will be an alternation
(vicissitudo) of confirmations and doubts concerning the
immortality of the soul. It is a “vicissitude” of hopes and
despair that is part of the providential regime of the world
established by God (De utilitate ex adversis capienda, OO, II,
26a). Hope in the immortality of the soul is also a fundamental
postulate in Cardano’s moral philosophy. As we will see in the
next section, Cardano maintains that true inner tranquillity depends,
among other things, on virtue, wisdom, and “hope in the
gods.” Otherwise, what is passed off as tranquillity is in fact
mere harshness and stiffness (duritia) (Theonoston,
OO, II, 303b, 305b, 308a, 312a).
The One (God), the ordered variety of nature (multitudo
ordinata), and the soul represent the main ontological
coordinates in Cardano’s view of the cosmos. The universe is
organized according to a plurality of orders, arranged along
hierarchical levels, but harmoniously attuned to each other. It is not
correct, in Cardano’s opinion, to say that everything is for the
sake of everything else (non omnia propter omnia), but rather
that everything is for the sake of one thing (omnia
propter unum). This means that the One toward which everything
else converges includes many orders, “different among each
other.” Nature, art and chance produce a variety of causal
sequences that often intersect and are more or less perfect depending
on the extent to which the end to be actualized prevails over
refractory matter. With respect to natural causes, some are universal,
others specific. Among the universal causes of action, the most
important are the stars, which act over the sublunary world through
influences conveyed by light, heat and motion (De uno, OO, I,
279, 281; ed. García Valverde, 12, 26). More specific and
individual sources of natural agency are demonic and human minds, which
add to the complexity of moral and political action.
At its deepest, the principle of unity and order coincides with God.
God is infinite, necessary, wholly undivided, therefore individual. In
keeping with the principles of theological Trinitarianism, God is
described by Cardano in terms of power (potestas), mind
(mens), and love (amor), and these attributes are not
“three gods, as Plotinus thinks,” but original divine
attributes. The natural world is a constant reminder that God’s
“threefold and undivided life” flows into each single
thing, down to the smallest beings (ad minima usque) (De
arcanis aeternitatis, OO, X, 6a). However, for all the layers and
mediations that characterize Cardano’s universe, the distance
between human beings and God remains unbridgeable. Man cannot reconcile
the finite with the infinite, for “no finite thing can be
transformed into an infinite nature.” Cardano rules out that
“this life of ours can get close to that which truly is,”
for there is no proportion and no resemblance between the two levels of
being. Echoing Cusanian motifs, he argues that “everything that
is understood by a finite being is finite, for the act of understanding
(comprehensio) occurs through some proportion; but there is no
proportion between the infinite and the finite.” Likewise, our
eyes cannot grasp the direct light (lux) of the sun, but only
a glimpse of its brightness (lumen) (De arcanis
aeternitatis, OO, X, 4b–5a). Such a powerful and all-encompassing
view of divine and natural order, in which the presence of latent
Platonic and Averroist motifs contributes to strengthen the cogent
organization of the whole universe, has inevitable repercussions
concerning the meaning of moral action. During his life, Cardano
devoted a considerable number of works to ethical inquiries, surveying
almost every aspect in the field: theoretical ethics, applied ethics,
prudential behaviour, consolation, education, and the role of rhetoric.
However, his most important contribution to moral philosophy consists
in his attempt to redefine the relationship between the universal scope
of practical reason and the need for human beings to apply moral laws
to the concrete circumstances of their life. This characteristic
tension between knowledge and application is particularly evident in
two works: Theonoston (which Cardano began to write around
1555) and De utilitate ex adversis capienda (published in
1561).
Cardano presents De utilitate and Theonoston as
complementary treatises aimed at implementing two different approaches
in moral philosophy, the former based on the ordinary circumstances of
human life (humanitus), the latter assuming the existence of
supernatural conditions such as immortal individual souls and the
effects of divine providence (divinitus). They outline two
different paths towards the achievement of the same end: lasting
happiness. While the ethical program devised in De utilitate
is designed to face situations of obvious emergency (quae oculis
ipsis subjacent) concerning human affairs (humanae
res), Theonoston provides an account of the
immortality of the soul (enarratio immortalitatis
animi) that has momentous ethical consequences (De
utilitate, OO, II, 8, 39a; Theonoston, OO, II, 299b). The
same duplicity of levels is evident in the way Cardano examines the
notion of “tranquillity,” which represents the highest
point in one’s virtuous behaviour: one type of tranquillity is
premised on the attainment of a certain level of “honorable and
moderate pleasure,” the other secures a decent degree of
happiness “even in the greatest calamities”
(Theonoston, OO, II, 310b). Here it is worth pointing out that
Cardano’s pragmatic approach to questions of moral philosophy
works on both levels, the rational and the empirical. In the final
analysis, tranquillity is for Cardano the most useful thing that may
happen to a human being, for it provides inner joy, long life, and a
more robust kind of wisdom.
Despite the emphasis he places on the benefits of prudent action,
Cardano believes that real, lasting happiness can be possible only if
we demonstrate in a persuasive way that the human soul is immortal and
that God intervenes actively in the human world, sanctioning a
providential regime of the world. Two principles, more than any other,
underlie Cardano’s moral philosophy: that the human soul is
immortal, and that universal order, being a direct emanation of the
One, governs all aspects of reality. Everything that happens has been
planned by God, and all that God has established can only be good.
Regarding the immortality of the soul, Cardano maintains that, in order
to lead a meaningful existence and act accordingly, people need to know
whether there is life after death and whether the nature of their
afterlife will depend on the way they behaved in this world. In his
opinion, Aristotle and the Stoics took the value of virtue for granted.
In actual life, human beings will never be persuaded that virtue should
be pursued for its own sake, unless they are convinced that their soul
is immortal (De utilitate, OO, II, 3). In this sense, Cardano
defends the immortality of the soul on strong pragmatic grounds.
Referring to Seneca’s renowned instructions on how to cope with
the thought of death, he points out that meditating about death while
maintaining that the soul is mortal is simply absurd. In his eyes,
Seneca is a bad rhetorician and an Epicurean in disguise, who exhorts
us to die serenely while claiming that there is nothing after death
(De utilitate, OO, II, 10a; see Giglioni 2012, 187).
As we have seen while examining his natural philosophy,
Cardano’s moral views assign a central role to the soul:
“The soul is the most important thing we own; everything refers
to it, for riches, honors, and health are nothing without a sound
soul” (De utilitate, OO, II, 10a). Mental
self-awareness, in particular, is the principal argument through which
Cardano advocates the immortality of the soul, for a human being is the
same thing as his mind (homo animus est) (De
utilitate, OO, II, 12; on Cardano’s notion of the mind, see
Giglioni 2005–2007; García Valverde 2013). The same emphasis on
mental awareness can be found in Cardano’s moral investigations,
for in his opinion human beings cannot understand what the ends of
their actions are if they lack a clear knowledge of themselves (De
utilitate, OO, II, 2). The highest good for them can only lie in
those attributes and activities that are part of their minds (quae
animo coniuncta sunt) (De utilitate, OO, II, 27a). In
this sense, the relationship between tranquillity and awareness is
biunique: human beings can be peaceful only when they know what the
highest good is and know that they have attained it
(Theonoston, OO, II, 303b). According to the Hermit’s
definition of tranquillity in Theonoston,
tranquillitas coincides with securitas, that is, a
condition of unbreakable inner peace, free from cares and anxiety, and
it is a level of wisdom that would even suit God. In this respect, true
tranquillity for human beings coincides with their being
“assimilated” to God, so that, when this condition of
serenity is reached, nothing is any longer felt as lacking in meaning
and substance. This level of happiness is a “kind of
pleasure” that derives from the awareness of “being in the
possession of goods” (Theonoston, OO, II, 302a; De
optimo vitae genere, OO, I, 488b). Intellectual pleasure should
never be a monstrum, that is to say, a hybrid creature
resulting from combining the goods of reason with those of the body and
external luck (Theonoston, OO, II, 313b–314a).
By doing so, Cardano provides a definition of happiness which is
inclusive of both knowledge and pleasure. Happiness consists in a
“perception of pleasure” that is great (magna),
full (plena), pure (pura), untroubled
(secura), and safe (tuta) (De utilitate, OO,
II, 37b; Theonoston, OO, II, 305b; De libris
propriis, OO, I, 76b; ed. Maclean, 212–213). In
Theonoston, happiness is said to coincide with a kind of inner
composure understood not in terms of lack of sensibility
(indolentia), but as a condition of mental vigour stemming
from the contemplation of the true nature of things. If tranquillity
consisted in mere refractoriness to unsettling experiences, the
impassive state of a stone should then be viewed as the best condition
(Theonoston, OO, II, 299b, 305b, 313b). By contrast, ethical
peace rests on a state of cognitive tension and focus. In ways that
remind us of the sea and the air, undisturbed calm (tranquilla
quies) is always accompanied by a current of “light
motion,” i.e., a state of balance between opposite conditions
“which does not unsettle, but delights us.” Cardano’s
tranquillitas is therefore not the same as absolute rest:
“in its state of highest tranquillity, our soul is as it were
tremulous and breathing” (Theonoston, OO, II, 300a,
305b). The incessant vitality of our being demonstrates that “the
matter we are made of, being of a celestial origin, produced and
entwined with motion, does not enjoy rest, but thrives on
motion,” a motion that, in the final analysis, is no bodily
activity, but an expression of knowledge and intellect
(Theonoston, OO, II, 304a). True tranquillity results from a
condition of inviolable self-fulfilment (securitas) based on
resources that are in our power (in nostra potestate esse).
Cardano is not convinced by the Senecan view of tranquillity as a
balanced active life (vita actuosa), or by Socrates’s
kind of ‘engaged’ tranquillity; in both cases, their
behaviour is for Cardano symptomatic of ambition rather than being the
indication of a truly committed philosophical life
(Theonoston, OO, II, 306b). Finally, Cardano rejects the
ideals of tranquillity championed by Plutarch, Antoninus and Cicero,
viewed as models of ethical escapism devised by men who in their life
never managed to reach a condition of stable serenity
(Theonoston, OO, II, 305a).
In outlining his views about the nature of the good, Cardano is
following a deliberately eclectic approach. He combines the Stoic
conception of virtue with Epicurus’ emphasis on indifference
(indolentia), Aristotle’s notion of virtuous life with
Averroes’ characterization of happiness as the highest level of
knowledge accessible to human beings. He justifies his eclectic
position by arguing that philosophers who were so clever in their
fields are likely to have come up with closely related ideas and that
therefore “two or more of their opinions can converge into
one” (De utilitate, OO, II, 24b). From Socrates, for
instance, Cardano draws the principle that only wise people can be
truly happy because virtue lies in knowledge (De utilitate,
OO, II, 90b). From medical authors, he borrows the view that pleasure
always follows release from a condition of tension or pain (De
utilitate, OO, II, 28a). Following traditional argumentative
patterns in moral philosophy, Cardano distinguishes among goods of the
mind (virtues), goods of the body (health, longevity), and goods of
fortune. Among the goods of fortune, Cardano lists finding the right
wife, a lasting fame, and a painless death (De utilitate, OO,
II, 19b). Goods of the body, such as enjoying good health and following
a healthy regimen, are also part of one’s happiness (De
utilitate, OO, II, 19a; on Cardano’s notion of health, see
Siraisi, 70–90).
Strictly speaking, goods and ills are values. As such, they
transcend the level of nature and therefore cannot be treated as if
they were natural or against nature: “Goods and ills reside in
the soul; faculties and defects in the body; helps and impediments in
fortune and its occurrences” (Theonoston, OO, II, 314b).
In general terms, Cardano defines the good as “what is longed for
by the majority of human beings,” such as health, wealth,
friends, glory, offspring and wisdom. In a more specific sense
(simpliciter), good is what is everlasting
(perpetuum), safe (securum), and unchangeable
(immutabile) (De utilitate, OO, II, 23ab). In order
to achieve a stable condition of inner peace people need to commit to a
good that cannot be taken away from them. Ultimately, since only God
has all the requisites to be this kind of imperishable good, the more
genuine meaning of good is that which brings us closer to God or make
us similar to Him (Theonoston, OO, II, 307b–308a, 313b). The
difference between human beings and God is that in God the good
(bonum) coincides entirely with self-preservation (vita
incolumis), whereas in human beings these two conditions are
generally separate. Human beings need to take care of their life and
aim at a life that is marked by reason. There cannot be any discourse
on happiness where the primary requisites for life are lacking (due to
mental illness or death) (Theonoston, OO, II, 309b).
Goods of the mind are virtues. By virtue, Cardano means the
principle that teaches human beings to behave in the best way towards
God, animals and our fellow human beings. Hence the key virtues are
sense of duty (pietas), compassion (humanitas), and
kindness (benignitas) (Theonoston, OO, II, 312ab).
Given their importance, virtues are among the foundations of human
action: “by its nature, virtue is eternal and a divine good in
us; all the rest rots in time and depends on circumstances”
(De utilitate, OO, II, 21a. See ibid., 38b) . Emanating from
the innermost part of our rational soul, virtues have the power to
retroact on our mind, thus fortifying and safeguarding its faculties.
The most prophylactic among virtues are fortitude, prudence and
moderation, and they result from the combined actions of nature, habit
and reason, establishing a delicate balance between control of natural
impulses (impetus naturae), education, and the process of
decision making.
As already said, Cardano’s moral philosophy rests on a series of
interrelated principles which also play a key foundational role in
natural philosophy: that the soul is immortal; that incorporeal lives
are everlasting; and that mental awareness is the defining
characteristic of the soul. Since the intellect is the only thing that
humans can boast about themselves as being truly immortal,
intellectual self-knowledge is regarded by Cardano as the highest good
that a human being may ever attain. Inevitably, this assumption
re-proposes the Averroist conundrum about whether the mind belongs to
humankind as a whole or it informs the life and knowledge of each
individual human being. Cardano seems to suggest that the mind
transcends individual human beings ([mens] superior est
homini), for happiness coincides with eternal life: “he who
does not live long cannot be happy for long” (De
utilitate, OO, II, 23ab; on Averroism in Cardano, see
García Valverde 2013). There cannot be happiness in human life
if there is no afterlife for the soul. On this point, Cardano follows
St Paul’s argument in his Letter to the Romans (8: 20–22):
Cardano’s reflections on mental happiness, assimilation to
God, and universal intelligibility should be read against the
background of contemporary discussions about the Averroist notion of
intellectual beatitude. There is no doubt that, when Cardano
characterizes the highest good as the union of the soul with God, his
definition is full of Aristotelian and Averroistic resonances. The
summum bonum, he argues in De utilitate ex
adversis capienda, is “to be assimilated to the highest
good,” i.e., God. Unlike other kinds of love, love of God is
“honest” and “safe,” for its object never
deserts the seeking soul (De utilitate, OO, II, 6, 25a.
500a; De sapientia, OO, I, 500–501; ed.  Bracali,
30–36). Elsewhere, Cardano’s definition of
summum bonum is suppler and implies such components
as wisdom (sapientia), virtue (especially fortitude and
prudence), and progeny: wisdom is distinctively human; expressions of
fortitude and prudence can also be seen in several animals; to have
children, finally, is a prerogative that belongs to almost all living
beings. It is a sort of pyramidal model of virtue, with fertility at
the basis and wisdom at the top (only very few people can reach wisdom)
(De utilitate, OO, II, 25b; Theonoston, OO, II, 302b;
on Cardano’s views on virtue, see Ingegno 1980, 318–76).
The characteristic oscillation between intellectual good and
prosperous life is particularly evident in De utilitate ex adversis
capienda. This work is meant to provide directions on how to
overcome difficult situations and lead a reasonably serene life relying
only on the material conditions of one’s existence and on the
information that one can get from sensible experience. Contrary to the
approach followed in Theonoston, in De utilitate
Cardano focuses on the kind of happiness that one can reach in this
life, advancing the hypothesis – to be understood in an
experimental sense – that there is no survival of the soul
(etiam sublata immortalitate) (De utilitate,
II, 5). In this case, the moral actor is confronted not so much with
the goods attainable by the mind as with the ills that the mind needs
to transform into opportunities for inner exercise or practical gain.
Cardano divides ills (mala) into external and internal. They
both can be measured according to the impact they have on our lives
(magnitudo) and the level of constraint they impose on our
actions (necessitas). External ills depend on the variable
arrangement of external events (fortunae arbitrium)
and on the shifting states of the body. Although, properly speaking,
the body is “no part of ourselves,” nevertheless, it
communicates with our mind. Internal ills are all those passions that
can be hardly eradicated from our soul, such as madness, anger, fear,
and envy. Since they are located within the soul (animus), it
is exceedingly difficult to turn them into something useful and
productive unless we undergo a radical transformation of our self
(De utilitate, OO, II, 11b–12a, 13b).
Cardano claims that there can be five kinds of responses to
calamities in one’s life. The first two are
“paradoxical” and have nothing relevant to say about
possible applications to the practical aspects of one’s life.
These are the Christian and the Stoic responses: adversities are either
good in themselves, or they have absolutely no incidence in
someone’s happiness. The remaining three kinds of response are of
a “pragmatic” nature, for they appeal to the human senses
and have possible social outcomes. First, they teach us how to avoid
misfortunes or mitigate the impact they have on our life; second, in
case they happen, they direct our attention to ways of coping with
misfortunes or escape dangerous consequences; third, they tell us how
to gain “some good” out of “any kind of ill”
(De utilitate, OO, II, 10b, 27b, 39a). For Cardano, this
ethical program in three stages is an approach that suits people
involved in the many activities of civic life and helps meet their
social commitments. The distinctive trait of prudent people is their
ability to turn difficulties into opportunities of knowledge and moral
betterment (De utilitate, OO, II, 11a). Regarding the
“paradoxical” attitudes to calamities displayed by Stoic
and Christian sages, Cardano thinks that there is a great difference
between the situation in which the wise man is deemed capable of
“bearing calamities with fortitude” (the Stoic approach)
and that in which he is supposed to look at them as part of
“one’s goods” (the Christian attitude). Even more
different, however, is to interpret calamities as useful and productive
means of experience, as suggested by Cardano. Otherwise, to praise the
ills of life remains a futile rhetorical exercise, and for this reason
Cardano does not hesitate to place Erasmus’ Laus
stultitiae (“Praise of Folly”) in this category of
edifying but useless rhetoric. With the exception of irreparable
losses, which can only be assuaged by resorting to a whole range of
consolatory techniques, Cardano maintains that any other ill can always
be turned into something useful and therefore no consolation is needed.
To sum up, he identifies different levels – rhetorical,
cognitive, and pragmatic – within the domain of moral philosophy:
“To praise adversities is the eloquent rhetorician’s task;
to bear them with fortitude belongs to a generous soul or a person who
knows divine truths; to draw useful instruction from them is the mark
of a prudent man” (De utilitate, OO, II, 11a).
As in the case of intellectual happiness, relief from emergencies is
predicated on knowledge. Cardano characterizes his method
(ratio) for avoiding misfortunes and preparing against
calamities as based on a particular kind of knowledge
(scientia) – both useful and necessary – which
“teaches us to recognize and obtain known goods, and once they
are obtained, it tells us how to use them and how to protect us with
them against ills” (De utilitate, OO, II, 17a). The
ambivalent role of animus in Cardano’s moral philosophy
is particularly evident in his directions on how to draw profit from
misfortunes, for both misery and happiness depend on awareness
(“the fact that we know our condition”) (De
utilitate, OO, II, 88b). Our thinking activity is a key element in
turning adversities into opportunities of growth in self-awareness. Any
philosophical discussion of ethical matters presupposes that the
ethical subject is aware of his or her happiness or unhappiness:
“the mind (animus) alone is the one who is happy or
unhappy.” We have previously noted how closely Cardano’s
notion of the summum bonum is connected to the
principle of soul’s awareness. In the same way, all forms of
external goods (riches, physical beauty, health, friends, offspring,
country, honors) are no part of happiness unless they are related to
the mind (quatenus ad animum referuntur).
The principal resources through which human beings may learn to draw
advantages from adversities are fortitude, prudence, worldly knowledge
(rerum experientia), and all sorts of helps
(auxilia), such as material means, friends, authority, bodily
strength and practical experience (exercitatio) (De
utilitate, OO, II, 12a). Among the resources provided by reason,
Cardano shares with Seneca the belief that meditating about one’s
death (meditatio mortis) can trigger active and
pointed responses to everyday problems: “although death is a
necessary event, nevertheless, it contains in an eminent way, so to
say, all the reasons that sadden our life.” Thinking about death,
regardless of whether people may be sure that they are going to survive
after death, “can dissolve almost any form of sorrow”
(De utilitate, OO, II, 17b). When methodically structured, far
from producing anxiety, the thought of death and of the transient
nature of all human affairs injects a sense of purpose and order into
our existence, making us gradually adjusted to a universe in a constant
flux. Cardano’s method of drawing profit from adversities is
based on the general principle that everything in nature is subject to
incessant change: “I usually compare human affairs, this whole
sublunary frame (machina sublunaris) and all that
happens in it to a mass of wax in which, while it is compressed,
protrusions become cavities and cavities protrude, all forms change,
and now they change into similar ones, now into dissimilar ones, into
charming or foul, horrible and pleasant ones.” The principle of
the unremitting transformation of reality (vicissitudo
rerum) is therefore the ontological rationale behind our
belief that ills can be turned into goods (De utilitate, OO,
II, 14b). Closely related to this principle is Cardano’s striking
assumption that, when considered from the point of view of happiness,
all things are on a par (omnia aequalia sunt):
“God levelled the conditions not only for all human beings, but
also for all things which are under the sky” (De
utilitate, OO, II, 18a, 24b).
It is while examining the essence of humane misfortune that Cardano
reaches the important conclusion that loss and want are the ultimate
causes of one’s hardships. The ability to anticipate and feel in
advance the effect of losing something or someone (sensus
amissionis) can therefore prepare us to face calamities in our
life (De utilitate, OO, II, 7). While Cardano insists that
experience of adversities in life (sensus
calamitatum) provides people with a richer sense of their
happiness, however, he is also well aware that there are limits in the
human ability to process misfortunes into material for inner
transformation (De utilitate, OO, II, 38b). Material
destitution is certainly one of these limits. Among the circumstances
that affect our perception of want, penury prevents us from focusing on
the improvement of our knowledge and level of awareness. When in his
division of the goods (of the mind, of the body and of fortune) Cardano
describes material means as a pre-condition for the exercise of virtue
and happiness, he takes special care in specifying that the ethical
inconvenience in being poor does not lie in not having access to the
advantages of material prosperity, but in the inability to work towards
one’s own happiness: “if someone does not have the means to
raise his children, to look for wisdom or to practice justice, he will
certainly be unhappy, not because he is poor, but because he cannot
practice the works of happiness” (De utilitate, OO, II,
26a). Mental pain is another situation in which human ability to turn
misfortunes into positive experiences is tested to the limit. The way
Cardano insists on the severe reality of mental pain (molestia
animi, dolor animi) is one of the most
characteristic aspects of his moral philosophy: “No disease, if
there is not fear of death, can equal mental pain (dolor
animi)” (De utilitate, OO, II, 18a).
In promoting (whenever possible) the value of happiness in all
circumstances of human life, Cardano does not intend to humour any
human tendency to self-delusion. On the contrary, he sees his effort to
dispel false beliefs and to curb proclivities to self-deception as his
main contribution to moral philosophy, for there is no greater merit
than “to free mankind from false opinions” (De
utilitate, OO, II, 26a). Indeed, sometimes he goes so far as to
criticize Averroes’ notion of mental happiness as a form of
entertaining false hopes (in this case, the hope to achieve
intellectual bliss). Cardano thinks that the principal task of a moral
philosopher should be that of freeing the mind from misapprehensions
and prejudices: “There are many people who prefer to be happy in
a mistaken way rather than acknowledge the reality of their affairs and
their condition” (De utilitate, OO, II, 24b). As already
said, mental securitas cannot be premised on forms of
self-distraction and self-delusion, which turn our mind away from the
causes of our discontent. A good physician would never try to assuage
the pain of the patient by recommending him to buy “paintings and
precious stones” (Theonoston, OO, II, 307a).
Cardano’s method of drawing profit from adversities is therefore
an attempt to promote endurance while insisting on a courageous
acceptance of the human condition.
The clash between appearance and reality, which represents the
hallmark of Cardano’s ontology and theory of knowledge, has
therefore its obvious counterpart in his moral philosophy, where he
often associates human misery with unrealistic ambitions triggered by
human desires: “Since human nature is driven to the infinite by
appetites, it can never be satisfied, for it cannot contain the
infinite, indeed, not even a great part of what it desires.”
Therefore, he who is not capable of restraining his own appetites, be
he the greatest of the kings, will certainly be the unhappiest person
(De utilitate, OO, II, 5; De sapientia, OO, I, 532a,
544b–545a; ed. Bracali, 135, 174–175). To fight our propensity to
cherish illusory dreams of happiness (somnium umbrae
and umbra somnii), Cardano recommends us to become more aware
of the precarious nature of the human condition (humana
fragilitas) and to increase our level of self-mastery. The
combined action of self-knowledge (nosce te ipsum)
and self-control (impera te ipsum) contributes to
narrow the otherwise unmanageable scope of our desires
(Theonoston, OO, II, 310b; De consolatione, OO, I,
615a; De utilitate, OO, II, 89b-90a). Self-awareness and
self-control contribute to create positive habits (mores) out
of actions and passions. Unlike nonhuman animals (belluae),
human beings are capable of disciplining themselves (imperare
sibiipsis) and to shape their nature (et naturam et mores
sibi formare) (Paralipomena, OO, X, 448a). They modify
their behavior through thought (cogitatio), language
(sermo), and action (actio). Actions are primarily
directed to what is useful for us and are ruled by the criterion of
interest (utile), by pleasure, nature, and habit. Thought
concentrates on what is either useful or harmful for us. Language
adjusts our actions and thought to the variable circumstances that
present themselves from time to time (De utilitate, OO, II,
19a, 20b; De minimis, I, 693a). Once we manage to strike a
balance between the scope of our desires and the reality in which we
live, two things become most necessary (maxime
necessaria): to obtain what we wish to have (habere
quod velis) and to know how to use what we have (his quae
habes uti commode scire) (De utilitate, OO, II, 1). To
facilitate this task, Cardano distinguishes between disciplines in
which the theoretical aspect is more prevalent (such as geometry and
theology), disciplines which are characterized by a balanced interplay
of theory (scientia) and practice (usus), such as
medicine and law, and finally disciplines in which practice
(exercitatio) is essential, like moral philosophy. Cardano
enumerates five requisites that define the nature of an accomplished
action (in terms of attaining the right means for the right end
(adeptio), readiness of execution (promptitudo), and
completion (perfectio)). These requisites are nature, art,
diligence, practice, and familiarity with the experts in the field
(De utilitate, OO, II, 1–2; De
sapientia, OO, I, 494b; ed.  Bracali, 15).