The term globalization has only become commonplace in the last three
decades, and academic commentators who employed the term as late as the
1970s accurately recognized the novelty of doing so (Modelski 1972).
At least since the advent of industrial capitalism, however,
intellectual discourse has been replete with allusions to phenomena
strikingly akin to those that have garnered the attention of recent
theorists of globalization. Nineteenth and twentieth-century
philosophy, literature, and social commentary include numerous
references to an inchoate yet widely shared awareness that experiences
of distance and space are inevitably transformed by the emergence of
high-speed forms of transportation (for example, rail and air travel)
and communication (the telegraph or telephone) that dramatically
heighten possibilities for human interaction across existing
geographical and political divides (Harvey 1989; Kern 1983). Long
before the introduction of the term globalization into recent popular
and scholarly debate, the appearance of novel high-speed forms of
social activity generated extensive commentary about the compression of
space.
Writing in 1839, an English journalist commented on the implications
of rail travel by anxiously postulating that as distance was
“annihilated, the surface of our country would, as it were,
shrivel in size until it became not much bigger than one immense
city” (Harvey 1996, 242). A few years later, Heinrich Heine, the
émigré German-Jewish poet, captured this same experience
when he noted: “space is killed by the railways. I feel as if the
mountains and forests of all countries were advancing on Paris. Even
now, I can smell the German linden trees; the North Sea’s breakers are
rolling against my door” (Schivelbusch 1978, 34). Another German
émigré, the socialist theorist Karl Marx, in 1848
formulated the first theoretical explanation of the sense of
territorial compression that so fascinated his contemporaries. In
Marx’s account, the imperatives of capitalist production inevitably
drove the bourgeoisie to “nestle everywhere, settle everywhere,
and establish connections everywhere.” The juggernaut of
industrial capitalism constituted the most basic source of technologies
resulting in the annihilation of space, helping to pave the way for
“intercourse in every direction, universal interdependence of
nations,” in contrast to a narrow-minded provincialism that had
plagued humanity for untold eons (Marx 1848, 476). Despite
their ills as instruments of capitalist exploitation, Marx argued, new technologies
that increased possibilities for human interaction across borders
ultimately represented a progressive force in history. They provided
the necessary infrastructure for a cosmopolitan future socialist
civilization, while simultaneously functioning in the present as
indispensable organizational tools for a working class destined to
undertake a revolution no less oblivious to traditional territorial
divisions than the system of capitalist exploitation it hoped to
dismantle.
European intellectuals have hardly been alone in their fascination
with the experience of territorial compression, as evinced by the key
role played by the same theme in early twentieth-century American
thought. In 1904, the literary figure Henry Adams diagnosed the
existence of a “law of acceleration,” fundamental to the
workings of social development, in order to make sense of the rapidly
changing spatial and temporal contours of human activity. Modern
society could only be properly understood if the seemingly
irrepressible acceleration of basic technological and social processes
was given a central place in social and historical analysis (Adams
1931 [1904]). John Dewey argued in 1927 that recent economic and
technological trends implied the emergence of a “new world”
no less noteworthy than the opening up of America to European
exploration and conquest in 1492. For Dewey, the invention of steam,
electricity, and the telephone offered formidable challenges to
relatively static and homogeneous forms of local community life that
had long represented the main theatre for most human activity. Economic
activity increasingly exploded the confines of local communities to a
degree that would have stunned our historical predecessors, for
example, while the steamship, railroad, automobile, and air travel
considerably intensified rates of geographical mobility. Dewey went
beyond previous discussions of the changing temporal and spatial
contours of human activity, however, by suggesting that the compression
of space posed fundamental questions for democracy. Dewey observed that
small-scale political communities (for example, the New England
township), a crucial site for the exercise of effective democratic
participation, seemed ever more peripheral to the great issues of an
interconnected world. Increasingly dense networks of social ties across
borders rendered local forms of self-government ineffective. Dewey
wondered, “How can a public be organized, we may ask, when
literally it does not stay in place?” (Dewey 1927, 140).
To the extent that democratic citizenship minimally presupposes the
possibility of action in concert with others, how might citizenship be
sustained in a social world subject to ever more astonishing
possibilities for movement and mobility? New high-speed technologies
attributed a shifting and unstable character to social life, as
demonstrated by increased rates of change and turnover in many arenas
of activity (most important perhaps, the economy) directly affected by
them, and the relative fluidity and inconstancy of social relations
there. If citizenship requires some modicum of constancy and stability
in social life, however, did not recent changes in the temporal and
spatial conditions of human activity bode poorly for political
participation? How might citizens come together and act in concert when
contemporary society’s “mania for motion and speed” made it
difficult for them even to get acquainted with one another, let alone
identify objects of common concern? (Dewey 1927, 140).
The unabated proliferation of high-speed technologies is probably the
main source of the numerous references in intellectual life since 1950
to the annihilation of distance. The Canadian cultural critic Marshall
McLuhan made the theme of a technologically based “global
village,” generated by social “acceleration at all levels
of human organization,” the centerpiece of an anxiety-ridden
analysis of new media technologies in the 1960s (McLuhan 1964,
103). Arguing in the 1970s and 1980s that recent shifts in the
spatial and temporal contours of social life exacerbated authoritarian
political trends, the French social critic Paul Virilio seemed to
confirm many of Dewey’s darkest worries about the decay of
democracy. According to his analysis, the high-speed imperatives of
modern warfare and weapons systems strengthened the executive and
debilitated representative legislatures. The compression of territory
thereby paved the way for executive-centered emergency government
(Virilio 1977). But it was probably the German philosopher
Martin Heidegger who most clearly anticipated contemporary debates
about globalization. Heidegger not only described the “abolition
of distance” as a constitutive feature of our contemporary
condition, but he linked recent shifts in spatial experience to no
less fundamental alterations in the temporality of human activity:
“All distances in time and space are shrinking. Man now reaches
overnight, by places, places which formerly took weeks and months of
travel” (Heidegger 1950, 165). Heidegger also accurately
prophesied that new communication and information technologies would
soon spawn novel possibilities for dramatically extending the scope of
virtual reality: “Distant sites of the most ancient
cultures are shown on film as if they stood this very moment amidst
today’s street traffic…The peak of this abolition of every
possibility of remoteness is reached by television, which will soon
pervade and dominate the whole machinery of communication”
(Heidegger 1950, 165). Heidegger’s description of growing
possibilities for simultaneity and instantaneousness in human
experience ultimately proved no less apprehensive than the views of
many of his predecessors. In his analysis, the compression of space
increasingly meant that from the perspective of human experience
“everything is equally far and equally near.” Instead of
opening up new possibilities for rich and multi-faceted interaction
with events once distant from the purview of most individuals, the
abolition of distance tended to generate a “uniform
distanceless” in which fundamentally distinct objects became
part of a bland homogeneous experiential mass (Heidegger 1950,
166).  The loss of any meaningful distinction between
“nearness” and “distance” contributed to a
leveling down of human experience, which in turn spawned an
indifference that rendered human experience monotonous and
one-dimensional.
Since the mid-1980s, social theorists have moved beyond the
relatively underdeveloped character of previous reflections on the
compression or annihilation of space to offer a rigorous conception of
globalization. To be sure, major disagreements remain about the precise
nature of the causal forces behind globalization, with David Harvey
(1989 1996) building directly on Marx’s pioneering explanation of
globalization, while others (Giddens 19990; Held, McGrew, Goldblatt
& Perraton 1999) question the exclusive focus on economic factors
characteristic of the Marxist approach. Nonetheless, a consensus about
the basic rudiments of the concept of globalization appears to be
emerging.
First, contemporary analysts associate globalization with
deterritorialization, according to which a growing variety of
social activities takes place irrespective of the geographical location
of participants. As Jan Aart Scholte observes, “global events can
– via telecommunication, digital computers, audiovisual media,
rocketry and the like – occur almost simultaneously anywhere and
everywhere in the world” (Scholte 1996, 45). Globalization
refers to increased possibilities for action between and among people
in situations where latitudinal and longitudinal location seems
immaterial to the social activity at hand. Even though geographical
location remains crucial for many undertakings (for example, farming to
satisfy the needs of a local market), deterritorialization manifests
itself in many social spheres. Business people on different continents
now engage in electronic commerce; television allows people situated
anywhere to observe the impact of terrible wars being waged far from
the comfort of their living rooms; academics make use of the latest
video conferencing equipment to organize seminars in which participants
are located at disparate geographical locations; the Internet allows
people to communicate instantaneously with each other notwithstanding
vast geographical distances separating them. Territory in the sense of
a traditional sense of a geographically identifiable location no longer
constitutes the whole of “social space” in which
human activity takes places. In this initial sense of the term,
globalization refers to the spread of new forms of non-territorial
social activity (Ruggie 1993; Scholte 2000).
Second, recent theorists conceive of globalization as linked to the
growth of social interconnectedness across existing
geographical and political boundaries. In this view,
deterritorialization is a crucial facet of globalization. Yet an
exclusive focus on it would be misleading. Since the vast majority of
human activities is still tied to a concrete geographical location,
the more decisive facet of globalization concerns the manner in which
distant events and forces impact on local and regional endeavors
(Tomlinson 1999, 9). For example, this encyclopedia might be seen as
an example of a deterritorialized social space since it allows for the
exchange of ideas in cyberspace. The only prerequisite for its use is
access to the Internet. Although substantial inequalities in Internet
access still exist, use of the encyclopedia is in principle unrelated
to any specific geographical location. However, the reader may very
well be making use of the encyclopedia as a supplement to course work
undertaken at a school or university. That institution is not only
located at a specific geographical juncture, but its location is
probably essential for understanding many of its key attributes: the
level of funding may vary according to the state or region where the
university is located, or the same academic major might require
different courses and readings at a university in China, for example,
than in Argentina or Norway. Globalization refers to those processes
whereby geographically distant events and decisions impact to a
growing degree on “local” university life. For example,
the insistence by powerful political leaders in wealthy countries that
the International Monetary Fund (IMF) recommend to Latin and
South American countries that they commit themselves to a particular set of
economic policies might result in poorly paid teachers and researchers
as well as large, understaffed lecture classes in São Paolo or Lima;
the latest innovations in information technology from a computer
research laboratory in India could quickly change the classroom
experience of students in British Columbia or Tokyo. Globalization
refers “to processes of change which underpin a transformation
in the organization of human affairs by linking together and expanding
human activity across regions and continents” (Held, McGrew,
Goldblatt & Perraton 1999, 15). Globalization in this sense is a matter
of degree since any given social activity might influence events more
or less faraway: even though a growing number of activities seems
intermeshed with events in distant continents, certain human
activities remain primarily local or regional in scope. Also, the
magnitude and impact of the activity might vary: geographically
removed events could have a relatively minimal or a far more extensive
influence on events at a particular locality. Finally, we might
consider the degree to which interconnectedness across frontiers is no
longer merely haphazard but instead predictable and regularized (Held,
McGrew, Goldblatt & Perraton 1999).
Third, globalization must also include reference to the speed
or velocity of social activity.  Deterritorialization and
interconnectedness initially seem chiefly spatial in nature. Yet it is
easy to see how these spatial shifts are directly tied to the
acceleration of crucial forms of social activity.  As we observed
above in our discussion of the conceptual forerunners to the
present-day debate on globalization, the proliferation of high-speed
transportation, communication, and information technologies
constitutes the most immediate source for the blurring of geographical
and territorial boundaries that prescient observers have diagnosed at
least since the mid-nineteenth century. The compression of space
presupposes rapid-fire forms of technology; shifts in our experiences
of territory depend on concomitant changes in the temporality of human
action. High-speed technology only represents the tip of the iceberg,
however. The linking together and expanding of social activities
across borders is predicated on the possibility of relatively fast
flows and movements of people, information, capital, and
goods. Without these fast flows, it is difficult to see how distant
events could possibly posses the influence they now enjoy. High-speed
technology plays a pivotal role in the velocity of human affairs. But
many other factors contribute to the overall pace and speed of social
activity. The organizational structure of the modern capitalist
factory offers one example; certain contemporary habits and
inclinations, including the “mania for motion and speed”
described by Dewey, represent another. Deterritorialization and the
expansion of interconnectedness are intimately tied to the
acceleration of social life, while social acceleration itself takes
many different forms (Eriksen 2001; Rosa 2013). Here as well,
we can easily see why globalization is always a matter of degree.  The
velocity or speed of flows, movements, and interchanges across borders
can vary no less than their magnitude, impact, or
regularity.
Fourth, even though analysts disagree about the causal forces that
generate globalization, most agree that globalization should be
conceived as a relatively long-term process. The triad of
deterritorialization, interconnectedness, and social acceleration
hardly represents a sudden or recent event in contemporary social life.
Globalization is a constitutive feature of the modern world, and modern
history includes many examples of globalization (Giddens 1990). As we
saw above, nineteenth-century thinkers captured at least some of its
core features; the compression of territoriality composed an important
element of their lived experience. Nonetheless, some contemporary
theorists believe that globalization has taken a particularly intense
form in recent decades, as innovations in communication,
transportation, and information technologies (for example,
computerization) have generated stunning new possibilities for
simultaneity and instantaneousness (Harvey 1989). In this view,
present-day intellectual interest in the problem of globalization can
be linked directly to the emergence of new high-speed technologies that
tend to minimize the significance of distance and heighten
possibilities for deterritorialization and social interconnectedness.
Although the intense sense of territorial compression experienced by so
many of our contemporaries is surely reminiscent of the experiences of
earlier generations, some contemporary writers nonetheless argue that
it would be mistaken to obscure the countless ways in which ongoing
transformations of the spatial and temporal contours of human
experience are especially far-reaching. While our nineteenth-century
predecessors understandably marveled at the railroad or the telegraph,
a comparatively vast array of social activities is now being
transformed by innovations that accelerate social activity and
considerably deepen longstanding trends towards deterritorialization
and social interconnectedness. To be sure, the impact of
deterritorialization, social interconnectedness, and social
acceleration are by no means universal or uniform: migrant workers
engaging in traditional forms of low-wage agricultural labor in the
fields of southern California, for example, probably operate in a
different spatial and temporal context than the Internet entrepreneurs
of San Francisco or Seattle. Distinct assumptions about space and time
often coexist uneasily during a specific historical juncture (Gurvitch
1964). Nonetheless, the impact of recent technological innovations is
profound, and even those who do not have a job directly affected by the
new technology are shaped by it in innumerable ways as citizens and
consumers (Eriksen 2001, 16).
Fifth, globalization should be understood as a multi-pronged
process, since deterritorialization, social interconnectedness, and
acceleration manifest themselves in many different (economic,
political, and cultural) arenas of social activity. Although each
facet of globalization is linked to the core components of
globalization described above, each consists of a complex and
relatively autonomous series of empirical developments, requiring
careful examination in order to disclose the causal mechanisms
specific to it (Held, McGrew, Goldblatt & Perraton 1999). Each
manifestation of globalization also generates distinct conflicts and
dislocations. For example, there is substantial empirical evidence
that cross-border flows and exchanges (of goods, people, information,
etc.), as well as the emergence of directly transnational forms of
production by means of which a single commodity is manufactured
simultaneously in distant corners of the globe, are gaining in
prominence (Castells 1996). High-speed technologies and organizational
approaches are employed by transnationally operating firms, the
so-called “global players,” with great effectiveness. The
emergence of “around-the-world, around-the-clock”
financial markets, where major cross-border financial transactions are
made in cyberspace at the blink of an eye, represents a familiar
example of the economic face of globalization.  Global financial
markets also challenge traditional attempts by liberal democratic
nation-states to rein in the activities of bankers, spawning
understandable anxieties about the growing power and influence of
financial markets over democratically elected representative
institutions. In political life, globalization takes a distinct form,
though the general trends towards deterritorialization,
interconnectedness across borders, and the acceleration of social
activity are fundamental here as well. Transnational movements, in
which activists employ rapid-fire communication technologies to join
forces across borders in combating ills that seem correspondingly
transnational in scope (for example, the depletion of the ozone
layer), offer an example of political globalization. Another would be
the tendency towards ambitious supranational forms of social and
economic lawmaking and regulation, where individual nation-states
cooperate to pursue regulation whose jurisdiction transcends national
borders no less than the cross-border economic processes that may
undermine traditional modes of nation state-based
regulation. Political scientists typically describe the trend towards
ambitious forms of supranational organization (the European Union, for
example, or North America Free Trade Association) as important recent
manifestations of political globalization. The proliferation of
supranational organizations has been no less conflict-laden than
economic globalization, however. Critics insist that local, regional,
and national forms of self-government are being rapidly supplanted by
insufficiently democratic forms of global governance remote from the
needs of ordinary citizens (Maus 2006), whereas their defenders
describe new forms of supranational legal and political decision as
indispensable forerunners to more inclusive and advanced forms of
self-government.
The wide-ranging impact of globalization on human existence means
that it necessarily touches on many basic philosophical questions. At a
minimum, globalization suggests that academic philosophers in the rich
countries of the West should pay closer attention to the neglected
voices and intellectual traditions of peoples with whom our fate is
intertwined in ever more intimate ways (Dallmayr 1998). In this
section, however, we focus exclusively on the immediate challenges
posed by globalization to normative political theory.
Western political theory has traditionally presupposed the existence
of territorially bound communities, whose borders can be more or less
neatly delineated from those of other communities. The contemporary
liberal political philosopher John Rawls continues to speak of bounded
communities whose fundamental structure consists of
“self-sufficient schemes of cooperation for all the essential
purposes of human life” (Rawls 1993, 301). Although political
and legal thinkers historically have exerted substantial energy in
formulating defensible normative models of relations between states
(Nardin and Mapel 1992), they typically have relied on a clear
delineation of “domestic” from “foreign”
affairs. In addition, they have often argued that the domestic arena
represents a normatively privileged site, since fundamental normative
ideals and principles (for example, liberty or justice) are more
likely to be successfully realized in the domestic arena than in
relations among states. According to one influential strand within
international relations theory, relations between states are
fundamentally lawless.  Since the achievement of justice or democracy,
for example, presupposes an effective political sovereign, the lacuna
of sovereignty at the global level means that justice and democracy
are necessarily incomplete and probably unattainable there. In this
conventional realist view of international politics, core features of
the modern system of sovereign states relegate the pursuit of western
political thought’s most noble normative goals primarily to the
domestic arena (Mearsheimer 2003.) Significantly, some prominent
mid-century proponents of international realism rejected this
position, at least in part because they tried to deal seriously with
the challenges posed by globalization (Scheuerman 2011).
Globalization poses a fundamental challenge to each of these
traditional assumptions. It is no longer self-evident that
nation-states can be described as “self-sufficient schemes of
cooperation for all the essential purposes of human life” in the
context of intense deterritorialization and the spread and
intensification of social relations across borders. The idea of a
bounded community seems suspect given recent shifts in the
spatio-temporal contours of human life. Even the most powerful and
privileged political units are now subject to increasingly
deterritorialized activities (for example, global financial markets)
over which they have limited control, and they find themselves nested
in webs of social relations whose scope explodes the confines of
national borders. Of course, in much of human history social relations
have transcended existing political divides. However, globalization
implies a profound quantitative increase in and intensification of
social relations of this type. While attempts to offer a clear
delineation of the “domestic” from the
“foreign” probably made sense at an earlier juncture in
history, this distinction no longer accords with core developmental
trends in many arenas of social activity. As the possibility of a
clear division between domestic and foreign affairs dissipates, the
traditional tendency to picture the domestic arena as a privileged
site for the realization of normative ideals and principles becomes
problematic as well. As an empirical matter, the decay of the
domestic-foreign frontier seems highly ambivalent, since it might
easily pave the way for the decay of the more attractive attributes of
domestic political life: as “foreign” affairs collapse
inward onto “domestic” political life, the relative
lawlessness of the former potentially makes disturbing inroads onto
the latter (Scheuerman 2004). As a normative matter, however, the
disintegration of the domestic-foreign divide probably calls for us to
consider, to a greater extent than ever before, how our fundamental
normative commitments about political life can be effectively achieved
on a global scale. If we take the principles of justice or democracy
seriously, for example, it is no longer self-evident that the domestic
arena is the main site for their pursuit, since domestic and foreign
affairs are now deeply and irrevocably intermeshed. In a globalizing
world, the lack of democracy or justice in the global setting
necessarily impacts deeply on the pursuit of justice or democracy at
home. Indeed, it may no longer be possible to achieve our normative
ideals at home without undertaking to do so transnationally as
well.
To claim, for example, that questions of distributive justice have no
standing in the making of foreign affairs represents at best empirical
naivete about economic globalization. At worst, it constitutes a
disingenuous refusal to grapple with the fact that the material
existence of those fortunate enough to live in the rich countries is
inextricably tied to the material status of the vast majority of
humanity residing in poor and underdeveloped regions.  Growing
material inequality spawned by economic globalization is linked to
growing domestic material inequality in the rich democracies (Falk
1999). Similarly, in the context of global warming and the destruction
of the ozone layer, a dogmatic insistence on the sanctity of national
sovereignty risks constituting a cynical fig leaf for irresponsible
activities whose impact extends well beyond the borders of those
countries most directly responsible. Global warming and
ozone-depletion cry out for ambitious forms of transnational
cooperation and regulation, and the refusal by the rich democracies to
accept this necessity implies a failure to take the process of
globalization seriously when doing so conflicts with their immediate
material interests. Although it might initially seem to be
illustrative of clever Realpolitik on the part of the
responsible nations to ward off strict cross-border environmental
regulation, their stubbornness is probably short-sighted: global
warming and ozone depletion will affect the children of Americans who
drive gas-guzzling SUVs or use environmentally unsound
air-conditioning as well as the future generations of South Africa or
Afghanistan (Cerutti 2007). If we keep in mind that environmental
degradation probably impacts negatively on democratic politics (for
example, by undermining its legitimacy and stability), the failure to
pursue effective transnational environmental regulation potentially
undermines democracy at home as well as abroad.
Philosophers and political theorists have eagerly addressed the
normative and political implications of our globalizing world. A
lively debate about the possibility of achieving justice at the global
level pits representatives of cosmopolitanism against myriad
communitarians, nationalists, realists, and others who privilege the
nation-state and moral, political, and social ties resting on it. In
contrast, cosmopolitans tend to underscore our universal obligations
to those who reside faraway and with whom we may share little in the
way of language, custom, or culture, oftentimes arguing that claims to
“justice at home” can and should be applied elsewhere as
well (Beitz 1999; Caney 2006; Wallace-Brown & Held 2010). In this
way, cosmopolitanism builds directly on the universalistic impulses of
modern moral and political thought. Cosmopolitanism’s critics dispute
the view that our obligations to foreigners possess the same status as
those to members of particular local and national communities of which
we remain very much a part. They by no means deny the need to redress
global inequality, for example, but they often express skepticism in
the face of cosmopolitanism’s tendency to defend significant legal and
political reforms as necessary to address the inequities of a planet
where millions of people a year die of starvation or curable diseases
(Miller 2012; 2013; Nagel 2005; Pogge 2001, 9; Pogge 2002). Nor do
cosmopolitanism’s critics necessarily deny that the process of
globalization is real, though some of them suggest that its impact has
been grossly exaggerated (Kymlicka 1999; Nussbaum et
al. 1996). Nonetheless, they doubt that humanity has achieved a
rich or sufficiently articulated sense of a common fate such that
far-reaching attempts to achieve greater global justice (for example,
substantial redistribution from the rich to poor) could prove
successful. Cosmopolitans not only counter with a flurry of
universalist and egalitarian moral arguments, but they also accuse
their opponents of obscuring the threat posed by globalization to the
particular forms of national community whose ethical primacy
communitarians, nationalists, and others endorse. From the
cosmopolitan perspective, the tendency to favor moral and political
obligations to fellow members of the nation-state represents a
misguided and increasingly reactionary nostalgia for a rapidly
decaying constellation of political practices and institutions.
 A similar divide characterizes the ongoing debate about the
prospects of democratic institutions at the global level. In a
cosmopolitan mode, David Held (1995) argues that globalization
requires the extension of liberal democratic institutions (including
the rule of law and elected representative institutions) to the
transnational level. Nation state-based liberal democracy is poorly
equipped to deal with deleterious side effects of present-day
globalization such as ozone depletion or burgeoning material
inequality. In addition, a growing array of genuinely transnational
forms of activity calls out for no less intrinsically transnational
modes of liberal democratic decision-making. According to this model,
“local” or “national” matters should remain
under the auspices of existing liberal democratic institutions. But in
those areas where deterritorialization and social interconnectedness
across national borders are especially striking, new transnational
institutions (for example, cross-border referenda), along with a
dramatic strengthening and further democratization of existing forms
of supranational authority (in particular, the United Nations), are
necessary if we are to assure that popular sovereignty remains an
effective principle. In the same spirit, cosmopolitans debate whether
a loose system of global “governance” suffices, or instead
cosmopolitan ideals require something along the lines of a global
“government” or state (Cabrera 2011; Scheuerman
2014). Jürgen Habermas, a prominent cosmopolitan-minded theorist,
has tried to formulate a defense of the European Union that conceives
of it as a key steppingstone towards supranational democracy. If the
EU is to help succeed in salvaging the principle of popular
sovereignty in a world where the decay of nation state-based democracy
makes democracy vulnerable, the EU will need to strengthen its elected
representative organs and better guarantee the civil, political, and
social and economic rights of all Europeans (Habermas 2001, 58–113;
2009). Representing a novel form of postnational constitutionalism, it
potentially offers some broader lessons for those hoping to save
democratic constitutionalism under novel global conditions. Despite
dire threats to the EU posed by nationalist and populist movements,
Habermas and other cosmopolitan-minded intellectuals believe that it
can be effectively reformed and preserved (Habermas 2012).
In opposition to Held, Habermas, and other cosmopolitans, skeptics
underscore the purportedly utopian character of such proposals,
arguing that democratic politics presupposes deep feelings of trust,
commitment, and belonging that remain uncommon at the postnational and
global levels. Largely non-voluntary commonalities of belief, history,
and custom compose necessary preconditions of any viable democracy,
and since these commonalities are missing beyond the sphere of the
nation-state, global or cosmopolitan democracy is doomed to fail
(Archibugi, Held, and Koehler 1998). Critics inspired by realist
international theory argue that cosmopolitanism obscures the
fundamentally pluralistic, dynamic, and conflictual nature of
political life on our divided planet.  Notwithstanding its pacific
self-understanding, cosmopolitan democracy inadvertently opens the
door to new and even more horrible forms of political
violence. Cosmpolitanism’s universalistic normative discourse not only
ignores the harsh and unavoidably agonistic character of political
life, but it also tends to serve as a convenient ideological cloak for
terrible wars waged by political blocs no less self-interested than
the traditional nation state (Zolo 1997, 24).
 Ongoing political developments suggest that such debates are of
more than narrow scholarly interest. Until recently, some of
globalization’s key prongs seemed destined to transform human
affairs in seemingly permanent ways: economic globalization, as well
as the growth of a panoply of international and global political and
legal institutions, continued to transpire at a rapid rate. Such
institutional developments, it should be noted, were interpreted by
some cosmopolitan theorists as broadly corroborating their overall
normative aspirations. With the emergence of resurgent nationalist and
populist political movements, many of which diffusely (and sometimes
misleadingly) target elements of globalization, globalization’s
future prospects seem increasingly uncertain. For example, with
powerful political leaders regularly making disdainful remarks about
the UN and EU, it seems unclear whether one of globalization’s
most striking features, i.e., enhanced political and legal
decision-making “beyond the nation state,” will continue
unabated. Tragically perhaps, the failure to manage economic
globalization so as to minimize avoidable inequalities and injustices
has opened the door to a nationalist and populist backlash, with many
people now ready to embrace politicians and movements promising to
push back against “free trade,” relatively porous borders
(for migrants and refugees), and other manifestations of globalization
(Stiglitz 2018). Even if it seems unlikely that nationalists or
populists can succeed in fully halting, let alone reversing,
structural trends towards deterritorialization, intensified
interconnectedness, and social acceleration, they may manage to
reshape them in ways that cosmopolitans are likely to find
alarming. Whether or not nationalists and populists can successfully
respond to many fundamental global challenges (e.g., climate change or
nuclear proliferation), however, remains far less likely.