A distinction is often drawn between global and international
justice. The key point of difference between these two notions
involves clarifying the entities among which justice is sought. In
international justice the nation or state is taken as the central
entity of concern and justice among nations or states is the focus. In
the domain of global justice, by contrast, theorists do not seek
primarily to define justice between states or nations. Rather
they drill down through the state shell and inquire about what justice
among human beings consists in. Global justice inquiries take
individual human beings as of primary concern and seek to give an
account of what fairness among such agents involves. There are a range
of actions that cut across states or involve different agents,
relationships, and structures that might be invisible in an inquiry
seeking justice among states exclusively. Many different kinds of
interactions are not circumscribed by state membership and yet can
importantly affect human beings’ most fundamental interests, so
asking the question about what individual human beings owe one another
often uncovers significant neglected features of relationships and
structures that are of normative concern. Global justice analyses are
not precluded from yielding state-level obligations; indeed, they
typically do. However, they consider a wider array of possible agents
and organizations that might have duties as well.
There are advantages associated with both types of inquiries. An
important advantage of asking what states owe one another is that much
international law presupposes the states system and requires states to
perform various actions to promote justice. In this way,
responsibilities often appear to be clearly allocated to particular
parties thus making it quite precise who ought to do what in our
actual world. One advantage of global justice inquiries is that we are
not forced to take states as a fixed constraint and we can therefore
consider a range of relevant relationships, capacities and roles that
also structure our interactions and might be relevant to how we ought
to conceptualize global responsibilities. While asking about what
individuals owe each other may well have implications for states and
their obligations, a range of other agents and institutions may also
have relevant justice obligations. These responsibilities can become
more visible when we explore what individuals owe each other. The two
approaches have different strengths and can complement each other, but
in contemporary debate they are often taken as rivals competing to
provide the most plausible framework.
Since there is already an entry in this encyclopedia that focuses on
 international justice (see the entry  on 
 international distributive justice),
 this entry will focus on the area of global justice.
In general, a theory of global justice aims to give us an account of
what justice on a global scale consists in and this often includes
discussion of the following components:
Theories of global justice aim to help us understand our world
better and what our responsibilities are in it. While some
theorists aim purely at theoretical understanding, others hope also to
provide an analysis that can be useful in practical policy making
concerning global justice matters.
A problem is often considered to constitute a global justice problem
when one (or more) of the following conditions obtain:
So, in general, a problem is one of global justice when the problem
either affects agents resident in more than one state or the problem is
unresolvable without their co-operation. For the problem to be
considered genuinely global rather than regional it should affect more
than one regional area.
 

What sorts of duties of justice, if any, exist among human beings
who do not reside in the same country? If there are such duties, what
grounds them? Some argue that John Rawls’s principles developed
for the case of domestic justice, notably, the Fair Equality of
Opportunity Principle or the Difference Principle, should apply
globally (Caney 2005, Moellendorf 2002). Others maintain that the
content of our duties to one another is best explored by examining
alternative concepts not featured in the Rawlsian corpus, such as
capabilities or human rights (Nussbaum 2006, Pogge 2008).
Much discussion about what we owe one another in the global context is
influenced by the work of John Rawls, so a short synopsis is needed to
situate debates. Since discussion of these issues is amply
 covered in the entries on
 international distributive justice
 and on 
 John Rawls,
 this will be a compressed
summary focusing only on the most central aspects of the debate that
have a bearing on core topics of global justice.
In The Law of Peoples, John Rawls argues for eight
principles that he believes should regulate international interactions
of peoples. For Rawls, a “people” is constituted by a
group of persons who have in common sufficient characteristics such as
culture, history, tradition, or sentiment. Rawls uses the term
“people” in ways that relevantly correspond with how many
use the term “nation”. In addition, Rawls often
assumes that, for the most part, each people has a state.
The eight principles Rawls endorses acknowledge peoples’
independence and equality, that peoples have the right to
self-determination along with having duties of non-intervention, that
they ought to observe treaties, honor a particular list of human
rights, should conduct themselves in certain appropriate ways if they
engage in warfare, and that they have duties to assist other peoples in
establishing institutions to enable people’s self-determination.
He also advocates for international institutions governing trade,
borrowing, and other international matters that are characteristically
dealt with by the United Nations.
Several claims have been the subject of much debate between critics
and defenders of Rawls’s position. In particular, Rawls believes
that so long as all peoples have a set of institutions that enable
citizens to lead decent lives, any global inequality that might remain
is not morally troubling. Critics draw attention to the ways in which
global inequality—perhaps in levels of power or
affluence—can convert into opportunities for deprivation and
disadvantage. For instance, the global advantaged can use their
superior position to influence the rules that govern international
institutions—such as trade practices—which can facilitate
further opportunities for increased advantage and so they can indeed
threaten the abilities of others in distant lands to lead decent lives
 (Pogge
 2008).[1]
Another important issue that underlies debate between Rawls and his
critics concerns different views about the nature and origins of
prosperity. Rawls gives a particularly strong statement of what he
takes the causes of prosperity to be. He claims that the causes of the
wealth of a people can be traced to the domestic political culture,
the virtues and vices of leaders, and the quality of domestic
institutions. He says:
 

Critics observe that in addition to local factors there are also
international ones which play an important role in prospects for
well-being. Thomas Pogge prominently helps bring some of these into
view. International institutions, such as the International Borrowing
and Resource Privileges, are good examples of the ways in which
international institutions can have profound effects on domestic
factors which undeniably also play a role in promoting
prosperity. According to the international borrowing privilege,
governments may borrow amounts of money on behalf of the country and
the country thereby incurs an obligation to repay the debt. The
international resource privilege refers to a government’s
ability to do what it likes with resources, including sell them to
whomsoever it chooses to and at what price. Any group that exercises
effective power in a state is internationally recognized as the
legitimate government of that territory and enjoys the two
privileges. But, Pogge argues, this sets up undesirable incentives
that hamper developing countries’ abilities to flourish. These
include incentivizing those strongly motivated to hold office for
material gain to take power by force or exercise it in oppressive ways
that help reinforce oppressive governments’ abilities to retain
control. The global advantaged benefit greatly from these privileges
and so have little incentive to reform them. But, according to Pogge,
reforms are sorely needed.  If only sufficiently legitimate
governments are able to enjoy these privileges, the international
community would remove one important obstacle developing countries
currently face.
Defenders of Rawls’s views argue that his position is more
complex than is commonly acknowledged and allows for both a principled
stance on some fundamental values along with appropriate openness to
alternative ways in which legitimate and decent peoples might organize
their collective lives (Reidy 2004, Freeman 2006). They argue that
Rawls’s position shows great sensitivity to a number of factors
that must be weighed in considering right conduct in international
affairs. For instance, when Rawls makes his bold claims about the
causes of wealth it is useful to bear in mind the context in which he
is arguing. Against an assumption that resources are enormously
important for a society’s ability to flourish, Rawls emphasizes
the importance of strong institutions, political culture and other
local factors, in sustaining decent lives for citizens.  Rawls also
reflects on the difficulty of changing political culture, noting that
simply transferring resources will not help.  Interestingly, in a
little discussed passage, Rawls ventures that an “emphasis on
human rights may work to change ineffective regimes and the conduct of
rulers who have been callous about the well-being of their own
people” (Rawls 1999, p. 109). For more on whether Rawls provides
us with a cogent model that can provide sage guidance in international
 matters see the entry on
 international distributive justice
 and the entry on 
 John Rawls.
 See also Martin and
Reidy (2006). For the purposes of this entry we need only summarize
some key questions that were influential in setting the terms of
discussion about global justice for some time.
Some key questions are:
I trace some of the influential positions that have shaped answers
to these questions next.
One of the most visible and large-scale contemporary global justice
problems we face is that of global poverty. What ought we to do for
the 1 billion or so people who currently live in poverty? (This is a
 huge area nicely canvassed in the entry on 
 international distributive justice.)
 A few seminal arguments deserve mention
here as well, however. In a classic argument Peter Singer describes a
so-called easy rescue case in which an infant is drowning in a shallow
pond. You happen by and can save the child with minimal effort and
inconvenience on your part. Singer argues that you would be obligated
to assist using the principle that when it is in our power to prevent
something bad from happening without sacrificing anything comparable,
it is wrong not to prevent the bad from occurring. Reflecting on this
principle Singer argues that it entails extensive duties to assist
needy others, whether they be geographically proximate or not. We have
extensive duties to assist the global poor who, with equally minimal
effort on our part, can be saved from dire circumstances, since the
same principle applies in both cases (Singer 1972, and for more
treatment Unger 1996).
Another enormously influential contribution is that of Thomas Pogge
who argues that since developed countries impose a coercive global
order on the poor that foreseeably and avoidably causes great harm,
they have important responsibilities to reform the global order such
that it ceases to do so and instead better secures human rights (Pogge
2002, 2008, 2010). We harm the global poor when we collaborate in
imposing an unjust global institutional order on them and, moreover,
that order is unjust when it foreseeably perpetuates large-scale human
rights deficits that can reasonably be avoided were we to make quite
feasible institutional modifications (Pogge 2002, 2008, 2010). While
Singer emphasizes our capacity to assist with need
satisfaction, Pogge emphasizes instead our contributions to
the problem as grounding our duties.
When discussing our duties to one another there is also vigorous
debate about what the content and target of our duties should be,
along with discussion about what are the best ways to discharge
these. Traditional dominant economic approaches to promoting
prosperity have focused on raising income levels or increasing Gross
Domestic Product (GDP). Railing against such approaches, Amartya Sen
suggested that the capabilities approach provides an improved measure
of well-being and constitutes a better way to capture changes in
people’s condition over time (Sen 1980). Exploring what people
are able to do and be provides a more appropriate standard by which to
evaluate whether their condition has improved rather than focusing
exclusively on their incomes or per capita GDP. Martha Nussbaum
develops this approach and argues for a list of ten capabilities that
should be secured for all people in all places.  This universal list
can provide an important tool in persuading governments to make
 reforms conducive to their citizens’ flourishing. (See the entry on
 the capability approach
 for more.)  What constitutes well-being and the
best ways to measure it is an enormous topic both in Philosophy and in
 adjacent disciplines. For a good introduction see the entry
 well-being.
 Another important discourse for discussing these
topics is that of human rights which is discussed in Section 2.4
below.
When considering what we owe one another, are compatriots special? Do
we have the same duties to non-compatriots as we have to compatriots
or is there some principled way in which these two sets of duties
ought to differ?
Nationalists argue that we belong to national communities and any
account of our global responsibilities that ignores this omits an
important aspect of how we relate—and ought to relate—to
one another. They argue that nations can provide a valuable grounding
for social attachment, identity and meaning in life, and can ground
special obligations to strengthen national life and assist
co-nationals. Others defend the value of nationalism on instrumental
grounds; there is nothing inherently special about our co-national
relationships but state boundaries are useful in assigning important
duties to particular agents (Goodin 1998). In a world of great unmet
need, paying special attention to one’s co-nationals can be
justified
 (Goodin
 1998).[2]
In the words of Diogenes, widely credited as the first person to
propound cosmopolitan views, cosmopolitans see themselves as
“citizens of the world”. Contemporary cosmopolitans
typically hold that every human being has standing as an ultimate unit
of moral concern and is entitled to equal consideration of her
interests no matter what other affiliations, especially national
affiliations, she might have. Drawing on the idea that we all
have equal moral worth, cosmopolitans seek to broaden our moral
horizons so that we do not forget about the responsibilities we have to
others beyond state borders, even when we have local responsibilities
as well.
There are two particularly prominent contemporary accounts of
cosmopolitanism. Martha Nussbaum emphasizes that, as human
beings, we belong to a global community of human persons (Nussbaum
1996). Nussbaum argues that while love for one’s country
might have a legitimate place in people’s conceptions of a good
life, we should not overlook the many other relationships we are in
which connect us to others in the world. We need to draw the
global community in closer to the local one, and, more generally, aim
to see ourselves as members of overlapping communities which also have
important claims on us.
Thomas Pogge offers an enormously influential account that focuses
on the implications of cosmopolitanism for the global institutional
order. We need to ensure that global institutional structures
give equal consideration to everyone’s interests. He says,
“Insofar as human agents are involved in the design or
administration of global rules, practices, or organizations, they ought
to disregard their private and local, including national, commitments
and loyalties to give equal consideration to the needs and interests of
every human being on this planet” (Pogge 2013, 298). This
equal-consideration-of-interests requirement only applies to such
contexts. While such impartiality norms are perfectly familiar
within the state, for instance, when judges operate in law courts, we
have yet to realize the requirement at the global level.
It is often assumed that cosmopolitanism must necessarily be in
tension with more local attachments to friends, family or
compatriots. Some cosmopolitans believe such conflict is
inevitable and a necessary part of understanding what cosmopolitanism
entails but that this implication is unproblematic (Ypi 2013). 
Others argue for different ways in which the apparent tensions could be
resolved (Pogge 2013, Tan 2004). As we see above, Pogge
emphasizes the clear separation of spheres in which equal consideration
of people’s interests applies. Kok-Chor Tan also offers a
similar argument. His strategy is to show that cosmopolitan principles
should govern global institutional structures that ensure people are
treated as equals in their entitlements (Tan 2004). When this is
the case there can be a legitimate role for patriotism that operates
within such constraints. Partiality to co-nationals need not
conflict with cosmopolitan obligations. Another notable strategy
is to argue that we cannot achieve justice at a national level unless
we attend to justice at a global level. On this view, we have at
least instrumental reasons to care about global justice, even if we
care deeply about social justice in our nation (Banai, Ronzoni and
Schemmel 2011, Ronzoni 2013).
There is an important debate among egalitarian theorists about
whether our concern with equality should be confined to members of the
same state or whether it should extend to all globally. Some
theorists argue that careful consideration of notions such as
reciprocity, coercion, or fair terms of co-operation mandate that we
give special weighting to the interests of compatriots. Others,
by contrast, argue that these concerns, when properly understood, point
in the direction of equally strong duties to non-compatriots. One
form of the argument that we have special duties to compatriots that
are not shared with non-compatriots, draws on the coercive legal
structure that applies within states and claims that such coercive
structures do not apply outside of them (R. Miller 1998, Blake
2001). Another highly influential version claims that there is a
difference in the authority to enforce justice within and outside the
state (Nagel 2005). There are many important challenges to such
positions. One important line of argument maintains that coercion
is indeed relevant in triggering duties of egalitarian justice, but
since this is rampant at the global level it activates global not just
national egalitarian duties (Cohen and Sabel 2006, Abizadeh
2007). In addition, some argue that the same ingredients Nagel
identifies as crucial in generating state authority exist at the global
 level as well (Cohen and Sabel 2006). See the entry on
  international distributive justice
 for more on these issues. For
comprehensive treatment of nationalism and cosmopolitanism see the
 entries on
 nationalism  
 and on
 cosmopolitanism, 
 respectively.
Discussion of global justice matters often invokes concern for human
rights. In fact, for all their differences, both nationalists and
cosmopolitans frequently agree that a good way to think about some of
our duties to one another is via human rights. Human rights can and
does therefore serve as an important discourse for furthering
discussion about our global responsibilities.
Respecting human rights is an important requirement in much
international law and can be a key criterion in evaluating whether
governments are considered legitimate by the international
community. The United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights is
a highly influential account of all human beings’ basic
entitlements and this document often plays an important role in real
world debates about justice matters. See the comprehensive entry on
 human rights for more detail. Here I
have space to discuss only two issues that have been prominent in
debates about global justice.
The first concerns the kinds of duties we have in relation to human
rights. Against a conventional view widespread before 1980, Henry Shue
argues that if rights to physical security are basic, so are rights to
subsistence (Shue 1980). A careful analysis of the duties associated
with human rights indicates that the commonly held distinction between
positive and negative duties cannot be maintained. All rights have a
range of both positive and negative duties associated with them.
Thomas Pogge offers an enormously influential account of duties with
respect to human rights. Our current global order perpetuates
global poverty on a massive scale, but since feasible reforms to that
order could avert this harm, our failure to make reforms not only
implicates us in the misery but also in the violation of the rights of
 the
 poor.[3] 
 We therefore
have extensive obligations to reform our global order so that the
rights of the poor can be fulfilled.
For more treatment of issues, especially concerning what human rights
are, which rights are rightly construed as human rights, and how human
rights function in international law, see the entry 
  human rights.
Within the field of global justice, issues concerning war have one of
the longest histories. The just war framework has been influential in
setting the terms of much debate about the proper use of force in
international affairs. Aristotle, Cicero, Augustine and Thomas Aquinas
offered some of the earliest accounts of the criteria that should be
met for war to be justified. Two areas have been especially thoroughly
studied (1) the conditions under which entry into the war is justified
(Jus Ad Bellum) and (2) the conditions for fair conduct
within the war (Jus In Bello).  While having a just cause is
standardly held to be a necessary condition for a war to be justified,
it is not sufficient. Theorists often disagree about which additional
conditions must be satisfied for a war to be characterized as a just
war. The most common additional conditions proposed are that the war
should be undertaken by a proper authority, with the right intentions,
when the war would follow requirements of proportionality (the ends to
be secured would warrant going to war), only as a last resort, and
when there are reasonable prospects of success. On traditional
accounts of just war theory all conditions must be met, but more
contemporary theorists challenge whether they are all necessary
(Mellow 2006, Moellendorf 2002).
Once the fighting begins two central principles guide
evaluation of whether the war is being conducted fairly: one which
respects the distinction between combatants and noncombatants (The
Principle of Non-Combatant Immunity) and another that governs what
counts as the proportional use of force (Proportionality). On the
first, it is not legitimate to use force against civilians and, even
though some collateral civilian damage may occur, it is wrong to
deliberately target non-combatants. On the second, combatants may
only use the force necessary to achieve their ends -- the force used
must be proportional to the ends that are to be secured in conducting
the war. There are further requirements governing fairness, such
as requirements to comply with international laws and treat prisoners
fairly, but the two featured principles are the most commonly invoked
in normative analyses of Jus In Bello.
The third part of just war theory (Jus Post Bellum) concerns
how the war concludes and the transition back to a situation of
peace. It deals with issues such as compensation, punishment, and
reform.  More recently a further component has been suggested
especially in light of engagements in Iraq and Afghanistan in the
years 2001-2011, namely, justice in exiting the war (Jus Ex
Bello), which concerns when it is appropriate to end a war
(Moellendorf 2008, Rodin 2008).
There are many contemporary global justice issues concerning the
appropriate use of force and its aftermath that currently command
attention including: Is drone warfare permissible? Can terrorism
ever be justified? Are “targeted assassinations”
(where leaders who are primarily responsible for decisions to go to war
are targeted for assassination) justifiable? May we engage in a
war in order to prevent an anticipated “worse war” (as
proponents of the “Bush Doctrine” maintain)? Is
torture to contain major global threats permissible? Is the
attempt to contain nuclear weapons development by those who have them
already fraught with hypocrisy? How should we deal best with
societies in a state of transitional justice? Is there a place
for “Truth and Reconciliation Committees”? When are
political apologies for historic injustice in warfare
appropriate? 
Here we consider very briefly only two further issues that have
widespread current interest in the global justice literature:
Humanitarian Intervention and Terrorism. See the entry on
 terrorism 
for an extended analysis of such questions. 
  See the entry on 
 war for a comprehensive overview of issues
concerning justice in war.
 

Under what conditions, if any, may we engage in military
intervention aimed at stopping genocide? In recent years this issue
has become salient as large-scale human rights violations and
suffering unfolded in Rwanda, the Sudan, the former Yugoslavia, and
Libya. Against the traditional understanding that respecting state
sovereignty requires non-interference, successful arguments were
marshaled that there are important responsibilities to protect the
vulnerable (International Commission on Intervention and State
Sovereignty 2001). Leaning heavily on the conventional conditions
contained in the just war framework, the International Commission on
Intervention and State Sovereignty argued that we may engage in war
aimed at protecting those who suffer at the hands of governments
unwilling or unable to stop large-scale human rights abuses. The
commission produced an influential report “The Responsibility to
Protect” which was accepted by the United Nations in 2005, and
the principles contained in the report have guided decisions about
recent cases, such as Libya in 2011 and Syria in 2012.
One frequently voiced concern about humanitarian interventions is
whether they are just another form of imperialism. How will
interveners be held accountable for their actions? Taking such
concerns seriously Allen Buchanan and Robert Keohane advocate for a
series of innovative mechanisms of accountability, both before and
after the proposed intervention takes place, to allay fears about
abuse (Buchanan and Keohane 2004).
 

What kinds of violence count as terrorism? Is there a difference
between state terrorism and that perpetrated by insurgent
organizations? Might terrorism be justified under certain
circumstances? Terrorism centrally involves either using or
threatening to use violence against people, commonly taken to be
innocent, in order to produce results that would not otherwise occur
(Coady and O’Keefe 2002, Primoratz 2013). Some challenge that
the targets are innocent. As terrorists often point out about citizen
complicity in atrocities, citizens pay taxes and vote, and their
governments undertake actions that they can be said to sanction and
from which they benefit, so it is coherent to hold citizens
responsible for their governments’ actions. On this argument,
citizens can be legitimate targets of violence. In addition, there is
relevant precedent from governments targeting civilians when they
perceive the situation to be one of a “supreme emergency”,
as happened in the case of Britain targeting German civilians in the
Second World War. So when governments judge that some moral disaster
is sufficiently likely, it can be repelled using unorthodox and
otherwise repugnant means.
 

Possibly the next most prominent global justice issue after
considerations of proper use of force concerns the impact of, and
responsibilities created by, globalization. Globalization is a complex
phenomenon with many facets. For our purposes we need note only some
of its characteristic central features. These include (i) an
increasingly globally integrated economy, (ii) dominated by
transnational corporations engaged in activities (such as production
and distribution) that span multiple countries, (iii) increasing
regulation of economic matters by supranational institutions (such as
the World Trade Organization), (iv) general commitment to removal of
barriers to “free trade,” and (v) higher levels of
economic interdependence. While there is much debate about the
long-term effects of globalization and whether they are on balance
good or bad, at this stage, the effects of globalization have been
mixed. For some, globalization has brought improvements, while it has
worsened the position of others (Singer 2002).
Philosophers have been concerned with answers to a range of questions
such as: What kinds of economic arrangements are just?  Should our
international institutions be reformed to better reflect fair terms of
co-operation in our globalized world? Can globalization be better
managed so that it works to assist the global poor more effectively?
Are protectionist policies in trade justified or, rather, is free
trade required by considerations of justice? Should poor working
conditions in developing countries be a matter of concern for citizens
and consumers in affluent, developed countries? If so, how might
harmful employment conditions be effectively improved?
 

While Thomas Pogge argues that globalization has harmed the poor
on a massive scale, Mathias Risse argues that this is not at all clear
(Pogge 2010, Risse 2005). Risse argues that in many ways the global
order must be credited with benefiting the global poor as well. He
challenges Pogge’s claim that there are feasible alternatives to
our global order that could be easily implemented and would avert the
harm to which Pogge draws attention.
The World Trade Organization has been an important focal point for
discussion about global economic justice. In particular, critics
argue that some of its policies, such as those that generally advocate
free trade but allow protectionism in affluent developed countries,
involve grave hypocrisy and unfairness to some of the world’s
most vulnerable people (Pogge 2001, Moellendorf 2002). There are
also large disparities in the resources at the disposal of various
parties such that weaker parties often suffer huge disadvantages in
being able to negotiate agreements that work well for them. In
these sorts of ways agents in developed countries (such as governments,
citizens or firms) can take unfair advantage of those in developing
countries (R. Miller 2010).
More generally, there are concerns related to the extraordinary
power of multinationals and the undue influence they are able to
exercise in negotiating deals favorable to them at the expense of the
interests of the most vulnerable. So-called sweatshops (in which
workers typically labor under harsh and hazardous conditions) are also
a frequently raised example of how western consumers are implicated in
far away suffering, given the high level of dependence in high-income
countries on labor from low-income ones. When we purchase
products manufactured in sweatshops are we guilty of contributing to
exploitation and if so, what ought we to do to mitigate these
unfairnesses? Christian Barry and Sanjay Reddy offer an
innovative proposal to incentivize improvements in labor standards and
wage levels in poor developing countries (Barry and Reddy 2008). 
This “Just Linkage” proposal offers some additional
desirable opportunities for enhanced international trade to those who
meet higher standards.
In this domain philosophers have also examined a range of other issues
including obligations to forgive odious debt (Barry, Herman and
Tomitova 2007) and whether micro-finance is to be welcomed as a
positive force for the global poor (Sorrell and Cabrera, 2015).  Other
more general concerns about exploitation and economic justice can be
 found at the entries on
 exploitation
 and economics [normative] and economic justice.
 See also the entry on
 globalization.
 
The effects of poverty do not fall equally on men and women, nor on
boys and girls. In general, poverty makes the lives of women and girls
harder than their male counterparts, as cultural expectations often
dictate that women and girls do more care and domestic work or go
without (or much less) when resources are scarce. This can
significantly thwart women and girls’ well-being, as education,
health care, and food are routinely withheld in favor of distribution
to men and boys. Alison Jaggar prominently argues that various
structures create and recreate transnational gendered vulnerabilities
and she illustrates with practices common in domestic work and the sex
industry (Jaggar 2009).
Cultural perceptions of gender roles can often lead to practices
highly damaging to the most fundamental interests of women and
girls. These include “honor killings” (where it is
believed culturally permissible to kill a girl or woman who is
perceived to have brought shame to the family), genital mutilation,
infanticide, forced prostitution, arranged marriage, and legal
recognition of property and inheritance rights that significantly
disadvantage women and girls. Poverty can exacerbate such
vulnerabilities so we have further reasons to address it as a matter of
urgency (Jaggar 2009, 2014). Martha Nussbaum has argued for a
list of ten capabilities that all human persons, no matter what their
gender, ought to be positioned to exercise. She argues that this
approach offers a powerful tool for persuasion in cases where girls and
women are denied these opportunities by local actors in different
cultures.
Some important policy has been influential in international
discourse concerning combating gender injustice. The Millennium
Development Goals includes as a third goal the promotion of gender
equality and the empowerment of women. The 1995 Beijing Platform
for Action set the stage for several International Covenants and before
that the United Nations Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination Against Women afforded some important protection for
women’s human rights. Some feminist theorists are
suspicious of human rights language and are inclined to reject what
they perceive as a masculine discourse that trumpets individual
autonomy in a way that fails to acknowledge adequately our fundamental
human interdependence. While there certainly is a place for
discussion of these important themes, others argue that we should not
lose sight of the important victories human rights have also been able
to secure, despite still having a long way to go (and other
failings). The rhetoric of human rights has enabled substantial
gains for promoting gender equality and protection of women’s
fundamental interests, so it has at least strategic value.
There are a large number of issues debated in the global justice
literature concerning migration, whether temporary, permanent, legal or
illegal. These include: Should states have the right to control
their borders? Even if they have such a right, should states be
more generous in admitting would-be migrants, especially considering
the facts about global disparities in life prospects? When
affluent developed states refuse to open their borders to the
economically disadvantaged, is this equivalent to members of the
aristocracy unjustly protecting their privilege as was the case in
feudal times? What responsibilities are there to admit more
refugees? Can illegal immigration be justified under certain
circumstances? What sorts of criteria may affluent developed
countries use when selecting migrants from the pool of applicants for
citizenship? May they legitimately consider how prospective
migrants would fit in with current citizens, favoring certain
religious, linguistic, or ethnic affiliations to manage
compatibility? When making migrant selection decisions, should
they consider the effects on those who remain in countries of origin
and if so, is this fair to the would-be migrants who would be excluded
on grounds of the alleged negative impacts for home country
citizens? If states admit migrant workers, are there moral
constraints on how they should be treated? Would admitting
temporary workers without simultaneously allowing them a pathway to
citizenship be unjust? What responsibilities do we have in
relation to human trafficking?
There are several now classic defenses of state’s rights to
control borders. David Miller (Miller 2005, 2007), Michael Walzer
(Walzer 1983) and Christopher Wellman (Wellman and Cole 2011) have been
particularly important. Joseph Carens is the most influential
proponent of the alternative “Open Borders” position
(Carens 1987, 2013, but see also Cole 2000 and Wellman and Cole
2011). While many theorists discuss the responsibilities to
refugees and guest workers, Walzer’s treatment is particularly
influential, especially in arguing for his view that guest worker
programs are only justified when they offer such “guests” a
proper pathway to full and equal citizenship (Walzer 1983). 
Wellman offers comprehensive discussion of defensible admission
criteria (Wellman and Cole 2011). Whether brain drain issues
should be salient for migration decisions has been the subject of
recent discussion (Carens 2013, Oberman 2012, Brock and Blake
2015). For detailed coverage of issues concerning whether borders
should be more or less open, what our obligations are to refugees or
guest workers, and issues concerning the ethics of recruiting
 immigrants away from poor, developing countries, see the entry on
 immigration.
 
Patterns of human behavior that destroy habitats, accelerate species
extinction, exacerbate toxic levels of pollution, contribute to ozone
layer destruction, or increase population levels are all issues of
global environmental concern. However, although there are many
global environmental topics that are rightly concerns of global
justice, there is one that dominates discussion and that concerns our
responsibilities with respect to climate change. Here we focus
exclusively on this issue.
Among the scientific community it is no longer controversial that
anthropogenic climate change is real and a significant threat to the
well-being of both current and future generations. 
But it is also widely acknowledged that human development is an
important way to address high levels of global poverty, that such
development is energy intensive, and the cheapest sources of energy
available are not likely to be clean energy types. These
considerations significantly affect efforts to deal with problems
presented by climate change. There is much discussion about the
principles that should inform a fair treaty aimed at dealing with
addressing climate change that also gives appropriate weight to
concerns for human development. Some of the main contenders
include principles that recognize causal responsibility for high
emission levels, principles that are sensitive to ability to pay, and
ones according to which those who have benefited from emissions should
now be expected to absorb more costs.
We have not all contributed equally to the problems created by
emissions; industrialized nations have contributed historically at much
higher levels than those that are still developing. And so we
should endorse the guidelines that those who have polluted more should
pay more to help redress current problems (The Polluter Pays
Principle). However critics argue that this principle
unfairly holds some responsible when they did not know they were
causing harm, since it was not widely known that greenhouse gases could
result in climate change prior to 1990. So on this view,
responsibility for emissions prior to 1990 should not conform with the
Polluter Pays Principle, even if it is used to allocate costs after
1990. A second principle that is often discussed is The
Beneficiary Pays Principle. Those who live in industrialized
countries have typically benefited greatly from high levels of
emissions so it is not unfair if they are expected to pay a higher
proportion of costs. Critics object that a history of benefiting is an
insufficiently strong consideration for assigning responsibilities now:
in many cases whether or not people benefit is largely outside of their
control. According to a third popular principle, The Ability
to Pay Principle, the capacity of agents to pay for costs
associated with mitigating climate change should be relevant.
Comprehensive treatment of climate justice requires addressing the
issue of responsibilities to future generations. For important
 treatment of our responsibilities to other generations see the entry on
 intergenerational justice.
 
One striking feature of the state of global health is that there are
large inequalities in health outcomes and opportunities for
health. Consider that life expectancy can vary a great
deal. A person born in Sierra Leone can expect to live about 40
years whereas one born in Japan can expect to live for 80 years. 
Malaria has been almost entirely eradicated in high-income countries,
but it still kills about a million people in developing countries
(United Nations 2009). A woman in the Niger has a 1 in 7 chance
of dying in childbirth, whereas this is 1 in 11 000 for women in Canada
(Benatar and Brock 2011). The global burden of disease is by no
means evenly spread nor does workforce capability correspond with areas
of highest need. In fact many of the countries that suffer from
the greatest burdens of disease have the fewest skilled healthcare
workers. In addition, pharmaceutical companies do not spend their
research and development budgets in ways that match where the needs are
greatest. Rather, seeking the most profitable ventures, they are
much more likely to spend resources developing drugs for lucrative
markets where the payoffs are greatest, even when the marginal benefits
to consumers are small. One example is the research and
development resources pharmaceutical companies frequently spend on
developing drugs that are similar to others already available, rather
than developing treatments for diseases for which there are no
cures. It is estimated that drug companies spend approximately
90% of their research and development resources in seeking treatment
for about 10% of diseases (Drugs for Neglected Diseases Working Group
2001).
The poor in developing countries are also often more vulnerable to
disease and less able to resist disease because of poor living
conditions related to poverty. Lack of clean water, clean energy
sources, inadequate nutrition, and other social determinants of health
play a key role in explaining this increased vulnerability. 
Living in overcrowded houses can facilitate the spread of infectious
diseases, such as tuberculosis. So, a number of issues that
sustain poverty or exacerbate people’s vulnerability to disease
as a result of poverty should be of concern (Benatar and Brock
2011). As Norman Daniels argues, health inequalities among
different social groups can be considered unjust when they result from
unjust distribution in factors that are socially controllable that
affect population health (Daniels 2011, 101). On this view many
of the health inequalities that exist are ones that ought to be of
concern as they meet this criterion. How should responsibilities
for improving this situation be allocated? In many ways, but here
I pick out just a few that have received considerable attention in the
philosophical literature.
The current system of intellectual property rights is one troubling
area. The World Trade Organization grants product patents for a
twenty year period which effectively renders many new medicines
unaffordable for the vast majority of the world’s population and
those in greatest need. There are a number of innovative
proposals aimed at addressing these issues. One prominent example is
the Health Impact Fund proposal developed by Thomas Pogge, which offers
alternative ways to reward pharmaceutical companies, notably by how
much impact they have on actually curing diseases (Pogge 2008). 
The greater their impact, the larger the share of the rewards they
would receive from the Health Impact Fund. Nicole Hassoun
proposes a certification program for rating pharmaceutical
companies’ contributions to the global poor, “Fair Trade
Bio” (Hassoun 2012). Companies would compete for the gold
star rankings which could significantly affect consumption choices and
thereby expected profits. In both cases the aim is to create
important incentives for key players to care about how their products
affect the global poor.
There are many other issues that concern philosophers in the domain
of global health. There are increasingly worrying practices of
experimentation on disadvantaged subjects in developing
countries. Increasingly, clinical research has been outsourced to
poor, developing countries with populations that are often highly
vulnerable. We might wonder about whether these populations are being
exploited and whether the participants have compromised abilities to
consent to drug trials. In many cases the trials bring
considerable health benefits that would not come their way were it not
in the interests of pharmaceutical companies to do clinical research in
those locations. If sufficient benefits accrue for local
populations some argue that these cases need not be of concern (London
2011).
New infectious diseases and the threat of pandemics are creating
further questions about our responsibilities. Often the case is
made that national interests in public health in developed countries
mandate concern for infectious diseases that originate in developing
countries. But more recently, this argument appears to have
striking limitations. The Ebola outbreak in West Africa in 2014
raises questions about what we ought to do to help the victims who,
because of the ways in which the disease spreads, are unlikely to
threaten large segments of the population in affluent developed
countries outside of Africa. The national interests of affluent
developed countries do not easily converge with public health demands
in developing ones in this case and yet we might still have important
responsibilities to assist.
Discussion of natural resources often figure prominently in several
topics of global justice. Some relevant questions include: Are
national communities entitled to the resources they find on their
territories? Should principles of global justice apply to our
arrangements for justly distributing natural resources? Charles
Beitz was an early proponent of a resource distribution principle,
according to which natural resources should be allocated such that each
society is able to provide adequately for its population (Beitz
1975). We saw in Section 2 that Rawls believes that resources are
not important to prosperity in the ways many imagine. Rather,
institutional resilience matters more. By contrast, Thomas Pogge
highlights the ways in which international practices concerning the
distribution of resources create considerable obstacles for prosperity
in developing countries. In short, these practices create incentives
for the wrong kinds of people to take power through illegitimate means
and to focus on retaining power at the expense of other goals
governments should have, such as trying to improve the well-being of
their citizens. We need to modify these international practices
so they do not create such an unfavorable environment. In
addition, Pogge proposes a Global Resources Dividend as one measure by
which practices concerning natural resource distribution would work in
some small way to the benefit of the global poor. On this Global
Resources Dividend proposal there would be a small tax on resource
extraction, payable by the consumers of resources, and available for
projects that would assist in helping everyone to be able to meet their
basic needs with dignity (Pogge 2008).
Leif Wenar is also concerned with prevailing practices governing the
sale of natural resources and their products (Wenar 2010). When
consumers in wealthy states buy goods from developing countries, this
is often similar to consciously receiving stolen goods. 
Legitimate resource sales require general agreement from
citizens. Evidence of agreement requires that: (i) owners must be
informed about sales, (ii) owners must be able to express dissent
freely should they have doubts about sales, and (iii) owners should be
able to stop resource sales without fearing grave consequences such as
violence and intimidation. In these sorts of ways, Wenar aims to
outlaw dispossession of citizens’ resources.
For various reasons (including strategic ones) Thomas Pogge and Leif
Wenar do not directly challenge the right of nations to own resources
on their territories. Policy recommendations, for instance, are
much more likely to be effective if they can fit within the main
structures of international conventions. However, other theorists
do take up this issue including Hillel Steiner, Tim Hayward and Mathias
Risse. Steiner argues that all inhabitants of the world are
entitled to an equal share in the value of all land and he advocates
for the “Global Fund” which aims to ensure that equal share
entitlements can be secured. The Global Fund would constitute a
clearing house for payments and disbursements (Steiner 2005).
Appealing to accounts of ownership of resources, some philosophers
draw out important implications for diverse global justice
debates. Mathias Risse argues that we all, collectively, own the
resources of the earth and this has profound implications for a range
of global justice issues, including immigration. When people are
under-utilizing their “rightful shares” of territory, they
cannot complain when co-owners would like to occupy some of it. 
Some theorists concerned with environmental issues also discuss our
rights with respect to natural resources. Some argue that we have
equal rights to access the earth’s resources. Tim Hayward,
for instance, argues that we have equal rights to ecological space
(Hayward 2005). This is often appealed to when there is a
perception that we have exceeded our share, such as in levels of carbon
emissions and consumption more generally.
Accounts according to which we have equal rights to resources, land,
ecological space and so on, are often accused of suffering from an
important common problem. It is difficult to defend a clear and
compelling account of the value of resources as these can vary
considerably in different social, cultural and technological
contexts. But we need to be able to quantify resource values to
some plausible extent, if we are to determine whether people are
enjoying or exceeding their equal shares.
There are a number of global justice problems that require
remedying, and this raises the issue of remedial
responsibilities. Who should do what to reduce global
injustices? Several different agents, groups, organizations and
institutions could play a role. Which responsibilities should
devolve to corporations, governments, consumers, citizens,
international organizations or social movements? Several
guidelines that are often discussed include issues concerning the
contribution agents have made to a problem, their patterns of benefit
from the problem, and their capacity to take constructive action now.
Two influential frameworks deserve more extended treatment, notably
that of Iris Marion Young concerning a social connection model for
allocating responsibilities for structural injustice and that of David
Miller concerning remedial responsibility (Young 2011, Miller
2007).
In contrast to the idea of responsibility as involving finding fault
and individual liability, Iris Marion Young develops a forward-looking
model which she argues is more appropriate. She draws on the idea
that participation via institutions sometimes produces injustice, so we
have particular responsibilities to address injustice. We share
responsibility for remedying injustice but we may have different
degrees and kinds of responsibility. She offers different
parameters of reasoning that can help individuals and organizations
decide what might make the most sense for them to do in efforts to
remedy injustice, given that there are so many injustices, whereas time
and resources are limited. Using the case study of the
global apparel industry she illustrates how the fact that we are
positioned differently can entail varying but important
responsibilities for all who participate in activities that sustain
sweatshops. There are at least four parameters that agents can
use in their reasoning:
In summary, Young encourages us to think about how we can best take
responsibility for reducing structural injustice by reflecting on these
four parameters—different positions of power, privilege,
interest and collective ability.
David Miller offers a tremendously influential connection theory of
responsibility that also discusses our remedial responsibilities. There
are six ways in which we can be connected to someone, P, who needs help
and so be held remedially responsible for assisting. These
connections give rise to six ways in which remedial responsibility can
be identified. We might be morally responsible for P’s
condition; we might be outcome or causally responsible for P’s
condition; we might have had no causal role in their condition but have
benefited from it; we might have capacity to assist P; or we might be
 connected to P through ties of
 community.[4]
In the global justice literature there are also important concerns
about the distribution of responsibilities among collective and
individual agents. Prominently, can we hold nations responsible for
global injustices or remedying such injustices? This raises important
questions about collective responsibility that are well
 treated elsewhere in this encyclopedia (see the entry  on
 collective responsibility.
 
Is it possible to have global justice in the absence of a world
state? Hobbes argues that this is not possible since there is no
global authority that can secure and enforce the requirements of
justice. He presents the classic so-called realist case, which is
highly influential in international politics, such that there is a
state of nature in the international realm. All states compete in
pursuing their own advantage and since there is no global authority
there can be no justice in international affairs.
Others are more optimistic. Since we already have a high level
of interaction among states, organizations and other agents, this has
generated various norms and expectations about appropriate conduct
which guide behavior in the international sphere (Beitz 1999). 
Moreover, we have a strong interest in co-operation when this is
necessary to deal practically with a range of problems that have global
reach. Global governance is concerned with how we manage
interests affecting the residents of more than one state in the absence
of a world state. There is already a high level of co-operation
among a variety of networks, organizations and other groups of
interested parties at the sub-state level, and this is powerfully
influencing the redesign of best practice norms in particular domains
(Anne-Marie Slaughter 2004).
Other change agents that can and have exercised considerable reform
pressures include global social movements, such as the anti-sweatshop
movement, the fair trade movement, and other ethical consumption
movements. Global activism has been an important source of
incremental change. These simple examples show that much more is
possible in the absence of a world state than realists acknowledge.
 For more on issues of world government, see the entry
 world government,
 which provides extended treatment of this issue.
 

Philosophers are contributing in important ways to discussions of
global justice policy issues. As illustrations, in this entry we have
canvassed several institutional reform proposals for addressing global
injustices which have enjoyed widespread attention, both within the
academy and beyond. These include Thomas Pogge’s Health Impact
Fund proposal (Section 8) along with his proposal for a Global
Resources Dividend (Section 9.1), Christian Barry and Sanjay
Reddy’s Just Linkage Proposal to help improve working conditions
(Section 4), and Allan Buchanan and Robert Keohane’s
institutional innovations to secure accountability in the use of
military force (Section 3.2). There is also the innovative work of
Leif Wenar concerning proposals for clean trade (Section 9.1).
In addition to those illustrations already highlighted in this
article, philosophers are also having an impact on policy discussions
in a wide range of areas including climate change, reforming the
United Nations, and suggesting the new priorities that should replace
the Millennium Development Goals which expire in 2015. Philosophers
have also contributed to influential international multi-disciplinary
projects that seek alternative ways to measure quality of life or
poverty (Nussbaum and Sen 1993, Pogge 2014). One area recently drawing
increased attention concerns tax and accounting matters. Philosophers
have discussed rampant abusive tax practices by corporations and
wealthy individuals and how this deprives developing countries of
much-needed income for human development in developing
countries. There has also been discussion of global income taxes,
carbon taxes, financial transaction taxes and Tobin Taxes (Moellendorf
2009, Caney 2005b, Brock 2009).
Philosophers continue to make an important contribution to policy
debates and this is also likely to be an area in which considerable
useful future work on global justice will concentrate.