Before the rise of Islam, a multisecular tradition of learning
(Brock 1977, 1994; Bettiolo 2005; Watt 2010) had already achieved in Syria the
transition “from antagonism to assimilation” (Brock 1982)
of the Greek philosophical
 culture,[6]
especially but not exclusively
 Aristotelian.[7]
Within the
theological schools of Edessa and Nisibi, during the 4th and 5th
centuries, not only were the exegetical works translated from Greek
into Syriac (e.g. those of Theodorus of Mopsuestia), but so were
philosophical works (in particular, Aristotle’s logical writings
and Porphyry’s Isagoge). The continuity between the
Neoplatonic schools of late Antiquity, with their typical approach to
the Aristotelian corpus (Hadot 1991), is best exemplified by Sergius of
Reshʿayna (d. 536), a physician who held a prominent position in
the Syriac Church (Hugonnard-Roche 2001, 2004). A former student of
Ammonius in the Neoplatonic school of Alexandria, Sergius translated
into Syriac some thirty treatises by Galen, the pseudo-Aristotelian
 De Mundo,[8]
a treatise by Alexander of Aphrodisias, On
the Principles of the All (lost in
 Greek),[9]
the writings of Dionysius the
Pseudo-Areopagite and Evagrius Ponticus (Watt 2011); he is also the author of a
treatise on Aristotle’s Categories and another one on
the scope of Aristotle’s
 writings.[10]
After the Arab conquest of
Damascus (635) and the whole of Syria (636), the Christian intellectual
communities living under the Umayyad Caliphate (661–750) continued to
assimilate Greek philosophy and
 science,
focusing in particular on the
Aristotelian logical corpus together with its Neoplatonic introduction,
namely, Porphyry’s
 Isagoge.[11] 
This tradition of learning
(Gutas 1983; Brock 1993; Hugonnard-Roche 2004; 2007; 2009; 2011) lay in the background
of many of the Christians of Syria who took part in the translation
movement fostered by the early ʿAbbasid Caliphate (Watt 2004, Janos 2015).
Albeit superseded in number and importance by the translations into
Arabic, translations into Syriac continued even amidts the growing 
translations into Arabic, in the ʿAbbasid capital of
Baghdad.
Already in Damascus, under the Umayyads, some philosophical writings
had been translated into Arabic. Salim Abu l-ʿAla’,
secretary to the caliph Hisham ibn ʿAbd al-Malik (r. 724–743),
initiated the translation of the pseudo-Aristotelian letters on
government to Alexander the
 Great.[12]
This collection forms the nucleus of the most
famous among the “mirrors for princes”, the Sirr
al-asrar (Grignaschi 1967, 1976; Manzalaoui 1974), known in the
Latin Middle Ages and early modern times as the Secretum
 secretorum.[13]
One of the Arabic translations of the
pseudo-Aristotelian De Mundo also traces back to this period
(Grignaschi 1965–66). However, it was under the ʿAbbasids
(750–1258), and in particular in the first two centuries of their
caliphate, that the translations blossomed.
Apparently, the first translations of the ʿAbbasid era were
produced under the caliphate of al-Mansur (r. 754–775): his secretary
Ibn al-Muqaffaʿ (d.
 756)[14]
is credited with the translation (or
production) of a compendium of Porphyry’s Isagoge, plus
the Categories, De Intepretatione and Prior
 Analytics.[15]
It has been contended (Gabrieli 1932, Kraus
1934) that this authorship rests on a mistake and that this work should
be attributed to his son, Muhammad ibn ʿAbdallah
al-Muqaffaʿ (fl. under the reign of al-Ma’mun, see
below); however, other scholars accept the father’s
 authorship,[16]
with the result
that a companion of Aristotelian logic was already available in the
first decades of the ʿAbbasid caliphate, under the ruler who
founded Baghdad (762). His son and successor al-Mahdi (r. 775–785) had
the Topics translated for him by the Nestorian
Patriarch
 Timothy I (d. 823).[17]
It
has been advanced that the ancient Arabic translation of the
Rhetoric, “edited” by Ibn al-Samh (d.
 1027),[18]
traces back to
the 8th century (Aouad 1989c, 456–7). Under the reign of Harun
al-Rashid (r. 786–809) a translation of Aristotle’s
Physics was made by a certain Sallam
 al-Abrash.[19]
Neither
translation has come down to us.
A great deal of translations made under the reign of al-Ma’mun
(r. 813–833) and his successors are extant. The new interpretation of
Islam and of the role of the caliph promoted by
 al-Ma’mun,[20]
as well as the
increasing interest in the secular sciences of the elites of
Islamic
 society,[21]
created the context for the development of the translations into
Arabic. Even though the court library (Bayt
al-hikma,“House of
 Wisdom”)[22]
cannot be viewed as an
institutional center for the translations of Greek works into
 Arabic,[23]
a close
relationship existed between the activities of the first group of
translators and the court. The leader of this group, the encyclopaedic
scientist and first faylasuf Abu Yaʿqub ibn
Ishaq
 al-Kindi,[24]
was
appointed as the preceptor of the son of the successor
of
al-Ma’mun, al-Muʿtasim
(r. 833–842):
one of Kindi’s works is addressed to al-Ma’mun, whereas his
 major metaphysical writing, On First
 Philosophy,[25]
is addressed to
al-Muʿtasim. How do we know that there was a group of translators
and that al-Kindi was its leader? The ancient sources give a hint to
this, in so far as they mention, for instance, that the earliest
translation of Aristotle’s Metaphysics was made
for
 him.[26]
Also, the incipit of the well-known
 Theology of Aristotle 
 claims that he acted as the
revisor of this work, in fact an adapted translation of parts of
Plotinus’ Enneads IV–VI. Since it has been established
(Endress 1973) that the same lexical and syntactical features of the
two translations just mentioned are shared by other translations from
Greek, one can be reasonably sure that several translators exchanged
among themselves and with al-Kindi: the latter has been described as
the spiritus rector of this group (Endress 1997a; 2007).
The translations of this circle include works by Plato, Aristotle,
Nicomachus of Gerasa, Alexander of Aphrodisias, Plotinus, Proclus, John
Philoponus and Olympiodorus. It is worth noting that the texts of
Plotinus, and in part those of Proclus and Philoponus, did not
circulate under the names of their authors: Plotinus circulated under
the name of Aristotle (Rosenthal 1974), Proclus under those of
Aristotle and Alexander of Aphrodisias, and Philoponus under the name
of Alexander (see below).
Plato. An early translation of the Timaeus is
mentioned in the bio-bibliographical
 sources,[27]
but it has not come down to us. The circulation of at least
parts of the 
Symposium,[28]
Phaedo (Aouad 1989a; Gutas 2012, 855), and 
Republic[29]
should be acknowledged in the age of al-Kindi.
Aristotle. The early translation of the Metaphysics
made for al-Kindi has come down to
 us;[30]
the translator is the otherwise
unknown
 Ustath.[31]
Other
Aristotelian works translated within the Kindi’s circle are the
 Prior Analytics,[32]
Sophistici Elenchi,[33]
De Caelo,[34]
Meteorologica,[35]
De Generatione animalium and De
 Partibus animalium,[36]
Parva Naturalia and possibly the De Anima,[37]
plus a paraphrasis
of this work in clear Neoplatonic vein (Arnzen 1998; 2003; Gannagé 2012, 533). As shown by Ullmann (2011–2012), the Arabic translation of Books V–X of the Nicomachean Ethics must be traced back to Ustath (see also Schmidt-Ullmann 2012). In addition to the
genuine Aristotelian works, some pseudepigrapha were also either
translated in this period, or produced within the circle of al-Kindi:
these are of pivotal importance for the rise and development of
falsafa. It has been established on firm grounds (Endress
1973) that the circle of al-Kindi produced the translation and
reworking of significant parts of the Enneads IV–VI (known as
 the Theology of
 Aristotle)[38]
as well as the translation and reworking of
Proclus’ Elements of Theology (known as the Book by
 Aristotle on the Pure Good). The
 Theology[39]
was the most
influential of the two in the Arabic-speaking world, whereas the
 Book by Aristotle on the Pure
 Good[40]
was bound to become immensely
famous in the Latin world, under the title Liber de
Causis. Other pseudo-Aristotelian writings trace back to
this period: the K. al-tuffaha (Liber de Pomo),
namely, a reworking of the Phaedo with Aristotle replacing the
dying Socrates (Aouad 1989a; Gutas 2012, 855), and a Physiognomic (Thomann
2003).
Nicomachus of Gerasa. The Introduction to
Arithmetic was translated within the circle of al-Kindi
(Altmann-Stern 1958, 35; Endress 1997a, 55; Freudenthal 2005).
Alexander of Aphrodisias. (i) Commentaries. The first book
of Alexander’s commentary on the De Gen. corr., lost in
Greek, is said to have been translated by Qusta ibn
 Luqa,[41]
a physician and
translator who came from Baalbek to Baghdad in the first decades of the
9th century and had exchanges on medical and philosophical matters
with
 al-Kindi.[42]
(ii) Personal works. Of prominent importance are two writings lost in
Greek: On Providence (Fazzo-Wiesner 1993) and a cosmological
treatise known in Arabic as On the First Cause, the effect and its
movements (ed. Endress 2002). From the circle of al-Kindi comes
also the translation of a series of Alexander’s genuine
Quaestiones, intermingled in the manuscript sources with
propositions of Proclus’ Elements of Theology, attributed to Alexander (Endress
1973; overview on the Arabic Alexander by Genequand 2011 and 2017).
Plotinus. Around AD 840 parts of Enneads IV–VI
(devoted in the Porphyrian edition of Plotinus’ writings to soul,
the intelligible world and the One) were translated into
 Arabic.[43]
The problems
about this translation, and in particular about the transformation of
parts of it into the Theology of Aristotle, are dealt with
in a separate
 entry.[44]
For present purposes, it will suffice to
mention the fact that at the beginning of the Theology of
Aristotle an author, speaking as if he were Aristotle,
proclaims to have devoted this treatise to the First Cause, Intellect
and Soul, after having dealt with matter, form, the efficient and final
causes in his Metaphysics. This proclaimed
“Aristotelian” authorship of the Theology 
granted Plotinus’ doctrine an extraordinary impact on subsequent
Arabic philosophy, especially in the East of the Muslim world.
Proclus. As we have seen before, the Elements of
Theology were translated into Arabic within the circle of
al-Kindi (Endress 1973; on later circulation, see Wakelnig 2006, 2011;
up-to-date survey by Endress 2012); some propositions were attributed
to Alexander of Aphrodisias under various titles—On the
First Cause, On the Existence of Spiritual Forms with no
matter, On the Difference between eternity and
time, On Coming-to-be, On the Body (van Ess
1966; Endress 1973; Zimmermann 1994). This collection of Proclus’
propositions is sometimes labelled as Account of what Alexander
has extracted from Aristotle’s book called Theology (Endress
1973, 53; Zimmermann 1986, 189–90; Goulet-Aouad 1989a, 133;
Fazzo 2003, 64–5). Another writing by Proclus, extant in Greek
only through the quotations by John Philoponus in his
De Aeternitate mundi, was translated into Arabic in this
period: the Eighteen arguments on the Eternity of the Cosmos
against the Christians (Endress 1973, 15–16; Endress 2012,
1657–61; see also Wakelnig 2012).
John Philoponus. The bio-bibliographical sources mention his
commentary on the Physics, translated partly by Ibn
Naʿima al-Himsi and partly by Qusta ibn
 Luqa.[45]
Also, fragments of an adapted
translation of parts of the De Aeternitate mundi were
 known[46]
under the name of Alexander of Aphrodisias
(Hasnaoui 1994; Giannakis 2002–3; Gannagé 2012, 535–7).
Olympiodorus. A commentary on the De Gen.
corr., lost in Greek, is said to have been translated by
 Ustath.[47]
In addition to these works, translated within the circle of
al-Kindi, two doxographies were translated into Arabic in this period:
the Placita of the pseudo-Plutarch, accounting for Greek
cosmologies from the Presocratics to the
 Stoics,[48]
and the Refutation of all
the Heresies by Hyppolitus of Rome; the latter was reworked in 
light of the theological discussions of the 9th century Baghdad and
attributed to Ammonius, the Alexandrian commentator of
 Aristotle.[49]
Thanks to this first set of translations, learned Muslims
became acquainted with Plato’s Demiurge and immortal soul; with
Aristotle’s search for science and knowledge of the causes of all
the phenomena on earth and in the heavens, culminating in the doctrine
of the Unmoved Mover; with Alexander’s cosmology and explanation
of providence; with Plotinus’ hierarchy of the principles One,
Intellect and Soul; with Proclus’ systematic account of how the
One—indisputably identified with Aristotle’s Unmoved
Mover—gives rise to the multiplicity of our universe; finally,
with John Philoponus’ philosophical arguments for creation. The
translation of Proclus’ arguments in favour of the eternity of
the cosmos against the Christians, as well as of John Philoponus’
reply to them, also made learned Muslims acquainted with the fact that
the Greek philosophers were at odds on some crucial issues. The
adaptations which appear in the reworking both of Plotinus’
Enneads (D’Ancona 2006) and of Hyppolitus doxography
attributed to Ammonius (Rudolph 1998) show the strategy to deal with
this problem typical of the circle of al-Kindi: a strategy which
would be successful in the long run. The idea of the basic unity of the
Greek philosophical tradition and the twin claim of its intrinsic
harmony with the Qur’anic doctrine of the tawhid (divine
oneness) will be established by the endorsment, apparent in
Kindi’s own works, of the Aristotelian model of the accumulation
of knowledge by trial and error (Metaphysics, A and alpha
elatton).
Another group of translators takes the floor a bit later: the one of
the Nestorian physician and scientist Hunayn ibn Ishaq (d. 873)
(Bergsträsser 1913, 1925; Gabrieli 1924; Meyerhof 1926a, 1926b;
Haddad 1974; Strohmaier 1990) his son Ishaq ibn Hunayn (d. 911), and
their associates. In addition to the medical corpus of
 Galen,[50]
this group of
translators made available in Syriac and/or in Arabic other works by
Plato, Aristotle, Theophrastus, some philosophical writings by Galen,
as well as works by Alexander of Aphrodisias, Porphyry, perhaps
Iamblichus, Themistius, Proclus, and John Philoponus.
Plato. The Arabic translation of the Timaeus made
by Ibn al-Bitriq within the circle of al-Kindi was either corrected by
Hunayn ibn Ishaq, or superseded by the latter’s
 translation.[51]
The
Laws were also translated by
 Hunayn,[52] but
neither translation has
come down to us. Hunayn ibn Ishaq is credited also with an exegesis of
 the Republic.[53]
To his son Ishaq is attributed the
translation of a dialogue which might be the Sophist, together
with a commentary, possibly by
 Olympiodorus.[54]
Aristotle. The K. al-Fihrist credits Hunayn ibn
Ishaq with the translation of the
 Categories.[55]
Hunayn also translated the
De Interpretatione into Syriac and Ishaq made the Arabic
translation of
 it.[56]
The Prior Analytics were translated
into Syriac partly by Hunayn and partly by Ishaq, and into Arabic by a
certain
Tayadurus.[57]
The Posterior Analytics were
translated into Syriac, partly by Hunayn and in their entirety
by Ishaq.[58]
The latter also made a Syriac translation of the
 Topics,[59]
but the
translation which has come down to us is the Arabic one, made by Abu
ʿUthman  al-Dimashqi[60]
(books I–VII) and by Ibrahim ibn
ʿAbdallah (book
 VIII).[61]
The K. al-Fihrist tentatively
 attributes to Ishaq a translation of the
 Rhetoric,[62]
but the extant
anonymous Arabic version does not bear the features of the translations
of this period and has been ascribed to an earlier
 stage.[63]
Ishaq also
 translated the Physics into
 Arabic.[64]
As for the De Caelo,
the K. al-Fihrist mentions a revision made by Hunayn on Ibn
al-Bitriq’s
 version.[65]
Hunayn is also the author of a compendium of
the Meteorologica (Daiber 1975). The De Generatione et
corruptione was translated into Syriac by Hunayn and into Arabic
by Ishaq; two other translations are mentioned, by Abu ʿUthman
al-Dimashqi and Ibn
 Bakkus.[66]
All the translations mentioned are lost,
although not without having left some
 traces.[67]
As for the De Anima,
in the K. al-Fihrist we are told that Hunayn translated it
into Syriac in its entirety, and that Ishaq made another partial
translation, plus a complete translation into
 Arabic.[68]
Ishaq ibn
 Hunayn also retranslated (or revised) the
 Metaphysics.[69]
He is also
credited with the translation into Arabic of the Nicomachean
 Ethics.[70]
In addition to the genuine Aristotelian works, some spuria were also
translated by
Hunayn
and his associates: Hunayn
himself possibly translated the Problemata Physica (Filius
2003, 593–98); also the compilation of the so-called De
Lapidibus has been ascribed to him (Zonta 2003, 652–54). Ishaq ibn
Hunayn made the Arabic version of the De Plantis (Drossaart
Lulofs-Poortman 1989; Hugonnard-Roche 2003b, 499–505), and Abu
ʿUthman al-Dimashqi is credited with the translation of the
 De Virtutibus et vitiis.[71]
Theophrastus. The translation of
the Metaphysics is attributed to Ishaq ibn Hunayn in one of
the extant manuscripts, and linguistic analysis confirms this
authorship, even though the K. al-Fihrist attributes the
translation to Yahya ibn 
ʿAdi.[72]
Nicolaus Damascenus. His compilation On the Philosophy
of Aristotle was translated into Syriac by Hunayn ibn Ishaq: the
extant fragments from the first five books are extant and
 edited.[73]
The commentary
on the De Plantis too was translated by Hunayn ibn Ishaq
(Drossaart-Lulofs 1965, 16).
Galen. The compendium of Plato’s Timaeus has
been translated into Syriac by Hunayn ibn Ishaq and from Syriac into
Arabic by Hunayn’s pupil ʿIsa ibn Yahya ibn Ibrahim: the
Arabic text has come down to us and forms volume I of the Plato
 Arabus.[74]
Alexander of Aphrodisias. (i) Commentaries. The commentary
by Alexander on Book Lambda of the Metaphysics, lost
in Greek together with the rest of Alexander’s commentary beyond
book Delta, is said to have been translated into Syriac by
Hunayn ibn
 Ishaq.[75]
The Arabic translation, based in all
likelihood on this Syriac version, is lost, but several extracts of it
survive in Averroes’ commentary on the Metaphysics
(Freudenthal 1885; Bouyges 1952, clxxviii-clxxix). (ii) Personal works.
Hunayn ibn Ishaq translated Qu. III 3 on sense-perception
(Ruland 1978), and his son Ishaq in all likelihood is the translator of
 Alexander’s 
De Anima.[76]
Two Arabic translations of the treatise
 On the Principles of the
 All[77]
have come down to us: one by Ishaq
ibn
 Hunayn[78]
and
the other by Abu ʿUthman al-Dimashqi (Genequand 2001, 31–9; Genequand 2017, 14–16). Even
more important for the subsequent developments of falsafa was
Ishaq’s Arabic translation of the short treatise On
Intellect (see Finnegan 1956; Badawi 1971, 31–42;
Goulet-Aouad 1989, 134; Geoffroy 2002).
Porphyry. The Isagoge, already known to some extent through
a compendium of Aristotelian logic ascribed to Ibn al-Muqaffaʿ, was translated by Abu
ʿUthman
 al-Dimashqi.[79]
This is the only writing by Porphyry whose Arabic translation is
extant; other translations are mentioned in the bio-bibliographical
sources or otherwise attested by Arab authors. These sources mention
an Introduction to the Categorical Syllogisms translated by
Abu ʿUthman
 al-Dimashqi.[80]
A commentary on the Categories is recorded in the K.
 al-Fihrist[81]
and served as a source for
Ibn
 Suwar’s[82]
“edition” of Hunayn’s translation of the
Categories (Elamrani Jamal 1989, 511). A commentary on the
Physics, lost in Greek, is also
 mentioned.[83]
A translation of the commentary on the Nicomachean
Ethics, lost in
 Greek, is attributed to Ishaq ibn
 Hunayn.[84]
Iamblichus. The anonymous translation of a commentary on
Pythagoras’ Golden Verses attributed to Iamblichus
possibly belongs to this
 period.[85]
Themistius. Ishaq’s Arabic translation of the
paraphrasis of the De Anima, mentioned in the
 bio-bibliographical 
 sources,[86]
is extant
and edited (Lyons 1973; see also Browne 1986, 1998 and the overview by Elamrani Jamal 2003, 352–53). The Arabic
translation of a Letter by Themistius On Government
is attributed to Abu ʿUthman al-Dimashqi (Gutas 1975, 47).
Nemesius of Emesa. The De Natura hominis was
translated into Arabic either by Ishaq or by his father Hunayn (see
Samir 1986, Zonta 1991, Chase 2005).
Proclus. Ishaq retranslated the Eighteen
 Arguments on the Eternity of the Cosmos against the
 Christians.[87]
John Philoponus. Even though there are no compelling reasons
to ascribe it to the milieu of Hunayn, the translation of
Philoponus’ treatise Against Aristotle on the Eternity of the
 World[88]
might trace back to this
 period.[89]
Olympiodorus. A paraphrasis of the Meteorologica
translated by Hunayn ibn Ishaq and corrected by his son
 Ishaq (Badawi 1971, 13)
has been
discovered and edited by ʿA. Badawi (Badawi 1971, 95–190). The
text, however, is very different from the one preserved in Greek
(Schoonheim 2003, 326).
Together with the translations of the Galenic corpus, Hunayn,
Ishaq and other translators associated with them put at
the disposal of learned Muslims the Aristotelian corpus in its
entirety. This enterprise paved the way to the understanding of
Aristotle’s thought as a systematic whole based on the theory of
demonstrative science and crowned by the Metaphysics, an
understanding which is apparent both in al-Farabi and in
Avicenna.[90]
The translation of Alexander’s treatises On the Principles of
the All and On Intellect helped to shape the metaphysical
cosmology and noetics of Medieval Arabic philosophy. A hierarchy of
separate, intellectual substances is seen as striving towards
Aristotle’s Unmoved Mover, also called the “True One”
by both al-Farabi and Avicenna, in a purely Neoplatonic and Kindian
vein. In doing so, these separate substances imitate the motionless
causality of the First Principle by their eternal circular movement
(Pines 1986; Martini Bonadeo 2004). This warrants the regularity of
the laws of nature in the sublunar world. The Agent Intellect also
belongs to this hierarchy of separate substances: the
“light” shed by the Agent Intellect is seen as the
condition for the intellect that is a faculty of the human soul,
namely the potential intellect, to actually know the intelligibles
(Walzer 1970).
Towards the middle of the 10th century, another set of translations
into Arabic was produced by the Nestorian Christian Abu Bishr
Matta ibn Yunus (d. 940) (Endress 1991a, Martini Bonadeo 2011a) and his pupils.
Abu Bishr Matta
received his Aristotelian
education at the monastery of Mar Mari and came to Baghdad, where in
the first decades of the 10th century he had al-Farabi, a Muslim, and
Yahya ibn ʿAdi, a Jacobite Christian, among his
 pupils.[91]
He did not know Greek
and his translations were made on the basis of the Syriac translations
already
 extant.[92]
Plato. Another translation of the Laws
is attributed to Yahya ibn ʿAdi by the ancient
 sources.[93]
Aristotle. Abu Bishr Matta translated into Arabic the
Syriac version of the Posterior Analytics made by Ishaq
ibn Hunayn[94]
 and the Syriac translation of the
 Poetics.[95]
Even though he did not know Greek,
the ancient sources mention also a translation by him into
 Syriac (hence, from Greek) of the
 Sophistici Elenchi.[96]
The sources
mention also a partial translation of the De Caelo by
 him,[97]
as well as a
 translation of the De Generatione et 
 corruptione.[98]
Abu Bishr Matta
 also translated the De Sensu et
 sensato[99]
and Book
Lambda of the Metaphysics, together with Alexander of
Aphrodisias’
 commentary.[100]
To his pupil
Yahya ibn ʿAdi—who was also a Christian theologian and the
author of philosophical
 treatises[101]—is 
attributed the Arabic version of
the Syriac translation of the Topics made in the previous
century by Ishaq ibn
 Hunayn.[102]
Yahya ibn ʿAdi is credited also with
the Arabic translation of the Sophistici Elenchi from the
Syriac version of Theophilus of
 Edessa,[103]
as well as with that of the
 Poetics.[104]
One of the Christian pupils of Yahya ibn
ʿAdi, Abu ʿAli ibn al-Samh, was the “editor” of
the ancient translation of the Rhetoric: it is this text which
has come down to
 us.[105]
Abu ʿAli ibn Zurʿa, another
Christian of this milieu, might have translated an Alexandrian
compendium of the Nicomachean Ethics known as Ikhtisar
al-Iskandaraniyyin (Summa Alexandrinorum) (Dunlop 1982;
Zonta 2003, 197). The 10th century Baghdad Aristotelian Abu l-Faraj
ibn
 al-Tayyib[106]
translated the pseudo-Aristotelian De Virtutibus et vitiis and
Divisiones (ed. Kellermann-Rost 1965; see also Ferrari 2006, 30), and might be also the
translator of the pseudo-Aristotelian Economics (Zonta 2003,
549).
Theophrastus. Ibn al-Nadim, whose information about
 Yahya ibn ʿAdi is first hand, maintains that the latter
 translated Theophrastus’ Metaphysics; however, in light
 of Ishaq’s authorship mentioned above, this claim has been
 interpreted as a revision of or an editorial work on Ishaq’s
 translation.[107]
Nicolaus of Damascus. Abu ʿAli ibn Zurʿa, a
Christian philosopher of the circle of Yahya ibn ʿAdi, translated
into Arabic (in all likelihood from the Syriac version made in the
previous century by Hunayn ibn
 Ishaq[108])
the Compendium of Aristotle’s
 Philosophy.[109]
The same Abu ʿAli ibn Zurʿa
began to translate Nicolaus’ compendium of the De
 Animalibus.[110]
Alexander of Aphrodisias. (i) Commentaries.
Abu Bishr Matta
translated Alexander’s
commentary on the De Generatione et corruptione, lost in Greek
but partially preserved in
 Arabic,[111]
as well as the commentary on the
 Meteorologica.[112]
He also made a partial translation of the
 commentary on the De Caelo.[113]
(ii) Personal works. Abu Bishr Matta
 translated Alexander’s treatise On
 Providence[114]
(which was also
known to the circle of al-Kindi [Fazzo-Wiesner 1993]).
Themistius. Themistius’ paraphrasis of the
 Physics[115]
was known in the circle of Abu Bishr Matta
(Endress 1977, 35) and some notes which trace back to it are
reproduced in the Leiden manuscript mentioned above, which contains the text of the
Physics as it was studied in the Baghdad
 school.[116]
In this
milieu his paraphrasis of the De Caelo, lost in Greek, was
also
 translated (by Abu Bishr Matta) and revised (by Yahya ibn
 ʿAdi).[117]
Abu Bishr Matta translated from Syriac into Arabic three other works: the paraphrasis
of the Posterior Analytics, that of Book Lambda of the 
Metaphysics, and a writing connected with the
 Topics.[118]
Proclus. Two works by him were known to Yahya ibn
ʿAdi: the De Decem dubitationibus circa providentiam
(Endress 1973, 30 and Endress 2012, 1668–9) and
the Elementatio Physica (Endress 1973, 27–28 and
Endress 2012, 1661).
Simplicius. The commentary on the Categories is
mentioned in the bio-bibliographical
 sources[119]
and was known to Ibn Suwar,
the “editor” of the so-called “Organon of
Baghdad” (see Hugonnard-Roche 1993).
Olympiodorus. Abu Bishr Matta translated into Arabic his
commentary on the Meteorologica, in all likelihood from the
Syriac version made by Hunayn ibn
 Ishaq.[120]
The commentary on the
De Gen. corr., translated also by Ustath at the beginning of
the translation movement, was translated by Abu Bishr Matta and revised
by Yahya ibn
 ʿAdi.[121]
A commentary of his on the De Anima,
unknown in Greek, is also mentioned as extant in
 Syriac.[122]
Finally,
an otherwise unknown “Allinus” who wrote a commentary on the
 Categories[123]
might be Elias, the pupil of Olympiodorus;
however, other names have been advanced; a “book by
Allinus” was translated by Ibn Suwar (Elamrani Jamal 1989,
151–2; Martini Bonadeo 2011c).
Typical of this period was the detailed exegesis of
Aristotle’s ipsissima verba made possible by the
translations into Arabic of the old versions (often Syriac), as well as
of the commentaries. Far away from Baghdad, Avicenna will argue time
and again against the interpretations of Aristotle advanced
within the context of the Baghdad school of philosophy (Pines 1952;
Gutas 2000). Nevertheless, he will continue to rely on the corpus of
the Greek sources made available in the previous centuries, not only in
the trivial sense of the access they provided to the Greek thought for
an Arabic readership, but also in the less evident sense of the
philosophical agenda set by the thinkers who assimilated the Greek
heritage. Together with the meticulous exegesis of the text of
Aristotle, the ideal of carrying on the search for the lore and science
of the Ancients, taken as a whole, is a prominent feature of the
philosophical circles of this era, apparent both in the production of
collections like the Siwan al-hikma (The Repository of
 Wisdom)[124]
and in the ideal of the attainment of
happiness through philosophy.
The attitude to the search for happiness in the intellectual life (see
Endress 2014) and the endeavour to rely on the heritage of the
Ancients as a guidance in search of the “science of the things
in their truth (ʿilm al-ashyaʿi
bi-haqa’iqiha)” and personal achievement bridges the
gap between the beginnings of falsafa in the age of al-Kindi
and the developments of the Muslim West, when Averroes would conceive
his project of commenting upon the Aristotelian corpus (Endress 1998;
2004).