Biographical information for much of the life of Gregory of Rimini
(a.k.a. de Arimino, Ariminensis, the “Torturer of Infants,” the
Lucerna splendens, and the Doctor acutus or
authenticus) derives from a letter of Pope Clement VI, dated
12 January 1345, requesting Gregory’s promotion to Master of Theology
at the University of Paris:
According to the letter, then,
Gregory first studied theology at Paris from 1322 or 1323 until 1328
or 1329. Working backwards, we can estimate that Gregory was born in
Rimini around 1300, joined the mendicant order of the Hermits of Saint
Augustine (OESA), and received his basic education before going to
Paris. There he was exposed to the latest developments in
philosophical theology, especially the ideas of the Franciscan Peter
Auriol, who had died in early 1322. Assuming that the sequence in the
papal letter is strictly chronological, Gregory then taught theology
at various Augustinian studia in Italy, first at Bologna,
where he is attested as lector in documents of late 1332,
1333, and early 1337. Perhaps he was transferred to Padua at the
Augustinians’ General Chapter meeting in Siena in 1338, and then he
was shifted to Perugia. Almost certainly while he was in Italy,
Gregory came into contact with the works of Oxford scholars from the
1320s and 1330s, most notably William of Ockham, Adam Wodeham, Richard
Fitzralph, and Walter Chatton. Pope Clement’s letter suggests that
Gregory returned to Paris in late 1340 or in 1341 in order to lecture
on the Sentences, but perhaps the “four years” refers to the
date of his order’s General Chapter of Montpellier, 1341, which may
have been the occasion when Gregory was assigned to return to
Paris. The prevailing view is that Gregory went to Paris in 1342 for a
year of preparation for his lectures on the Sentences, which
were given in 1343–44, but given that our records of these lectures
were subject to revision, there is a degree of uncertainty. With help
from the pope’s letter, Gregory probably became Master of Theology in
1345, holding at least one quodlibetal disputation at Paris, but he
continued to revise his written Sentences commentary until
1346, removing certain passages that were formerly considered later
additiones. In late 1346 Master Gregory was in Rimini and the
following year we find him teaching again in Padua, where he stayed
until 1351 when the General Chapter at Basel sent him to teach at the
recently established studium in Rimini. He remained there at
least until late 1356, but on 20 May 1357, at the General Chapter in
Montpellier, he was elected the Augustinians’ prior general,
succeeding the late Thomas of Strasbourg. Gregory died in Vienna
toward the end of 1358 (see V.  Marcolino’s chapter in Oberman 1981,
127–94; Lambertini et al. 2002; Delucca 2003).
Gregory’s most important writing by far is his commentary on the first
two books of the Sentences. Book I survives in some twenty
complete manuscripts, while there are about a dozen for book II.  The
work was printed several times from 1482 to 1532, reprinted in 1955,
and finally received a modern critical edition in six volumes in
1979–84 (Rimini 1979–84; Bermon 2002). Parts have been or are being
translated into French, German, and English. In addition to scriptural
commentaries, Gregory was also responsible for smaller writings,
including a work usually known as De usura, printed in 1508
and again in 1622 (see below, section 6). His tract on the intension
and remission of forms, De intensione et remissione formarum
corporalium, carries the incipit “Circa secundum partem huius
distinctionis” and is, therefore, just an excerpt of the
Sentences commentary, book I, distinction 17, part
2. Finally, from his brief term as his order’s prior general we have
his correspondence, which has been published (Rimini 1976).
Although Gregory of Rimini has received considerable attention from
historians of medieval thought, understanding his position in the
history of philosophy has been made difficult by several problems that
have plagued the historiography of fourteenth-century
scholasticism. He flourished at a time that has been judged by
historians as on the whole decadent, fideistic, and radically
skeptical, in contrast to the period in which, for example, Thomas
Aquinas worked (d. 1274); this historical viewpoint already made
difficult an objective evaluation of Rimini.  Historians also labeled
Gregory a “nominalist,” a term so broad and vague when applied to
fourteenth-century thinkers that, when it was used without
qualification, it tended to mislead and to obscure the differences
among them, as for example between Ockham and Gregory.  Finally,
unlike Aquinas, Henry of Ghent, and John Duns Scotus, Gregory was
active in a relatively understudied period, so that placing Gregory in
his context is difficult and statements about Gregory’s originality
are precarious. The history of Gregory’s own University of Paris in
the quarter century before his Sentences lectures, in
contrast to that of Oxford in the same years, is particularly
unclear. Few scholars realize, moreover, that from the 1330s until the
onset of the Great Schism in 1378, decades when the traditional
leaders of European thought, the Franciscans and Dominicans, were in
decline, Gregory was the leading light in an era in which his own
Augustinian Order dominated, with such towering figures as Thomas of
Strasbourg, Alphonsus Vargas of Toledo, and Hugolino of Orvieto, and a
number of other important authors.  Only careful diachronic studies of
specific philosophical problems can provide a precise picture of
Gregory’s role in the history of philosophy, and few such studies have
been accomplished thus far. There are some, however, and epistemology,
foreknowledge, and predestination are examples of topics about which
we know quite a bit (see below).
Generally, what has been learned so far is that Gregory was really
the first to introduce to the University of Paris the exciting ideas
developed at English schools between William of Ockham (ca. 1319) and
Thomas Bradwardine (ca. 1344). Beginning with Gregory the names of Adam
Wodeham, Richard Fitzralph, Walter Chatton, William Heytesbury, Thomas
Buckingham, Richard Kilvington, Robert Halifax and others became common
knowledge among Parisian scholars. Gregory was also deeply influenced
by recent thinkers at his own university, both negatively and
positively. The impact of Peter Auriol has long been recognized to be
great, but recent studies have made clear that other figures, such as
Francis of Marchia, Thomas of Strasbourg, Gerard Odonis, and Michael of
Massa, had an influence on Gregory. The question of Gregory’s
relationship to his Parisian predecessors needs to be investigated more
fully.
More clear is Gregory’s importance in the late Middle Ages and
Reformation, even if much of this period has received relatively
little attention. Gregory’s impact is obvious, because many
scholastics after 1350 copied large passages from his works, including
such prominent figures as the Cistercian James of Eltville, Pierre
d’Ailly, and Henry of Langenstein. Other important thinkers, such as
Hugolino of Orvieto OESA, the Cistercian Pierre Ceffons, Marsilius of
Inghen, and Peter of Candia OFM (Pope Alexander V) knew Gregory’s
ideas well and cited them often. Few if any philosophers in the later
fourteenth century can have been unaffected by his ideas, and for many
he was their main inspiration. Gregory’s impact both inside and
outside the Augustinian Order continued into the fifteenth
century. The common Sentences commentary (the so-called
Quaestiones communes) of the University of Vienna in the
first half of the century was largely based directly or indirectly on
Gregory’s thought, often duplicating his words. In the celebrated
quarrel over future contingents at the University of Louvain
(1465–1474), several of the participants cited Gregory’s position or
even adopted it without attribution. Of course, the fact that only
books I and II of Gregory’s commentary circulated means that Gregory’s
direct impact is to be found in topics discussed in those books rather
than in issues covered in books III and IV, such as the Immaculate
Conception and the Eucharist, which had their own philosophical
sub-issues.
Perhaps the most central element of Gregory of Rimini’s thought and
influence is his adherence to Augustine and the nature of that
adherence. For one thing, Gregory simply read Augustine more carefully
and extensively than most previous thinkers, and so, for example,
Gregory was able to attack Peter Auriol for his faulty citations and
quotations of Augustine. Gregory’s interest in the works of Augustine
has been seen as central to the development of a “historico-critical”
method in philosophical theology, especially in the Augustinian Order,
partly foreshadowing modern scholarly methods. In connection with this
historico-critical method, Gregory was part of a general attempt to
establish reliable texts of Augustine and to separate authentic works
from the pseudo-Augustinian corpus. Quotations from Augustine,
moreover, were cited with great accuracy and detail in Gregory’s
writings, and so his Sentences commentary, when not
plagiarized for his own ideas, was often used as a source for
Augustinian quotations (Trapp 1956).
Not surprisingly, Gregory’s ideas are often Augustinian. Gregory’s
brand of doctrinal Augustinianism, influenced rather by the Franciscan
and Oxonian tradition than the more Dominican (and Parisian) variety
of Giles of Rome, soon dominated the Augustinian Hermits’ philosophy
and theology. Thus by the early 16th century Aegidistae and
Gregoriistae schools of thought existed, and a recognized
via Gregorii was present in many universities such as
Wittenberg, the university of Gregory’s fellow Augustinian Hermit
Martin Luther (McGrath 1987). The fact that Gregory’s extreme
Augustinian views on predestination became virtually official doctrine
at the University of Vienna, and each book of his Sentences
commentary was printed six times between 1482 and 1532, further helps
explain why some of Gregory’s ideas often resemble those of Luther and
Jean Calvin. Gregory’s thought had a life after the reformation,
perhaps influencing Francisco Suarez, but certainly having an impact
on seventeenth-century debates over such topics as predestination.
A list of Gregory’s philosophical positions would perhaps not be
difficult to make, and neither would it be hard to describe his
relation to Ockham on various topics (e.g. Smith 1999). In natural
philosophy, for example, in agreement with Ockham, Gregory was a
nominalist and employed “Ockham’s” razor in denying that sudden
change, motion, and time are independent entities (Brown 1998b).
Gregory also claims that the world could have been eternal, and that
an actual infinite is possible (Maier 1949). But in these cases one
would like to know better the stances of Gregory’s immediate
predecessors, especially Parisians like Francis of Marchia, in order
to determine the possible sources and degree of originality of
Gregory’s ideas. (On the eternity of the world, for example, Gregory’s
view was not very strange in his day.)  Otherwise, a list of Gregory’s
ideas is just that, a mere list.  Consequently the focus here shall be
on a few of the issues on which the theories of Gregory and his
predecessors have been investigated in some depth.
In many ways Gregory was a philosopher’s theologian, because he
began with propositions from Scripture as premises for his arguments
and proceeded deductively. In his deductive theology, Gregory devoted
much time and space to defining his terms and exploring exhaustively
the implications of possible solutions, a practice that makes his
Sentences commentary a joy to read and a philosophical
classic. In distinctions 38–41 of book I, Gregory tackled the general
problem of divine foreknowledge and future contingents and the specific
dilemma of predestination and free will. Gregory’s positions on these
questions have already been the subject of study for many decades, and
recently historians have attempted to put Gregory into his immediate
Parisian and Oxonian context. Moreover, Gregory’s nickname, “the
Torturer of Infants,” stems in part from his stance on predestination.
A discussion of Gregory’s thought on these issues, therefore, provides
a convenient introduction both to his noetic and to his position in
history.
Gregory’s treatment of divine foreknowledge and future contingents is
aimed primarily at Peter Auriol and secondarily at Oxford theologians
(Vignaux 1934, ch. 4; Hoenen 1993, 196–214; Schabel 2000, 264–274;
Fiorentino 2004; Ciammetti 2011). In order to preserve the contingency
of events stemming from human free will, Auriol claimed that
propositions about future contingents are neither true nor false, but
rather neutral, and so God does not know that the Antichrist will
exist, since “the Antichrist will exist” is neither true nor
false. Although like Ockham and Rimini later, Auriol maintained that
exactly how God knows the future is incomprehensible to us, he did
give a sophisticated explanation and defense of God’s knowledge of our
future. Gregory, however, chose to focus on the above-mentioned
elements in Auriol’s position. Gregory recognized that Auriol’s theory
of future-contingent propositions relies on Aristotle’s stance in
chapter 9 of On Interpretation. Interestingly, although
Gregory denied the truth of the position itself, he nevertheless held
that it was in fact Aristotle’s. Indeed he rejected any attempt to
interpret Aristotle differently, in the way that many medieval and
modern philosophers have tried to do:
So for Gregory, Auriol was correct that Aristotle denied the
Principle of Bivalence when applied to propositions about future
contingents.
Auriol set up two basic rules for such propositions: (1) if a
proposition about the future, say, “Socrates will run,” is true, it is
true immutably and inevitably, since no instant can be found when it
would be false. (2) The significate of such a proposition will
inevitably and necessarily be put into being. The foundation for
Auriol’s claim is his modal theory: immutability and necessity are the
same thing. If something is immutable, it cannot be different from what
it is, and so it necessarily is the way it is.
Gregory answered with a rigorous and lengthy defense of Bivalence
and an alternative modal theory. His defense of Bivalence includes a
detailed set of rules for propositions. It is significant that this
section of Gregory’s text, some seven pages, stems from Francis of
Marchia’s refutation of Auriol’s position, a refutation adopted and
extended by Gregory’s own Augustinian predecessor at Paris, Michael of
Massa. In short, Gregory argued that the Principle of Bivalence applies
universally, and Aristotle was wrong to make an exception in the case
of future-contingent propositions. Although this was his basic
disagreement with Auriol, Gregory was so careful a philosopher that
before he refuted Auriol on this point he corrected his Franciscan
predecessor on details and in so doing made Auriol’s own theory more
precise.
Auriol placed greater emphasis on divine simplicity and necessity
than on divine freedom and contingency when he was wrestling with one
of the fundamental problems of Christian philosophical theology: given
an absolutely simple and necessary God, what is the source of
contingency? Auriol’s own explanation lies in God’s relationship with
events in time, but this explanation was not of interest to Rimini, who
was convinced by Scriptural prophecy that God does in fact know the
future, and convinced by logic that the Principle of Bivalence holds
universally. So the problem becomes, if God knows that Socrates will
run, and the proposition “Socrates will run” is true, will not Socrates
run necessarily?
Rimini’s answer is a version of the opinio communis, a
position with roots in Scotus and the Parisian tradition but which
Ockham and later Oxford scholars refined with their focus on
propositions. (It is possible that Ockham was influenced by Auriol in
his concentration on future-contingent propositions, as some have held,
but there is nothing specific to indicate that Ockham knew Auriol’s
treatment, and after Scotus it was natural for theologians to focus
their attention on the truth of future-contingent propositions anyway.)
The opinio communis relies on God’s freedom to save
contingency in the world: everything other than God is ultimately
contingent, because God wills and acts freely and contingently in
creating, and so it is logically possible for the things in the world
not to have been or to have been otherwise. At the same time, the
common position affirms God’s immutability and determinate knowledge of
such things. The upshot is that true propositions about future
contingents have always been true and are immutably true, even
determinately true, but that they are only contingently true and not
necessarily so. So Gregory denies Auriol’s equation of necessity and
immutability.
Gregory’s position relies on interesting uses of common logical
devices and distinctions developed at Paris and Oxford over the
preceding century, such as the distinction between the composite and
divided senses of propositions, and that between conditional and
absolute necessity. The purpose of these distinctions was to offer a
way of explaining the contingency of events, but in doing so they
assumed the ultimate contingency of everything except God. However, far
from being an affirmation of the “radical contingency” of the world, as
some historians have claimed, it was in fact the only way for most
theologians to save at least some contingency from the threat of
absolute logical and divine determinism. In fact, Gregory and others
admitted that, assuming God’s knowledge of the future, the future was
necessary ex suppositione, although not absolutely, because it
is logically possible for immutable God to know otherwise. Peter
Auriol, and later Peter de Rivo, Pietro Pomponazzi, and Martin Luther,
would consider these efforts feeble and deluded. The three Peters
resorted to alternative theories that others considered equally feeble
and deluded, whereas Luther simply accepted the conclusion that all
attempts to save meaningful contingency governed by human free will
were doomed to failure.
What is interesting about Gregory’s treatment, again, is not his
originality, but the clarity and precision with which he presented the
common position. He even pointed out problems in the discussions of
those with whom he broadly agreed, such as Ockham. True, almost all of
what Rimini said could be found in Marchia, Massa, Ockham, Landulph
Caracciolo, Adam Wodeham, and others, but not in such an organized
fashion.
One final element of Gregory’s stance on modal matters that deserves
our attention is the contingency or necessity of the past. The
opinio communis maintained that the past is somehow necessary
in a strong sense, even though it is not absolutely necessary. It seems
that Gregory did not go so far as to say that the past is necessary
(beyond the normal necessity ex suppositione), but he does
make some sort of modal distinction between the past and the future.
Thus we can say that Gregory did not think God can change the past,
although there has been some disagreement on this issue (Courtenay
1972–73; Schabel 2000, 271–2). Suffice it to say that the time has come
for a long and careful treatment of the modal status of the past in
medieval thought, to determine whether any thinker ever really thought
the past could be changed. The probable answer is negative.
Predestination was the traditional subject of distinctions 40–41 of
commentaries on book I of the Sentences. This was a more
purely “theological” subset of the more “philosophical” topic of
foreknowledge and future contingents treated in distinctions 38–39. As in the
case of foreknowledge, Gregory proceeded slowly and carefully, defining
his terms and outlining the possible positions. Gregory’s Augustinian
bent shows through more clearly in predestination than in
foreknowledge. Gregory quoted Augustine’s words no less than 43 times in this context,
and cited him still more often. Frequent scriptural quotations,
carefully chosen, provide the ultimate basis for his theory. From
Romans 9.13, where Paul comments on Malachi 1.2, “Jacob I have loved,
but Esau I have hated,” Gregory took his position that from eternity,
God actively elects to damn some and to save others, a theory called
Double Predestination or Double Particular Election (Vignaux 1934, ch.
4; Schüler 1934; Halverson 1998, 143–157; Schabel 2002).
The main issue is what the causal connection is between humans’
willing and acting and their salvation or damnation, and predestination
or reprobation: do humans participate in or contribute to their own
salvation and damnation, or is God’s will the sole cause? Traditionally
the answer had been that humans are the cause of their deserved
damnation, but that salvation depended solely on God’s will. Although
there were various interpretations of this traditional stance, Peter
Auriol seems to have been the first important university scholar to
provide a real alternative. Auriol had already sought to distance God
from the everyday details of the world’s existence, in order to
preserve divine necessity and the contingency of things. Auriol now
applied his general theory to the specific issue of soteriology and
claimed that God sets up general rules by which certain sets of people
will be damned and other sets saved, without actively choosing to save
or damn specific individuals. This maintained divine immutability but
had the added bonus of providing symmetry for reprobation and
predestination: the determining factor is the presence or absence of an
obstacle to grace (obex gratiae). For Auriol, while someone’s
obstacle to grace is indeed a positive cause of reprobation, the
absence of such an obstacle, however, is merely a negative or
privative cause of predestination. Thus Auriol thought he could avoid
charges of Pelagianism by simply denying a positive cause of
predestination in the elect. Ockham appears to have adopted the main
elements of Auriol’s stance, while Walter Chatton at Oxford and Gerard
Odonis and Thomas of Strasbourg at Paris went further and posited a
positive cause of predestination in the elect, which would appear to
approach the condemned Pelagian doctrine.
Gregory reacted by charging that both the theory of the privative
cause and the notion of the positive cause of predestination in those
who are predestined are Pelagian. Instead Gregory returned to the
traditional view as it concerned predestination: it stems only from
God’s merciful will. However, Auriol’s criticism of the asymmetry of
the traditional position led Gregory to claim that not only do the
predestined play no causal role in their salvation, but neither do the
reprobate contribute to their damnation. In short, there is no reason
either for one person’s salvation or for another person’s damnation
except the inscrutable will of God: we do not know why some are saved
and others damned. This, after all, Gregory believed, was the theory of
Paul and of Augustine.
One has to admire Gregory’s consistency here, mirroring that of his
opponent, Peter Auriol. In the case of divine foreknowledge, Auriol
provided an alternative to the traditional position because he claimed
that the common defense of contingency failed. Auriol’s theory allowed
him to preserve the causal role of humans in reprobation, at the
expense perhaps of involving humans in predestination and therefore
coming close to Pelagianism. There were problems with Auriol’s stance,
but it was consistent. Gregory, on the other hand, agreed with the
common position on divine foreknowledge, but when it really counted,
in soteriology, Gregory took this common position to what he (and
Auriol) thought was its logical conclusion. Since God’s free creation
and action is really the only source of contingency in the world, then
God’s free will is the only real cause of salvation and damnation.
Salvation and damnation are contingent like anything else, but not
contingent upon human free will, but merely on God’s will. No doubt
for Gregory, everyone else who held the opinio communis
should also have held to Double Predestination or Double Particular
Election. Indeed, at least one of Gregory’s immediate predecessors,
the Carmelite Guy Terrena, appears to have agreed (Schabel 2015).
Luther and Calvin agreed with Gregory, but they saw no reason for the
logical devices of the opinio communis, which for them as for
Auriol could not save the contingency of human willing.
Epistemology is another subject in which Gregory’s thought has
received much attention (e.g. Elie 1937; Dal Pra 1956; Gál 1977;
Eckermann 1978; V. Wendland’s chapter in Oberman 1981, 242–300; Tachau
1988, 358–71). As in natural philosophy, Gregory maintains a
non-realist position that universals are formed by the soul and only
after the mind has previous apprehensions of singular things. Thus
sensory experience plays a major role in intellectual cognition. For
simple cognition Gregory adopts the common terminology of the dichotomy
between intuitive and abstractive cognition, although the difference
between the two is based on the objects rather than the modes of
cognition. For Gregory, intuitive cognition terminates immediately at
the extramental object, but abstractive terminates at the object’s
species in the soul. Inspired by some of Ockham’s successors, Gregory
argues against the Venerable Inceptor’s claim that via intuitive
cognition one could determine whether a thing does not
exist.
In agreement with Auriol against most contemporaries, however,
Gregory also holds that one can have an intuitive cognition of an
object that does not exist, as for example when we see a “broken”
pencil in a glass of water, when there is only an unbroken pencil in
reality. But Auriol is wrong in claiming that this is an instance of an
intuitive cognition of something absent, because for Gregory the
cognition is really caused by the species of some present object,
although perhaps not the object that the mind thinks it is. Therefore
Gregory does not adopt Auriol’s definition of intuitive cognition as
the cognition when the soul merely thinks that the object is present.
In any case the dichotomy is different for Gregory because he maintains
that abstractive cognition is also somewhat intuitive, since the
species of the object is known immediately and therefore
intuitively.
In the course of Gregory’s long discussion of the problem of
foreknowledge and future contingents, he makes frequent reference to
the notion of the complexe significabile. When it comes to
complex cognition, or scientific knowledge, Gregory’s inspiration was
Adam Wodeham, who built on some of Walter Chatton’s ideas in developing
the complexe significabile. Ockham held that the object of
scientific knowledge is the conclusion of a syllogism, and Gregory
rejects this. Chatton’s alternative was that scientific knowledge has
as its object things outside the mind. Gregory also denies this,
because
One can see here how Gregory’s stress on the overarching contingency
of creation connects with his epistemology.
Gregory chooses as the object of scientific knowledge the
alternative offered by Adam Wodeham. Chatton’s notion of “thing” in
scientific knowledge was the state of affairs signified by both the
negative and the affirmative proposition. For example, “Socrates is
sitting” and “Socrates is not sitting” signify for Chatton the same
thing, not Socrates, not sitting, and not the propositions, but somehow
the whole Socrates’s-being-seated. Although Chatton had his reasons for
his theory, Wodeham modified it in a useful way, differentiating
between positive and negative states of affairs. Thus for Wodeham, each
proposition has its own total significate that is only complexly
signifiable (complexe significabile), so that
Socrates’s-being-seated and Socrates’s-not-being-seated are two
different things, the objects of scientific knowledge.
Gregory adopted Wodeham’s theory and tailored it where necessary to
his own thought. The complexe significabile, once thought to be
Gregory’s invention, is neither the proposition itself (although it
determines the truth or falsity of the proposition) nor individual
things in the world, but rather the arrangement of things in the world.
He differed from Wodeham, for example, in the way he thought about
“assenting to” and “dissenting from” such complexe
significabilia, an issue which had occupied Chatton at length.
Gregory then applied the notion to a host of other philosophical
problems, such as future contingents, and through him the complexe
significabile became the common intellectual property of
continental thinkers, and parallel notions are found in many important
later intellectuals.
Although his commentary on books I and II of the Sentences
is by far Gregory’s largest and most important work, historians
of medieval philosophy have recently devoted some attention to his sole
writing on economic thought, which was printed in Reggio Emilia in 1508
as the Tractatus de imprestantiis Venetorum et de usura and
reprinted in Rimini itself over a century later in 1622 (Rimini 1508; Lambertini
2003, 2009; Kirshner 2015). The only known manuscript witness is in a
codex containing various political and economic tracts: Florence,
Biblioteca Nazionale Centrale, Conv. Soppr. J. X. 51, ff. 201r-212r.
The manuscript carries a different redaction of the text, but it can be
used to correct the printed editions and should form the basis of a
future critical edition. The title and explicit in the manuscript
further identify the work as a quaestio disputata on the
forced loans of the Venetian commune according to the determination of
Gregory of Rimini, Master of Theology and prior general of the
Augustinians. Terminology in the text itself confirms that rather than
a purely written work, the piece derives from an oral disputation,
although the internal structure and the existence of two redactions
indicate that it was much revised afterwards. Since we know that
theologians’ administrative responsibilities did not preclude
their participation in such events as quodlibetal disputations, it is
possible that the debate took place while Gregory was his order’s
prior general as the incipit says, i.e., in the latter half of 1357 or
in 1358, which would make it his last word on intellectual matters.
Gregory was actually asked two questions, and he combined them in his
determination. The first was whether it was licit for a creditor to
receive interest on a forced loan. Various Italian communes resorted to
forced loans from their citizens to raise money, paying in return an
annual sum but never the principal. In the case of Venice, the forced
lender received 5%. The second question asked whether it was licit for
someone else to acquire the title to the loan from the forced lender,
for a sum smaller than the initial loan, and continue to receive the
annual sum from the commune. For example, the government could demand
$100 from a citizen, promising to pay $5 each year. Another citizen
could then pay $25 to the first citizen and acquire the right to
receive the annual payment of $5.
The issue was a concrete one in the fourteenth century, and several
scholars were asked similar or even identical questions, which allows
us to place Gregory’s determination in a historical context. One
writer gave a liberal response to the first question, that the mere
fact that the loan was forced made the creditor’s receiving of 5%
interest licit, while the same author considered the second transaction
an acceptable contract of sale and not a purchase of a loan. A more
conservative author, on the other hand, viewed the 5% as usury, unless
it constituted a spontaneous gift from the commune to the citizen and
as long as the citizen did not intend to profit. In this case, the gift
could not be purchased licitly by another, naturally, for the unforced
buyer would surely be a usurer.
Gregory’s treatment has been singled out as historically
significant. Gregory’s procedure reflects his earlier
Sentences commentary in his careful structure. Following
opening arguments, Gregory divides the determination into four
articles, first defining his terms, second discussing the sinfulness of
usury, third answering the questions, and fourth responding to the
opening arguments. Although Gregory is a Master of Theology, he answers
the question as a philosopher, employing rational arguments. For
Gregory, usury is wrong pure and simple, since it breaks the rule of
equality in exchanges. One might view this as a conservative approach,
but Gregory’s general position may entail a liberal
implementation of his theory, since the determining factor lies in
one’s conscience, in one’s intent: “Usury is profit
intended from a loan.” Gregory’s emphasis on the
role of intent and conscience here is unusual. In the case at hand,
Venice can legitimately pay the 5% only if the commune’s motives
are honorable, either because it believes it is paying for damages or
returning a kindness, although Gregory excludes from the rubric
“damages” the opportunity costs from the resulting
non-acquisition of possible profits, thus further demonstrating his
awareness of business and banking practices. Since Venice pays all
forced creditors such a regular annual fee, however, it does not seem
to Gregory to be paid for either of those reasons. Still, he leaves it
up to the conscience.
This applies to the second question as well. The creditor who has given
the loan in good conscience and without hope of profit has not
committed usury, so he has “a right over the commune” that
he can sell licitly. Moreover, the buyer can purchase this licitly, as
long as he does not intend to profit thereby. But if this is not the
case, if profit is intended, the sin of usury is committed, more
seriously than in the first case, since no force is involved.
Gregory’s determination would allow Venice and its creditors to
proceed with their practice of forced loans and creditors’
transfers of annual payments without outward restrictions from the
Church. Perhaps he was being practical given the complexities of the
situation. By stressing the role of intent and conscience, he freed
investors to pursue their projects. But without drawing clear lines
separating the legitimate from the illegitimate, he burdened them to
consider their motives in each and every transaction, warning that
whether they are usurers in truth will be determined before God at the
judgment of souls.
Now that Gregory’s works are available in a reliable modern edition,
he has begun receiving more direct attention, for example in the
collection of papers in Oberman 1981 and in the conference held in
Rimini in 2000 that was devoted to Gregory’s life and thought
(published as Gregorio da Rimini. Filosofo in Rimini in
2003).  It is to be hoped that further studies of his Parisian and
Oxford predecessors on various single issues will enable us to see his
innovations more clearly. Recent studies have shown that he was not
always as original as was once thought, but that does not diminish in
any way his important position in the history of philosophy. Moreover,
Gregory sometimes did come up with new solutions to problems, and even
where he did not, his treatments, because of their clarity and
comprehensiveness, often became the primary source for later thinkers
of the ideas he adopted from his predecessors and developed.