A group right is a right possessed by a group qua group rather than
by its members severally. It contrasts with a right held by an
individual person as an individual. An example of a commonly
asserted group right is the right of a nation or a people to be
self-determining. If there is such a right, it is a right
possessed and exercised by a nation or a people as a group. It is
logically possible that a single individual could have a right that an
entire people should be self-determining, so that an invader would
violate that individual's right rather than a right held by the
people themselves; but nowadays it would be difficult to find anyone
who would accept the political morality needed to turn that logical
possibility into a serious claim of right. We might try to
interpret a collective right of self-determination as merely an
aggregation of the individual rights of self-determination possessed by those who
make up the relevant nation or people. But an individual's
right of self-determination is normally understood as the right of a
person to determine his or her own life rather than a right over the
lives of others. Thus, the right of a group to determine the
character and destiny of its collective life cannot be merely a summing
together of individual rights of self-determination. We may
certainly appeal to individual rights of self-determination, and to the
values that underlie them, in making the case for a collective right of
self-determination, but that does not imply that the collective right
would be no more than the set of individual rights to which we
appeal.
Other rights that are now frequently asserted as group rights
include the right of a cultural group that its culture should be
respected and perhaps publicly supported; the right of a linguistic
group that its language should be usable and provided for in the public
domain; and the right of a religious group that it should be free to
engage in collective expressions of its faith and that its sacred sites
and symbols should not be desecrated. In each of these cases, the
right, insofar as it is a group right, is a right held by the relevant
group qua group, and the duties generated by the right are duties owed
to the group as a whole rather to its members severally.
Group rights should not be confused with rights that people possess
in virtue of being members of groups. People normally possess
rights as members of universities or sports clubs or businesses or
trade unions or churches or states but, in the ordinary run of cases,
these are individual rights. For example, the right of a member
of a university to use its library, or the right of a citizen to vote
in elections, is the right of an individual person. An
infringement of that right would infringe the right of the individual
right-holder, rather than a group right of the relevant university or
state. In fact, most rights held by individuals are associated
with group identities or group memberships of some sort. If we
are willing to extend rights to non-human animals, even human rights
will be rights unique to a particular group; yet most human rights are
conceived as individual rights and, on some views, can only be
individual rights.
A group right should not therefore be identified with a
“group-differentiated” right. That term has been
coined by Will Kymlicka (1995) to describe a right that is accorded to
a particular group but not to the larger society within which the group
exists. For example, a society might accord special rights, such
as special territorial rights or rights of self-government, to an
indigenous minority in recognition of the special status that that
minority should enjoy within the larger society, or out of concern for
the vulnerability of the minority's traditional form of
life. These would be “group-differentiated
rights”. That term is now sometimes abbreviated to
“group right”, which is unfortunate since a
group-differentiated right may or may not be a group right in the
ordinary sense (a right possessed by the group qua group rather than by
its members severally). For example, if the group-differentiated
right is the right of a group to be self-governing, it will be a group
right. But if it is, for example, a right unique to the members
of an indigenous minority to fish in certain waters and if that right
is vested in, and is exercisable by, the several individuals who make
up the minority, it will be a group-differentiated individual
right. (Kymlicka 1995, 45–48; Jones 2010.)
Group rights can be legal or moral or both. If a legal system
accords rights to a group, or recognises it as an entity possessing
rights, it will simply be the case for that legal system that the group
has rights. Those legal rights might then spawn moral
rights. A law may create a wrong that would not otherwise be a
wrong but, if the legal system is generally just and if the law serves
a useful purpose, its breach may be considered a moral, as well as a
legal, wrong. For example, you may have no right to a particular
good in the absence of a law giving you legal title to it but, once you
have legal title, my theft of that good can wrong you morally as well
as legally. Similarly, once a group has been accorded legal
rights, we might think that, in at least some cases, violations of its
legal rights wrong it morally as well as legally. A group may therefore
be credited with legally-dependent moral rights.
However, if group rights could only ever be creatures of law, we
could not protest that a legal system was failing to recognise or to
respect a group's right. Proponents of group rights, like
proponents of individual rights, have been keen to use the language of
rights in arguing about the form that legal, political and social
arrangements should take. That implies a conception of group
rights that is moral in foundation and that might be used to determine
what legal rights groups should have. It is as moral rights that
group rights are most controversial. Individual rights are
subject to innumerable disputes, but virtually no-one denies that
individuals, as persons or in other capacities, are capable of
possessing rights. By contrast, many people reject the very idea
that groups can possess moral rights, and even those who embrace the
idea of group rights frequently disagree about the sorts of group that
can possess them.
No-one ascribes rights promiscuously to every kind of group, so what
is it that marks out a group as the kind of group that might bear
rights? An essential condition for many theorists is the
integrity manifested by a group: a group must surmount a threshold of
unity and identity if it is to be potentially capable of bearing
rights.
Thus Peter French (1984) distinguishes between “aggregate
collectivities” and “conglomerate
collectivities”. An aggregate collectivity is a mere
collection of individuals such as a crowd or the people standing at a
bus stop or a statistical category such as middle-income earners.
If we were to ascribe either moral responsibility or moral rights to an
aggregate, that responsibility and those rights would be reducible,
without remainder, to the responsibilities and rights of the
individuals who make it up. A conglomerate collectivity, by
contrast, possesses a unified being since it is formally constituted as
an organisation with an internal structure, rules, offices and
decision-procedures. (For a similar, but not identical,
distinction between aggregates and organisations, see Copp 1984.)
Examples of groups that French classifies as conglomerates are the
Democratic Party, the US Congress, the US army, the Red Cross,
university faculties and business corporations.
Organizations of this sort possess identities that are not exhausted by
the identities of the persons in them; one person's leaving and
another's joining does not result in a new organization.
Thus, “what is predicable of a conglomerate is not necessarily
predicable of all of those or any of those individuals associated with
it” (1984, 13), including the rights and responsibilities that we
might ascribe to the conglomerate. French does not mean to deny
that the individuals in a conglomerate, such as a business corporation,
will also have rights and responsibilities relating to its activities;
he denies only that the rights and responsibilities of the conglomerate
can be distributed without remainder amongst those individuals.
Thus, on his view, if the Gulf Oil Corporation buys or sells property,
or joins a cartel, or is found causally responsible for environmental
pollution and held morally responsible for cleaning it up, the
Corporation as agent and patient is not reducible to the individuals
who are currently associated with it.
In a similar vein, Dwight Newman (2011, 4) distinguishes
between “sets” and “collectivities”. A set,
like French's aggregate, becomes a different set each time its
membership changes. It has no identity separate from the individuals
who make it up. A collectivity, by contrast, remains identifiable as
the same collectivity even though its membership changes. For both
French and Newman, a group's having an identity that survives changes
in its individual membership is an essential feature of its being the
kind of group that might bear rights. (See also Graham 2002,
68–9; Scruton 1989; Van Dyke 1977.)
The phenomenon of a group's having an identity and existence that is
separate from its members is most readily apparent in the case of
formally organised groups. So, for example, we can think of a football
club or a university department or a trade union as remaining the same
football club, university department or trade union, even though the
individuals who constitute its members change over time. When you or I
join or leave a formally constituted organisation, there is something
independent of ourselves that we join or leave. Thus, if we ascribe
rights to a formally constituted group, the right-bearing group will
be something other than the set of individuals who happen to belong to
it at any moment.
Formal organisation may not be deemed essential to a group's
having an irreducible and enduring identity. People often think
of nations, for example, as entities that have identities that run
across successive generations of nationals. A nation's
historic entitlement to a particular territory would be typically
thought of as the entitlement of the nation conceived as a single
enduring entity, rather than a right that has been inherited and
bequeathed by successive generations of nationals so that,
historically, there has been no continuous entity that has enjoyed
rights over the territory. People are given to thinking of nations in
this unitary and enduring fashion even in cases, such as the Kurds,
where a nation has not been instantiated in a state, or in cases, such
as the Poles, where it has been deprived of political independence for
significant periods of its history. Whether we conceive a group
as having an identity and being that supersedes that of its members
turns not just on what we find in the world, but also on how we choose
to see it.
For some proponents of group rights, we should look for the integrity
that is essential to a right-bearing group neither in the group's
internal organisation nor in its objective characteristics but in its
subjectivity. What matters is that the individuals who make up the
group feel themselves strongly bound together as members of a group
with which they identify. Thus Marlies Galenkamp holds that a
right-holding group has to possess a strong form of intra-group
solidarity and has to be the kind of group that communitarians
describe as a constitutive community (1993, 81–100, 111–2,
131; see also Segesvary 1995). Michael McDonald (1991) argues that it
is the shared understanding amongst individuals that they are
normatively bound to each other that makes them a group for moral
purposes. That shared understanding may be related to and promoted by
shared objective characteristics, such as a common history, language,
system of belief or social condition, but it is still the subjectivity
of the group rather than those objective features that is crucial to
its being a group. Larry May (1987) and Paul Sheehy (2006,
151–173) also find the source of a group's moral status in the
interrelatedness of its members, but argue that the significance of
those interrelationships lies in the common interests and needs to
which the relationships give rise.  A group will possess moral status
as a group when its members are so related that they share needs and
possess interests as members, such that what benefits or harms any
member must benefit or harm all. Others will then have obligations or
duties in repect of the group as a whole.
While those who focus on these features of groups insist that the
group has a moral standing that is not reducible to the moral standing
of its members taken severally, they cannot allow that a right-bearing
group has a being or identity that is separable from that of its
members. If sharing an intersubjective experience or enjoying certain
sorts of relationship is crucial to the integrity of a group, the
group must consist of a body of individuals who undergo that
experience or who share in those relationships. Unlike French's
conglomerate or Newman's collectivity, the group cannot be more or
other than the group as constituted by its members.
A significant measure of unity and identity would seem an essential
condition for a group's being the kind of group that might bear
rights, but that condition would seem necessary rather than
sufficient. Those who are sceptical of the very idea of group
rights do not deny that groups come in different forms or that some
exhibit a high degree of unity or that groups can be very important in
people's lives. They simply deny that there is reason to
ascribe to groups, however unified and however significant, the moral
standing that they must possess if they are to be independent
right-holders. So how do proponents of group rights seek to
provide that reason?
A favoured tactic is to identify features that groups share with human
individuals. If we accept that human individuals possess rights
because they possess certain features, we should accept that groups
also possess rights if they too possess those features.  French (1984)
is a particularly bold proponent of this strategy.  Although formal
organisation plays a significant part in his account of groups as
moral entities, he sees the attribution of moral personality to a
group as quite separate from the question of whether the group enjoys
legal personality. For French, to be a moral person is to be a
“noneliminable subject in an ascription of moral
responsibility” (38). That, in turn, requires a capacity for
intentional action. But, he argues, conglomerate groups, such as
business corporations, that possess internal decision structures and
stated policies, are capable of actions that we can properly represent
as the intentional actions of the group. That is enough to make those
groups “fully-fledged moral persons” capable of bearing
both moral responsibility and moral rights. Groups that are moral
persons “will have whatever privileges, rights and duties as
are, in the normal course of affairs, accorded to all members of the
moral community” (32).
A capacity for agency may be deemed essential for right-holding simply
because it is thought to be essential to an entity's having moral
standing. Or it may be thought crucial because choice is an essential
feature of rights themselves. According to the choice theory of
rights, to have a right is to have a choice such that it makes sense
to ascribe rights only to beings that are capable of choice (e.g. Hart
1982, Steiner 1998). Whatever the reason, making a capacity for agency
a necessary condition of right-holding significantly limits the range
of groups that might hold rights. Adina Preda (2012) argues that, to
be capable of holding rights, a group must be capable of agency,
although it can qualify as an agent for right-holding purposes if it
is capable of intentional action; it need not possess the
“full-blown” agency that we might attribute to a natural
person. In addition, it must be capable of choice. That, for Preda,
means that rights can be possessed only by groups that are organised
and that possess collective decision-making procedures. Ethno-cultural
groups, for example, that lack organisation and decision-procedures
will not bear rights as groups, although their members may have
individual rights that are associated with their ethnicity or
culture. Galenkamp also holds that a capacity for agency is essential
to a group's being a subject of rights (1993, 62, 71–3,
101–10) and couples that with using a group distinguished by its
common culture as her prime example of a right-holding group (112,
138–71). Yet it is hard to see how that sort of group could
qualify as an agent if it failed to meet the organisational criteria
set out by Preda. (On group agency in general, see the entry on
  shared agency, and
 List & Pettit 2011.)
For other theorists, agency is necessary neither for moral standing
nor for right-holding. It is enough that we have reason to regard a
group as an object of moral concern; a group does not have to be a
moral agent to be a moral patient. Even if a group is capable of moral
agency, not all of its rights need concern or presuppose its
agency. Thus Keith Graham points out that we can and do apply a range
of moral epithets to groups: groups can be treated justly or unjustly,
they can be deceived and treated offensively, and they can flourish
more or less well (2002, 89–93). Thinking about groups in this
way implies that they have moral status and that we can reasonably
ascribe rights to them. For May (1987), McDonald (1991) and Sheehy
(2006) the critical consideration is that a group can have interests
as a group—interests that are more than the aggregated interests
of its individual members. That is why a group is capable of being
harmed and of being treated unjustly as a group. In the case of
groups, as in the case of individuals, we may think of those harms and
injustices as violations of rights (cf.  Simon 1995, 2001).
For Newman (2011, Part I) groups that constitute right-bearing
“collectivities” come in many forms, ranging from
corporations, churches and universities, to nations, cultural groups
and hockey teams.  A collectivity is distinguished by the central
values to which it is committed and by a structure which defines its
membership and marks it off from other groups.  Its members are
essential to its existence, but the collectivity is no mere
aggregation of its members. Rather, it supervenes on its members. It
supervenes not only on their existence but also on their relationships
with one another and their beliefs about those
relationships. Supervenience does not imply reducibility. It does not
imply, for instance, that the existence of the collectivity, or its
actions or intentions, can be reduced to those of its individual
members. Newman also argues that a collectivity has moral status as a
collectivity, a status that is separate from the moral status of the
individuals who are its members. It is therefore capable of bearing
moral rights and moral responsibilities that are not merely the rights
and responsibilities of its individual members. It also has interests,
which are not merely the aggregated interests of its members; rather,
they consist in whatever makes the collectivity's life go better as a
collectivity. A collectivity's interests generate rights whenever
those interests are of sufficient importance to justify the ascription
of duties to others. In that respect, the rights of a collectivity are
no different from those of a human individual.
Miodrag Jovanović (2012) provides another interest-based
account of group rights but of a rather different sort. Current
international and domestic systems of law acribe rights to groups,
such as rights of self-determination and rights designed to protect
their cultures. Jovanović seeks to explicate those rights by
uncovering the “normative moral standpoint” implicit in
them. That standpoint, which he himself endorses, is, he argues
“value-collectivism”: “the view that collective
entities can have inherent value, which is independent of its
contribution to the well-being of individual members” (2012,
6). In other words, we should understand the legal rights attributed
to a group as grounded in the irreducibly collective value of the
group, a value that is not reducible to the value of the group for the
several individuals who constitute its members. Jovanović does
not ascribe those rights to every sort of group recognised in law. In
particular, he does not ascribe them to juristic persons, such as
business corporations and trade unions. Rather, he acribes them only
to groups that possess a pre-legal existence and identity, such as
national, ethnic, linguistic and religious groups. It is the
irreducibly collective interests of those groups that, on his account,
legal group rights (rightly) aim to protect and promote.
The various approaches to group rights described in the previous
section share a common feature. Each supposes that ascribing a
right to a group entails conceiving the group as moral entity in its
own right: the group must possess a moral standing that is not
reducible to the standing of its members. That is why arguments
about group rights frequently assume the same character as arguments
about the ascription of rights to foetuses or the dead or future
generations or non-human animals. In each of these cases, the
central issue is whether we should allow that the relevant entity has
the moral standing necessary for it to bear rights.
If, for groups, we answer that question affirmatively, we shall
conceive group rights analogously with individual rights. A group
right, like an individual right, will be a right held by a single
unitary entity. The right of a group will be “its”
right rather than “their” right. Indeed, we might
think of a group right as the right of a
“group-individual”. Groups might bear duties in the
same fashion. A group, as a single integral entity, can possess
duties just as it can possess rights, and those duties may derive from
group rights. For example, each nation's right of
self-determination is most obviously directed at other nations who, as
nations, have corresponding duties to respect one another's
rights. (It remains logically possible, of course, that duties
stemming from group rights will fall upon individual persons, just as
it is possible that the rights of individual persons will generate
duties for groups.)
This might be described as the “traditional” conception
of group rights, in that it describes the way in which group rights
have been most commonly understood. In recent years, however,
some proponents of group rights have conceptualised them quite
differently. They have understood a group right as a right that
is the shared or jointly held right of a set of individuals. In
this conception, a group right is still properly so-called because the
individuals who make up the right-holding group possess a right
together that none of them possesses separately. The right is not
a mere aggregation of rights held individually by the members of the
group. But, a group right conceived in this way does not entail
giving a moral status to the group qua group that is separate from that
of its members severally. Rather, the moral standing that
underwrites the group right is the moral standing of the several
individuals who jointly hold the right. The group right is
therefore conceived as “their” right rather than
“its” right (Jones 1999a).
The distinction between these two conceptions of group rights has
frequently passed unnoticed and there is no agreed vocabulary that
marks it. The term corporate will be used here to
describe the traditional conception, since that conception presents a
right-holding group as a unitary entity. The term
collective will be used to describe the conception of a group
right as a shared or joint right, since it conceives a right-holding
group as a “collection” of individuals, albeit a
collection that is bound together in a way that enables them to hold
their right collectively. (Note that, contrary to this usage, many
proponents of the “corporate” conception of group rights
use the term “collective” to describe those rights;
e.g. Galenkamp 1993, Jovanović 2012, McDonald 1991, Newman
2011.)
Joseph Raz has provided the most influential statement of the
collective conception. According to Raz, if a right is to be a
collective right, it must satisfy the following three conditions:
Raz's conception of a collective right is tied to his interest theory
of rights, according to which X has a right only
if X is capable of having rights and if, other things being
equal, “an aspect of
X's well-being (his interest) is a sufficient reason for holding
some other person to be under a duty” (1986, 166). Thus, a
group of individuals has a collective right if their shared interest is
sufficient to ground a duty in others, and if the interest of any
single member of the group is insufficient by itself to ground that
duty. When these conditions are satisfied, the group of
individuals possess a right together that none of them possesses
separately. In fact, Raz argues that the interests that ground a
right are not necessarily limited to the interests of the right-holder;
they can also include interests that others have in the
right-holder's having the right (1986, 245–63; 1994, 44–59;
1995). For example, the right of journalists not to disclose
their sources is grounded not only in their own interests but also in
the public's interest in their having that right. That
consideration can also apply to collective rights. The rights of
a group in respect of its culture, for example, might be grounded not
only in the interests of the group's members in their culture but
also in the interests of “outsiders” in the continued
existence of the group's culture.
Some other theorists whose approach to group rights is consistent with
what is described here as the “collective” conception are
Nathan Brett (1991), Allen Buchanan (1993, 1994), Leslie Green (1991),
Vinit Haksar (1998), Lesley Jacobs (1991) and Seumas Miller
(2001). (See also Margalit and Raz 1990.) The collective conception
need not be tied to an interest theory of rights. Miller, for example,
gives an account of the collective conception that owes nothing to
that theory (2001, 210–33). But the ascendancy of the interest
theory of rights in recent years has meant that those who have adopted
the collective conception have frequently followed Raz in combining it
with the interest theory. (For criticism of the collective theory so
conceived, see Griffin 2008, 261–265; Preda 2013.)  Moreover,
that theory does provide a ready-made account of what it is that
individuals share—interests—that makes them a
right-holding group. The way that interests can accumulate across
individuals also helps to explain how it is that a group of
individuals can have a right, as a group, that none of them possesses
singly.  For Raz, the number of individuals in a group can affect both
whether the group has a right and how weighty its right is (1986, 187,
209). Others are less comfortable with that “aggregative”
feature of Raz's conception; yet the relevance of numbers is often
hard to dismiss. Consider, for example, the claim of a linguistic
minority that its language should be usable, and provided for, in the
public domain. Given the public costs of meeting that claim, it would
seem implausible to hold that we should take no account of the size of
a linguistic minority (of which there may be several) in deciding
whether the claim amounts to a right.
The fact that, on the collective conception, the individual members
of a group hold their right jointly does not entail that the right must
be grounded in an interest that an individual could have as an
independent individual. Some goods take a necessarily collective
form, so that they cannot be made available to an individual in
isolation from others; for example, the good constituted by a
group's culture or its communal form of life. Yet it still
makes perfectly good sense to hold that a group right to those goods is
morally grounded in the interests of the several individuals who make
up the relevant group and that the right is held jointly by those
individuals. Thus, even though the collective conception gives no
moral standing to a group independently of its members, it can still
account for groups' having rights to goods that are necessarily
of a non-individual form.
At the same time, there is nothing in the logic of the collective
conception that limits the possible objects of group rights to
non-individualizable goods. Nor, if we adopt the interest theory,
need the right-holding group be a group in virtue of anything other
than the shared interest that grounds their right. The second
condition that Raz stipulates for a collective right suggests that
individuals must be members of a group before they can go on to have
interests of a sort that might ground a collective right. Miller,
too, makes membership of a social group a defining condition of a joint
right's being a collective right (2001, 211). But it is not
clear why we should hold that a set of individuals can have a
collective right only if they are antecedently identifiable as members
of a group. 
Consider the following example. A city is characterised by
very heavy traffic that poses a danger to its pedestrians. The
city's pedestrians have an interest in there being a network of
walkways so that they can move around the city in safety. Each
pedestrian, as an individual, has an interest in those walkways, but
the interest of just one pedestrian is insufficient to create a duty
for the city authorities to construct the walkways. However, the
shared interest of all pedestrians may well suffice to ground that
duty, in which case pedestrians will have a collective right that the
authorities should construct and maintain the walkways. The point
of this example is not to insist that, in these circumstances,
pedestrians would indeed have that right. Rather it is to show
that (a) a group might have a right to a good that is intelligible as a
good for an independent individual, and (b) a right-holding group need
be a group only in virtue of the shared interest that grounds their
right. The group need not be institutionalised as a group, nor
need it be distinguished by a common ascriptive feature. (In the
example given, the fact that the right-sharing individuals are
identifiable as “pedestrians” contributes nothing,
independently of their interest in being able to walk around the city
safely, to their having a collective right.)
The collective conception can, then, make sense of group rights both
to goods that would be intelligible as goods for independent
individuals and to goods that are intelligible only as goods enjoyed
collectively with others. It is often supposed that, if a good
takes a necessarily collective form (e.g. the collective good of
possessing a common culture), the interest in that good can be
understood only as the irreducible interest of a group. That is
associated with the supposition that, if the shared interest generates
a group right, the right-holding group must also be understood as an
irreducible moral entity. Both suppositions are mistaken.
Even in the case of a shared or collective interest, the interests that
do the moral work in generating a right are entirely intelligible as
the interests of the several individuals who make up the group and
whose good is at stake. Similarly, the moral standing necessary
for the individuals, as a group, to have a right to the shared good can
be the standing of the several individuals who compose the group.
Thus, vindicating group rights need not entail showing that the
right-holding group has either interests or a standing that is not
reducible to those of its members.
At the same time, there is a limit to the range of cases the
collective conception can encompass. As was mentioned earlier,
there can be cases in which the interest of a group logically precedes
that of its members and in which the members have interests simply
because, qua members, they share in the interest of the group.
For example, a football club may have the stated aim of being as
successful as possible in playing against rival clubs. The club
will then have an interest in whatever will promote that aim, including
fielding the strongest team possible in each game. I, as a member
of the club, will share in its interests. So, for example, if it
is in the club's interest to drop me from its team because I am
not playing well enough, that will also be in my interest qua
member. That interest qua member may conflict with a personal
interest that I have in remaining a team player, but arguably that does
not disturb my interest qua member. If we understand the interest
that grounds a group's right as an interest that the group has
independently of its members, and if we understand the members'
interests as mere derivatives of that group interest, we must
understand both the interest and the right of the group according to
the corporate model. The group right cannot be understood
adequately as a product of the aggregated interests of the individuals
who populate the group (Newman 2011, 57–82).
For the same reason, the collective conception cannot easily make
sense of a group right as a right possessed by a group whose identity
is unaffected by changes in its membership. As Newman points out
(2011, 59–60), if we conceive a group right as a right held jointly by
those who compose the group, each change in the group's
membership must entail a change in the identity of the right-holding
group. On the other hand, that may not be an objection.
Groups, such as cultural, linguistic, ethnic and religious groups, are
often shifting amorphous entities and we may have to get used to the
idea that right-holding groups can be groups that have constantly
changing compositions. Practically, that may be of little
consequence for group rights provided that there is a reasonable
continuity of interest amongst the group's changing members, so
that the content of the right does not change with every change in
membership.
Finally, note three things about the distinction between corporate and
collective rights. First, the limits of the collective conception
identified above stem from its unwillingness to conceive a group
separately from its members. They do not stem from any inability of
the collective conception to make sense of necessarily shared or
collective interests—interests that individuals can have only
along with others. Secondly, we can most readily conceive a group
separately from its members when it is formally constituted as an
institution, as in the case of a football club or a university. But
once we separate a group from its members in that way, we run into the
issue of whether we should really ascribe the right to an institution
or an organisation rather than to a group (Sheehy 2006, 159–167,
175–195). Presumably it is for that reason that people do not
normally describe the rights of Congress or Parliament or the Supreme
Court as “group rights”. Thirdly, it is logically possible
to interpret some group rights as corporate and others as collective,
so that we are not obliged to commit ourselves exclusively to just one
of these conceptions.
The distinction between corporate and collective rights concerns the
way in which we might conceive the subject of a group
right. But the issue of whether there is reason to ascribe rights
to groups is sometimes approached through their possible
objects—through what group rights might be rights
to. If there are goods that have a necessarily group character
and if there are rights to those goods, it would seem that those must
be group rights. So are there such goods?
The obvious place to start is with the economist's idea of
public goods. We might reasonably suppose with Raz (1986, 208)
that a right can be a group right only if it is a right to a good that
is public to the members of the right-holding group. For the
relevant group, the good must be non-excludable (it must be available
to all members of the group) and non-rival (its consumption by one
member of the group must not diminish its possible consumption by other
members). However, as Denise Réaume has pointed out (1988,
8–9), some goods that are deliverable only as public goods can
reasonably be considered objects of individual rights. Clean air
is a standard example of a public good, but we can reasonably hold that
individuals have rights to clean air as individuals. An
industrialist who seriously pollutes a community's atmosphere
might be held to violate the right to breathe unpolluted air of each
individual in the affected community rather than a collective or
corporate right of the community as a group.
Réaume's own proposal (1988, 1994), which has attracted much
attention amongst commentators on group rights, is that we should
understand group rights as rights to “participatory
goods”. A participatory good is a public good of a particular
type. It is a good whose enjoyment by an individual depends upon its
also being enjoyed by others. Consider the case of clean air
again. Although this is typically a good that is public to a group,
each individual breathes in and out as an individual and enjoys the
good of clean air as an individual. The goodness of clean air for me
does not depend upon its also being good for you, even though it is
good for you. Now consider goods such as friendship, a team game, and
a convivial party (Réaume 1988, 12–13; Waldron 1993,
355–6). Those are necessarily social goods. I cannot enjoy
genuine friendship as an entirely individual good; I can play a team
game only if others do too; and I can take pleasure in conviviality
only as a shared experience. So some goods are necessarily
“participatory” in nature.  These goods have also been
described as “communal” (Waldron 1993, 339–69),
“shared” (Green 1988 207–9; Raz 1995, 35–6),
and “common” (Marmor 2001). Charles Taylor's notion of
“irreducibly social goods” has been deployed to similar
effect: if those goods are the objects of rights, their irreducibly
social character implies that they must be the objects of group rights
(Taylor 1995, 127–145; Sheehy 2006, 159–167,
175–195.
Participatory goods are goods that must be both produced and enjoyed
publicly, and goods that are simultaneously produced and enjoyed by
those who participate in them. While participatory goods combine
production with consumption, it is the necessarily public character of
their enjoyment that really distinguishes them from other public
goods. It is because they can be enjoyed only as shared goods
that, Réaume argues, only groups can have rights to them.
Her claim is not that every participatory good must be the object of a
right; rather it is that, if there is a right to a participatory good,
that must be a group right. The relevant right here is neither
the liberty-right to participate in the good nor the claim-right to be
unprevented by others from participating in the good, both of which
will normally be individual rights. Rather it is a right to the
participatory good itself (e.g. the right not merely to participate in
an orchestra but the right that there shall be an orchestra, the right
not merely to participate in a culture but the right that the culture
shall be protected and sustained).
Some goods that can yield rights, and that are, Réaume
argues, participatory in at least some of their aspects, are living in
a cultured society, sharing a common language, and being a member of a
religious community. If groups have rights to these participatory
goods, do others have duties to provide them with those goods?
If, for example, a group has a right to its culture as a participatory
good, that might imply that it is entitled to constrain the freedom of
its dissident members in ways that ensure the continuance of its
culture. If a linguistic minority has a right to its language as
a participatory good, that might imply that it is entitled to coerce
reluctant others to use its language in order to sustain and promote
the language as a participatory good. However, those are not the
sort of rights that Réaume proposes since they would be
unacceptably onerous for those who bore the duty (1988, 16–17; 1994,
133–4; see also Marmor 2001). Moreover, some participatory goods
can be the goods they are only if people participate in them
willingly. 
The group rights that Réaume suggests might relate to
participatory goods are rights against “outsiders” rather
than “insiders”. And they would be rights not to
outsiders' participation in the good, but to their non-prevention
of, and their non-interference with, the group's participatory
good and perhaps also rights to measures and resources that will
facilitate the group's continued enjoyment of its participatory
good. A linguistic minority may, for instance, have a right that
the majority society should establish, maintain and respect
arrangements that will secure the minority's ability to continue
using its language. Similarly, an indigenous minority may have a
right that the majority society should institute arrangements that will
protect its traditional form of life, which form of life is, for the
minority's members, a participatory good. But these
externally directed rights would remain rights grounded in the
group's interest in its participatory good and that, for
Réaume, means they must be group rights.
There is an obvious gap in Réaume's attempt to identify
group rights as rights to participatory goods (1994, 123–4). If
only groups can have rights to participatory goods, it does not follow
that groups can have rights only to participatory goods. They may
also have rights to non-participatory goods, such as safe walkways or
community health safeguards or coastal defences. Even the claim
that rights to participatory goods must be group rights has not escaped
challenge. James Morauta (2002) argues that, conceptually, a
participatory good could be the object of an individual right. An
individual might, for example, have a right to require others to
participate with him in speaking his language and those others may be
duty-bound to comply if he so insists. That may be a morally
unappealing state of affairs but there is nothing in the logic of
rights or participatory goods that rules it out (provided that the very
nature of the good at issue does not require voluntary
participation). The lacuna that Morauta identifies indicates that
the proposition that only groups can have rights to participatory goods
relies upon more than just the “structural features” of
those goods. It relies also upon a moral assumption about the
relative standing of the individuals who have interests in, or who lay
claim to, a participatory good.
Suppose, for example, that one person in a nation had, uniquely, a
right that that nation should be self-determining. His
fellow-nationals should then be part of a self-determining unit, not
because they are entitled to be, but because he is entitled that they
should be. He therefore has a right over their lives that they
themselves do not. Normally, we would regard that sort of
inequality in moral standing as entirely unacceptable; but it is
because we take that moral unacceptability for granted that we are
predisposed to accept that rights to participatory goods—or, indeed,
rights to public goods as public goods—must be group
rights. Of course, people of equal standing can be unequally
interested in a good but, in any sizeable group, it is most unlikely
that one individual's interest in a good that is public to the
group will be so special and so disproportionate that that individual
will have, uniquely, a right to the good as a good for the
group as a whole (Jones 2014, 2016).
Criticism of group rights can take a case-by-case form. The
critic might argue that close inspection of particular rights that are
commonly claimed as group rights reveals either that they are not
rights at all or that they dissolve into individual rights (e.g.
Griffin 2008, 256–276; Lagerspetz 1998). However, much criticism is
directed at the very idea of group rights. That criticism is
generally of two sorts: either it is sceptical of the claim that groups
can hold rights or it is fearful of the implications or consequences of
ascribing rights to groups.
Sceptics often object to the ontology of groups that they take to be
implicit in the idea of group rights. To suppose that groups,
like individual persons, can hold rights is to suppose that groups can
have a being and an integrity that match those of individual
persons. But groups are collections of individuals and to make
them out to be supra-human entities that are somehow more than, or
other than, the sum of their parts is mistaken: “only individuals
can make decisions, can literally have values, literally engage in
reasoning and deliberation” (Narveson 1991, 334). Those who
make and administer the law may have good reason to create and to
operate with fictions, such as the legal fiction of corporate
personality. But moral rights and duties can attach only to real
persons; “fictitious entities have no rights” (Graff 1994,
194). Groups do not exist separately from their members and, when
we ascribe rights to groups as such, we ignore that simple truth.
(Narveson 1991, 331–5; Wellman 1995, 157–77; cf Vincent 1989).
Doubts about the integrity of groups are sometimes sociological rather
than ontological in nature. Generally, we might suppose that the
groups to which we ascribe rights have a unity and identity that is
independent of, and that provides the foundation for, our ascription
of rights to them. A group, such as an ethnic or cultural group, has a
certain “natural” existence and we recognise it as having
rights because of the kind of existent it is. In reality, however,
pre-institutionalised groups are shifting and changing entities and
lack clear boundaries. In addition, any section of humanity that we
might fasten upon as a group is likely to be part of a larger
sociological entity, and to have within it smaller entities, that
might also claim to be “groups”. So there can be a
significant element of arbitrariness about the segments of humanity
that we identify as “groups”. We may suppose that, in
ascribing rights to a group, we merely acknowledge the entitlements of
a pre-existing entity, but, in reality, it may be the ascription of
rights itself that identifies, creates and fixes a segment of humanity
as a “group”. (Flanagan 1985; Kukathas 1992, 110–15;
Mitnick 2006; Offe 1998, 125–31; Waldron 2002. Cf. Mello 2004;
Sharp 1999.)
Groups may be found improper subjects of rights because they lack
properties, other than genuine integrity, that are deemed essential
for right-holding. In general, proponents of the interest theory of
rights have been able to view group rights more generously than those
who adhere to the choice theory, although the supposition that groups
can have interests has not gone unchallenged (Wall 2003, 273).  Choice
theorists will not extend rights to groups that are incapable of
“exercising” them, such as groups distinguished merely by
an ascriptive identity. They can extend rights to organised groups
that possess decision-procedures (Preda 2012; Sumner 1987,
209–211), but some argue that even those groups are not capable
of the kind of agency required for right-holding (Wellman 1995,
157–65; Wall 2000, 2003, 270–6; cf. Nickel 1997). Again,
if sentience is a necessary condition of right-holding, that may
disqualify groups as right-holders: “groups are composed of
sentient individuals, but they do not themselves feel anything”
(Rainbolt 2006, 208. See also Kymlicka 1989, 241–2; Ellis 2005,
206–7. For a contrary view, see Graham 2002, 89–104).
A related objection focuses upon groups as entities of value.  When we
ascribe rights to groups as such, we may seem to ascribe value to
groups as such. Against that, many people hold that only individual
human beings can be of ultimate value—a position that has been
described as “value-individualism” (Hartney 1991; Ellis
2005; Kukathas 1992, 112; Narveson 1991, 329, 335–45).
Value-individualism stands in opposition to
“value-collectivism”, which ascribes inherent value to
groups and to which, as we have seen, Jovanović
subscribes. Value-individualists do not deny that groups and
communities are a fact of social life, nor do they deny that groups
and communities can matter very much to people and play a crucial role
in their well-being.  But they do insist that, ultimately, groups have
value only in so far as they are of value for individual human
beings. Groups, unlike individual persons, cannot have intrinsic
value, even though some of their activities may be intrinsic
goods. Hence, they cannot hold rights that presuppose their intrinsic
value; at best, they may have rights that are of instrumental value to
individual human beings.
For the most part, scepticism about group rights presupposes a
corporate conception of those rights. It challenges claims that
groups can have a being, status or value that is not reducible to that
of their members. But, since the collective conception makes none
of those claims, it is largely untouched by that scepticism. It
is not, however, exempt from other sorts of objection to group
rights.
Worries about the moral implications or consequences of ascribing
rights to groups, relate not only to whether we should accept that
groups have rights but also to how ready we should be to vest rights in
groups. The common thread running through these worries is the
threat that group rights may pose to individuals and their
rights. Sometimes the concern is for those inside, and sometimes
for those outside, the right-holding group.
One concern is that, if we give moral standing to groups as such, we
shall lose sight of individuals within the group (Vincent 1989,
714). If a group can have standing as a group independently of
its individual members, those individuals will have no standing on any
matter on which the relevant standing lies with the group. On
those matters, the separate wills of individuals cannot count.
They will not be overridden; they will simply pass unrecognised.
Thus, group rights may seem to be starkly at odds with the
“separateness of persons”.
Another fear concerns the power that group rights may enable a group
to wield over its members (e.g. Macdonald 1989; Offe 1998, 131–5;
Waldron 1993, 363–6). When we concede that a group has rights,
those may be rights that it holds against its own members and that it
can use to regiment their lives. Thus, once again, the rights
held and wielded by a group may be rights exercised at the expense of
those who fall within it. In one respect, that seems an
unnecessarily invidious way of representing the relationship between
groups and their members. There is nothing unusual about a
group's organising itself so that it can make decisions
collectively, either directly or through appointees, that bind its
members severally. That describes the normal state of affairs for
tennis clubs, anglers' associations, political parties, churches
and any number of quite unremarkable groups. The right of a group
collectively to make decisions that bind its members severally is a
simple description of democracy.
So why has there been so much angst about allowing that groups can
have rights over their members? The answer is that, in recent
years, group rights have been discussed primarily in relation to groups
that have an involuntary membership: groups that are distinguished by
their race, ethnicity, culture, or language. People do not choose
to be members of these “ascriptive” groups, nor can they
easily leave them as they might leave a club or association. If
they find the group's authority oppressive or its way of life
intolerable, they cannot simply opt out, since their membership of the
group is treated by others—insiders or outsiders or both—as a
natural “given” to which normal rights of entry and exit do
not apply. That is why Will Kymlicka, for example, a liberal
deeply sympathetic to the claims of cultural groups and indigenous
peoples, is reluctant to allow that the rights of groups can be
directed inwardly as restrictions upon the group's own members,
rather than outwardly as protections against the external world
(Kymlicka 1995, 34-48; cf. Marmor 2001).
Concerns about the potential for oppression implicit in group rights
often have an empirical dimension. Demands for group rights are often
looked upon most favourably when they are made by indigenous peoples,
cultural minorities and religious groups whose way of life is
threatened by external influences. But frequently, it is alleged, the
real effect of conceding rights to these sorts of group is to
reinforce the power of conservative elites whose wishes and interests
clash with those of others in the group. Typically, an elite will want
to use its power to maintain the traditions and integrity of the group
and will be unwilling to tolerate dissent, deviance and demands for
reform. It will also seek to maintain the position of those within the
group who have traditionally been subordinate. This issue is often
described as the problem of “minorities within minorities”
(Eisenberg and Spinner-Halev 2005; Green 1994), but it can also be a
problem of majorities (e.g. women) within minorities. In short, while
according rights to a group may enhance the position of some of its
members, it may seriously diminish the freedom and well-being of
others (Cohen et al. 1999; Deveaux 2000; Dick 2011; Kukathas 1992,
113-15; Okin 2002; Shachar 2001; Tamir 1999, 158-64, 173-4). We should
also bear in mind, however, that withholding power from a sub-state
group for that reason involves the assumption that the group's members
will be better served by the state's authority than by the authority
of their group, an assumption that some would question (e.g. Holder
2012).
A closely related fear concerns the potential of group rights to rival
and override the rights of individuals (e.g. Buchanan 1994; Caste
1992; Graff 1994; Isaac 1992; Macdonald 1989, 126–7; Tamir 1999,
161; Tesón 1998, 132–137). One of the strongest
motivations for ascribing rights to individual persons is to provide
them with safeguards.  Individuals as individuals are vulnerable to
those who wield power in all of its many forms and to the might of
numbers. Individuals who hold unpopular views or who live unorthodox
forms of life or whose existence proves tiresome or objectionable to
others, are in constant danger of being crushed by the many who view
them negatively.  When we give rights to individuals, we provide them
with moral shields that protect them from the excesses of power,
including the excesses of collective power. But, if we ascribe rights
to groups as well as to individuals, we might find that the rights of
individuals are met and overtaken by those of groups, so that rights
lose their potency as safeguards for individuals. We might fear that,
when the rights of a mighty group conflict with those of a mere
individual, it is Goliath rather than David who will more frequently
emerge as the victor.
Group rights conceived collectively may seem less threatening to
individuals than group rights conceived corporately. On the
corporate conception a group has a moral standing independently of its
members; the standing of the group can therefore displace that of its
individual members so that their separate wills or interests or voices
as individuals count for nothing. By contrast a collective right
is held jointly by the individuals who make up the collectivity and is
grounded in the standing and interests of those individuals.
Thus, on the collective conception, there can be no question of
individuals disappearing morally into a group in which they cease to
have any independent status. But fear of collective rights may
still be provoked by the way in which they derive from an aggregation
of individual interests. As we have already seen, on Raz's
conception of collective rights, numbers count. Numbers affect
both whether groups have rights and how weighty their rights are (1986,
187, 209). Others are loath to accept that rights can derive
from, or be affected by, that sort of aggregation (Réaume 1988,
2003; Tamir 1999, 166–71). In contemporary philosophy,
rights-thinking is commonly opposed to maximizing consequentialism, of
which utilitarianism is the prime example. Ascribing rights to
individuals is a way of acknowledging their separateness as persons and
of safeguarding them from the aggregative excesses of
utilitarianism. But if the aggregation of interests can yield
collective rights, a morality of rights may begin to assume the
character of, and to present the same dangers as, the very sort of
utilitarian thinking that many rights-theorists intend it to
preclude.
A number of things might be said in response to these worries.
First, very much depends upon the content that we give group rights. It
is possible to invest individual rights with a content that would make
them unsavoury, but that would not discredit the very idea of
individual rights; similarly, the possibility that we might find some
group rights objectionable is no reason to dismiss group rights
altogether. Secondly, it would seem strangely arbitrary, given
the moral significance that we give to rights, to insist that the
objects of rights can be only goods that individuals can enjoy as
independent individuals and never goods they can enjoy only in
association with others. Some theorists of rights seem to think
just that. But we cannot take for granted that no good, whose
shared nature was such that it could be the possible object only of a
group right, could ever have the significance that would justify its
actually being the object of a right.
Thirdly, there is no reason why individual rights and group rights
should not both figure in our moral thinking. Indeed, they commonly
do. For example, it would be entirely commonplace to hold that a
people, as a political unit, has a collective right to be
self-determining but only within the limits set by individuals' human
rights. Group rights do not have to clash with individual rights and a
complete moral theory would articulate individual rights and group
rights so that they formed a coherent set (cf. Buchanan 1994; De
Feyter and Pavlakos 2008; Holder and Corntassel 2002). It may prove
impossible to anticipate and avoid every conflict amongst rights, but,
even if it does, we need not suppose that conflicts will arise more
commonly between group rights and individual rights than amongst
individual rights themselves (McDonald 1998; Waldron 1993,
203-24).
There is also a well-established tradition of political thought,
associated particularly with Alexis de Tocqueville and the English
Pluralists, which sees the existence of groups as essential to the
dispersion of power and maintenance of liberty within a society.
According to that tradition, groups do not glower threateningly at
individuals. Rather, the rights of groups help to counter and
hold in check a potentially overmighty state. (Stapleton 1995;
Lustgarten 1983. See also Frohnen 2005 and Gedicks 1989.)
Group rights and individual rights can, then, co-exist more or less
peacefully, but it is also possible for them to enjoy a more positive
and mutually supportive relationship. Raz has pointed out that
individual rights frequently presuppose the existence of general social
goods and that individual rights themselves frequently promote social
goods (1986, 193–216, 245–263; 1995). Indeed, individual rights
may sometimes be rights only because they promote social goods.
Raz does not claim that those social goods are generally the objects of
group rights, but he does expose the error of supposing that an
antagonism towards collective considerations is somehow built into the
very idea or purpose of individual rights. The interests that
group rights and individual rights seek to protect will frequently be
the same interests.
Indeed, it may sometimes be an individual right that makes the case
for a group right. We might argue, for example, that some of the
goods to which individuals have rights depend for their realisation
upon the health of the communities and cultures to which those
individuals belong, so that there is a case for individuals sharing in
group rights because those rights serve their individual rights or
their individual freedom (Jacobs 1991; Kymlicka 1989, 1995; Wellman
1999). Or we might argue that individuals have equal rights to
the conditions of self-development, that individual self-development
requires common or joint activity, and that that makes the case for
group rights to the conditions necessary for that common or joint
activity (Gould 2001). Or, again, we might hold that amongst the
range of options required for individual autonomy are joint options,
options to pursue ends that require co-ordinated activity with other
members of one's group; that too may justify group rights, such
as the right of a group to control its own affairs (Wall 2007).
The claim here might be either that a group right is conducive to, or,
more strongly, that it is essential for, the realisation of an
individual right.
Dwight Newman also argues that some individual rights presuppose group
rights (2011, 76-82), but his general analysis of the proper
relationship between individual and group rights is both nuanced and
qualified (2011, Part II). As we have seen, he conceives right-holding
groups as possessing moral status as groups and as having rights that
are grounded in their interests as groups, interests that are not
reducible to the interests of their members taken individually. Even
so, he insists that group rights must be consistent with the
“humanistic principle”, which holds that ultimately what
matters is the well-being of individual human persons. In that
respect, he is a value-individualist rather than a value-collectivist.
Group rights (or “collective” rights as he prefers to call
them) cannot ultimately be in competition with the well-being of the
group's members. He formulates that requirement as “the service
principle”: if the claims that a group makes upon its members
are to be legitimate, those claims must serve the interests of the
group's members. He pairs that principle with a “mutuality
principle”, which provides that a right-holding group cannot act
with no regard for the well-being of outsiders, be they individuals or
other groups. The service principle does not translate into the
familiar claim that individual rights must always take priority over
collective rights. People have interests both as individuals and as
members of groups and sometimes their interests as members can matter
more than their interests as individuals. In addition, legitimate
group claims need not in every instance serve the interests of each
and every member of the group; rather, their overall effect should be
to promote the well-being of each member. If a tension arises between
group rights and individual rights, which should take precedence will
vary according to circumstances and cases, dependening upon what is
morally preferable given the all-in interests of those whose
well-being is at stake. Newman therefore cautions us against supposing
that the need for group rights to comply with the humanistic principle
must always entail their taking second place to individual rights.
In seeking to reconcile group rights and individual rights, can we go
still further and incorporate group rights within human rights? The
preambles to the UN's Covenants on Civil and Political Rights (1966)
and on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (1966) characterise the
rights set out in each Covenant as human rights. The first articles of
both Covenants ascribe to all “peoples” the right of
self-determination, the right freely to dispose of their natural
wealth and resources, and the right not to be deprived of their means
of subsistence. Rights of peoples would seem to be group rights and
yet they also figure in the UN Covenants as human rights. In addition,
as human rights have been given an increasingly inclusive content, an
idea of a “third generation” of human rights has
emerged. Political and civil rights constituted the first generation
and socio-economic rights the second; both sorts of right focused on
individuals as their bearers. Third generation or
“solidarity” human rights include rights to goods such as
development, peace, a healthy environment, communication, humanitarian
assistance, and a share in the common heritage of mankind. They are
rights to goods that are collective in nature and rights that are
often more intelligibly borne by groups than by
individuals. Collective rights are also prominent in the rights
attributed to indigenous peoples (sometimes described as a
“fourth generation” of human rights). A large proportion
of the rights set out in the UN's Declaration of the Rights of
Indigenous Peoples, 2007, are collective rights. They include the
right of indigenous peoples to self-determination (art.3) and other
rights stemming from that general right, such as the right to
“maintain and strengthen their distinct political, legal,
economic, social and cultural institutions” (art.5), the right
that their culture shall not be destroyed (art.8), the right not to be
forcibly removed from their lands and territories (art.10), and the
right to practise and revitalize their cultural traditions and customs
(art.11). In UN parlance, the Declaration is a “human rights
instrument” and commentators commonly conceive the rights it
enunciates as human rights (see, e.g., Allen and Xanthaki 2011).
In spite of these developments, the idea that human rights can be
collective in form remains controversial.  For many, human rights are
necessarily the rights of human individuals so that, even if groups
have rights, those will not be human rights (e.g. Donnelly 2003,
23–27; Graff 1994; Griffin 2008, 256–276; Jovanović
2012, 166–195; Miller 2002; Nickel 2007, 163–167;
Nordenfelt 1987; Raz 2010; Waldron 1993, 339–69). Others insist
that some of the goods that are fundamental to human life and to human
well-being can be enjoyed only collectively and that our conception of
human rights should accommodate that reality (e.g. Beitz 2009,
181–186; Casals 2006; Crawford 1988; Felice 1996; Freeman 1995;
Holder 2006; Jones 2013; Kymlicka 2001, 69–90; Malik 1996; Mello
2004; Thompson 2015).
This debate encompasses a number of distinct if related
issues. One is whether the practical effect of extending human
rights to groups will be to corrode the protection that human rights
afford individuals, in ways already indicated. Another is whether
the idea of rights has itself become over-extended. Goods such as
a world peace, a healthy environment, and efficient communications, may
be better understood as ideals or policy objectives for the human race
rather than objects of human rights. Moreover, some third
generation human rights seem to be conceived as the group rights of all
humanity as a single entity, which makes puzzling who bears the
corresponding duties. A further issue concerns what it is that
makes a right “human”. If it is enough for a right to
be a human right that the relevant international authority declares it
to be so, there is no obstacle to group rights being human
rights. But, if we conceive human rights as rights that
human beings hold in virtue of being human and that are universal to,
identical for, and possessed equally by, human beings, that sets
a more discriminating test for the group rights that might qualify as
human rights.
If we return to the distinction between corporate and collective
rights, group rights have a greater affinity with human rights if we
conceive them according to the collective model. On the corporate
conception, a group right is a right held by a corporate entity, which
immediately makes it other than a human right since its holder is that
corporate entity. On the collective conception, a right is held
jointly by a set of individuals. To qualify as a human right, a
collective right would have to be universal to human beings but, if we
suppose that politically every human individual belongs to a people
and has an interest in that people's being self-determining, we might
hold that all human beings enjoy a right to collective
self-determination. All have that right, but each will hold it only
jointly with other members of his or her people (Jones 1999b,
2016). However, the group rights that can satisfy this test of
universality will be limited in number. Assertions of group rights are
often stimulated by “difference” rather than
uniformity—by features, ways of life or commitments that
significantly differentiate one group from another rather than by
characteristics that all human beings share (e.g. Addis 1992;
Galenkamp 1993; Ingram 2000; Jovanović 2012, 188–195;
Young 1990). Of course, it may be that group rights that provide for
group differences, such as differences in culture, will themselves
derive from more basic rights that are universal in scope—just
as rights to practise different faiths can derive from a universal
right of freedom of religion. Uniform rights need not make for uniform
lives. But it is unnecessary to contrive a fit between group rights
and human rights where one is not comfortable. Because the language of
human rights has become the lingua franca of international standard
setting, there has been an unfortunate tendency to present every
significant international standard in that language. Many
individually-held rights are not human rights but are still rights and
still matter. Similarly, groups can have rights and their rights can
matter, even if those rights are not human rights.