Haecceitism is a modal thesis. Like other modal theses, there are
competing metaphysical frameworks in which it might be expressed. Some
of these frameworks involve a commitment to possible worlds or maximal
possibilities, while other frameworks aim to do without these
commitments. To further complicate matters, some frameworks
distinguish possible worlds from the maximal possibilities they
represent, while other frameworks collapse this putative distinction
by identifying maximal possibilities with possible worlds. This
section surveys some of the options for formulating and interpreting
haecceitism, but, as Skow (2008, 2011) argues, any formulation of
haecceitism that employs the framework of possible worlds will
tendentiously presuppose something about the nature of possibilities
or possible worlds. For this reason, the proper formulation of
haecceitism is itself a matter of controversy.
For modalists, the correct analysis of modality involves no
quantification over possibilities or possible worlds. (On modalism,
see Forbes (1992), Melia (2003: 81–98) and Peacocke (1999:
155–159).) Instead, modal notions are properly understood in
terms of primitive modal operators like the box and diamond of modal
logic. Since modalists do without quantification over possibilities or
possible worlds, haecceitism and anti-haecceitism cannot be expressed
in terms of differences between such entities. But, following Skow
(2008), the modalist can nevertheless characterize anti-haecceitism as
follows:
Modalist Anti-Haecceitism:
Necessarily, the world could not be non-qualitatively different
without being qualitatively different.
Within the modalist framework, haecceitism is therefore equivalent
to the denial of Modalist Anti-Haecceitism.
Those who reject the expressive limitations of modalism can help
themselves to richer ontological resources in characterizing
haecceitism. For example, if quantification over possibilities is
allowed for, two distinctions among possibilities prove especially
helpful for formulating haecceitism. According to the first
distinction, some possibilities are maximal: they are total
ways the entire world could have been. So, for any possibility, a
maximal possibility includes that possibility or its negation. (On
some views, talk of possibilities including other possibilities is
understood in terms of entailment. On other views,
“inclusion” is understood in terms of set
membership—e.g., membership relations between sets of
propositions. Here, inclusion is taken as a neutral bit of
terminology.) In contrast, non-maximal possibilities like the
possibility that Obama is human are less than total ways things could
have been.
A second distinction among possibilities
divides non-qualitative possibilities, which are ways
specific individuals like Napoleon or Nefertiti could have been,
from qualitative possibilities, which are not tied to any
specific individuals. So, for example, the possibility that Napoleon
escapes Elba is non-qualitative, while the possibility that there are
four red objects is a qualitative possibility. (On some views, the
distinction between qualitative and non-qualitative possibilities can
be identified with or analyzed in terms of the distinction
between de dicto and de re possibilities.) Granted
these two distinctions among possibilities, haecceitism can be
characterized as follows:
Possibility Haecceitism: There are distinct
maximal possibilities that differ only with respect to the
non-qualitative possibilities they include.
According to Possibility Haecceitism, maximal possibilities
that differ haecceitistically include the very same
qualitative possibilities and differ only in terms of the
non-qualitative possibilities they include. (While most everyone holds
that there are maximal possibilities that differ
qualitatively and non-qualitatively from actuality,
haecceitistic differences are distinctive insofar as the divide
maximal possibilities that differ only non-qualitatively.)
Although Possibility Haecceitism requires quantification over
possibilities, it remains silent about possible worlds. But, for most
realists about possible worlds, quantification over maximal
possibilities requires or is simply equivalent to quantification over
possible worlds. Typically, such realist views of possible worlds
identify each maximal possibility with a unique possible world and
non-maximal possibilities with sets of possible worlds. And, while
views that reduce possibilities to possible worlds can employ
Possibility Haecceitism to express haecceitism, some might be tempted
to interpret haecceitism as a thesis about qualitatively indiscernible
worlds. Such a view would attempt to formulate haecceitism as the
following thesis:
World Indiscernibility: There are distinct
possible worlds that are qualitatively indiscernible.
As Lewis (1986: 220–247) and Skow (2008) point out, however,
World Indiscernibility is a misleading way to express haecceitism
given certain views of possible worlds.
According to ersatzist views, which identify possible
worlds with abstract entities like sentence-types, properties,
propositions, or sets, the truth of World Indiscernibility will turn,
not on whether there are distinctively haecceitistic possibilities,
but on whether such entities are qualitatively indiscernible from one
another. (Qualitatively indiscernible entities share all
their qualitative properties, while qualitative duplicates
share only their intrinsic qualitative properties.) So, if one holds
that sets or propositions have no qualitative features, then World
Indiscernibility is true, regardless of one’s views about what
is and what is not possible. So, for many ersatzists, the status of
World Indiscernibility does not depend upon any distinctive modal
commitments, but is settled by apparently orthogonal questions
regarding the nature of the entities with which possible worlds are
identified. (The inadequacy of World Indiscernibility as a formulation
of haecceitism within the Lewisian modal realist framework is
explained below. Crucially, Lewis (1986) takes the issue of
haecceitism to turn, not on issues regarding qualitatively
indiscernibility, but on how possible worlds represent de re
possibilities.)
In light of disagreement about which entities play the role of
possible worlds, no characterization of haecceitism that makes
substantive assumptions about the nature of possible worlds will prove
acceptable to all ersatzists. (On ersatzism, see Lewis (1986:
136–142), Divers (2002: 167–292), and Sider (2002).)
Despite this, competing ersatzist views can employ their own
distinctive resources to provide formulations of haecceitism. For
instance, if possible worlds are identified with maximal consistent
sets of propositions, haecceitism can be taken as the claim that there
are distinct maximal consistent sets of propositions that include the
same qualitative propositions but different non-qualitative
propositions. For other versions of ersatzism, alternative strategies
for formulating haecceitism that appeal to properties, sets, or other
entities are available, but none that deploy contentious metaphysical
commitments will have a plausible claim to being a canonical
expression of haecceitism.
Although formulations of haecceitism tailored to various ersatzist
views differ significantly, they typically share a commitment to a
one-one correspondence between possible worlds and maximal
possibilities. This correspondence allows ersatzists to treat talk of
maximal possibilities and possible worlds as largely interchangeable
for most theoretical purposes. Ersatzists who accept Possibility
Haecceitism therefore commonly endorse the following thesis:
World Haecceitism: There are distinct maximal
possibilities that differ only haecceitistically and there is a
one-to-one correspondence between possible worlds and the maximal
possibilities they represent.
Erzatzists can, however, reject World Haecceitism, and, as
we’ll see, the resulting view is an analogue of the Lewisian
modal realist’s “cheap haecceitism.” But, as should
be clear from the preceding, whether a given formulation of
haecceitism is an apt one greatly depends upon the background
metaphysics of possibilities and possible worlds.
On issues that arise in formulating haecceitism, see Lewis (1986:
220–247), Russell (2013a), Skow (2008, 2011), and Stalnaker
(2011). Kaplan (1975) is an importantly early contribution where,
among other things, Kaplan attributes the use of the label
‘haecceitism’ to R.M. Adams. On the ways in which
Kaplan’s use of ‘haecceitism’ departs from
now-standard uses, see Stalnaker (2011: 54–62). For other issues
in characterizing haecceitism, see Graff Fara (2009) and Torza
(2012).
While ersatzist views identify possible worlds with abstract
entities, Lewisian modal realism identifies possible worlds with
maximal sums of (analogically) spatiotemporally interrelated
entities. According to Lewisian modal realism, for any way things
could have been, there is some possible world that represents that
possibility. Moreover, these possible worlds are no less
“real” or concrete than our actual world. (Lewis
characterizes these possible worlds as “concrete” only
with reservation, given competing, non-equivalent conceptions of the
abstract-concrete distinction.)
Within Lewisian modal realism, de re modality is analyzed
in terms of Lewis’ distinctive and controversial counterpart
theory. According to counterpart theory, ordinary individuals are
not numerically identical or “bilocated” across possible
worlds. Instead, possible individuals are worldbound, existing in only
one world, and possess their de re modal properties in virtue
of bearing counterpart relations to other possible entities. Roughly
put, counterpart theory holds that an individual \(a\) is possibly
\(F\) if and only if \(a\) has a counterpart that is \(F\), where
counterpart relations are relations of qualitative resemblance between
possible individuals. So, according to Lewis’
counterpart-theoretic treatment of de re modality, it is true
that Obama could have been a doctor if and only if there is some
possible individual that appropriately resembles Obama and is a
doctor. De re modality is therefore a matter of resemblance
relations between parts of possible worlds although the relevant
resemblance relations vary from context to context. (Lewis’
views on counterpart theory and counterpart relations change over
time, see Lewis (1968, 1986). On counterpart theory, see Graff Fara
(2009), Fara and Williamson (2005), and Hazen (1979).)
Since Lewis analyzes de re representation—i.e., the
way in which entities represent de re possibilities—in
terms of qualitative resemblance, counterpart relations never divide
qualitatively indiscernible entities (i.e., for any qualitatively
indiscernible entities \(x\) and \(y\) in a given context, \(x\) is a
counterpart of \(z\) if and only if \(y\) is a counterpart of
\(z)\). This commitment has serious consequences for the modal realist
treatment of haecceitism. In particular, it guarantees that
qualitatively indiscernible possible worlds do not differ in terms of
what de re possibilities they represent. Lewis therefore
endorses the following thesis about the connection between qualitative
properties and what de re possibilities a world
represents:
Qualitative Supervenience: Facts about what worlds
represent de re supervene upon facts about the qualitative
properties of worlds.
As Lewis uses “haecceitism”, it is the denial of
Qualitative Supervenience and therefore the claim that non-qualitative
features of worlds at least partially determine what worlds
represent de re. (On the relation of supervenience, see the
entry by McLaughlin and Bennett.) For modal realists who would reject
Qualitative Supervenience, qualitatively indiscernible possible worlds
can differ with respect to which de re possibilities they
represent. Non-Lewisian modal realists of this sort can
therefore hold qualitatively indiscernible possible worlds to
represent maximal possibilities that differ haecceitistically. But,
since Lewis endorses Qualitative Supervenience, he claims that
qualitatively indiscernible worlds represent the very same
possibilities. Positing qualitative indiscernible worlds therefore
provides Lewis with no additional resource for making sense of
haecceitistic differences. (Lewis is officially agnostic about whether
there are any qualitatively indiscernible worlds. See Lewis (1986:
224).) As a consequence, Lewis holds that we go wrong in assimilating
questions of haecceitism to questions about qualitatively
indiscernible. For Lewis, haecceitism is an issue regarding how
possible worlds represent de re possibilities. So, even if
Lewis were to posit distinct yet qualitatively indiscernible worlds,
they would differ non-qualitatively but not haecceitistically
in the Lewisian sense. In this way, the Lewis’ concern with
haecceitism places question of representation rather than qualitative
indiscernibility at the forefront.
Since qualitatively indiscernible worlds are no help to Lewis in
accounting for haecceitistic possibilities—e.g., where two twins
swap their qualitative roles—and Lewis takes these to be genuine
possibilities, he offers an important modification to his earlier
version of counterpart theory with the aim of explaining how such
haecceitistic possibilities are represented. Lewis’ modified
counterpart theory permits individuals to have multiple counterparts
within the actual world. (See Lewis (1967, 1983, and 1986).) So, in
the case of our two twins, the firstborn twin has its second-born twin
as one of its counterparts. In certain contexts, the second-born twin
therefore represents a possibility for the firstborn—namely, the
possibility of occupying precisely the qualitative role of the
second-born twin. In this way, the actual world and its parts will, in
suitable contexts, represent, not only the actualized maximal
possibility, but also maximal possibilities that differ
haecceitistically from the actualized maximal possibility. Context
permitting, each possible world can therefore represent a plurality of
maximal possibilities each of which differ haecceitistically from one
another. And, since Lewis’ modified counterpart theory holds a
single possible world and its parts to represent distinct maximal
possibilities that differ haecceitistically, it accommodates the
representation of such possibilities without multiplying possible
worlds. Accordingly, Lewis describes it as “haecceitism on the
cheap.” Understood in terms set out above, this “cheap
substitute for haecceitism” entails Possibility Haecceitism yet
rejects World Haecceitism.
In denying World Haecceitism, Lewis forgoes a one-to-one
correspondence between maximal possibilities and possible worlds. This
feature proves significant in several discussions about the tenability
of “cheap haecceitism.” Graff Fara (2009) argues that, by
rejecting World Haecceitism, cheap haecceitism cannot satisfactorily
interpret modal logic enriched with an actuality operator. Kment
(2012) also argues that cheap haecceitism delivers an inadequate
treatment of chances and counterfactuals, while Stalnaker (2008:
69–71) suggests that semantic considerations support World
Haecceitism over cheap haecceitism. On early challenges to counterpart
theory, see Kripke (1980) and Hazen (1979). On counterpart theory,
actuality, and haecceitism, see Baltimore (2014), Cowling (2013), and
Russell (2013a, 2013b).
This section discusses the connection between haecceitism and
haecceities as well as some of the central issues regarding
haecceities and other non-qualitative properties.
Consider once again the haecceitistic possibility according to
which you do not exist and a different individual, Double,
instantiates all of your actual qualitative properties. A natural way
to describe this possibility is as one where the distribution
of qualitative properties is just as it actually is, but
where non-qualitative properties are distributed
differently. In particular, this alleged possibility is one according
to which your haecceity goes uninstantiated and the haecceity
of a non-actual individual, Double, is instantiated in its place.
Since haecceities like being Napoleon and being
identical to Socrates are properties uniquely tied to specific
individuals, haecceitistic differences are naturally explained in
terms of differences in the distribution of haecceities. These
properties, sometimes called “thisnesses” or
“individual essences”, are typically thought to have the
existence of the relevant individuals as a necessary and sufficient
condition for their instantiation. So, for example, if Napoleon
exists, then, necessarily, exactly one thing, Napoleon,
instantiates being Napoleon and, if Napoleon does not exist,
nothing instantiates being Napoleon. In addition, facts about
the distribution of other non-qualitative
properties—e.g., being five feet from
Napoleon—are necessitated by the distribution of
haecceities and qualitative properties. (Here, talk of
‘properties’ should be interpreted in the broad sense
including monadic properties as well as \(n\)-adic relations.) Most
haecceitistic differences will therefore involve differences in the
distribution of haecceities as well as additional non-qualitative
properties like being five feet from Napoleon.
While haecceitistic differences are commonly explained in terms of
the distribution of haecceities, haecceitism is not merely the view
that haecceities exist. To see why, notice that nominalists who deny
the existence of properties might nevertheless accept the modal
commitments of haecceitism, claiming that things could have been
different non-qualitatively without being different qualitatively. In
addition, those who affirm the existence of haecceities and other
non-qualitative properties might still go on to reject the distinctive
modal commitments of haecceitism (e.g., denying that things could
differ non-qualitatively without differing qualitatively). So,
although it is common for haecceitists to posit haecceities and employ
them in characterizing haecceitistic differences, haecceitism is, in
principle, independent of realism about haecceities given
haecceitism’s ineliminable modal component.
Although haecceitism is not merely realism about haecceities, the
metaphysics of haecceities and non-qualitative properties is still
relevant for understanding haecceitism. Perhaps most importantly, some
account of the qualitative/non-qualitative distinction is needed to
interpret the thesis of haecceitism. Typically, this distinction is
introduced by way of example with haecceities like being
Napoleon taken as paradigmatic non-qualitative properties and
properties like mass and charge taken as
paradigmatic qualitative properties. When moving beyond these
examples, other non-qualitative properties are usually held to share
haecceities’ dependence upon specific individuals. For
example, being five feet from Napoleon is plausibly thought
to require the existence of Napoleon while a qualitative property
like being five grams mass requires the existence of no
specific individual. Terminologically, non-qualitative properties
exhibiting this kind of dependence are sometimes labeled “impure
properties”, “identity properties”, or
“haecceitistic properties”, where “haecceity”
is usually reserved properties like being Napoleon.
Attempts at a philosophical analysis of the
qualitative/non-qualitative distinction often take the connection
between non-qualitative properties and specific individuals as a
starting point. For example, Hawthorne (2006: 8) says:
“haecceitistic properties—such as being identical to
John or being the daughter of Jim—are those which,
in some intuitive way, make direct reference to a particular
individual(s).” But, while rough characterizations of this sort
leave the (non-)qualitative status of other kinds of properties
indeterminate or unclear, reductive analyses have been proposed with
the aim of providing a comprehensive account of the distinction. Adams
(1979: 7–9) considers an account of the distinction that ties
non-qualitative properties to certain kinds of linguistic items. Lewis
(1986, 2002) endorses views on which qualitative properties supervene
upon or are appropriately definable in terms of a distinctive class of
“perfectly natural properties.” Still other
views—e.g., Rosenkrantz (1979)—aim to analyze the
dependence of non-qualitative properties on individuals and
distinguish non-qualitative properties in terms of this dependence. In
contrast, Diekemper (2009) and Cowling (2015) endorse primitivism
about the distinction between qualitative and non-qualitative
properties, taking it instead as irreducible or metaphysically
fundamental. But, regardless of one’s preferred view of the
distinction, some account is owed of the qualitative status of
non-paradigmatic cases including modal properties like being
possibly a statue, broadly logical properties like being
self-identical, and, for those impressed by the analogies between
individuals and species, certain kind properties like being a
tiger.
Debates about the metaphysical status of haecceities are also bound
up with more general debates about the nature of
properties—e.g., whether properties are universals or
tropes, in re or ante rem entities, sparse or
abundant, and so on. But, regardless of one’s preferred view
about the metaphysics of properties, haecceities do seem to have some
distinctive features. Unlike most other properties, haecceities are
not typically thought to be multiply instantiable—i.e., there is
exactly one possible object that can instantiate being
Napoleon—and, as commonly conceived, haecceities do not
(without auxiliary assumptions) ground qualitative resemblance. So, if
one holds that all properties must be multiply instantiable or ground
qualitative resemblance, then one must either reject haecceities or
opt for a disunified metaphysics of properties. (On some competing
views of the metaphysical role of haecceities, see Diekemper
(2015).)
Within leading views of properties, various options are available
for developing a metaphysics of haecceities. For example, in an effort
to assimilate haecceities into a class nominalist ontology where
properties are identified with sets, Lewis (1986: 225) characterizes
haecceities as follows: “So we get properties that are in no way
qualitatively delineated, and some of these are haecceities of this-
and other-worldly individuals. A unit set of an individual is one
especially stringent haecceity. Also, for any individual and any
counterpart relation, there is the set of that individual together
with all its counterparts, and this is a less strict sort of
haecceity.” The resulting view takes our talk of haecceities to
slide between talk of properties distinctive to each worldbound
individual and talk of properties shared by individuals unified by a
common counterpart relation. (On the broader conception, haecceities
are non-qualitative in nature, while, on the narrower conception,
haecceities end up being qualitative, provided there are no
qualitatively indiscernible worlds.) In contrast to this Lewisian
view, other views attribute a more significant metaphysical role to
haecceities, taking haecceities to individuate or determine the
identity of entities and therefore figure into a metaphysical
explanation of facts about identity and individuation.
Views that take haecceities to provide metaphysical explanations of
the identity of individuals suggest a noteworthy connection between
haecceitism and fundamentality. In particular, if we assume that the
stock of the world’s fundamental properties (provided there are
such properties) suffices to fix the distribution of absolutely all
properties, then haecceitism guarantees that qualitative properties
cannot, on their own, fix the distribution of non-qualitative
properties like haecceities. As a consequence, haecceitism points
toward the conclusion that some non-qualitative properties are
fundamental. So, for those who hold that fundamental properties are
exclusively qualitative, either the assumed conception of
fundamentality or haecceitism must be rejected. For the committed
haecceitist, a remaining option admits fundamental qualitative as well
as fundamental non-qualitative properties.
A further notable debate about the metaphysics of haecceities
concerns their modal status. Some, like Plantinga (1974), take
haecceities to exist necessarily. So, while being Napoleon
goes uninstantiated in possible worlds without Napoleon, it
nevertheless exists in such worlds. According to other views like that
of Adams (1981), haecceities are contingent existents, existing only
in those worlds where their bearers exist. So, although being
Napoleon actually exists, it neither exists nor is instantiated
at worlds without Napoleon. For discussion of this debate and cognate
ones, see Diekemper (2015).
On the general metaphysics of haecceities, see Adams (1979, 1981),
Cover and O’Leary-Hawthorne (1997), Cowling (2015), Lewis
(1986), Swinburne (1995), and Rosenkrantz (1993). On epistemological
and metaphysical issues about haecceities—e.g., whether
individuals can be acquainted with the haecceities of other
individuals—see Rosenkrantz (1993). On haecceities and the
identity of indiscernibles, see Robinson (2000). On haecceities of
mathematical entities and their role in mathematical structuralism,
see Shapiro (2006: 139).
Haecceitism and essentialism are controversial theses about de
re modality. This section briefly introduces essentialism and
then examines its interaction with haecceitism.
The essential properties of an individual are properties
it cannot exist without instantiating. In contrast,
its accidental properties are those properties that are not
essential to it. (According to the modal view of essence, this modal
characterization of essential properties provides necessary and
sufficient conditions for essentiality. On non-modal views, this
characterization merely captures a necessary condition. See Fine
(1994) for the case against the modal view.)
Essentialist theses claim that certain kinds of properties are
essential to certain kinds of individuals. For example, according
to origin essentialism, biological individuals have their
biological origins essentially. Origin essentialism therefore requires
that an individual like George W. Bush have his actual biological
origins—in this case, Barbara and George Bush—in any
possible world in which it exists. (On origin essentialism, see Kripke
(1979) and Robertson (1998). On other essentialisms, see Cartwright
(1968) and Mackie (2006).)
Essentialist theses come in “stronger” and
“weaker” forms. Weaker, less interesting forms of
essentialism require that all individuals instantiate indiscriminate
properties like being self-identical or being such that
\(2+2=4\). (Again, non-modalists like Fine (1994) deny these
necessary properties are properly counted as essential to all entities
even while being such that \(2+2=4\) might be essential the
number two.) Stronger, more interesting versions of essentialism like
origin essentialism ascribe distinctive essential properties to
individuals. The strongest form of essentialism
is hyperessentialism, according to which each individual has
all of its properties essentially. So, for any individual, there is
only way that that individual can be.
Intuitively, essentialism limits the de re possibilities
for individuals, while haecceitism extends the de re
possibilities for individuals by admitting contentious
possibilities—e.g., the possibility where you swap qualitative
roles with Obama. It is important to note, however, that even the
strongest versions of essentialism, hyperessentialism, do not rule out
haecceitism. For, while hyperessentialism does rule out haecceitistic
differences where you have different properties, it does not
rule out a “mass replacement”—i.e., an alternative
maximal possibility where wholly different individuals occupy each of
the qualitative roles occupied in the actual world. These maximal
possibilities differ haecceitistically even while there is no
violation of essence, since no individual exists according to more
than a single world. (Those who reject possibilities involving
non-actual or “alien” individuals would, however, have the
makings of an argument from hyperessentialism to anti-haecceitism.)
Although essentialism provides no direct argument against haecceitism,
hyperessentialism and other strong versions of essentialism do
preclude certain kinds of haecceitistic differences where individuals
“swap” qualitative roles. For example, just as
hyperessentialism rules out any haecceitistic possibilities where you
have a different qualitative role, origin essentialism rules out
haecceitistic differences that involve organisms having anything other
than their actual biological origins. For this reason, a commitment to
strong versions of essentialism will constrain the range of admissible
haecceitistic differences.
Weak forms of essentialism have few consequences for
haecceitism. Moreover, the thesis that individuals have their
haecceities essentially is often taken as a prerequisite for a
commitment to haecceitism, since the thesis sometimes called
“extreme haecceitism” holds that haecceities are
the only essential properties of individuals aside from
perfectly general properties instantiated by all entities
(e.g., being self-identical). According to extreme
haecceitists, not only could Napoleon have been a poached egg, the
world could have been qualitatively just as it actually is but such
that a poached egg and Napoleon swap their respective qualitative
roles. Extreme haecceitism is therefore among the most permissive
views about de re modality and admits possibilities where you
occupy the qualitative roles of a poached egg. For this reason,
extreme haecceitism is typically (albeit confusingly) classified as a
version of “anti-essentialism”, by virtue of denying that
individuals have distinctive essences apart from their respective
haecceities. (On anti-essentialism and extreme haecceitism, see Heller
(2005), Stalnaker (1979), and Lewis (1986). See Mackie (2006) for a
defense of “minimal essentialism”, according to which
individuals have their haecceities and belong to their ontological
categories like property or object essentially.) At
the same time, extreme haecceitism is typically paired with a
commitment to the necessity of identity and distinctness and therefore
rules out possibilities according to which actually distinct objects
are one and the same. A yet more permissive view about de re
modality might abandon this commitment, taking even the identity and
distinctness of individuals as accidental. (On whether
anti-essentialism is best paired with the necessity of identity and
distinctness, see Nelson (2006).)
Finally, while essentialism holds certain properties
as necessary for being a specific individual, related
“sufficiency” theses might hold certain properties to
be sufficient for being a particular individual. If, for
example, we take Obama’s actual qualitative role to be a
sufficient condition for an object to be identical to Obama, we
thereby rule out possibilities according to which some other
individual occupies Obama’s qualitative role. (Sufficiency
theses of this sort can be hammered into essentialist theses by
holding individuals like Obama to have essential properties
like occupying the qualitative role of the President in 2014 if
the world is qualitatively as it actually is.) Theses of this
kind play a notable role in certain essentialist arguments—e.g.,
in certain arguments for origin essentialism—but it remains
unclear how such principles might be used to offer a
non-question-begging argument against haecceitism. (For discussion of
sufficiency principles, see McKay (1986) and Robertson (1998).)
As just noted, no familiar version of essentialism provides a
direct argument against absolutely all haecceitistic differences,
although strong versions of essentialism will limit the range of
admissible haecceitistic differences. In addition, haecceitists
typically assume at least a modest form of essentialism insofar as
individuals are taken to have their haecceities essentially.
This section surveys arguments for haecceitism. The most familiar
of these are conceivability arguments, which appeal to the apparent
conceivability or imaginability of maximal possibilities that differ
haecceitistically. Another line of defense takes the form of an
argument usually called “Chisholm’s Paradox”, which
exploits incremental modal variations in order to defend haecceitistic
differences. In addition, one might endorse haecceitism, not on the
strength of any distinctive argument, but by a more general appeal to
modal intuition, according to which haecceitistic differences
simply seem possible. This survey of arguments leaves aside
the general issues in modal epistemology raised by appeals to modal
intuition, focusing instead on conceivability arguments for
haecceitism and Chisholm’s Paradox.
Note, also, that these arguments are most naturally taken as
arguments for Possibility Haecceitism rather than, say, World
Haecceitism. So understood, the Lewisian “cheap
haecceitist” can, in principle, accept the conclusions of these
arguments even while denying such arguments establish the existence of
qualitatively indiscernible possible worlds.
Conceivability arguments for haecceitism have two steps. The first
step requires our success in conceiving or imagining certain states of
affairs. The second step requires an inference from the relevant
conceiving or imagining to the possibility of the states of affairs in
question. Among the wide variety of conceivability arguments for
haecceitism, some vary with respect to the kind of conceivability or
imagination required, while others vary with respect to the kinds of
states of affairs involved. This section sets out some conceivability
arguments offered in the literature with some limited remarks about
their salient differences.
Black (1952) offers a now-famous conceivability argument against
the Identity of Indiscernibles, which appeals to the apparent
conceivability of a world containing only two indiscernible iron
spheres. In defending haecceitism, a natural strategy is to extend
Black’s case by arguing that, not only can we conceive of a
world containing only two indiscernible iron spheres, we can conceive
of distinct worlds that differ only insofar as these spheres swap
their spatial locations. (Jubien (1993: 41–42) discusses an
argument of this sort.) A closely related argument holds that we can
conceive of a pair of worlds in which some pair of spheres has been
replaced by some other pair of spheres. Granted the conceivability of
the states of affairs in question, haecceitism follows. (A related
line of argument, owing to Adams (1979), is considered below.)
Other arguments appeal to similar states of affairs featuring
qualitatively indiscernible objects or regions. For example, Melia
(2003: 162) presents a conceivability argument that requires us to
conceive of a world that contains a single cylinder on a qualitatively
homogeneous plane. Intuitively, there are many possible directions in
which the cylinder could fall, but, since there is no qualitative
variation between these possibilities, they can be distinguished only
haecceitistically—i.e., with respect to the identity of which
regions of the plane are occupied by the fallen cylinder.
Unlike the preceding arguments, some conceivability arguments
involve a kind of “inside” or “first-personal”
imagination that requires imagining a state of affairs from the
perspective of a specific conscious individual. Compare, for example,
the act of imagining Napoleon defeated at Waterloo “from
above” with the act of imagining being Napoleon
defeated at Waterloo from the perspective of Napoleon. The distinction
between these imaginative acts is commonly taken as a distinction
between imagining from the outside and imagining from the inside. If
we help ourselves to this distinction, it is plausible to view several
conceivability arguments as relying upon imagination from the inside
rather than imagination from the outside. (On the distinction between
inside and outside imagination, see Nichols (2008), Ninan (2009),
Peacocke (1985), and Velleman (1996).)
Lewis (1986: 227) offers an argument of this sort, which we can
take to involve our imagining a world of one-way eternal recurrence
where the history of the actual world repeats itself ad
infinitum. Lewis then suggests that we can successfully imagine
ourselves occupying different “epochs”—specific
recurrences of history from the inside. And, since we can imagine
ourselves occupying different epochs, he concludes that some
possibilities differ solely with respect to whether one lives in, say,
the seventeenth rather than the fortieth epoch. In addition, Lewis
(1983, 1986: 239) suggests another conceivability argument that is
plausibly taken to require us imagining living the life of one of a
pair of twins. (Whether Lewis thinks any robust imaginative
undertaking is required here is unclear, but the general features of
this particular kind of conceivability argument is our interest here.)
And, since we can equally well imagine living the life of the
firstborn twin and that of the second-born twin, while holding the
qualitative character of the world fixed, it seems that we can
successfully imagine possibilities that differ only
haecceitistically.
Another kind of conceivability argument, like the Double case
offered above, requires us to imagine our nonexistence in a world
qualitatively indiscernible from actuality. Different views of
imagination will deliver importantly different verdicts about how, if
at all, we might succeed in this imaginative undertaking. (It is hard,
for example, to see how we might successfully imagine our own
nonexistence from the inside.) But, among others, Bricker (2007: 130)
suggests that a plausible view of de re modality must
accommodate the possibility of oneself failing to exist even while
things are qualitatively just as they actually are. (On
Bricker’s view, this requires only a sufficiently rich account
of counterpart relations rather than, say, qualitatively indiscernible
possible worlds. On imagining one’s own nonexistence, see
Nichols (2007).)
A final conceivability argument usefully illustrates the intuitive
difference between arguments that rely solely upon outside imagination
and those invoking inside imagination. Adams (1979: 22) presents the
following conceivability argument:
Adams explicitly marks the move from outside to inside imagination,
noting that the haecceitistic difference “becomes vividly
clear” when we imagine the relevant states of affairs from the
perspective of the individuals involved. (See Melia (1999: 650) for a
similar argument.)
If we take \(Q\) to be a purely qualitative description of the
relevant states of affairs, we can present a more formal rendering of
Adams’ conceivability argument:
In addressing these and other conceivability arguments for
haecceitism, anti-haecceitists have two primary lines of
defense. According to the first kind of response, the evidential
connection between conceivability and possibility is
rejected—e.g., by denying that conceivability of the relevant
state of affairs is grounds for taking the state of affairs in
question to be possible. Responses of this sort reject premises like
P3 or P4 and, in doing so, take sides on a key issue in modal
epistemology.
According to a second line of response, the apparent conceivability
of the relevant states of affairs is merely apparent. To this end, the
anti-haecceitist denies that individuals successfully conceive of or
imagine the states of affairs required to establish
haecceitism. Responses of this sort hold agents to be mistaken about
the content of their imaginings and, as a consequence, mistaken in
believing themselves to conceive of states of affairs that differ
haecceitistically. Responses of this sort reject premises P1 or P2 or
their analogues.
Chisholm’s Paradox, presented in Chisholm (1967), begins
innocuously enough. Suppose that individuals are identical across
possible worlds such that de re modal claims like “Fred
could have been taller” are true only in case there is some
possible world where the very same individual, in this case, Fred, is
taller than he is in the actual world. Now, consider that two actual
individuals, Adam and Noah, could have had slightly different
qualitative properties. For example, Adam, instead of dying at age
930, could have died at age 931. Similarly, Noah, instead of dying at
age 950, could have died at age 949. If Adam and Noah can tolerate
these incremental “changes” to each of their qualitative
profiles, it seems that had they been a different way than they
actually are, they could have tolerated even further incremental
changes.
Now, if we allow incremental possible changes to the ways that Adam
and Noah could have been and accept the transitivity of identity, we
are committed to a finite series of incremental changes that ends in a
possible world where Adam has all the qualitative properties Noah
actually has and Noah has all the qualitative properties that Adam
actually has. This is because the relevant iterated modal claim
“Adam could have been such that he could have been such that he
could have been such” is, by our initial assumption, true in
virtue of one and the same individual, Adam, existing at different
possible worlds. So, if Adam and Noah could be incrementally different
and the individuals they could have been could also be incrementally
different, we must accept that Adam and Noah could “swap”
their respective qualitative properties. And, if so, there is a
maximal possibility that differs from actuality only in haecceitistic
terms—that is, it differs only in terms of which individuals
instantiate which qualitative profiles.
We can clarify Chisholm’s Paradox as a particular schema of
modal inference. This schema involves a two-place predicate that
relates an individual and either their actual qualitative properties
(represented as \(p_{1})\) or their possible qualitative properties
(represented as successors up to \(p_{n})\), where differences between
\(p_{X}\) and \(p_{X+1}\) are small increments of qualitative
properties. In this way, Chisholm’s Paradox purports to
establish that a particular individual might have had different
qualitative properties and, through iteration and the transitivity of
identity, that it might have had precisely the qualitative properties
some other individual actually has. Following Salmon (1986) and Forbes
(1984), we can present Chisholm’s Paradox as follows:
In the version presented in Chisholm (1967), \(M\) is the
relation instantiates each member of; \(a\) is the individual
Adam; \(p_{1}\) is the set of Adam’s actual qualitative
properties; \(p_{n}\) is the set of Noah’s actual qualitative
properties. Chisholm’s Paradox therefore involves
If Chisholm’s Paradox is sound, the conclusion that Adam
could occupy Noah’s qualitative role entails haecceitism. This
is because Noah’s qualitative properties include, not only
Noah’s intrinsic properties, but also Noah’s extrinsic
properties (e.g., being such that there are seven
continents), which suffice to fix the qualitative character of
the world. As result, if Adam could instantiate Noah’s actual
qualitative properties, then the world in which he does so must be
qualitatively just like the actual world. Such a possibility therefore
entails that some maximal possibilities differ haecceitistically.
If successful, Chisholm’s Paradox seems to establish not only
haecceitism, but also an extreme form of
“anti-essentialism” like extreme haecceitism. Since we can
construct a “Chisholm-sequence” with any two individuals,
unqualified endorsement of Chisholm’s Paradox guarantees that,
for any individuals, there is a possible world where those individuals
swap their qualitative profiles. For instance, there would be a
possible world where Obama occupies the qualitative profile of the
Eiffel Tower and vice versa. As a result, neither the Eiffel
Tower nor Obama can have any distinctive qualitative properties
essentially.
While some have taken haecceitism and this anti-essentialism (or
“minimal essentialism”) to be a natural package, it is
important to note that they are separate conclusions. One might reject
certain instances of Chisholm’s Paradox that require teacups to
swap qualitative roles with tornadoes, but admit that other instances
succeed in showing that distinct teacups might have swapped
qualitative roles. Despite this, responses to Chisholm’s Paradox
are typically motivated by efforts to sustain a commitment to
essentialism rather than avoid commitment to haecceitism. To this end,
some follow Salmon (1986) in holding the assumption of an
\(\mathbf{S5}\) modal logic that validates \(\Diamond P\rightarrow
\Box \Diamond P\) as the underlying culprit. (Salmon (1989, 1993)
rejects, not only \(\mathbf{S5}\), but \(\mathbf{S4}\) and
\(\mathbf{B}\) axioms.) Such responses opt for a weaker logic that
avoids (at least) the transitivity of the accessibility relation
between possible worlds. Other responses turn on the finer points
of de re representation. For example, while Lewis’
counterpart theory can, in non-standard contexts, accommodate
anti-essentialism, the fact that our ordinary contextual standards
rule out extreme de re possibilities is explained by the
intransitivity of the counterpart relation between
individuals. Another potential response to Chisholm’s Paradox
would be akin to those offered in dealing with
the sorites—e.g., holding that some premises of
Chisholm’s Paradox are false even while we are in no position to
specify precisely which ones. Yet another line of response takes
Chisholm’s Paradox to deliver the correct verdict: there are no
interesting qualitative essential properties of individuals. For
example, some like Mackie (2006) take Chisholm’s Paradox to lend
support to a minimal essentialist view, according to which any object
might occupy any given qualitative role, provided it retains its
non-qualitative haecceity.
This section surveys arguments for anti-haecceitism. It is worth
noting, however, that for many anti-haecceitists, the denial that any
maximal possibilities differ haecceitistically issues from a broader
commitment regarding ontology or modality. (Anti-haecceitists include
Dasgupta (2009), Forbes (1985), and Robinson (1989: 400).) Consider,
for example, generalism, according to which there are no
individuals. Instead, the world is exhaustively general, comprising
facts about the distribution of qualitative properties without any
facts about individuals. Since haecceitism presupposes that there are
maximal possibilities that differ solely regarding the identity of
individuals, generalism thereby rules out haecceitism. (On generalism,
see Dasgupta (2009) and Turner (forthcoming).) Similarly,
necessitarians hold that there are no non-actual maximal
possibilities. Consequently, all truths are necessarily true, so there
is only one way things could have been. And, since haecceitism
requires that there are distinct maximal possibilities,
necessitarianism rules out haecceitism. Other broad metaphysical
commitments have also been claimed to support
anti-haecceitism. (Armstrong (1989: 57–61) claims that
anti-haecceitism best squares with his antecedent naturalist and
combinatorialist commitments.) And, just as modal intuition is
commonly taken as the grounds for endorsing haecceitism, modal
intuition is very often taken as grounds for endorsing
anti-haecceitism. For example, while Hofweber (2005: 27) is officially
neutral on haecceitism, he nicely summarizes the standard
anti-haecceitist appeal to modal intuition:
Anti-haecceitists who appeal to modal intuitions in this way owe
some response to the arguments set out in the previous
section. Moreover, since modal intuitions of haecceitists and
anti-haecceitists are at direct odds, assessing the evidential weight
and proper assessment of these intuitions points towards deep
methodological waters. But, rather than taking up these issues, it
will be useful to focus on two direct lines of arguments for
anti-haecceitism.
One important argument against haecceitism turns on issues about
the grounding of identity facts—i.e., facts about the identity
of individuals. Set out in Forbes (1985: 128), this argument holds
haecceitism to require what we can call bare identity facts,
where such facts concern the identity of individuals but are not
grounded in the qualitative features of the world. Since these
identity facts can vary without any difference in qualitative
character, they are alleged to resist metaphysical explanation. On
this front, Forbes remarks as follows:
On one construal of Forbes’ argument, haecceitistic
differences are unintelligible and therefore objectionable because all
identity facts must be grounded in facts about the qualitative
character of the world. Accordingly, Forbes’ argument requires a
commitment to the sufficiency of qualitative facts to account for all
facts about the identity of individuals. Such a commitment rules out
haecceitistic differences, but raises questions about the tenability
of the relevant constraint on identity facts. What, if anything, can
be taken to ground the facts about the identity of qualitative
properties? And, if there are at least some ungrounded identity facts,
what precisely makes bare identity facts objectionable? (On
Forbes’ argument, see Bricker (1988), Yablo (1988), and Mackie
(2007).) And, while the denial of bare identities is not strictly
equivalent to the denial of haecceitism, it is plainly a very small
step from the former to the latter. Accordingly, some commentators
have raised concerns that an argument for anti-haecceitism from the
denial of bare identities is tantamount to begging the question. More
generally, if one accepts the ban on bare identity facts, the
challenge arises of explaining how all identity facts might be
grounded in qualitative facts without doing violence to our modal
intuitions.
The Principle of the Identity of Indiscernibles (hereafter, PII)
holds that, if any objects share all the same properties, these
objects are identical. To avoid triviality, PII is typically
interpreted with the domain of properties restricted to what are
usually taken to be qualitative properties. (On PII, see
Rodriguez-Pererya (2010), Hawley (2009) and Della Rocca (2005).)
Since haecceitistic differences concern qualitatively indiscernible
possibilities, it is tempting to think that, since PII rules out the
existence of qualitatively indiscernible objects, it thereby
undermines haecceitism. Assessing this line of argument raises issues
about the proper formulation of PII as well as radically different
views about the nature of possible worlds. To see how these issues
hang together, it is useful to first consider how PII might be used to
argue against haecceitism within the context of Lewisian Modal
Realism. In doing so, two versions of PII need to be
distinguished.
According to the first version regarding objects within a given
world, PII-Objects, there are no qualitatively indiscernible
objects within a single possible world. PII-Objects therefore rules
out states of affairs like those suggested in Black (1952) involving
qualitatively indiscernible iron spheres. Although PII-Objects ensures
that no object has a qualitatively indiscernible worldmate, it is
neutral on whether or not there are qualitatively indiscernible
worlds, leaving open whether there are distinct yet qualitatively
indiscernible worlds.
A second version of PII, PII-Worlds, concerns possible
worlds themselves rather than the individuals within them. It holds
that there are no distinct yet qualitatively indiscernible worlds, but
it is neutral on whether there are qualitatively indiscernible
individuals within a single world. PII-Worlds therefore leaves open
whether there are worlds like Blacks’ two sphere scenario in
which there are distinct qualitatively indiscernible objects.
Having now distinguished these principles, we can consider whether
either provides an argument against haecceitism. As Lewis (1986: 224)
notes, PII-Objects leaves haecceitism untouched, since it is
compatible with the possibility of qualitatively indiscernible worlds
that differ haecceitistically. And, while PII-Worlds rules out
qualitatively indiscernible worlds rather than objects within worlds,
Lewis’ cheap haecceitism still permits the representation of
maximal possibilities that differ haecceitistically even without
positing qualitatively indiscernible worlds. It looks, then, like PII
is not a plausible starting point for a case against Possibility
Haecceitism within Lewisian Modal Realism.
Does an argument against haecceitism on the basis of PII fare any
better within an ersatz view of possible worlds? It’s tough to
say. As noted in Section One, different versions of ersatzism deliver
different verdicts about whether possible worlds are qualitatively
indiscernible from one another. For example, if one holds that all
propositions are qualitatively indiscernible, an unrestricted
application of PII will cause broad problems for such a
view—e.g., by ruling out the existence of more than a single
possible world. On other ersatzist views, according to which possible
worlds have distinctive qualitative characters even while they
represent maximal possibilities that differ haecceitistically, PII
will not rule out a commitment to haecceitism. In light of these
consequences, PII would need to be applied, not to the possible worlds
of the ersatzist, but, rather, to the possibilities they
represent. And, of course, if the ersatzist denies that there are
maximal possibilities that differ without differing qualitatively,
they reject haecceitism. But, since the relevant principle used to
undercut haecceitism is not, strictly speaking, PII regarding objects
or worlds but instead possibilities, it is unclear whether it merely
collapses into the straightforward denial of haecceitism. A worry,
then, is that the version of PII that suffices to undercut haecceitism
is so close to the thesis of anti-haecceitism that any argument that
proceeds from such a principle merely begs the question. In addition,
it is unclear if such a principle can be plausibly motivated without
leading to objectionable modal commitments by requiring one to reject
the kinds of possibilities that Black (1952) notes. (On the case for
Black-style possibilities involving qualitatively indiscernible
objects, see Adams (1979: 17–19).)
The preceding arguments aim to show that there are no haecceitistic
differences of any kind between maximal possibilities. Other arguments
are narrower in scope and aim to establish a weaker thesis: that
certain kinds of haecceitistic differences are spurious. If
successful, these arguments will rule out only some kinds of
haecceitistic differences while falling short of providing a perfectly
general case against haecceitism. To get a sense of restricted or
domain-specific (anti-)haecceitisms, it will be useful to focus on one
example where restricted, domain-specific theses of haecceitism or
anti-haecceitism play a notable role in a core metaphysical
debate.
Consider the kind of possibility exploited in a rough approximation
of Leibniz’s shift argument against absolute space: If absolute
space exists, then there is a non-actual possibility, according to
which all actual objects are uniformly shifted five feet from their
actual spatial positions. Such a possibility—let us
suppose—differs only haecceitistically from actuality. (For more
on haecceitism and spacetime, see Section 7 and the references
therein. On Leibnizian shift arguments, see Russell (2014).)
In considering this alleged possibility, a range of responses are
available: For those who believe realism about space requires
accepting such possibilities, but find such possibilities incredible,
the denial of absolute space is an available response. For other
realists about absolute space unbothered by haecceitistic differences,
the possibility in question poses no challenge. Still others might
retain realism about absolute space yet deny this apparent possibility
is a genuine one. The most natural strategy here is to claim that
certain kinds of haecceitistic differences—specifically, those
that involve merely a shift in spatial position—do not
correspond to genuinely distinct possibilities. Importantly, this
third strategy does not rule out haecceitistic differences per
se, but requires at least a domain-specific anti-haecceitism,
according to which there are no haecceitistic differences regarding
regions of absolute space.
In response to arguments that broach the question of haecceitism in
a limited domain, useful debate requires us to distinguish the scope
of different versions of haecceitism and the distinctive motivations
of domain-specific (anti-)haecceitisms. Naturally, one might accept
certain kinds of haecceitistic differences while rejecting
others. Moreover, almost any haecceitist will reject at least some
putative haecceitistic differences. For example, while one might
accept possibilities according to which two twins swap qualitative
roles, one might deny that you and Obama could swap their respective
roles. In addition, even those who accept these haecceitistic
differences regarding humans will likely deny that you might have
swapped qualitative roles with your singleton set or some other
mathematical entity. The question that arises for those unswayed by
blanket arguments against haecceitism is to determine which putative
haecceitistic differences between possibilities are to be admitted. It
is, however, no small matter to adequately characterize the scope of
haecceitistic differences one admits. For, while a ban on
haecceitistic differences regarding certain ontological categories
(e.g., spatial regions) is easy enough to state, nuanced views that
accept only certain kinds of haecceitistic differences concerning
material objects are challenging to plausibly or definitively
formulate. In this way, characterizing this or that view as committed
to haecceitism simpliciter can prove unhelpful without a
specification of the precise haecceitistic differences admitted.
Haecceitism has consequences for a range of issues in metaphysics
and the philosophy of language. This section provides a brief overview
of some of the ways in which haecceitism proves most significant.
Quidditism is the property-theoretic analogue of
haecceitism. (Armstrong (1989: 59) seems to coin the term
‘quidditism.’) But, while distinctively haecceitistic
possibilities involve individuals being “swapped” or
“replaced” without any qualitative difference,
distinctively quidditistic possibilities involve properties swapping
or replacing one another in the world’s causal-nomic
structure. If, for example, there is a maximal possibility, otherwise
indiscernible from actuality, where mass and charge
swap their respective causal-nomic roles (e.g., where objects resist
acceleration in virtue of their charge), this maximal possibility
would differ quidditistically from actuality. Similarly, if there is a
maximal possibility according to which all actual causal-nomic facts
are the same except that some actually uninstantiated
property, schmass, occupies the causal and nomic role
of mass, this maximal possibility would also differ
quidditistically from actuality. (Typically, quidditism is taken as a
thesis about fundamental or “sparse” properties
like mass and charge rather than as a thesis about
all properties whatsoever.)
Like haecceitism, quidditism’s proper formulation is
contentious and depends heavily upon background metaphysical
assumptions. Some formulations of quidditism invoke either maximal
possibilities or possible worlds, while modalist formulations of
quidditism do without either resource. Additionally, there is a
quidditistic analogue of cheap haecceitism, according to which a given
possible world represents various maximal possibilities that differ
only quidditistically. (On formulations of quidditism and property
counterpart theory, see Hawthorne (2002b) and Heller (2002,
2005).)
Arguments for quidditism have notable parallels with arguments for
haecceitism. Some quidditists suggest that our pedestrian modal
judgments support quidditism (see, e.g., Lewis (2009: 209), while
other defenses of quidditism can appeal to the apparent conceivability
of scenarios where properties swap their causal-nomic
roles. Additionally, Bird (2007: 74–76) considers but rejects a
property-theoretic analogue of Chisholm’s Paradox that, if
successful, establishes quidditism. A different line of argument,
which has no direct analogue in the case of haecceitism, appeals to
combinatorial principles regarding the nature of modality. These
combinatorial principles hold that various permutations of fundamental
properties across, say, causal nomic roles, correspond to distinct
maximal possibilities, which, if genuine, would differ only
quidditistically. (See Lewis (2009: 209) for the combinatorial
argument and Locke (2010) and Schaffer (2005: 10) for discussion.)
Arguments against quidditism also appeal to modal intuitions. Black
(2000: 94) says, for example, that quidditistic differences are
“distinctions which my intuitions tell me are distinctions
without differences… My intuition is that to play the
nomological role of some colour or flavour is to be that colour or
flavour, at that the idea of two qualities swapping nomological roles
is thus unintelligible.” Other anti-quidditist arguments turn on
its purported epistemological consequences. On this front, some
anti-quidditists (as well as some quidditists) hold that quidditism
entails that we are irremediably ignorant of the distribution of the
world’s fundamental properties. (Lewis (2009) labels the
resulting view, “Ramseyan Humility.” On quidditism and
humility, see also Bird (2007: 79), Hawthorne (2002b), Locke (2009),
Schaffer (2005), Shoemaker (1980), and Whittle (2006).) Additional
complaints and concerns about quidditism are diverse in
character. Locke (2012) discusses Ockhamist worries about the ontology
of quidditism and, specifically, second-order quiddities. Whittle
(2006) worries about the epiphenomenal intrinsic nature of properties,
given quidditism’s alleged modal consequences. Black (2000)
offers a cardinality argument against quidditism, which holds its
modal commitments to demand the existence of proper class-many
possible worlds. Hawthorne (2002b) considers whether quidditism might
ultimately require a kind of “hyperstructuralism”,
according to which absolutely any property might swap roles with any
other property including the relation of causal necessitation
itself. The resulting bizarre possibilities—e.g.,
where mass and causal necessitation swap
roles—would deliver a reductio of quidditism should
they prove unavoidable.
Although haecceitism and quidditism are independent theses, since
neither strictly entails the other, their evidential relationship is
an interesting one. Given the parallels between the arguments for and
against them, it is unclear whether haecceitists ought to be
quidditists and vice versa or if the metaphysical
disanalogies between properties and individuals justifying endorsing
one but not the other. (On the analogies and disanalogies between
haecceitism and quidditism, see Schaffer (2005: 15–16).)
Debates about personal identity relate to haecceitism in diverse
and complex ways. Perhaps most notably, some arguments for the
“Simple View” of personal identity (alternatively, the
“Further Fact view”), according to which facts about the
identity of persons over time are irreducible and non-qualitative, are
plausibly taken as arguments for haecceitism. (On anti-reductionism
and the Simple View, see Parfit (1984: 210) and Olson (2012).) These
arguments exploit so-called “fission cases”, which involve
an individual that apparently splits into distinct individuals but
without principled grounds for identifying one rather than another of
the post-fission individuals with the pre-fission
individual. According to some proponents of the Simple View, it seems
possible that that the pre-fission individual be identical to one of
the post-fission individuals while, in other physically and
psychologically indiscernible worlds, the pre-fission individual is
identical to an apparently different post-fission individual. If,
however, these are each genuine possibilities, facts about the
identity of persons over time do not supervene upon any physical or
psychological facts. And, since these are the qualitative facts
typically held to be relevant to personal identity over time, such
cases suggest that facts about personal identity over time do not
supervene upon qualitative features. In this way, the Simple View
lends support to the more general thesis that non-qualitative facts
about the identity of persons do not supervene upon qualitative
facts.
In addition to its connection to the Simple View, a broader
methodological connection unites haecceitism and inquiries into
personal identity: a focus on the qualitative/non-qualitative
distinction. In debates about personal identity, appeal to exclusively
qualitative properties and relations (e.g., having such-and-such
psychological features) rather than non-qualitative properties
and relations (e.g., having Bob’s memories) is commonly
taken as a constraint on a genuinely reductive analysis of personal
identity over time. So, just as haecceitism requires clarifying the
nature of this metaphysical distinction, criteria for distinguishing
the reductive and non-reductive approaches to personal identity also
rely heavily on the idea that certain properties are uniquely tied to
the identity of individuals. On the connection between haecceitism,
the Simple View, and (anti-)reductionist approaches to personal
identity, see Ninan (2009).
The connection between haecceitism and physicalism is
controversial. If we understand physicalism as the unqualified thesis
that physical properties like mass and charge
exhaustively fix all other properties, haecceitistic differences
present a prima facie challenge. For, if some worlds differ
haecceitistically but are alike with respect to the distribution of
physical properties, then, contrary to physicalism, possible worlds or
maximal possibilities can be physically indiscernible yet fail to be
indiscernible simpliciter. Moreover, some follow Hofweber
(2005) in taking the irreducibility of haecceities and other
non-qualitative properties to physical properties to constitute a
challenge to more sophisticated conceptions of physicalism. (See Daly
and Liggins (2012) and Almotahari and Rochford (2012) on
Hofweber’s argument. See Ninan (2009: 433) on haecceitism and
its relation to physicalism.)
A different assessment denies that haecceitism and physicalism are
in tension with one another by taking the scope of physicalism to be
restricted to qualitative properties. So understood, haecceitism has
no significance for the fate of physicalism, since haecceitistic
differences are purely non-qualitative in character. For those who
characterize physicalism as the thesis that worlds that are physical
duplicates of one another are duplicates simpliciter, this
response is especially plausible, since talk of
“duplication” is typically restricted to qualitative
properties. (See Stoljar (2010: 136) on the options for formulating
physicalism.)
Given the complex interaction between haecceitism and physicalism,
a natural strategy for circumventing this issue simply sets aside the
question of haecceitism in investigating the status of
physicalism. For example, in characterizing physicalism, Chalmers
(1996: 367) says: “I will always be considering worlds
‘qualitatively’, and abstracting away from question of
‘haecceity.’ That is, I will count two worlds that are
qualitatively identical as identical and will not be concerned with
questions about whether individuals in those worlds might have
different ‘identities.’” The merits of bracketing
the uncertain compatibility of haecceitism and physicalism are
significant, but, for views that do hold them to be incompatible, no
such strategy will ultimately prove plausible.
The Hole Argument against substantivalism purports to show that,
given some auxiliary assumptions, substantivalism illicitly requires
the truth of indeterminism. (See Norton’s entry on the Hole
Argument.) Defenders of the Hole Argument take this commitment to
indeterminism to be a consequence of accepting certain models of
general relativity as genuinely distinct possibilities for
substantival spacetime. The possible models in question are typically
held to differ only haecceitistically, so, for substantivalists,
anti-haecceitism provides a route for rejecting the possibilities that
are alleged to require indeterminism. For committed haecceitists who
endorse substantivalism, some alternative strategy is required. One
available option is to revise the relevant conception of determinism
by taking it as a thesis about qualitatively discernible possibilities
rather than possibilities in general. On the resulting revision,
indeterminism requires the availability of qualitatively discernible
possibilities. As a consequence, admitting possibilities that differ
only haecceitistically would have no implications for the status of
determinism. Careful attention to the status and scope of haecceitism
therefore proves crucial for assessing this leading argument against
substantivalism.
In addition to Norton’s entry on the Hole Argument, see
Pooley (2006) for a defense of anti-haecceitism. See Dasgupta (MS) and
Russell (2013b) on anti-haecceitism about spacetime, and Brighouse
(1994, 1997) and Melia (2009) on haecceitism and determinism.
Haecceitism informs several issues in the philosophy of language
primarily through its conventional connection to realism about
haecceities. Since haecceities uniquely correspond to individuals,
realists about haecceities have a distinctive metaphysical resource
for the development of semantic theories. In addition, for realists
about haecceities who believe that all properties exist necessarily,
haecceities of nonexistent individuals provide an especially natural
metaphysical surrogate when explaining the possibility of true and
meaningful claims about the individuals in question. So, for example,
if one holds that singular terms like ‘Obama’ contribute
the haecceity being Obama to the singular proposition expressed by
sentences that include ‘Obama’, one can make sense of the
truth and meaningfulness of claims regarding Obama in worlds in which
Obama does not exist. (On this strategy, see Plantinga (1978: 132).)
The general strategy of using haecceities as metaphysical surrogates
for individuals has surfaced in debates about the philosophy of time,
where, e.g., Markosian (2004: 54–56), considers appropriating
haecceities of non-present individuals to address objections to
presentism.
Some appeals to haecceities in the philosophy of language are more
limited and nuanced—e.g., Hawthorne and Manley (2012: 204)
consider the deployment of haecceities and other non-qualitative
properties in a semantics for demonstratives—while other
applications are more general in scope—e.g., analyses of de
re senses or individual concepts in terms of haecceities. (For
discussion, see Chisholm (1976: 29).)