 Born in London in 1871, the eldest child of Walter Stennett
Prichard (a solicitor) and his wife Lucy, Harold Prichard attended
Clifton College in Bristol and was admitted to New College, Oxford to
study mathematics. But after taking First Class honours in
mathematical moderations (preliminary examinations) in 1891, he
studied Greats (ancient history and philosophy) taking First Class
Honours in 1894. He also played tennis for Oxford against
Cambridge. On leaving Oxford he spent a brief period working for a
firm of solicitors in London, before returning to Oxford where he
spent the rest of his life, first as Fellow of Hertford College
(1895–8) and then of Trinity College (1898–1924). He took
early retirement from Trinity in 1924 on grounds of temporary
ill-health, but recovered and was elected to the White’s Professorship
of Moral Philosophy in 1928. He retired in 1937 and died in 1947.
Prichard is mainly known for his work in moral philosophy, but the
first of his very few publications were in epistemology. His main
intellectual debt was to his teacher John Cook Wilson, whose thinking
centered on topics in epistemology and what would now be called
philosophical logic, rather than in ethics. In 1909 Prichard published
his only book, Kant’s Theory of Knowledge, which was an
account of Kant’s Transcendental Idealism. This book criticized
Kant severely, and Prichard acknowledges that his main arguments
against Kant originated from Cook Wilson. The book’s main
conclusion is that ‘Knowledge is sui generis and
therefore a ‘theory’ of knowledge is impossible. Knowledge
is knowledge, and any attempt to state it in terms of something else
must end in describing something which is not knowledge’ (p.
245). This view that a ‘theory’ of knowledge is impossible
has its analogue in Prichard’s later argument that there can be
no philosophical account of moral obligation of the sort that moral
philosophers have traditionally tried to provide.
Cook Wilson’s influence is also evident in Prichard’s argument against
Kant’s view that we cannot know things in themselves, but only know
them as they present themselves, or appear, to us. Prichard inherits
from Cook Wilson the view that any state of mind that affects the
nature of its presentations cannot be knowledge.  Knowledge can only
be of what it does not affect; its object must be entirely
independent. In Kant’s terms, then, the only possible objects of
knowledge are things in themselves. Appearances, assuming that they
are objects, cannot be known at all, but must be the object of some
other state of mind.
But appearances are not objects. When two lines appear to converge,
there is, we might say, an appearance of convergence here, but we
should not understand this as the two lines presenting a appearance
that is convergent. Appearances can be neither convergent, nor
divergent; and they cannot be parallel either. More generally, spatial
properties cannot be properties of appearances, since no appearance
can be great or small, square or round, bent or straight. Prichard
therefore thinks of the noun ‘appearance’ is a source of
confusion, because it leads us to think of appearances as objects with
their own ‘phenomenal’ properties, and thereby to ascribe
to them properties that really belong (or perhaps only appear to
belong) to the object that so appears. Having fallen victim to this
mistake, we then make the further mistake of supposing that we can
never cognize objects as they are, but only as they appear to be, and
we understand this last as cognition of the appearances rather than of
the objects. But an object can of course be the way it appears to be,
and when it is, its so appearing makes it possible for us to know that
it is so. So in knowing how things appear we sometimes know how they
are - indeed, how they are ‘in themselves’.
The view that knowledge must be of what is independent is the second
prong of Prichard’s persistent attacks on the notion of a sense-datum
(and thereby on Russell, Moore and Price). A sense-datum, he says, is
supposed to be something of whose existence we know in every case of
perception. But sense-data are not supposed to have an independent
existence, and therefore the very conception of a sense-datum involves
a contradiction. As Prichard came to see it, the basic mistake made by
defenders of a sense-datum theory is that of supposing that perceiving
is a form of knowing; all the other errors flow from this (Prichard
1938; see also his 1909, p. 99).
Prichard continued to work and to lecture on topics in epistemology,
in particular perception. He gave lectures on Modern Philosophy
(Descartes, Locke, Berkeley and Hume) every year for the first five
years of his tenure of the White’s Professorship. Indeed he
lectured as often on these topics as on moral philosophy. He wrote on
the perception of movement and the apprehension of time. He said,
characteristically, that ‘the hearing a sound – a sound
having as such a duration – and in general what is called the
perceiving anything which has a duration – is absolutely
underivative and cannot be resolved into anything else’
(Knowledge and Perception ed. Ross, 48). I cannot resist
quoting also a passage from a lecture on perception which was not
published in Prichard’s lifetime, with the warning that Prichard
was known to trail his coat in lectures, in the hope of generating
lively discussion (ibid., 59–60). ‘For as soon as
we compare our states or processes of seeing with one another or with
other states or processes of perceiving we have to allow that we do
not see bodies. For example, it is certain that if
we see bodies we in some cases see a body move, but it is also
certain that we cannot possibly ever see a body move; for in
spite of what the followers of Einstein say, motion is, and is always
really thought of as, absolute, relative motion being a contradiction
in terms. (I should like, incidentally, but without any sense of
shame, to offer this statement as a specimen of one of the few
statements of things which we can really be said to know.)
And, motion being absolute, when we are said to be seeing a body move,
we cannot possibly be really doing so, since a stationary body would
present precisely the same appearance to us, provided our body was
moving in a certain way, so that in that case we should be seeing a
body move although in fact it was stationary.’
Prichard was renowned in Oxford (and not only among philosophers)
for the simplicity and clarity of his writing style, though he
published so little of what he wrote. There are also occasional moments
of wry humour such as his comment in a commemorative piece on Joseph:
‘His best memorial, unlike that of many other teachers, perhaps
consists in the books that his pupils refrained from writing.’
Prichard is standing here in a venerable Oxford tradition of not
publishing oneself and discouraging others either by example and
precept (Cook Wilson, Prichard – but not in fact Joseph) or by
fear (Austin). Prichard’s daughter wrote: ‘My father was
always so reluctant to publish’ (quoted in MacAdam 2002, xv).
Finally, some anecdotes and personal testimony:
Austin was much impressed by Prichard, whom he thought the most
rigorous and minute thinker in Oxford (Berlin, 1973, 2). J. O. Urmson
told me that Austin had attended Prichard’s lectures as an
undergraduate in the early 1930s, sat right at the front and asked very
many questions. Eventually Prichard wrote to Austin’s tutor in
Balliol (I’m not sure who that was), asking him to persuade
Austin either not to ask so many questions, or not to attend at all.
But Austin did neither of these things. Urmson himself wrote ‘As
a member of the very last generation of undergraduates to attend
Prichard’s lectures and informal instruction, I learnt to admire
his patience as a teacher, his philosophical acuity and, above all, his
quite exceptional intellectual honesty and independence.’ (This
is in his introduction to his Prichard collection, reprinted in
MacAdam, p. x.)
C. D. Broad called Prichard ‘a man of immense ability whom I
have always regarded as the Oxford Moore’ (Cheney 1971, 14). It
is also worth reporting Broad’s remarks about Prichard’s
examination of T. H. Green: ‘Seldom can the floor have been more
thoroughly wiped with the remains of one who was at one time commonly
regarded as a great thinker and who still enjoys a considerable
reputation in some circles’ (1950, 557). The realist backlash
against nineteenth century Oxford Idealism was complete.
Wittgenstein came to speak in Oxford in 1947, just before Prichard’s
death. He had said he did not want to read a paper, but was willing to
respond to a paper given by some agreeable student. O. P. Wood, who
was still an undergraduate (at Corpus Christi) was set up as the fall
guy, and read a paper on the Cogito. Wittgenstein, using the
paper as a springboard for his own ideas, responded at
length. Prichard made several interventions, on each occasion very
deliberately mispronouncing Wittgenstein’s name as
Whittgensteen. Finally he rose again and said, in his high reedy voice
‘Mr. Whittgensteen, Mr. Whittgensteen, you have not answered the
question. Cogito ergo sum – I think therefore I am. Is
it true, Mr Whittgensteen, is it true – I think therefore I
am?’. Wittgenstein, exasperated, turned very icy and replied
‘I think this is a very foolish old man; so I am –
what?’. (This story comes from Peter Hacker, who heard it
from two people who were there, J. O. Urmson and H. L. A. Hart. Hart
thought that Wittgenstein’s reply was brilliant repartee; Urmson
thought it unforgivably rude.)
[All simple page references from now on will be to the MacAdam 2002
edition of Prichard’s work.]
Prichard starts where many moral philosophers never tread: from an
account of what an act is. For him, an act is the origination of a
state of affairs. That is, to act is to originate a state of affairs.
The agent is the originator.
What makes an act, so conceived, either right or wrong? Prichard
holds that the rightness of an act is ‘constituted’ by a
combination of two things:
What this means is that a right act is made right by such a
combination of features. An example might be that of an act made right
by being the origination of a certain change, say, the educating of a
young person, and the relation between the agent and that person, say,
his being her parent. However Prichard is pretty catholic about what is
to count as a relation, since he allows common humanity to count as
such: ‘the obligation not to hurt the feelings of another
involves no special relation of us to that other, i.e. no relation
other than that of our both being men, and men in one and the same
world’ (13). So a ‘definite’ relation need not be a
‘special’ relation.
 There is a question what Prichard meant to exclude by his claim
about what constitutes the rightness of an act. One thing he
definitely meant to exclude was that an act can be made right merely
by the goodness of its consequences. He argues (216–17) that
this alone cannot be sufficient to constitute an act as right. Take an
act whose consequence will be an increase in someone’s patience, which
is good. If that someone is oneself, one has a duty to do it, Prichard
claims; if it is someone else, one also has a duty to act in that way
but it is a different duty. So the mere goodness of the consequence is
insufficient to render an act a duty. We need also to know what the
relevant ‘definite relation’ is.
As it stands, however, all this is compatible with the view that the
rightness of an act is (at least capable of being) constituted by this
combination:
But in my view this reading of Prichard is wrong; it would involve
two mistakes. The first, less subtle but still enticing, is to suppose
that the value of the state of affairs originated is at least part of
what we would now call the ‘ground’ of the relevant duty
– part of what makes the action a duty. The second, more subtle,
is to suppose that the phrase ‘state of affairs originated’
refers to the consequences of the action rather than to the nature of
the action itself. I will comment on the first of these supposed
mistakes immediately, and on the second later.
 One might be forgiven for thinking that Prichard is a sort of
agent-relative consequentialist. He says that ‘unless the effect
of an act were in some way good, there would be no obligation to
produce it, i.e. the goodness of the thing produced is a
presupposition of the obligation to produce it’ (2). And he says
that a moral principle specifies two things, (a) a good thing which
the action will produce and (b) a definite relation…’
(4). And in his most famous published article he writes ‘At best
it can only be maintained that there is this element of truth in the
Utilitarian view, that unless we recognized that something which an
act will originate is good, we should not recognize that we ought to
do the action’ (10). I take it, however, that it is one thing to
specify as part of the ground something that is good, and another to
say that its goodness is itself part of the ground, and that
Prichard’s choice of the word ‘presupposition’ was well
advised. (Not all necessary conditions for the rightness of an act are
parts of the ground for that rightness; consider the role of the fact
that there is nothing else that one should be doing instead.) And I
would offer in support of this reading the following sentence from the
same paper: ‘we do not come to appreciate an obligation by an
argument, i.e.  by a process of non-moral thinking, and in particular
we do not do so by an argument of which a premiss is the ethical but
not moral activity of appreciating the goodness either of the act or
of a consequence of the act, i.e. our sense of the rightness of an act
is not a conclusion from our appreciation of the goodness either of it
or of anything else’ (13-14). Note the words ‘a
premiss’ in this sentence.
Why did Prichard reject all such appeals to value? I think his main
point is similar in style to the main ‘argument’ of
Berkeley’s Principles §3. ‘Suppose we ask ourselves whether
our sense that we ought to pay our debts or to tell the truth arises
from our recognition that in doing so we would be originating something
good … We at once and without hesitation answer
“No”’ (10). But he does try to support this claim by
argument. For instance, it might be held that the reasoning that runs
‘This would be the repayment of a debt, and one which I
voluntarily incurred; so I ought to do it’ is actually
enthymematic, and properly runs ‘This would be the repayment of a
debt, and one which I voluntarily incurred; such a result would be
good; so I ought to do it’. But Prichard says that there is
nothing much wrong with the original reasoning, and that the expanded
version is actually worse, since it appeals to an unsound principle,
that what is good ought to be. The principle is unsound because the
idea of ‘ought to be’ does not make sense; what makes sense
is ‘I ought to do it’. But we can only derive ‘I
ought to do it’ by means of a principle that what is good ought
to be, and another that if something ought to be, then we ought to do
whatever would have it as a consequence. But these principles require
us to think of the good as somehow imperatival (nowadays we would say
‘deontic’), because otherwise there would be no explanation
of our ability to extract an ‘ought’ from a
‘good’ – and nobody thinks of the good as imperatival in
that way. Further, it does not follow that if some state of affairs
would be good, and I am able to bring it about by acting in some way,
then I ought to act in that way. Suppose, for instance, that it would
be good if you gave money to a hospital, and that you would do this if
I wrote you a letter asking you to make some contribution. Does it
follow that I ought to write you a letter? Not at all. What follows is
not even that my writing you a letter would be good. (Prichard rejects
the very notion of the ‘instrumentally good’.) All that we
get is that my writing you a letter is something that would have a good
result, which is just what we had at the beginning.
So much for Prichard’s views about what makes acts right. He
further held that every act that is right is of a type (specified as
above) such that all acts of that type are right. At least, this is how
he expressed himself early in his career. Later, he came to realize
that this was incautious. We may have one act that is right, and which
is of such and such a type, and which (as he would have said) is made
right by being of that type, but where there could be another act of
that type which is not right, because it is also of another type which
is more important, as it were, and which makes the act either not a
duty, or even plain wrong. So what he came to say was that if an act is
right, it is of a type such that all acts of that type make a claim on
the agent – a claim which may however be defeated by a greater
claim made on the agent to avoid acting in that way. Either way round,
Prichard is not a particularist. Wherever an act is right, according to
him, there is a principle at work.
 This does not mean, however, that in order to appreciate the
rightness of the act, one must appeal to the principle.  Prichard’s
view is quite the contrary. The main thrust of his famous article is
the claim that ‘the sense of obligation to do, or of the
rightness of, an action of a particular kind is absolutely
underivative and immediate’ (12). To come to recognize that an
act is a duty, one need only concentrate on the relevant non-moral
facts, facts about the state of affairs that one will, if successful,
originate (including any consequences) and facts about the relations
in which one stands here to others and to oneself (e.g. that one
borrowed the money and promised to return it by the end of the
week). Then, by an act of specifically moral thinking, one recognizes
that those facts together make a claim on one to respond in a specific
way, and that the claim made is stronger than any competing claim
thrown up by other features of the situation. Again, ‘Suppose we
come genuinely to doubt whether we ought, for example, to pay our
debts … The only remedy lies in actually getting into a
situation which occasions the obligation, or – if our
imagination be strong enough – in imagining ourselves in that
situation, and then letting our capacities of moral thinking do their
work’ (20).
But Prichard also supposes that if we ask why a feature that grounds
an obligation does so, for example why the fact that I borrowed the
money means that I ought to pay it back, all we can really do is to
offer a principle, e.g. ‘because I ought to pay anything I
owe’ (4). If we then go on to ask for a reason for the principle,
there is nothing left to be said. But this is not because there is no
reason for the principle; it is because the principle ‘includes
its reason, the reason becoming explicit when the principle is properly
expressed’ (ibid.). It is when we have lost our sense of the
truth of the principle itself, so conceived, that ‘the only
remedy lies’ in exposing ourselves to a real or imaginary case.
‘We first recognize the particular obligation and then by
reflecting on it discover the principle, i.e. formulate to ourselves
that general character of the act which renders it, or any act like it,
an obligation’ (5).
This process, then, enables one to discern a moral principle, one that
says that all acts of a specified type (that is, which are the
origination of some specified sort of state of affairs), and whose
agents stand in some specified relation either to others or to
themselves, are such that there is a claim on those agents to act in
that way, this claim being grounded in the specified nature of the act
and/or the relevant relation. Knowing this principle might be of some
use. But if one comes to doubt the principle, just gazing at it will
not restore one’s confidence in it, no matter how searching one’s
gaze. Nor will it help to try to infer the principle from something
else; “the remedy lies not in any process of general
thinking” (20).  To recover one’s sense of its truth, one needs
to put oneself into a situation of the relevant sort, or at least to
imagine oneself in such a situation, if one’s imagination is powerful
enough, and see whether the sense of obligation arises or not.
It is characteristic of intuitionists to deny that the right can be
derived from the good, and Prichard, as we have seen, was no exception.
Some intuitionists think that the good can be derived from the right,
perhaps by thinking of the good as that which it is right to approve,
admire, seek. Prichard does not take this sort of line either. For him,
goodness is very different from rightness. Goodness seems to be a
simple monadic property. The things that can have this property are
states of affairs, people and actions. An act can be thought of as
good, but whenever we do so, we are really thinking of its motive; a
good act is one done from a good motive. Prichard distinguished between
the moral motive, which is a sense of obligation, and ordinary motives,
which are desires. ‘Desire and a sense of obligation are
co-ordinate species of motive’ (15). There is the act, the
origination of a change, and there is the motive for that act. Acts
themselves are not good or bad. But we can think of the act together
with its motive, and think of such a thing as good or bad.
Prichard used the term ‘action’ for this combination of act
and motive (officially, but not always consistently). Acts cannot
really be good or bad, but actions can (156–7).
We might protest that an act can surely be good if it has good
consequences: it is ‘instrumentally good’, that is, good as
a means (though not good as an instrument; the term ‘instrumental
value’ is a snare). Prichard’s response to this is that
being a means to a good is not a way of being good.
 Obligatoriness is completely different. It looks initially as if
obligatoriness – being what one ought to do – is another
monadic property, distinct from goodness. If it is, the only things
that can have this property are acts. The motive with which an act is
done is irrelevant to its obligatoriness; one can do what one ought
for the wrong reason, or from a bad motive (11–12).  Agents
cannot have obligatoriness, and nor can outcomes. And to think of an
action (in Prichard’s official sense) as obligatory is just evidence
of confusion. If an action is what one ought to do, it is because the
act involved, the origination, is what one ought to do. Motives
themselves cannot be morally right or wrong. Nor can one have an
obligation to act from a certain motive, for two reasons. First, one
is not able to choose to have a motive, and one can only have an
obligation to do something that one is capable of choosing to do or
not to do. In general, we either have certain motives or we
don’t, and there is not a lot that we can do about it. (We can,
of course, try to train ourselves up so that we are in a better
position next time.) Second, when we choose an action, the motive for
which we will act if we do so act is already given (12). There is not,
and cannot be, a separate motive for which we will choose the
action. The motive for choice is the motive for acting.
But in fact Prichard held, or at least came to hold, that
obligatoriness is not a property of acts at all. An act that ought to
be done is one that is obligatory for some agent, one that that agent
ought to do, or that is his duty. These notions of duty, obligation,
and ought really denote properties of agents. It is not so much the
action that is obligatory as the agent that has the obligation to do
it, or to act in that way.  There is no obligatoriness out there,
belonging to the act that we are considering. A sense of obligation is
not a recognition of a property that the act has got, in addition to
all its more normal properties. It is really a sense that one is
obliged, or ought, to act in that way. One might think of this as a
relation, except that there is no act there yet for one to be related
to in the obligated way. It is not a relation, then.  But if one is
obliged to act in this way, that will (as I said at the beginning) be
because of – be constituted by – facts about the act and
about relations in which one stands to others or to oneself.
We can now see further reason for rejecting these two
inferences:
If this act would have a good result, I ought to do it.
Both inferences take us from a remark about an act or action to a
remark about an agent. Prichard asks us what the principles of these
inferences could possibly be.
Of course Prichard does not just announce that obligatoriness is not a
property of acts. He has two arguments. The first is that there are
epistemic difficulties in supposing that acts are made obligatory by
objective matters of fact such as their own nature and the attendant
circumstances. Most of these things are things that we cannot truly
know to be the case, such as what results our action will have (at
this point Prichard is appealing to the theory of knowledge that he
inherited from Cook Wilson). If so, we would hardly ever be able to
know what our duty was; and the thought that most of our duties are
things of which we cannot know is unbearable. This difficulty vanishes
if we suppose that the ground for duty is not the objective nature of
the situation, but the way the agent supposes things to be. But if we
make that move, we suppose that the ground for duty lies in some fact
about the agent (that she so supposes), and this makes it much easier
to think of the duty itself as attaching to the agent rather than to
the act. (On this argument and its peculiarities, see Dancy,
2002.)
Prichard’s second argument is equally idiosyncratic. We can
have an obligation to do an action long before the action is done. If
so, the obligation cannot be a feature of the action, since it exists
before the action does. It must be a feature of something else, if it
is a feature of anything, and the obvious candidate is the agent.
This argument impressed Prichard. But Broad wrote ‘I find it
difficult to persuade myself that this argument is very
formidable’ (1950, 555). I don’t myself think that the
argument is especially formidable, exactly, but it does serve to
prevent errors of various sorts, such as the error of thinking that
deciding what to do is like choosing chocolates from a box, as if the
actions between which one is choosing are somehow laid out before one
in their full particularity, waiting to be chosen, that is, done. In
the present case, the question is how to avoid the argument without
going down Prichard’s route. It is true that there is no
particular action that we are now obliged to do tomorrow; what we are
obliged to do is only to act in a certain way; there will be a wide
variety of actions that would meet that obligation, and we are not
obliged to do one of them rather than any other. If we have to pay the
money, it doesn’t matter, so far as that goes, how we go about
doing it. But how does this help us understand what it is that is
obligatory – the owner of the obligatoriness, as it were? It cannot
belong to ‘acting in a certain way’. The most we could do
would be to abandon the idea of obligatoriness as a character belonging
to ‘acting in a way’ and think instead of something like
‘it is obligatory that p’, where p stands for ‘A
Vs’. But even that doesn’t quite work, since it seems to
specify a state of affairs or perhaps an event as obligatory, and this
makes no sense at all. The only way to resolve the impasse is to take
Prichard’s way out and award the obligation to the agent,
yielding ‘A is obliged to V’ – which is where
Prichard wanted to take us.
So when one senses an obligation one senses a character of oneself,
a claim on oneself to act in a certain way. And to sense an obligation
all that is needed is to put oneself into the relevant situation and
consider the various ways of acting that are available, and the various
relevant relations in which one stands to others and to oneself. If
this does not lead to a sense of obligation, there is nothing much else
that can do it. Moral philosophy, certainly, offers no such resources,
and the Mistake on which Moral Philosophy rests, to revert to the title
of Prichard’s famous article, is to suppose otherwise.
Despite all this, in the article in which Prichard addresses these
issues (1932) he seems at one point to distinguish the obligatory from
the right, and to suppose that rightness is still to be understood as
a monadic property of the act, like goodness. If that is the correct
reading, it introduces considerable complications. See Dancy (2002)
for comment.
Prichard works initially with Sidgwick’s contrast between
intuitionism as the view that conduct is right when conforming to
certain principles known to be unconditionally binding, and
non-intuitionism as the view that there are ends at which we should
aim. (The view that there are ends that we should do what we can to
realize, which is a different view, is according to Prichard not
Sidgwick’s official view, but a better view that Sidgwick should
have adopted instead.)
Prichard argues that when one asks oneself what it is to aim at an
outcome, the answer has to be that it is to act from the desire of it,
that is, to be motivated by the prospect of achieving it. But in that
case, Sidgwick (as a non-intuitionist) is maintaining that right
actions are those that have a certain motive. And Prichard has his
argument (which we have already seen) that we cannot be required to act
from a certain motive, since our motivation is not something over which
we have the required control. This form of non-intuitionism, then, is a
non-starter, despite the fact that it appears to be Sidgwick’s
preferred form.
What is more, Prichard thinks that even if it were true that we
ought to aim at this end, it would not follow that we ought to do what
(we think) will lead to it. The derived ‘ought’ here can
only be identical with the sort of ‘ought’ that we derive
in non-moral cases, as when we say to a poisoner ‘you ought to
give a second dose’, and such an ‘ought’ has no
force for those who have not adopted the relevant end. This is partly
because it is not true that we have a moral duty to do those actions
that will lead to outcomes that we have a duty to aim at. We might, for
instance, have a duty to help the sick, and it may be that the only way
to achieve that end is to write begging letters to our more prosperous
friends. But it does not follow that we have a duty to write those
letters. It will be true that we ought to write those letters, but this
only means (says Prichard) that if we do not write them, we will not
achieve our end. The ‘ought’ here is the non-moral
‘ought’.
We might think (and Broad did think) that Prichard cannot be right
to say that there are only two sorts of ‘ought’: the moral
one, full-blown, and the means-end one which only has force for those
who have adopted the end, and only says that if they don’t take
this means they will not achieve that end. I myself would want to
appeal to the normative force of advice. But Prichard’s main
point might survive such a response. For all that he needs to establish
is that in order to show that we have a moral duty to write the begging
letters we need to do more than show that it is the best or only means
to something which we have a moral duty to aim at.
Prichard thinks, however, that Sidgwick never really considered the
question what it is to aim at an outcome, and that if he had he would
have abandoned his official view for a very different view, namely that
our duty is not to aim at certain outcomes, but to achieve them or
ensure them.
This new view, however, comes in two forms, which emerge when we ask
what it is about those outcomes that gives us a duty to ensure them.
The first answer, which again we can attribute to Sidgwick, is that it
is the value of those outcomes that grounds the relevant duty. But we
have already seen Prichard’s attack on this view. He claims that
it doesn’t survive the test of instances; nobody thinks that
their sense of obligation, when they feel obliged to do something,
arises from their recognition that in so acting they will be
originating something good. And even if they did, it is impossible to
understand how the supposed duty can be derived from some fact about
goodness. For duty is imperatival in nature and goodness is not. We
would have to find some link between the goodness of the action and the
duty to act, and all such links are spurious.
The only remaining alternative is to say that the ground for our
duty to ensure certain outcomes lies not in their value but in their
nature. But Prichard claims that this is just a form of intuitionism in
its conception of our duties – at least in its conception of
those duties that are grounded in outcomes (137–42). We are dealing
with principles that are unconditionally binding, and which require us
to achieve certain ends, or ensure certain outcomes. There is nothing
here that is inconsistent with intuitionism, or even hard for the
intuitionist to explain. At this stage non-intuitionism collapses into
intuitionism. For the act which it is our duty to do is the origination
of a change, and the act of originating that change is not a duty in
virtue of its consequences, or outcomes; it is a duty in its own
nature.
Prichard’s other main target was Kant. As he sees it, Kant
maintained that an action is right if and only if it is done from the
motive of duty, that is, from a sense of obligation. Now Prichard wants
to admit that it can be good to act from this motive; maybe this is the
only morally good motive. Other motives, such as a general benevolence,
may make the relevant action good, but cannot make it morally good. But
he wants first to insist that we cannot have an obligation to act from
a particular motive, as we have already seen. And there are further
difficulties peculiar to Kant’s position, in which the motive is
specified as the conviction that the act concerned is a duty. The first
is that the position has the consequence that no act, in
Prichard’s official narrow sense, is a duty at all. One’s
duty is to act from the motive of duty, never to do this or that act in
the narrow sense. So Prichard is able to present Kant as holding that
there is nothing that we ought to do, and therefore that it is
impossible to act from the sense that one ought to do this. If so, Kant
has undermined his own position, since his understanding of the motive
of duty shows that there can be no such thing. Or rather, if there is
such a thing as the motive of duty, it follows necessarily that it
cannot be one’s sole or primary duty to act on it.
 This is a lovely chain of criticism, but it seems to me to suffer
from a mistake right at the beginning – which, if it is a
mistake, is one echoed by Ross (1930, 5), though Ross corrected his
mistake later (1939, 139). Kant held that an action was only morally
good if done from the motive of duty, but he did not hold, as far as I
can see, that an act is only right if done from that motive. The
Kantian Categorical Imperative ‘I ought never to act except in
such a way that I could also will that my maxim should become a
universal law’ need not, and surely should not, be read as
saying acts are only right if motivated in a certain way. Kant treats
it as an open question whether an act done ‘in conformity with
duty’ has also been done ‘from duty’. He would think
it possible for people to do what they ought, do the right thing, even
if their actions do not have the special sort of value that so
interests him.  Actions have that sort of value when they are done out
of respect for the law rather than merely in accordance with it.
So it seems to me that Prichard imposes on Kant a view that he
neither held nor needed to hold (but see the extended discussion of
Kant (153–9), which ends ‘Plainly he had not fully thought the
position out.’). Prichard would have done better to concentrate
on the difference between Kant’s account of how it comes about
that an action is a duty and his own minimal account. Kant’s
explanation would start from the fact that the maxim of the action can
be willed as a universal law. Prichard would, I think, say that there
is no possibility of, or need for, any such explanation. This is just
one more instance of the quietism that characterizes intuitionism as
opposed to constructivism.
Prichard’s views remained broadly unchanged throughout his
life, except in the following respects.
Prichard originally thought that conscience, or a sense of
obligation, was a distinct species of motive from desire. ‘A
sense of obligation does sometimes move us to act’ (15). In this
he was a precursor of the direction that intuitionistic moral
philosophy would take 60 years later. By 1928, however, he had
abandoned this dualist view, writing ‘Again, if we face the
purely general question ‘Can we really do anything whatever
unless in some respect or other we desire to do it?’ we have to
answer “No”’ (38; see also 129). On this new
understanding a sense of obligation was not a motive at all, since it
involved no desire; to get motivation, one needs in addition a desire
to do the right. This ‘externalist’ position, also adopted
by Ross, opened the door to complaints that on the intuitionist picture
moral cognition was the recognition of facts that lacked any intrinsic
connection to action; it should be possible to come to know that it is
wrong to kill the innocent without thinking of that as at all relevant
to one’s choice of action. And those complaints eventually became
the strongest argument for non-cognitivism in meta-ethics.
At the beginning of his career Prichard writes ‘In action we
consciously originate a change’ (1). On p.10 he speaks apparently
without strain both of our action as being the origination of a change
and as originating that change, and of ourselves as originating that
change. In the Manuscript on Morals (of uncertain date, perhaps c.
1928), we read that the phrase ‘an action’ is ambiguous,
but ‘ordinarily it stands for the origination or bringing
something about … such as the action of poking a fire or
annoying a neighbour’.
By 1932 he has moved on, but only a little. ‘It is, no doubt,
not easy to say what we mean by ‘an action’ or by
‘doing something’. Yet we have in the end to allow that we
mean by it originating, causing, or bringing about the existence of
something, viz. some new state of an existing thing or substance, or,
more shortly, causing a change of state of some existing thing.
… We may be tempted to go farther, and say that we mean by
‘an action’ the conscious origination of something, i.e.
the originating something knowing that we are doing so. But this will
not do; for no one, for instance, thinks himself to be denying that he
has hurt a person’s feelings when he says that he did not know that
he was hurting them, and, indeed, thought he was not’ (85).
But at this point Prichard introduces a distinction between what we
cause directly and what we cause indirectly. He says that when we cause
something indirectly, by causing something else to cause it, ‘the
result is not wholly due to us’. When we cause something
directly, by contrast, it is wholly due to us. And Prichard gives us an
example of such a thing, namely ‘transferring certain ink to
certain places on a piece of paper’. But he maintains that if
such a thing were an obligation, it would be the sort of obligation we
would never be able to know that we have, because we can never know
what will in fact result. If we are to be capable of knowing our
obligations, they cannot be obligations which we cannot know that we
have met when we have met them. If so, our obligations cannot be to
achieve this or that outcome, but only to ‘set ourselves to
achieve them’. All actions that are obligatory are of this sort.
And Prichard evidently concludes that when we cause a change directly,
in each case there is such a thing as ‘setting oneself to cause
that change’, which may be successful and may not be. An action
that is a failure is still an action. So though we may describe an
action in terms of its further effects, say lighting the fire, a
necessary part of that action will have been a ‘setting oneself
to …’.
At the end of his life, in 1945, he writes that the view he has
inherited from Cook Wilson, namely that to act is to originate a
change, has to be wrong. In fact, to act is to will a change, and the
change willed is not an action; most often it is a bodily movement,
that is to say, a change in the location of one’s body or of
parts of it. He says that the characterization of willing as
‘setting oneself to cause a change’ has to be wrong.
“I now think I was mistaken in suggesting that the phrase in use
for it is ‘setting oneself to cause’” (274).
The reason he gives for abandoning the Cook Wilson picture is that
an action is an activity, and there is no such activity as that of
originating or causing a change in oneself or anything else (273). Even
if causing a change may require an activity, it is not that activity.
Now often we do not know what activity is involved when one body causes
a change in another. But when it comes to human actions, we do know.
First, we know that we are looking for something mental, and second, we
know that the word for that special kind of mental activity is
‘willing’.
Very little can be said about this mental activity of willing,
though we are all, of course, perfectly familiar with it. But we can
ask about its proper object. What is it that we will? Two possible
answers present themselves: we will actions, and we will changes. The
first of these must be wrong because it generates an infinite regress.
So the second must be right. An action is the willing of a change.
Prichard’s earliest work does seem to treat rightness or
obligatoriness as a property of the action to be done, or rather, as a
property of the action once it is done. By 1932, however, as discussed
in section 3 above, he had moved to the view that obligation is a
property of the agent, not of the act at all. There is some sign in his
published paper of that date that he had not yet extended the new view
to include rightness, i.e. that he had come to distinguish rightness,
which remained a property of the act and not of the agent, from
obligation or obligatedness, now appearing as a property of the agent.
For he writes ‘While the truth could not be expressed by saying
‘My setting myself to do so-and-so would be
right, because I think it would have a certain effect’
– a statement which would be as vicious in principle as the
statement ‘Doing so-and-so would be right
because I think it would be right’ – there is nothing to
prevent its being expressible in the form ‘I ought to
set myself to do so-and-so because I think it would have a certain
effect’ (99–100). With this distinction the property of
obligatoriness vanishes altogether, though rightness remains, grounded
in the familiar combinations of the (objective) nature of the situation
and some definite relation in which the agent stands to others or to
himself. However, if this was Prichard’s view at the time, no
trace of it appears later, and Ross appears not to have noticed it at
all (see his account of the argument of Prichard’s 1932 paper in
Ross 1939, ch. 7). And this is just as well, because it is very
unsettling to be told that one can have an obligation to do an action
that is in fact wrong.
In his earliest work Prichard supposes that principles specify
distinct obligations, e.g. those of telling the truth, educating
one’s children, serving one’s country. It did not take him
long to see that, so understood, pretty well any collection of
principles is going to lead to contradiction and incoherence. He then
moved to what looks like a form of what we now know best as
Ross’s theory of prima facie duties. On this understanding, a
principle specifies what Prichard calls a ‘claim’ on us,
for example that we serve our country – but all such claims can
be defeated by more pressing claims to do something else, such as care
for our aging mother. Prichard’s version seems to differ from
Ross’s, however, at least if we are to trust a letter he wrote to
Ross in 1932 (to be found in MacAdam, 286–7). Ross thinks that duty
proper, as he calls it, is a quite different sort of thing from a prima
facie duty; the notion of ‘duty’ in ‘prima facie
duty’ is a different notion from that in ‘duty proper’.
Prichard, by contrast, thinks of this as incoherent, and opts instead
for the view that, expressed in terms of ‘ought’, maintains
that, faced with a moral difficulty, there will be different actions
each of which in some respect I ought to do (this is the prima facie
ought) and of those one will be the action which I most ought to do, my
duty proper. On this picture there is no great divide between the
‘ought’ of duty proper and the ‘ought’ of prima
facie duty.