The woman who is today most commonly known as Harriet Taylor or
Harriet Taylor Mill was born Harriet Hardy in London in October
 1807.[1]
She married the pharmaceuticals wholesaler John Taylor on 14 March
1826; she was eighteen and he thirty nine. The couple had three
children: Herbert, born in 1827; Algernon (“Haji”), born
in 1830; and Helen (“Lily”), born in 1831. John Taylor
died of rectal cancer in 1849, and in the spring of 1851 Harriet was
married again, this time to John Stuart Mill. She suffered from
various health problems affecting her nervous and respiratory
systems. In 1841, for instance, she lost much of the use of her legs
for an extended period (J. S. Mill, [TEL], 486–7). A tuberculosis
sufferer, as was John—it is possible that she caught
“consumption” from him (see Packe 1954, 360)—she
died of a respiratory failure on 3 November 1858.
Harriet Taylor and John Stuart Mill met for the first time in
1830. Their meeting was arranged by the leader of Harriet’s Unitarian
congregation, the Reverend W. J. Fox. The two young people very
quickly fell in love. Their conduct during the long period in which
Harriet was married to John Taylor would be scandalous by contemporary
standards, let alone Victorian ones. Early on, John Mill made almost
nightly visits to the Taylors’ home, visits that John Taylor would
facilitate by going to his club. On the whole, John Taylor was
remarkably tolerant of the fact that his wife was on such intimate
terms with another man, but his tolerance did have some limits. In
1833, at his insistence, Harriet established a separate residence, and
she lived apart from her husband for most of the rest of his life,
seeing John at her convenience. (Helen lived with her, Herbert and Haji
with their father.) In 1848, John Taylor refused to allow John Mill to
dedicate The Principles of Political Economy to Harriet,
although the dedication was nonetheless inserted into special copies
of the book that they distributed to friends. When John Taylor
began to suffer from the cancer that would eventually take his life,
he asked Harriet to return home to care for him. She declined, on
the grounds that her first duty was to John Mill, who at the time was
himself suffering from an injured hip and temporary
near-blindness. While John Mill eventually mended, John Taylor’s
condition only worsened, and at the end Harriet did dedicate herself
to caring for her husband. In fact, she rebuked John Mill very sharply
for having failed, while visiting her, to ask about her husband’s
health. She upbraided him even more severely for having suggested that
she might write to him during an “odd time” when she might
find a “change of subject of thought a relief”:
“Good God, sh[oul]d you think it a relief to think of something
else some acquaintance or what not while I was dying?”
(H. T. Mill, [CW], 360).
Harriet was widowed in 1849, and she married John Mill in 1851. The Mills spent most of their married life in their Blackheath Park
home, with just Haji and Helen Taylor for company. They had already
largely withdrawn from society, perhaps due to the gossip that their
relationship generated. Real or perceived slights toward Taylor Mill
by Mill’s mother and some of his siblings after their wedding
resulted in his estrangement from much of his family (on this see
Packe 1954, 349–57; Jacobs 2002, 117). The Mills did sometimes
interrupt their reclusion to travel, separately or together, to the
south of England or to the Continent in pursuit of a more healthful
climate. In late 1858, after Mill’s retirement from the East
India Company, they set out for Montpellier, but Taylor Mill’s
fragile health gave out in Avignon. Mill bought a small house there,
next to the cemetery in which she was buried, where he spent a
considerable portion of the remainder of his life. (He died and was
buried in Avignon in 1873.)
Had Taylor Mill produced a substantial body of philosophical work that
could uncontroversially be called her own, we would not need to
concern ourselves with what her contemporaries had to say about her
abilities; we could make our own assessment. Because she lacks such a
corpus, however, and because questions about what she might have
written or how much influence she
might have had on Mill’s intellectual career are so difficult to
answer on purely textual grounds, the estimates of her intellectual
powers formed by people who knew her must be taken into account.
Taylor Mill’s contemporaries offer radically different impressions of
her. Mill’s view is already fairly clear from the lines
from the dedication to On Liberty that were quoted above, but
the description of her in his Autobiography is worth quoting
in its entirety.
This passage and others like it lead Richard Reeves to 
describe Mill as having a “lifelong mission to deify
Harriet” (2007, 206–7).
No one else who knew Taylor Mill personally spoke of her in anything like
these terms, as far as we know, and indeed several of her acquaintances
held her in low estimation. The Carlyles were admirers initially,
but they soon had changes of heart. Jane says that Harriet was
“a peculiarly affected body” who “was not easy unless
she startled you with unexpected sayings” and was even
“somewhat of a humbug” (quoted in Packe 1954, 325–6).
Thomas comments that “She was full of unwise intellect, asking
and re-asking stupid questions” (quoted in Packe 1954,
315). Harold Laski relates that “Morley told me that Louis
Blanc told him that he once sat for an hour with her and that she
repeated to him what afterwards turned out to be an article that Mill
had just finished for the Edinburgh….
If she was what he thought, someone at least should have given us
indications” (quoted in Stillinger 1961, 24–5).
Those who argue that Taylor Mill was something less than what Mill
took her to be must explain how he was so misled.  There is a
tradition of thinking that, in essence, he was psychologically unable
to resist her charms. According to Mill’s friend and biographer
Alexander Bain, it was commonly held among their contemporaries that
“she imbibed all his views, and gave them back in her own form,
by which he was flattered and pleased” (1882, 173). Ruth
Borchard says that “Accustomed by training and experience to the
acceptance of ascetic, masculine values, he was completely overpowered
by her intensely feminine atmosphere” (1957, 46). And Laski
speculates: “I should guess that she was a comfortable and
sympathetic person and that Mill, brought up to fight Austin, Praed,
Macaulay and Grote, had never met a really soft cushion before.”
(op. cit.). Some writers have even advanced the idea that
after the death of his domineering father James, Mill felt a need to
invent another parental authority in order that he might submit to it
(e.g., Trilling 1952, 118; Mazlish 1975, 286–91).
There is obviously a vast middle territory between these extremes. Taylor Mill
was not often described in judicious or balanced terms. Nevertheless, 
Mill’s brother George, who knew her reasonably well, did relate
to Bain that “Mrs.  Taylor was a clever and remarkable woman,
but nothing like what John took her to be” (Bain 1882, 166).
Philosophical reputations are usually forged through producing a body
of written work. This section will discuss various works of which
Taylor Mill is or might be the author or at least a co-author,
including three significant works in whose creation Mill credits
Taylor Mill with playing a major role: The Principles of Political
Economy, On Liberty, and “The Enfranchisement of
Women.” 
While there are several works of which it is possible to describe
Taylor Mill as an author or co-author with little fear of
contradiction, Menaka Philips observes that none of them constitute
what philosophers have traditionally regarded as a “great text” (2018,
629). A handful of published pieces, such as some poems, book reviews,
and an essay on the aesthetic appreciation of the seasons that were
published in the Monthly Repository in the early 1830s, when
Fox was its editor, have minimal philosophical content. The
Complete Works of Harriet Taylor Mill, edited by Jo Ellen Jacobs,
contains various drafts of unpublished essays that are in Taylor
Mill’s hand on ethics and social philosophy; their topics
include defenses of women’s rights and tolerance and criticisms
of religion (Jacobs 1998). But while at points suggestive, these
pieces are also brief and indeed most are incomplete
fragments. Although these drafts share thematic similarities with the
published works described in this section, as well as other works by
Mill such as The Subjection of Women and “The Utility of
Religion,” they do not correspond closely with particular
stretches of text in these published
works.[2] While
little has been written about these drafts, commentators have offered
conflicting assessments of their cogency and significance. (Compare,
for example, Michèle Le Doeuff’s (2003, 203–4) and
K. C. O’Rourke’s (2001, 60–1) remarks on a draft of an
essay on toleration and conformity, which is circa five pages in
length.)
In a bibliography that he compiled of his writings, Mill describes a
number of newspaper articles that appeared from the middle of the
1840s to the early 1850s—most comment on recent criminal
trials—as having been co-authored by himself and Taylor Mill
(MacMinn et al. 1945, 59–76). Frequently, he adds that
very little of the article was his. In a like manner, he says in the
entry for an 1853 pamphlet examining a proposed domestic violence bill
“In this I acted chiefly as an amanuensis to my wife”
(MacMinn et al. 1945, 79). One thread that runs through many
of these occasional pieces is the suggestion that the law is
excessively harsh where the security of property is concerned yet
excessively lax when dealing with those who do violence to other
persons, especially women and children. A newspaper article or short
popular pamphlet is necessarily far from being a theoretical treatise,
but Philips (2018, 634) credits Taylor Mill with the
“gritty” detail in which these co-authored pieces depict
women’s lived experience from a theoretically-informed
perspective.[3]
Mill suggests that Taylor Mill was deeply involved in the composition
of three works of greater philosophical significance than those discussed
above. The earliest is the
Principles of Political Economy. The Principles’
subtitle is With Some of their Applications to Social
Philosophy. At least a third of the volume is concerned with
topics that belong as much to philosophy as to economics, including
the portion of the work that Harriet did the most to shape, a chapter
titled “On the Probable Futurity of the Labouring Classes”
(J. S. Mill, [PPE], 758–96). This chapter argues that when the
laboring class has made sufficient moral and intellectual progress,
its members will refuse to settle for mere wages any longer. They will
instead insist first on profit-sharing and later on employee ownership
of firms. They will even experiment with Socialist and Communist
communities of the sorts depicted by Saint-Simon, Fourier, Blanc, and
Owen. Mill’s
Autobiography states that
As Jacobs reads this passage, Mill is declaring the chapter
“to be written primarily by Taylor Mill” (2002, 207–8).
This gloss, though, seems to overlook his statement that “she was
the cause of my writing it.” Moreover, the aforementioned
“forbidden dedication” of the volume refers without
qualification to Mill as the author. 
Even if the decision to put only Mill’s name on the cover of
the Principles could be explained as an expedient to win
greater acceptance for the ideas within, there would have been
little harm in describing her as its co-author in this dedication if
she were such, especially once the decision was made only to paste it
inside copies of the Principles given to personal
friends. On the other hand, though, his annotated bibliography
does describe the Principles as a “joint production with
my wife” (MacMinn et al. 1945,
 69).[4]
And Taylor Mill was actively
involved in revising portions of the later editions of the
Principles. For example, the second (1849) edition is
considerably more favorable to Socialism and even Communism, and the
impetus for this shift seems to have been a change in Taylor Mill’s
thinking. In a letter written to Taylor Mill early in 1849, Mill
points out that she now “had marked dissent” from a passage
in the first edition raising an objection to Communism that “was
inserted on your proposition & very nearly in your own
words.” He continues, though, that
Thus while we can be confident that one important chapter of the Principles would not exist
if not for Taylor Mill and that she helped to
edit other chapters, it is unclear whether her role in the volume’s
composition was substantial enough to merit calling her its
co-author. It is not even entirely clear whether John thought of her
as such, and if he did, whether this was true from the start or a
retrospective judgment that he came to hold years
later.[5]
This brings us to On Liberty, the celebrated defense of
individual freedom, which was published in the year after
Taylor Mill’s death. The dedication of this essay, a portion of
which has already been quoted, says that “Like all that I have
written for many years, it belongs as much to her as to me,” and
in the Autobiography Mill elaborates on Taylor Mill’s role
in the essay’s production.
The entry for On Liberty in Mill’s bibliography,
though, makes no mention of Taylor Mill (MacMinn et al. 1945,
92). Since he used the term “joint product” in the
bibliography for the Principles, it is somewhat curious that
he does not use it there for On Liberty as well.
Mill’s letters to Taylor Mill and others also speak equivocally to
the question of On Liberty’s production. In
January of 1855, Mill writes to Taylor Mill from Rome that he has decided
that a volume on liberty would be “the best thing to write &
publish at present” (J. S. Mill, [TLL], 294). He asks her to
look at an essay on the subject that he had written in the preceding
year to see if it could serve as the basis for one part of this volume,
and says that if her answer is yes and if his health allows “I
will try to write & publish it in 1856.” In this
letter, he clearly suggests that he will be the one doing the
writing. (On Liberty in fact appeared in 1859.) In
a reference to this projected volume in a letter of the next month,
though, he says that “We must cram into it as much as possible of
what we wish not to leave unsaid” (J. S. Mill, [TLL], 332).
In letters to others, he refers to the essay as his and to himself as
the one writing it (J. S. Mill, [TLL], 539, 581).
“The Enfranchisement of Women,” published in The
Westminster Review in 1851, is the best candidate for a
significant philosophical work authored primarily or even solely by
Taylor Mill (H. T. Mill, [CW], 51–73). Occasioned by a series of
feminist conventions in the United States, it makes a case not merely
for giving women the ballot but for “equality in all rights,
political, civil, and social, with the male citizens of the
community” (H. T. Mill, [CW], 51). This essay contains many of
the same lines of argument as The Subjection of Women,
written by Mill and published in 1869, although it expresses a
somewhat more radical view of gender roles than the later essay (see
Rossi 1970, 41–5). It maintains that the denial of political
rights to women tends to restrict their interests to matters that
directly impact the family, with the result that the influence of
wives on their husbands tends to diminish the latter’s
willingness to act from public-spirited motives. Further, it contends
that when women do not enjoy equal educational rights with men then
wives will impede rather than encourage their husbands’ moral
and intellectual development. And it insists that competition for jobs
will prevent most of the problems that admitting women into the
workforce would putatively cause from materializing. All of these
points are common to “The Enfranchisement” and The
Subjection. The major point of difference between the two is that
while the Subjection rather notoriously suggests that the
best arrangement for most married couples will be for the wife to
concentrate on the care of the house and the children (J.S. Mill,
[TSW], 297–8), a position that Mill also takes in an early essay
on marriage written for Harriet (J. S. Mill, [OMA], 43), the
“Enfranchisement” instead argues for the desirability of
married women’s working outside the home.
This difference is an important piece of evidence in favor of
attributing the essay to Taylor Mill (although Richard Krouse points out
that the essay leaves unanswered the question it raises about who is to
care for the home and the children; see 1982, 169). Still, not all
of the evidence is on this side. In 1849, Mill urges Taylor Mill to
finish a pamphlet that she was writing on the subject of women ([TLL],
13). Yet soon thereafter, in correspondence with the
Westminster’s editor about the “Enfranchisement,”
he speaks of the article as if he is its author, writing for instance
that “If you are inclined for an article on the Emancipation of
Women, … I have one nearly ready… ” ([TLL],
55–6, 65–6). In an 1854 letter, Mill rather ambiguously
reminds Taylor Mill that when the “Enfranchisement” is
published in a projected collection of his work it will be
“preceded by a preface which will show that much of all my later
articles, and all the best of that one, were, as they were, my
Darling’s” ([TLL], 190). If we can draw any implication from
this, it seems to be that while the strongest arguments in the article were
due to Harriet, Mill was still the actual author. But the preface that
actually appeared, in the collection of Mill’s writings published in
his lifetime (Dissertations and Discussions), suggests
(albeit vaguely) that his contribution was somewhat smaller than this;
there he describes the essay as “hers in a particular sense, my
share in it being little more than that of an editor and
amanuensis” (J. S. Mill 1882, 93–4). (He adds that the
article’s authorship was “known at the time, and publicly
attributed to her.”) In an 1851 letter to William Lloyd and
Helen Benson Garrison, Lucretia Coffin Mott writes that she had
received a copy of the essay from Harriet’s son Herbert and adds
“The writer of it was a Mrs. Taylor a widow who has recently
married J. S. Mill.… Part of it is from his pen. Indeed, she
says, he wrote it—he says, she wrote it”
(Mott 2002, p. 209).
Despite the conflicting evidence, today there seems to be a general
consensus that Harriet is the article’s primary author. It appears in
the University of Toronto’s Collected Works of John Stuart
Mill, but only in an appendix and under her name (H. T. Mill, 
[EW]). John Robson, the editor of Mill’s Collected Works,
says that “most of the evidence” favors attributing it to
her (Robson 1984, lxxv). Some commentators do dissent from this view,
however (for example, Himmelfarb, 183–6; Warnock 1996, xxxv).
Whatever conclusions we reach about Taylor Mill’s authorship of the
works discussed in the preceding section, she might also have made
important contributions to philosophy through changing the direction
of Mill’s writing in consequential respects. This section discusses
some of the evidence for and against the proposition that she did
so.
Mill himself speaks to the difficulty of separating his and
Taylor Mill’s contributions to their collaboration in his
Autobiography:
Here Mill implicitly acknowledges that his hand most often held the
pen, but he also suggests that Taylor Mill contributed numerous ideas
to works that he was solely or primarily responsible for
composing. “In this wide sense,” he continues,
“not only during the years of our married life, but during many
of the years of confidential friendship which preceded it, all my
published writings were as much my wife’s work as mine; her share in
them constantly increasing as years advanced” ([ALE], 251).
Mill does give some indication, though, of his and Taylor Mill’s 
relative strengths:
In contrast, Mill says that his own greatest powers to lie in
“the uncertain and slippery intermediate region, that of theory,
or moral and political science,” including “political
economy, analytic psychology, logic, philosophy of history,”
etc. Mill stresses both the reciprocity of their collaborative
efforts and their different manners of reaching conclusions:
Mill acknowledges that Taylor Mill had very little to do with his
first major work, A System of Logic (first published in
1843), or with his discussions of the more technical aspects of
political economy. Her areas of interest, clearly, were moral and
social-political philosophy. Within these areas, though, Mill almost
seems to suggest that his entire project is that of systematizing
Taylor Mill’s insights and incorporating them within a utilitarian
framework.
Just as the people who knew Taylor Mill formed wildly divergent
conclusions about her abilities, so too have different interpreters
reached wildly different conclusions about the scope and significance
of her influence on Mill. Some of Mill’s interpreters are skeptical
that Taylor Mill really made much difference to his
writings. H. O. Pappe, for example, questions
whether Taylor Mill introduced any substantial alterations whatsoever into
the pattern of Mill’s thought.
Similarly, Francis Mineka says that “Neither he nor his recent
biographers have convinced us that she was the originating mind behind
his work …” (1963, 306). More recently, Reeves writes
that “There is no reason to think that Mill’s views would have
been substantially different had he ended up with, say, Lizzie [Eliza]
Flower—although his life certainly would have been.”
(2007, 86), and Kinzer states bluntly that Taylor Mill “did not
decisively alter the course of” Mill’s development (2007,
111).
Alice Rossi criticizes this “minimalist” approach to
estimating Taylor Mill’s influence on Mill when she observes that
“one senses in Mill scholars an unwitting desire to reject
Harriet Taylor as contributing in any significant way to the vigor of
Mill’s analysis of political and social issues unless it
included some tinge of sentiment or political thought the scholar
disapproved of, in which case the disliked element was seen as
Harriet’s influence” (1970, 44 –5). Some
commentators, however, have inclined toward a “maximalist”
stance. Chief among these is Jacobs, whose basic interpretative
approach is to take Mill’s characterizations of Taylor Mill and
their collaboration at face value, although she departs from this
practice when she believes that there is evidence that Mill may not
have given Taylor Mill the full credit she was due. For example, in an
unpublished essay Taylor Mill writes that
Jacobs takes this comment to establish that Taylor Mill is the
originator of Mill’s distinction between the logics of arts and
sciences at the end of the System of Logic, and she accuses
Mill of having in this case understated Taylor Mill’s contribution to
one of his works (Jacobs 2002, 203n27; J. S. Mill, [SOL],
 943–52).[7]
And while
Mill states that Taylor Mill learned almost as much from him as he
from her, Jacobs appears to think otherwise. In toting up the
advantages of the collaboration to each of them, she notes that
“Harriet administered Mill’s daily life, nursed his ego, and
provided him with ideas.” In return, according to Jacobs, Mill
gave Taylor Mill little more than Mary Ann Evans got for herself by
becoming George Eliot: she merely “acquired the freedom to write
provocative articles … and to be heard as a man, with
seriousness and consideration” (Jacobs 2002, 129–31). 
Conservative historian Gertrude Himmelfarb also credits Taylor Mill
with having made a very significant difference to Mill’s
philosophical output, at least during one stage of his life. In
contrast to Jacobs, however, she maintains that this influence was
decidedly for the worse. She decries in particular Taylor Mill’s
effect on Mill’s views on liberty, arguing that it was only when
Harriet’s influence on him was at its peak that Mill embraced a
simplistic liberalism grounded on his sweeping and absolute liberty
principle instead of a more nuanced political theory that treats
liberty as an important value but one that can be limited by other
values (Himmelfarb 1974, 208–72). (Himmelfarb’s maximalist
reading clearly might be seen as a limit case of the approach that
Rossi challenges.)
To feel entirely confident about any judgment about how far Taylor
Mill influenced Mill, we would need not only access to her letters
which were destroyed but recordings from inside their home at
Blackheath. But as with the descriptions of Taylor Mill’s
character and ability discussed above, there is a wide middle ground
between the minimalist and maximalist assessments. One
intermediate view is that of Bain, who suggests that just as
Mill’s friend John Sterling “overflowed in suggestive
talk, which Mill took up and improved in his own way,” so Taylor
Mill might have done as well (1882, 173–4). Robson
comments that “[I]n what we have of her writings, Harriet
constantly has her eye on the future, even when criticizing the
present; she was a woman of dreams and aspirations, and she must
constantly have breathed into Mill a hopeful and expansive view of
human possibilities” (1966,
178).[8] 
What Bain seems to be suggesting is that Taylor Mill’s greatest
contribution to the Mills’ collaboration, apart from any writing
that she did herself, was to turn Mill’s attention to the
defense of a set progressive ideals and causes reflective of these
possibilities: Socialism, women’s rights, individual liberty,
and above all a “utopian” view of humanity’s
improvability. This is not necessarily to say that he held these
positions just because she did, which he explicitly tells us was not
the case with women’s rights ([ALE], 253n). Nor must it mean
that she contributed little or nothing to the arguments by which he
defends them. Bain knew Mill extremely well, and even though he says
that his friend was under “an extraordinary hallucination as to
the personal qualities of his wife,” and “outraged all
reasonable credibility in describing her matchless genius,” he
is also adamant not only that Mill “was not such an egoist as to
be captivated by the echo of his own opinions” but also that he
would only have been stimulated by someone with “independent
resources” who had a “good mutual understanding as to the
proper conditions of the problem at issue” (1882,
173–4).
Recent work by feminist scholars also makes a strong case that Taylor
Mill may have influenced Mill’s work in more subtle and less
direct ways than commentators usually consider. Helen McCabe suggests
that Taylor Mill helped Mill “develop an emotional language that
had previously been alien to him … and made him acknowledge,
face up to, and express his emotions”; she describes this as
“the most profound influence anyone could have had” on
Mill, since it “made him into a much more human, sensitive and
empathetic philosopher than he would otherwise have been”
(McCabe 2017, 115). And Philips observes that Taylor Mill’s own
experience of patriarchy meant that she brought knowledge to her
collaboration with Mill that he could never have acquired on his own
(Philips 2018).
 No firm conclusions have been reached here as to what personal
qualities Taylor Mill possessed, what if any philosophical works she
authored or co-authored, or how much influence she exercised over
Mill’s philosophical career. All that has been attempted is to
present the wide range of answers that have been given to these
questions. The available evidence may be too sparse and too
contradictory for us ever to arrive at definitive answers. Taylor Mill
may therefore be destined to remain an essentially contested figure in
the history of philosophy.