Sidgwick was born on May 31, 1838, in the small Yorkshire town of
Skipton. The extended Sidgwick family was well-known in the area and
quite prosperous, with their cotton-spinning mills representing the
oldest manufacturing firms in the town (Dawson 1882, Schultz 2017).
But Henry was the second surviving son of Mary Crofts and the Reverend
William Sidgwick, the headmaster of the grammar school in Skipton, who
died when Henry was only three. Henry’s older brother William
went on to become an Oxford don, as did his younger brother Arthur.
His sister Mary, known as Minnie, ended up marrying a second cousin,
Edward White Benson, who in addition to being an early mentor of
Henry’s (and Rugby master) went on to become the archbishop of
Canterbury. The Sidgwick and Benson families would contribute much to
English letters and science over the course of the 19th and 20th
centuries, though their legacies have also been controversial on some
counts (Askwith 1971; Schultz 2004, 2017; Bolt 2011; and Goldhill
2016).
Henry was educated at Rugby and at Trinity College, Cambridge, where
he took his degree in 1859. As an undergraduate, he excelled at both
mathematics and, especially, classics, in due course becoming Craven
Scholar, 33rd Wrangler, and Senior Classic, also winning the
Chancellor’s Medal. He wound up staying at Cambridge his entire
life, first, beginning in October of 1859, as a Fellow of Trinity and
a lecturer in classics—a position that in the later sixties
evolved into a lectureship in the moral sciences—then, from
1875, as praelector in moral and political philosophy, and finally,
from 1883, as Knightbridge Professor of Moral Philosophy. He resigned
his Fellowship in 1869 because he could no longer subscribe in good
conscience to the Thirty-Nine Articles of the Church of England, as
the position required. This act helped inspire the successful
opposition to such requirements. In 1881 he was elected an honorary
Fellow, and in 1885, he regained a full Fellowship, remarking on the
changing times: “Last time I swore that I would drive away
strange doctrine; this time I only pledged myself to restore any
College property that might be in my possession when I ceased to be a
Fellow” (Sidgwick and Sidgwick, 1906: 400).
Sidgwick’s Cambridge career was rich in reformist activity
(Rothblatt 1968; Harvie 1976; and Todd 1999). As an undergraduate,
he had been elected to the “Apostles,” the secret
Cambridge discussion society that did much to shape the intellectual
direction of modern Cambridge; Sidgwick’s allegiance to this
group was a very significant feature of his life and work (Lubenow
1998). The 1860s, which he described as his years of “Storm and
Stress” over his religious views and commitments, were also the
years in which his identity as an academic liberal took shape, and he
got caught up in a range of causes emphasizing better and broader
educational opportunities, increased professionalism, and greater
religious freedom. He evolved into an educational reformer committed
to downplaying the influence of classics, introducing modern subjects,
and opening up higher education to women. Much influenced by the
writings of F. D. Maurice and J. S. Mill, he would become one of the
leading proponents of higher education for women and play a guiding
role in the foundation of Newnham College, Cambridge, one of the first
colleges for women in England (Tullberg [1975], 1998, and Sutherland
2006). He was also active in the cause of university reorganization
generally, in due course serving on the General Board of Studies, the
Special Board for Moral Sciences, and the Indian Civil Service Board,
and he worked tirelessly to expand educational opportunities and
professionalize educational efforts through such vehicles as
correspondence courses, extension lectures, the Cambridge Working
Men’s College, and the University Day Training College for
teachers (initiated by Oscar Browning). Such educational reforms were,
he held, also of political value in overcoming class conflict and
social strife. But Sidgwick’s broader political commitments,
which ranged from academic liberal to Liberal Unionist—he joined
the breakaway faction of the Liberal Party opposing Gladstone’s
policy of Home Rule for Ireland—to independent, were complex and
shifting; he was not, alas, always able to rise above the marked
imperialistic and orientalist tendencies of the late Victorian era
(Schultz 2004, 2007; and Bell 2007, 2016).
In 1876 Sidgwick married Eleanor Mildred Balfour, the sister of his
former student, Arthur Balfour, the future prime minister. An
accomplished and independent woman with serious scientific
interests—she collaborated with her brother-in-law Lord Rayleigh
on many scientific papers—Eleanor Sidgwick worked as an equal
partner with her husband on many fronts, particularly higher education
for women and parapsychology. She eventually took over as Principal of
Newnham in 1892, and was for many decades a mainstay of the Society
for Psychical Research, an organization that Henry had helped to found
(in 1882) and several times headed, though his interest in the
paranormal had been evident long before. The Sidgwicks hoped that
their psychical research might ultimately support some core religious
claims, particularly concerning the personal survival of physical
death, which they deemed a vital support for morality. Their extensive
and often quite methodologically sophisticated investigations were not
as conclusive as they had hoped, but following Henry’s death
from cancer on August 28, 1900, Eleanor did become persuaded that he
had succeeded in communicating from “the other world.” The
Sidgwicks’ work in this field continues to this day to be
debated by academic parapsychologists (Gauld 1968, and Braude
2003).
Although Sidgwick published extensively in his lifetime, he is best
known for his first major book, The Methods of Ethics, which
first appeared in 1874 and went through five editions during his
lifetime. His second most widely read book would be his Outlines
of the History of Ethics for English Readers, which appeared in
1886 as an expanded version of the article on the subject that he had
contributed to the famous ninth edition of the Encyclopedia
Britannica. But he also published The Principles of Political
Economy (1883), The Elements of Politics (1891), and
Practical Ethics, A Collection of Addresses and Essays
(1898), and after his death, Eleanor Sidgwick worked with various of
his former colleagues to bring out Lectures on the Ethics of T. H.
Green, H. Spencer, and J. Martineau (1902), Philosophy, Its
Scope and Relations (1902), The Development of European
Polity (1903), Miscellaneous Essays and Addresses
(1904), Lectures on the Philosophy of Kant and Other Philosophical
Lectures and Essays (1905), and Henry Sidgwick, A Memoir
(1906), which Eleanor and Arthur Sidgwick assembled largely from his
correspondence and journal. These posthumous works are typically quite
polished and shed a great deal of light on the works that Sidgwick
himself saw through publication (Schneewind 1977).
As Sidgwick’s publications attest, he was not only a pre-eminent
moral philosopher, with sophisticated views on both going
controversies in ethics and metaethics and the history of these
subjects, but also an accomplished epistemologist, classicist,
economist, political theorist, political historian, literary critic,
parapsychologist, and educational theorist. If he was a founder of the
Cambridge school of philosophy, he was also a founder of the Cambridge
school of economics (along with his colleague and sometimes nemesis
Alfred Marshall) and of the Cambridge school of political theory
(along with such colleagues as Browning and Sir John Seeley). If such
students as Moore and Russell owed him much, so too did such students
and admirers as Balfour, J. N. Keynes, F. W. Maitland, F. Y.
Edgeworth, James Ward, Frank Podmore, and E. E. Constance Jones. He
had serious interests in many areas of philosophy and theology, and
also wrote insightfully about poetry and literature, two of his great
loves (at Newnham, he lectured on Shakespeare, along with such
subjects as philosophy and economics). Indeed, Sidgwick was a force in
the larger cultural developments of his age, active in such
influential discussion societies as the Metaphysical Society and the
Synthetic Society. His friends included George Eliot, T. H. Green,
James Bryce, H. G. Dakyns, Roden Noel, and, of special importance,
John Addington Symonds, the erudite cultural historian, poet, and man
of letters who was a pioneer in the serious historical study of same
sex love (Schultz 2004). Sidgwick’s versatile and many-sided
intellect—not to mention his keen wit—are typically better
displayed in his essays and letters than in his best-known academic
books. He was in fact much loved for his gentle humor (or
“Sidgwickedness”) and sympathetic conversation, and his
philosophical students prized him for his candor. As Balfour put it:
“Of all the men I have known he was the readiest to consider
every controversy and every controversialist on their merits. He never
claimed authority; he never sought to impose his views; he never
argued for victory; he never evaded an issue.” (Sidgwick and
Sidgwick, 1906: 311).
Sidgwick’s Methods was long in the making. His
correspondence with his close friend H. G. Dakyns, a Clifton master
who had been a private tutor for the Tennyson family, reveals how long
and volatile the development of his ethical views was, particularly
during the 1860s when he was working himself free of Anglican
orthodoxy. As early as 1862, he wrote to Dakyns that he was
“revolving a Theory of Ethics” and working on “a
reconciliation between the moral sense and utilitarian theories”
(Sidgwick and Sidgwick, 1906: 75). He started telling people that he
was “engaged on a Great Work,” which would indeed turn out
to be the case. By 1867, much of the basic intellectual structure of
the Methods was clearly in place; according to Marshall, at
the faculty discussion group known as the “Grote Club,”
Sidgwick “read a long & general sketch of the various
systems of morality: I. Absolute right II. Make yourself noble III.
Make yourself happy IV Increase the general happiness. In the course
of it he committed himself to the statement that without appreciating
the effect of our action on the happiness of ourselves or of others we
could have no idea of right & wrong” (quoted in Schultz
2004: 142).
It was also in 1867 that Sidgwick sent a draft of his pamphlet on
“The Ethics of Conformity and Subscription” to J. S. Mill,
inviting comments. This work, part of his efforts with the Free
Christian Union (an organization for promoting free and open religious
inquiry), reflected his casuistical struggles over whether he had a
right to keep his Fellowship, given his increasingly Theistic views.
He had been increasingly drawn to Theism, which then, as now, stressed
that “God’s will and purpose, and God’s assurance of
an ultimate fulfilment, are behind all that is happening”
(Polkinghorne 1998: 114), but without the orthodox commitments to
belief in the Trinity, miracles, eternal punishment, etc.. As Sidgwick
explained to his sister: “I have written a pamphlet … on
the text ‘Let every man be fully persuaded in his own
mind.’ That is really the gist of the pamphlet—that if the
preachers of religion wish to retain their hold over educated men they
must show in their utterances on sacred occasions the same sincerity,
exactness, unreserve, that men of science show in expounding the laws
of nature. I do not think that much good is to be done by saying this,
but I want to liberate my soul, and then ever after hold my
peace” (Sidgwick and Sidgwick, 1906: 226). As he put it in the
pamphlet, which appeared in 1870:
This was a vision of inquiry and even culture that Sidgwick would
promote throughout his life (Schultz 2004, 2011, 2017), though after
this point he no longer openly directed his criticisms at the church.
Mill had replied to his effort to address the question of subscription
on “objective” and “utilitarian” grounds:
“What ought to be the exceptions … to the general duty of
truth? This large question has never yet been treated in a way at once
rational and comprehensive, partly because people have been afraid to
meddle with it, and partly because mankind have never yet generally
admitted that the effect which actions tend to produce on human
happiness is what constitutes them right or wrong” (quoted in
Schultz 2004: 134). Mill urged Sidgwick to turn his “thoughts
to this more comprehensive subject,” and apparently when the
latter did, he concluded that it would not be conducive to the general
happiness to continue his open attacks on organized religion. The
reasons for this larger conclusion are only partly evident from the
Methods itself.
Sidgwick did always explicitly claim, however, that his struggles with
the ethics of subscription shaped the views set forth in the
Methods. These struggles had led him “back to
philosophy” from his more theological and philological
investigations—for which he had learned German and Hebrew and
struggled with biblical hermeneutics. He found the problem of whether
he ought to resign his Fellowship very “difficult, and I may say
that it was while struggling with the difficulty thence arising that I
went through a good deal of the thought that was ultimately
systematised in the The Methods of Ethics” (Sidgwick
and Sidgwick, 1906: 38). One of the ways in which this is evident has
been highlighted in the work of J. B. Schneewind, whose
Sidgwick’s Ethics and Victorian Moral Philosophy (1977)
was the most comprehensive and sophisticated commentary on
Sidgwick’s ethics produced in the twentieth century. As part of
an extensive account of the historical context of the
Methods, underscoring how Sidgwick’s work was shaped by
both the utilitarian tradition and its intuitionist and religious
opposition (represented in part by the “Cambridge
Moralists” William Whewell, Julius Hare, F. D. Maurice, and John
Grote), Schneewind argued that
That account, as both Schneewind and Rawls have stressed, repeatedly
affirms that the aim of the book is less practice than knowledge,
“to expound as clearly and as fully as my limits will allow the
different methods of Ethics that I find implicit in our common moral
reasoning; to point out their mutual relations; and where they seem to
conflict, to define the issue as much as possible.” That is,
echoing his views on theological inquiry, he confesses that:
The model for such an approach is not Bentham or even J. S. Mill, but
Aristotle, whose Ethics gave us “the Common Sense
Morality of Greece, reduced to consistency by careful comparison:
given not as something external to him but as what
‘we’—he and others—think, ascertained by
reflection.” This was really, in effect, “the Socratic
induction, elicited by interrogation” (Sidgwick 1874 [1907:
xix]).
As Marcus Singer and others have observed (Singer 1974),
Sidgwick’s notion of a “method” of ethics is not the
same as that of an ethical principle, ethical theory, or ethical
decision-procedure. A “method” is a way of
“obtaining reasoned convictions as to what ought to be
done” and thus it might reflect a commitment to one or more
ethical principles as the ultimate ground of one’s determination
of what one has most reason to do, here and now, while allowing that
one might ordinarily be reasoning from such principles either directly
or indirectly. Thus, one might, on theological grounds, hold that the
moral order of the universe is utilitarian, with God willing the
greatest happiness of the greatest number, while also holding that the
appropriate guide for practical reason is enlightened self-interest,
since utilitarian calculations are God’s business and God has
ordered the cosmos to insure that enlightened self-interest conduces
to the greatest happiness. In this case, one’s “method of
ethics” would be rational egoism, but the ultimate philosophical
justification for this method would appeal to utilitarian principles.
Still, despite this emphasis on the reasoning process between
principles and practical conclusions—another reflection of his
struggles with subscription—Sidgwick obviously had quite a bit
to say in the Methods about the defense of the ultimate
principles of practical reason (Crisp 2014, 2015).
Many have felt that, in setting up the systematic comparison between
the main methods of ethics, Sidgwick was not nearly as neutral and
impartial as he thought, and in various ways slanted the discussion
against a wide range of alternatives, including Aristotelian and other
forms of perfectionism, Whewellian rationalism, Idealism, and more
(Donagan 1977, 1992; Irwin 1992, 2007, and 2011; Hurka 2014a,
2014b). He simply dismisses the traditional philosophical concern with
the “moral faculty,” explaining that he is going to leave
that matter to psychologists. For Sidgwick, in any given situation,
there is something that it is right or that one ought to do, and this
is the proper sphere of ethics. The basic concept of morality is this
unique, highly general notion of “ought” or
“right” that is irreducible to naturalistic terms, sui
generis, though moral approbation is “inseparably bound up
with the conviction, implicit or explicit, that the conduct approved
is ‘really’ right—that is, that it cannot without
error, be disapproved by any other mind” (Sidgwick 1874 [1907:
27]).  On this count, at least, his student G. E. Moore was willing to
declare the Methods untainted by the “naturalistic
fallacy”—that is, the confusion of the “is” of
attribution and the “is” of identity that supposedly
infected much previous ethical theory, including that of Bentham and
the Mills. And indeed, it is plain that Sidgwick parted company from
classical utilitarianism in many ways, rejecting the empiricism,
psychological egoism, and associationism (supposedly) characteristic
of the earlier tradition. F.H. Hayward, who wrote one of the first
books on Sidgwick’s ethics, famously complained that E. E.
Constance Jones had missed just how original Sidgwick was:
“Sidgwick’s identification of ‘Right’ with
‘Reasonable’ and ‘Objective’; his view of
Rightness as an ‘ultimate and unanalysable notion’
(however connected subsequently with Hedonism); and his admission that
Reason is, in a sense, a motive to the will, are due to the more or
less ‘unconscious’ influence of Kant. Miss Jones appears
to think that these are the common-places of every ethical system, and
that real divergences only arise when we make the next step in
advance. I should rather regard this Rationalistic terminology as
somewhat foreign to Hedonism. I do not think that Miss Jones will
find, in Sidgwick’s Hedonistic predecessors, any such emphasis
on Reason (however interpreted)” (Hayward 1900–1: 361).
Sidgwick himself allowed that Kant was one of his
“masters,” and he was also quite familiar with the works
of Hegel. Schneewind’s reading (Schneewind 1977) has stressed
this influence, along with the influence of Joseph Butler, whose works
persuaded Sidgwick of the falsity of psychological egoism and of the
reality of other than self-interested actions (Frankena 1992).
Indeed, the comparison between Sidgwick and Kant has proved to be a
fertile and ongoing source of academic work on Sidgwick, and one of
increasing significance (Parfit 2011; Paytas 2018)
However, despite the considerable influence Kant and
Kantianism—and the Cambridge Moralists—exercised on
Sidgwick, the Methods also deviated from some stock features
of such views, among other things rejecting the issue of free will as
largely irrelevant to ethical theory and failing to appreciate the
Kantian arguments about expressing one’s autonomy and the
incompatibility of the categorical imperative and rational egoism. As
Schneewind allows, Sidgwick’s
Naturally, a Sidgwickian position on the venerable free will issue is
bound to be controversial, and recent work on the Sidgwick/Kant
comparison has brought out how divided commentators continue to be on
this matter (Crisp 2015; Skelton 2016; Paytas 2018). Moreover,
there has also been significant controversy over just how internalist
Sidgwick’s account of moral motivation actually was. On balance,
he held that the dictates or imperatives of reason were
“accompanied by a certain impulse to do the acts recognized as
right,” while admitting that other impulses may conflict
(Sidgwick 1874 [1907: 34]). Brink (1988, 1992) has urged that some of
Sidgwick’s chief arguments make better sense if he is construed,
in externalist fashion, as allowing the possibility that one may have
good reasons not to be moral. But Sidgwick’s moderate, qualified
internalism seems plain and plausible enough to most commentators
(Schultz 2004; de Lazari-Radek & Singer 2014; and Crisp
2015).
There has been perhaps even more controversy surrounding
Sidgwick’s account of the “good.” The
Methods is at least fairly clear in arguing that the
difference between “right” and “good” in part
concerns the way in which judgments of ultimate good do not
necessarily involve definite precepts to act or even the assumption
that the good in question is attainable or the best attainable good
under the circumstances. Rightness and goodness thus “represent
differentiations of the demands of our own rationality as it applies
to our sentient and our active powers” (Schneewind 1977: 493).
But Sidgwick offers an intricate account of ultimate good that has
struck some as highly naturalistic. In A Theory of Justice,
Rawls famously explained that Sidgwick “characterizes a
person’s future good on the whole as what he would now desire
and seek if the consequences of all the various courses of conduct
open to him were, at the present point of time, accurately foreseen by
him and adequately realized in imagination. An individual’s good
is the hypothetical composition of impulsive forces that results from
deliberative reflection meeting certain conditions” (Rawls,
[1971], 1999: 366). Many have followed the Rawlsian line in casting
Sidgwick as a defender of a naturalistic
“full-information” account of the “good” (for
example, Sobel 1994, and Rosati 1995), but the balance of scholarly
opinion has it that Sidgwick’s account adumbrates an
“objective list” view that allows that some desires,
however informed, may be rejected as irrational or unreasonable (see
especially Schneewind 1977; de Lazari-Radek & Singer 2014; and
Parfit 1984, 2011). Crisp (1990, 2015) and Shaver (1997) provide
helpful reviews of the debates; although the former offers perhaps the
best possible defense of the interpretation of Sidgwick’s view
as a naturalistic full-information account (with an experience
requirement), it also admits that the objective list reading is a more
charitable one.
Some commentators have made much of the difference between Sidgwick
and Moore on the notion of ultimate good, urging that whereas Sidgwick
prioritizes an unanalysable notion of “right,” Moore
prioritizes an unanalysable notion of “good,” while adding
a suspect ontological claim about “goodness” involving a
non-natural property (Moore 1903; and Shaver 2000). However, Hurka
(2003) has offered some forceful arguments against most such
accounts:
Moreover, as Hurka has developed the point, the “initial
reviewers of Principia did not see it as altering
Sidgwick’s ontology but emphasized its continuity with Sidgwick,
while Moore himself said little about his non-natural property and
even tried to limit his metaphysical claims, saying that though
goodness is an object and therefore ‘is somehow’,
it does not ‘exist’, and in particular does not exist in a
‘supersensible reality’ ” (Hurka 2014: 90).
For his part, Sidgwick goes on to argue that the best going account of
ultimate goodness is a hedonistic one, and that this is an
informative, non-tautological claim, though also a more controversial
one than many of the others that he defends. As Irwin and Richardson
have insightfully argued, Sidgwick’s hedonistic commitments, and
his criticisms of such views as T. H. Green’s, often reflected
the (problematic) conviction that practical reason simply must be
fully clear and determinate in its conclusions (Irwin 1992:
288–90; Richardson 1997). Without some such metric as the
hedonistic one, Sidgwick argued, how can one virtue be compared to
another? And can one really recommend making people more virtuous at
the expense of their happiness? What if the virtuous life were
conjoined to extreme pain, with no compensating good to anyone? But
here again, Sidgwick’s arguments are not as perspicuous as they
at first seem. Admittedly, as Shaver points out, “Sidgwick works
out what it is reasonable to desire, and so attaches moral to natural
properties, by the ordinary gamut of philosopher’s
strategies—appeals to logical coherence, plausibility, and
judgment after reflection.” (Shaver 1997: 270). Even so, as
Rawls noted, “Sidgwick denies that pleasure is a measurable
quality of feeling independent of its relation from volition. This is
the view of some writers, he says, but one he cannot accept. He
defines pleasure ‘as a feeling which, when experienced by
intelligent beings, is at least apprehended as desirable or—in
cases of comparison—preferable.’ It would seem that the
view he here rejects is the one he relies upon later as the final
criterion to introduce coherence among ends.” (Rawls [1971],
1999: 488). Sumner, in an important treatment, has also urged that
Sidgwick and Mill, by contrast with Bentham,
Although the last few years have seen a remarkable rehabilitation of
ethical hedonism, particularly in the works of Crisp (2006, 2007, and
2015), Feldman (2004, 2010), and de Lazari-Radek and Singer (2017),
the forms of hedonism being defended usually reconfigure or qualify
the Sidgwickian approach in important ways. Crisp, who defends an
internalist account of pleasure, even urges that Sidgwick’s
writings did not express his better inclinations on the subject
“Sidgwick is at heart an internalist about pleasure who was
mislead by the heterogeneity argument into offering an externalist
view which is open to serious objections” (Crisp 2007: 134).
Indeed, on this count, Sidgwick might appear to be defending a
position that is “intermediate between internalism and
externalism,” as de Lazari-Radek and Singer note in their recent
and very informed defenses of Sidgwickian hedonism against all the
other alternatives, including the desire satisfaction view that Singer
had previously adopted (de Lazari-Radek & Singer 2014: 254, 2016).
However, Shaver (2016) has offered a subtle account and defense of
Sidgwick’s notion of pleasure as feeling apprehended, perhaps
wrongly, as desirable qua feeling, rather than as feeling manifesting
a special tone of pleasantness. 
This rehabilitation of Sidgwickian hedonism has also involved a
recognition of the importance of the hedonimetrics of F. Y. Edgeworth,
the brilliant economist who was a slightly junior contemporary of
Sidgwick’s and one of his most enthusiastic philosophical
disciples, though one whose work has until recently been largely
ignored in philosophical commentary on Sidgwick (Edgeworth 1877 and
1881 [2003]). Edgeworth’s approach has been revived in economics by
such figures as Kahneman (2011), and the convergence of economic and
philosophical (and neurobiological) interests on this point suggests
that Sidgwickian hedonism represents a new growth area in ethics. But
it does seem that in key respects Sidgwick’s account remains
superior to these more recent developments, which rely on a rather
crude claim about pleasurable consciousness as a state that a subject
wishes to prolong.
For better or worse, Sidgwick uses the language of hedonism to label
two out of the three methods with which he will be chiefly
concerned—namely, egoistic hedonism (or rational egoism) and
universal hedonism (or utilitarianism). The third method is variously
called dogmatic or intuitional morality, which is somewhat ambiguously
construed as either the (mostly negative) precepts of common-sense
morality or the somewhat more refined version of these set out in the
theories of such moral theorists as Whewell or Henry Calderwood
(Whewell 1864; Calderwood 1876; and Donagan 1977, 1992). The main
point of such views is that conformity to such moral duties as
truth-telling, promise-keeping, temperance etc. is held to be
“the practically ultimate end of moral actions” and these
duties are “unconditionally prescribed” and discernible
with “really clear and finally valid intuition,” though it
is the job of the moral theorist to set them out with proper precision
and “to arrange the results as systematically as possible, and
by proper definitions and explanations to remove vagueness and prevent
conflict.” (Sidgwick 1874 [1907: 101]). Indeed, the plain person
is apt to be rather confused about the differences between the methods
of ethics, arbitrarily deploying one or another without recognizing
any inconsistency.
The three methods of ethics—egoism, intuitional morality, and
utilitarianism—respectively form the subject matter of books two
through four of the Methods, which brackets them with an
opening book reviewing the whole work and a concluding chapter on
“The Mutual Relations of the Three Methods.” Each of these
books represents in itself a classic treatment of the view at issue,
though it is the chapter on utilitarianism that has perhaps most often
been treated as such. This architectonic can, however, make it
somewhat difficult to follow the thread of Sidgwick’s thought,
particularly on the more philosophical points having to do with
intuitionism. Indeed, intuitionism figures in both the second method
of ethics, and, in a more philosophical form, in the treatment of all
the methods of ethics, particularly when it comes to the discussion of
fundamental principles. As Sidgwick explains, although some might
think that conscience delivers immediate judgments on particular
acts—a view he variously calls aesthetic, perceptional or ultra
intuitionism—“reflective persons, in proportion to their
reflectiveness, come to rely rather on abstract universal intuitions
relating to classes of cases conceived under general notions.”
Hence, dogmatic intuitional morality, which in the Methods is
rather awkwardly taken to cover both more deontological views and
non-hedonistic teleological ones, on the ground that the latter tend
to construe virtue in the same fashion as the simply the done thing,
whatever the consequences. But the process of reflection should not
stop there: there is another, more sophisticated phase of
intuitionism. Without “being disposed to deny that conduct
commonly judged to be right is so, we may yet require some deeper
explanation why it is so.” Thus, philosophical
intuitionism, “while accepting the morality of common sense as
in the main sound, still attempts to find for it a philosophic basis
which it does not itself offer: to get one or more principles more
absolutely and undeniably true and evident, from which the current
rules might be deduced, either just as they are commonly received or
with slight modifications and rectifications.” (Sidgwick 1874
[1907: 102]),
The ascent to this philosophical intuitionism is especially evident in
the treatment of common-sense or intuitional morality. As Sidgwick
explained in reply to Calderwood’s critical review of the
Methods, which asked why he had not simply confined himself
“to the consideration of Intuitionism in its most philosophical
form,” that tactic “would have led me at once to
Utilitarianism: because I hold that the only moral intuitions which
sound philosophy can accept as ultimately valid are those which at the
same time provide the only possible philosophical basis of the
Utilitarian creed. I thus necessarily regard Prof. Calderwood’s
Intuitionism as a phase in the development of the Intuitional method,
which comes naturally between the crude thought of Butler’s
‘plain man’ and the Rational Utilitarianism to which I
ultimately endeavor to lead my reader.” That is, allowing that
the morality of common sense is his as well, he must as a philosopher
nonetheless
And as he explained in another important commentary on the
Methods, “The Establishment of Ethical First
Principles,” he accepts Aristotle’s distinction between
logical priority and priority in the knowledge of a particular person,
such that we “are thus enabled to see that a proposition may be
self-evident, i.e., may be properly cognisable without being viewed in
connexion with any other propositions; though in order that its truth
may be apparent to some particular mind, there is still required some
rational process connecting it with propositions previously accepted
by that mind.” This latter can be done in two ways: by showing
how “some limited and qualified statement” supposed to be
self-evident is only part of a “simpler and wider
proposition,” on which the limitations turn out to be arbitrary,
and by establishing some general criteria “for distinguishing
true first principles” that are then used to “construct a
strictly logical deduction by which, applying their general criteria
to the special case of ethics, we establish the true first principles
of this latter subject” (Sidgwick 1879: 106–7). Truth
being one, both tactics should ultimately converge on the same
conclusions.
Whether Sidgwick succeeded in avoiding mere “hostile criticism
from the outside” in his analysis of common-sense morality is
open to debate; certainly, the critical reflection can seem quite
remorseless, with the utilitarian repeatedly demonstrating to the
dogmatic intuitionist
Time and again, common sense collapses into utilitarian thinking, or
is shown to presuppose it, or is at least revealed as requiring
something very like it. This effort to criticize and assimilate
common-sense moral rules went far beyond the efforts of J. S. Mill and
has served as a template for the utilitarian or consequentialist work
of Smart (1973), Brandt (1979), Hare (1981), Parfit (1984, 2011,
2017), Hardin (1988), Singer (2001), Gibbard (1982, 1990), and de
Lazari-Radek and Singer (2014). Like so many in the utilitarian
tradition, Sidgwick ended up recognizing the moral standing of
non-human animals, puzzling over questions of suicide, defending a
notion of intention covering all foreseen consequences, rejecting
purely retributive accounts of punishment, embracing a cosmopolitan
(rather than nationalistic) outlook, and thinking—though not
public insisting—that orthodox religion and its morality were
often dogmatic and superstitious. He initiated the (modern)
philosophical discussion of the problem of future generations and
optimal population growth, arguing that “strictly conceived, the
point up to which, on Utilitarian principles, population ought to be
encouraged to increase, is not that at which average happiness is the
greatest possible … but that at which the produce formed by
multiplying the number of persons living into the amount of average
happiness reaches its maximum” (Sidgwick 1874 [1907:
415–16]).  But he was not always consistent in his treatment of
this issue (Schultz 2004, 2017).
Although it can seem strained and anachronistic to apply the
classification of “act” or “rule”
utilitarianism to Sidgwick, the scholarly consensus does for the most
part classify him as an act utilitarian (Gray 1989; Williams 1995;
Hooker 2000; de Lazari-Radek & Singer 2014; and Crisp 2015). In
any event, it is quite clear that he defended an
“indirect” form of utilitarianism; indeed, he goes rather
far in defending the possibility of utilitarianism entailing a
self-effacing, even esoteric morality:
Such provocative remarks, which flatly contradict any Kantian
insistence on the necessary publicity of fundamental moral principles,
may reflect a consistent interpretation of the different
“levels” of moral thinking, critical versus everyday, but
they have generated much criticism, with Williams charging that
Sidgwick was a “Government House” utilitarian whose views
comported well with colonialism (Williams 1995, and Schultz 2004,
2017). Yet even on the count of esoteric morality, Sidgwick’s
views have attracted some forceful recent defenders (Singer & de
Lazari-Radek 2010, and de Lazari-Radek & Singer 2014, 2016) who
strike at the very heart of the Kantian and neo-Kantian publicity
requirement. Their argument owes much to Parfit’s demonstration
that an ethical theory could be self-effacing without being incoherent
or untrue (Parfit 1984).
Again, Sidgwick has often been charged with slanting his discussion
against a wide range of alternatives (Donagan 1977, 1992; Irwin
1992, 2007, and 2011; Hurka 2014). And at times it is very far from
clear whose views he is criticizing. Thus, his account of
“aesthetic intuitionism” would seem to be trained on a
certain form of Aristotelianism stressing the contextual and
particularist nature of practical wisdom (McDowell 1979; Dancy 2004;
and Hurka 2014), but, in a curiously neglected work on the history of
ethics that was in some ways a successor to Sidgwick’s own
Outlines (and contained an extended treatment of
Sidgwick’s views), Reginald A. P. Rogers identified aesthetic
intuitionism with the moral sense theory of Shaftesbury (Rogers
1911). Furthermore, of special concern to recent intuitionists has
been the effort to combine Sidgwick’s views with those of Ross
on prima facie intuitions, acknowledging that Sidgwick’s account
of intuitional morality did not address such an option (Hurka 2014a,
2014b; and Crisp 2015). Hurka has developed this critique forcefully,
expanding on his claim that Sidgwick’s framing of ethical theory
was slanted from the start: Sidgwick
For others, however, it is clear enough that Sidgwick’s
hedonistic utilitarianism does not require any Rossian apparatus for
recognizing apparent conflicts of duties. De Lazari-Radek and Singer,
in response to Crisp’s defense of Rossian prima facie
intuitions, argue that “Ross starts by assuming that, as he puts
it, ‘the main moral convictions of the plain man’ are
‘not opinions which it is for philosophy to prove or disprove,
but knowledge from the start.’ As we have already indicated both
in our book and in this response, we are skeptical about the validity
of most of our moral intuitions” (de Lazari-Radek & Singer
2016). Sidgwick would probably not have deemed the Rossian gambit to
the point for purposes of dealing with the dualism of practical
reason.
More generally, it must be said that Sidgwick, under the influence of
Hegel and other historically-minded philosophers, did not claim that
he was impartially addressing all historically important methods of
ethics, but only those that in his estimate had become the live
options as humanity had progressed (Schultz 2013, 2014). He may
have been somewhat misguided in identifying those, but that is not the
same as being blind to the content of the alternatives.
At any rate, fair or not, Sidgwick’s reconciliation of
intuitional morality and utilitarianism obviously deploys a
sophisticated form of intuitionist epistemology, one allowing for the
fallibilism of its conclusions. He formulates four criteria or
conditions “the complete fulfillment of which would establish a
significant proposition, apparently self-evident, in the highest
degree of certainty attainable: and which must be approximately
realised by the premises of our reasoning in any inquiry, if that
reasoning is to lead us cogently to trustworthy conclusions”
(Sidgwick 1874 [1907: 338]). The first, often called simply the
“Cartesian Criterion,” demands that the “terms of
the proposition must be clear and precise,” and the second
requires that the “self-evidence of the proposition must be
ascertained by careful reflection,” which is especially
important in ethics because “any strong sentiment, however
purely subjective, is apt to transform itself into the semblance of an
intuition; and it requires careful contemplation to detect the
illusion” (Sidgwick 1874 [1907: 339]). Third, the “propositions
accepted as self-evident must be mutually consistent,” since it
“is obvious that any collision between two intuitions is a proof
that there is error in one or the other, or in both.” (Sidgwick
1874 [1907: 341]). And fourth, since “it is implied in the very notion
of Truth that it is essentially the same for all minds, the denial by
another of a proposition that I have affirmed has a tendency to impair
my confidence in its validity.” This last adds an important
social dimension to Sidgwick’s epistemology: “the absence
of such disagreement must remain an indispensable negative condition
of the certainty of our beliefs,” for “if I find any of my
judgements, intuitive or inferential, in direct conflict with a
judgment of some other minds, there must be error somewhere: and if I
have no more reason to suspect error in the other mind than in my own,
reflective comparison between the two judgments necessarily reduces me
temporarily to a state of neutrality” (Sidgwick 1874 [1907:
341–42]). In other, more purely epistemological works, Sidgwick
collapsed the first two conditions into one, such that his
philosophical intuitionism involved the three-pronged demand for
clarity and ability to withstand critical reflection, consistency or
coherence, and consensus of experts. He was also apt to explain that
these conditions only afforded the best means for reducing the risk of
error, rather than establishing indubitable truth. On this count, such
posthumous works as Lectures on the Philosophy of Kant (1905)
and Philosophy, Its Scope and Relations (1902) provide
important supplements to the Methods. Singer (2000) provides
an excellent collection of those of Sidgwick’s essays and
reviews most relevant to the Methods.
Perhaps no region of Sidgwick’s work has been the subject of
greater interpretive controversy than his epistemology. The early work
of Schneewind (1963), Rawls (1971, 1975), and Schultz (1992) played up
the dialectical side of Sidgwick’s approach and the ways in
which he anticipated the Rawlsian account of the method of reflective
equilibrium. Reactions to any such interpretation, which supposedly
accorded a too generous role to “received opinion” in
Sidgwick’s methodology, came from Singer (1974) and many others
influenced by Hare’s critique of Rawls (see also Sverdlik 1984,
and especially, Skelton 2007, 2008, 2010). Rawls himself shifted his
ground somewhat in later work, playing up Sidgwick’s
“rational intuitionism” (Rawls 1996, 2007). But other
recent accounts, notably Brink (1994) and Shaver (1999, 2011, and
2014), have recognized that Sidgwick’s approach contains both
dialectical and more purely intuitionist elements, debating whether
these can be combined in a consistent or coherent way. Recent work on
Sidgwick has also benefited from the renaissance in and rehabilitation
of intuitionism, evident in such works as Audi (1997), Parfit (2011),
and Stratton-Lake (2002); the latter contains an important
contribution by Crisp that effectively distances Sidgwick’s
views from cruder versions of intuitionism, though Deigh (2010) has
argued forcefully that Sidgwick was too committed to an axiomatic
approach that was undermined by developments in analytical philosophy,
a point in some ways reminiscent of Donagan’s (1977) critique of
Sidgwick’s intuitionism. Schultz (1992, 2004) surveys the
development of some of these debates, but this is a very lively area
of research in which the history of English moral philosophy from
Whewell to Ross is being actively rewritten in dramatic fashion
(Hurka 2011, 2014a). Yet it does appear that in the last decade, the
scholarly emphasis has been disproportionately on Sidgwick and his
successors, notably Ross, rather than Sidgwick and his predecessors,
notably Whewell, who remains a comparatively neglected figure (Snyder
2001 [2019], 2006).
Sidgwick’s epistemology is linked to other significant
controversies as well, such as those concerning the degree to which he
can really be classified as a utilitarian, in any unqualified fashion.
For Sidgwick argues, over the course of the Methods, that
common-sense or intuitional morality keeps giving way to more abstract
formal principles as the better candidates for genuinely self-evident
truths. Although there is some controversy over just how many such
principles he advances, at the least he defends a universalizability
principle (one must be able to will one’s maxim to be a
universal law) and a principle of rational prudence (or temporal
neutrality, such that one should be ceteris paribus equally
concerned with all parts of one’s life), in addition to the
utilitarian principle of rational benevolence. Controversially, he
holds that the universalizability principle is merely formal and lacks
content, being consistent with both egoism and utilitarianism, and
that temporal neutrality translates into a form of prudence. And in
fact, even utilitarianism is actually derived from two more
fundamental principles, and involves the “relation of the
integrant parts to the whole and to each other” in order to
obtain “the self-evident principle that the good of any one
individual is of no more importance, from the point of view (if I may
say so) of the Universe, than the good of any other; unless, that is,
there are special grounds for believing the more good is likely to be
realised in the one case than in the other. And it is evident to me
that as a rational being I am bound to aim at good generally,—so
far as it is attainable by my efforts,—not at a particular part
of it.” And from “these two rational intuitions we may
deduce, as a necessary inference, the maxim of Benevolence in an
abstract form: viz. that each one is morally bound to regard the good
of any other individual as much as his own, except in so far as he
judges it to be less, when impartially viewed, or less certainly
knowable or attainable by him” (Sidgwick 1874 [1907: 382]). Thus, in
his more careful statements of the candidates for self-evident truths,
Sidgwick refrains from formulations directly invoking “the
greatest happiness of the greatest number” or hedonistic
considerations. Some of the most sophisticated commentary on the
Methods, such as Schneewind (1977), Shaver (1999, 2014),
Nakano-Okuno (2011), Parfit (2011), Phillips (2011), de Lazari-Radek
and Singer (2014), Hurka (2014a), and Crisp (2015), has highlighted
the gap between these “axioms” and the substantive ethical
theories derived or developed from them. Sidgwick himself appreciated
the irony of his position, the way in which the hard-headed, reformist
utilitarian emphasis on clarity and conclusiveness had dissipated in
his work: there are indeed “certain absolute practical
principles, the truth of which, when they are explicitly stated, is
manifest; but they are of too abstract a nature, and too universal in
their scope, to enable us to ascertain by immediate application of
them what we ought to do in any particular case; particular duties
have still to be determined by some other method” (Sidgwick
1874 [1907: 379]). Common-sense rules have their place, but are not even
clear enough to serve as the “middle axioms” of the
utilitarian theory. As he put it to Dakyns: “Ethics is losing
its interest for me rather, as the insolubility of its fundamental
problem is impressed on me. I think the contribution to the
formal clearness & coherence of our ethical thought which
I have to offer is just worth giving: for a few speculatively-minded
persons—very few. And as for all practical questions of
interest, I feel as if I had now to begin at the beginning and learn
the ABC” (Sidgwick and Sidgwick, 1906: 277).
Worse still, all was not happy even in the ethereal region of the
axioms. The “insolubility” of the “fundamental
problem” of ethics—the key problem that had troubled
Sidgwick in the 1860s—was indeed on display in Sidgwick’s
treatise, in that he did not find the unified account of practical
reason that he sought even at the more abstract level. As he had put
it in an earlier letter to his friend Dakyns: “You know I want
intuitions for Morality; at least one (of Love) is required to
supplement the utilitarian morality, and I do not see why, if we are
to have one, we may not have others. I have worked away vigorously at
the selfish morality, but I cannot persuade myself, except by trusting
intuition, that Christian self-sacrifice is really a happier life than
classical insouciance” (Sidgwick and Sidgwick, 1906: 90). The
problem of self-sacrifice and the claims of rational egoism were not,
on Sidgwick’s view, amenable to the same form of reconciliation
with utilitarianism that intuitional morality was. In fact, the first
edition of the Methods concludes that rational egoism and
utilitarianism end up in a stand-off, that there is a “dualism
of the practical reason,” and that as a result, there is a
“fundamental contradiction in our apparent intuitions of what is
Reasonable in conduct” such that “the ‘Cosmos’
of Duty is thus really reduced to a Chaos, and the prolonged effort of
the human intellect to frame a perfect ideal of rational conduct is
seen to have been foredoomed to inevitable failure” (Sidgwick 
1874 [1907: 473]). Later editions of the work sounded a somewhat less bleak
concluding note, but did not differ in substance. The main possible
solutions to the problem that Sidgwick considered are two, a weakening
of epistemological standards, or a Theistic postulate about the
coherent moral government of the universe. On the first, he suggests
that if “we find that in our supposed knowledge of the world of
nature propositions are commonly taken to be universally true, which
seem to rest on no other ground than that we have a strong disposition
to accept them, and that they are indispensable to the systematic
coherence of our beliefs,—it will be more difficult to reject a
similarly supported assumption in ethics, without opening the door to
universal scepticism” (Sidgwick 1874 [1907: 509]). On the second, he
explains that if “we may assume the existence of such a Being,
as God, by the consensus of theologians, is conceived to be,
it seems that Utilitarians may legitimately infer the existence of
Divine sanctions to the code of social duty as constructed on a
Utilitarian basis; and such sanctions would, of course, suffice to
make it always every one’s interest to promote universal
happiness to the best of his knowledge” (Sidgwick 1874 [1907:
506]).
Sidgwick often departed from the pristine language of the axioms when
describing this conflict. In another important essay on his own work,
he explained that along with “(a) a fundamental moral conviction
that I ought to sacrifice my own happiness, if by so doing I can
increase the happiness of others to a greater extent than I diminish
my own, I find also (b) a conviction—which it would be
paradoxical to call ‘moral’, but which is none the less
fundamental—that it would be irrational to sacrifice any portion
of my own happiness unless the sacrifice is to be somehow at some time
compensated by an equivalent addition to my own happiness”
(Sidgwick 1889: 483). He urges that each of these convictions has as
much clarity and certainty “as the process of introspective can
give” and each also finds wide assent “in the common sense
of mankind.” Moreover, his account of rational egoism does not
rely on a narrow or low-minded account of self-interest. Besides
Still, he found it impossible to deny that even very high-minded
versions of egoism posed a problem, prescribing actions conflicting
with the general good in such cases as heroic sacrifice of self in
battle, etc. This view, he suggested, could be found in Butler’s
claim that “Reasonable Self-love and Conscience are the two
chief or superior principles in the nature of man,” each
generating an obligation, though Frankena (1992) and Darwall (2000)
have raised questions about the historical accuracy of this
attribution. But in any event, the basic point is that if “the
Egoist strictly confines himself to stating his conviction that he
ought to take his own happiness or pleasure as his ultimate end, there
seems no opening for an argument to lead him to Utilitarianism (as a
first principle). But if he offers either as a reason for this
conviction, or as another form of stating it, the proposition that his
happiness or pleasure is objectively ‘desirable’ or
‘a good’, he gives the requisite opening. For the
Utilitarian can then point out that his happiness cannot be
more objectively desirable or more a good than the happiness of any
one else; the mere fact … that he is he can have
nothing to do with its objective desirability or goodness.”
(Sidgwick 1873: 259–60). But the egoist need not make that
move—it is just as rational simply to take one’s own point
of view as it is to take the point of view of the universe—of
the utilitarian superperson.
Sidgwick’s dualism has stimulated much controversy, even leading
some commentators to urge that he is better termed a
“dualist” or “dual-source theorist” than a
utilitarian (Crisp 2002). Moore (1903) famously dismissed the problem
on the grounds that the notion of one’s “own good”
was nonsense, but Mackie (1976) sharply countered that Moore was
begging the question. Broad (1930) claimed that Sidgwick’s
account was confused, since his proposed solutions did not touch the
problem of the inconsistent fundamental principles, though this has
been effectively addressed by Coady (1994), Schneewind (1977) and many
others. Brink (1988) has argued that it is absurd to claim that two
self-evident principles are inconsistent, but Shaver (1999) has
replied that Sidgwick is for the most part consistent in calling the
principles at issue only “apparently” self-evident, though
Shaver also suggests that Sidgwick did not present a compelling case
for the egoistic side of the conflict. Skorupski (2000) has forcefully
argued that there is no dualism of the “pure” practical
reason, which is agent neutral, but there are many such conflicts in
the larger field of less than pure practical reason, not merely a
conflict with egoistic reasons. Parfit, too, has recently argued that
Sidgwick’s two standpoints approach failed to capture how
egoistic reasons can be weaker than omnipersonal ones (Parfit 2011),
though Smith (2009) has defended Sidgwick’s construction of the
problem. And Baier (1995) has argued that Sidgwick’s account
suffers from various ambiguities because he does not clearly
distinguish “requiring” reasons from
“permissive” ones, which would avoid the contradiction.
Indeed, more generally, it is telling that many of Sidgwick’s
most notable admirers, such as Larmore (2008) and Parfit (2011), do
not carry all the baggage of his epistemological intuitionism but
prefer instead to translate his arguments into the idiom of normative
“reasons.” Indeed, Parfit called his deeply Sidgwickian
view a form of non-naturalistic, non-metaphysical moral rationalism.
And in another major recent work on the Methods, Phillips
(2011) reconstructs Sidgwick’s arguments in a similar, Parfitian
way, while retaining more of Sidgwick’s terminology. Thus, in
one vocabulary or another, these controversies are likely to continue
as long as there is such a thing as ethical philosophy.
The point is worth illustrating in more detail, given the importance
of recent work in this area. Thus, unlike Sidgwick, but like Phillips
(2011), Parfit does not regard practical reason as teetering on chaos
or think it a cosmic calamity if we cannot demonstrate that we always
have most reason to do what would be impartially best. He is content
with the effort to sort out the complex of reasons that we might have,
without going so far as to worry about the absurdity of a universe in
which Own Good and Other Good might be left in conflict, and he even
pronounces Sidgwick’s “somber claims” on this score
“overstatements,” and the result of an unhelpful
“two standpoints” framework of self and other that
implausibly casts self-interested and impartial reasons as wholly
incompatible. Moreover, according to Parfit, Sidgwick drew the
conflict too narrowly, between impartial and egoistic reasons, when in
fact we might have personal and partial, but not self-interested
reasons to act wrongly – or to care about the well-being of
others – and impartial reasons to act wrongly. Parfit, while
allowing that we have “sufficient reasons” for acting
morally, also urges that Sidgwick’s more plausible claim is
simply: “When one of our two possible acts would make things go
in some way that would be impartially better, but the other act would
make things go better either for ourselves or for those to whom we
have close ties, we often have sufficient reasons to act in either of
these two ways” (Parfit 2011, vol. 1: 137). And the substantive
ethical theory that Parfit sketches, the Triple Theory, represents a
convergence of rule consequentialism, Kantian universalizability, and
Scanlonian contractualism, and is thus at some distance from
Sidgwick’s form of utilitarianism (though Parfit himself is far
from clear on the assessment of act utilitarianism).
However, the recent work by de Lazari-Radek and Singer (2012, 2014,
2016) has opened up some ingenious new lines of argument in this area,
arguments that, it is claimed, are more thoroughly Sidgwickian. As
noted, Sidgwick had argued that apparently self-evident claims had to
be clear and precise, able to withstand critical reflection,
consistent with one another, and able to win a consensus of experts,
though in other writings he collapsed the first two into just one
condition. De Lazari-Radek and Singer seem less concerned to reject
any element of Sidgwick’s account than to add to it, such that
the significance of evolutionary “debunking” arguments is
recognized, and this leads them to reject Sidgwick’s
Dualism:
Thus, if, with Sharon Street (2006), one holds that in many cases
“it is more scientifically plausible to explain human evaluative
attitudes as having evolved because they help us to survive and to
have surviving offspring, than because they are true” (de
Lazari-Radek & Singer 2014: 180), one can debunk many of the
beliefs competing with the Axiom of Universal Benevolence, such as
those purportedly justifying partial or personal reasons for action.
If Benevolence is not debunked, and if it can in fact be accounted for
straightforwardly as a result of reason coming as a unity or package,
such that either “we have a capacity to reason that includes the
capacity to do advanced physics and mathematics and to grasp objective
moral truths, or we have a much more limited capacity to reason that
lacks not only these abilities, but others that confer an overriding
evolutionary advantage. If reason is a unity of this kind, having the
package would have been more conducive to survival and reproductions
than not having it.” (de Lazari-Radek and Singer: 183).
That Singer, in particular, should in this way have developed
defenses, not only of Sidgwickian hedonism, but also of Sidgwickian
metaethical cognitivism (against his former commitment to Hare’s
prescriptivism), and used these to advance a form of utilitarianism
that, he holds, is more consistently utilitarian than Sidgwick’s
own position and in that way in line with Sidgwick’s deeper
tendencies, is illustrative of the increasingly important role that
Sidgwick’s work is playing in cutting edge ethical theory.
Whether the principle of Universal Benevolence really has the ability
to withstand evolutionary debunking arguments, and whether such
arguments can really be made compelling in the first place, are open
questions, as is the question of whether Sidgwick himself would not
have found such gambits too narrow and unable to address his deeper
worries about the religious significance of the dualism of practical
reason (Schultz 2004, 2014, 2017; and Gray 2015). But even so, these
recent developments amount to something of a Sidgwickian
counter-revolution to the Rawlsian Kantian revolution, an effort at
both the meta and substantive ethical levels to provide an effective
intuitionist and consequentialist alternative to Kantian
constructivist and proceeduralist accounts of moral reasons.
Although Sidgwick denied that it was his special purpose, in the
Methods, to call attention to the dualism of practical
reason, this problem clearly loomed very large for him and affected
many other aspects of his life and work, including his views on the
history of ethics: he thought egoism the dominant view of the
classical Greek philosophers, the difference between ancients and
moderns having largely to do with the modern preoccupation with
“ought” rather than “good” and the emergence
of the dualism in Butler (Frankena 1992; Irwin 1992, 1994, 2011).
Again, arguably, he never did full justice to non-hedonistic,
teleological forms of perfectionism (Hurka 2001, 2011, and 2014a;
Crisp 2015) or to fully deontological, Kantian views (Schneewind 1977,
and Korsgaard 2009). However, as the remarks above underscore, the
range of his arguments is richer and more fertile than many of his
critics have recognized. Indeed, in his own day, he advanced effective
criticisms of the evolutionism of Herbert Spencer, the idealism of
Green and Bradley, and most of the other currents of philosophical
opinion that he encountered. Weinstein (2000) argues effectively that
on key points Spencer and Sidgwick had much in common; Brink (2003)
indicates just how intelligent and penetrating the exchanges between
Sidgwick and Green were, though he concludes that Green scored an
effective point in charging that Sidgwick’s hedonism was
implausible, even if coherent, a point that the recent hedonists are
of course not willing to concede (de Lazari-Radek & Singer 2014,
2016).
In the end, however, at least on the topic of classifying
Sidgwick’s Methods as a work of classical
utilitarianism, it remains difficult to dissent from
Schneewind’s summary of its heterodoxy: the Methods
This helps explain why the work continues to inspire both utilitarians
and their critics.
In an intriguing piece of retrospection written in 1887, Sidgwick
explained: 
Whether Sidgwick’s memory was entirely accurate is uncertain. In
a letter actually composed in 1870, he confessed to his friend Roden
Noel:
What I really base it on (apart from the evidence supplied by
Spiritualism, and apart from religious grounds) is on Ethics,
as Kant, supported by Common Sense. But I do not state the argument
quite as you answer it, but thus
In the face of the conflict between Virtue & Happiness, my own
voluntary life, and that of every other man constituted like me, i.e.
I believe, of every normal man, is reduced to hopeless anarchy.
Two authorities roughly speaking Butler’s
‘self-love’ and ‘Conscience’ claim to rule,
and neither will yield to the other.
The only way of avoiding this intolerable anarchy is by the Postulate
of Immortality. But you may say—‘you cannot believe it
because you want to’
I reply; I find
At any rate, he often expressed dissatisfaction with the Kantian
solution, devoting endless hours to “the serious search for
empirical evidence” of personal survival. He had long been
sympathetic to this type of natural theology, devoting more effort to
it than to exploring alternative epistemological arguments of
relevance to the dualism. Indeed, Sidgwick joined the Cambridge
“Ghost Society” as an undergraduate, and he had already
devoted many years to informal psychical research before the formation
of the Society for Psychical Research, in 1882, although his efforts
expanded thanks to the larger formal organization (Gauld 1968, and
Oppenheim, 1985). He was president of the SPR from 1882–85 and
again from 1888–93. The comparative sobriety of his leadership
of this organization, which represented an unusual combination of
eminent intellectuals, first-rate scientists, and spiritualistic
lunatics, undoubtedly did a great deal to enhance its respectability
and insure its longevity. Even many of the spiritualists, who were
precommitted to belief in disembodied human spirits, seances, and so
forth, allowed that Sidgwick was as fair-minded as any non-mystic
could be.
Sidgwick’s parapsychology was clearly and admittedly an
extension of his religious studies and as such relevant to the
solution of the dualism of practical reason. He did not successfully
spell out the precise chain of argument leading from evidence for
survival to a unified conception of practical reason, but the general
Theistic idea of a “friendly Universe” enjoying a
utilitarian moral government was obviously behind his efforts. Again,
although he was not sure that he could rationally defend it, he was
strongly drawn to the Theistic view that there is a “Heart and
Mind” behind phenomena—a “Sovereign Will that orders
all things rightly” (Sidgwick and Sidgwick, 1906:
604)—and that the universe is ethically meaningful, even if the
storm and stress that he had suffered in the 1860s had permanently
distanced him from Christian orthodoxy. Interestingly, his conversion
to a more utilitarian mode of ethical theory had even predated his
break with Anglican orthodoxy, which involved a long and painful
struggle that had him studying Hebrew and German, engaging with the
new biblical criticism of Strauss and Renan, and arguing with some of
the most prominent theologians of his day, including Benson (Schultz
2017). He found, however, that historical and philological study of
the Bible could not answer the deepest philosophical and ethical
questions, which called for, among other things, free and open inquiry
into the possibility of miracles and paranormal phenomena.
Unfortunately, he found that orthodox religion was all too often
unreceptive to such forms of inquiry, and that his doubts about such
matters as the Virgin Birth were not adequately addressed by the
theologians. In a revealing public letter to the Times,
Sidgwick distinguished three different approaches to the Bible:
“Simple Scripturalism,” which took it all as literally
true, “Historical Scripturalism,” which took only its
theological and moral statements has having that standing, and
“Rationalism,” which held that, although the “most
important part of religious truth … was discovered or revealed
before the first century of Christianity was closed,”
nonetheless “the process of development which the historical
scripturalist traces between the earlier and later of them has
continued since, and will continue, and that we cannot forecast its
limits, and that even where the doctrine of the Bible, taken as a
whole, is clear, an appeal lies always open to the common sense,
common reason, and combined experience of the religious portion of
mankind” (quoted in Schultz 2004: 83). Sidgwick identified
himself with the Rationalist camp, which was congenial to developing a
thin Theistic account of religion emphasizing the moral government of
the universe, personal survival of physical death, and the existence
of a benevolent God. Indeed, he is confident “that the thought
of civilised Europe is moving rapidly in its direction, and that it
must inevitably spread and prevail,” though he also hopes
“that it may spread with the least possible disruption and
disorganization of existing institutions, the least possible
disruption of old sympathies and associations.” He is also
confident, as he makes plain in various works, that the day of
theological censure and authoritarianism is passing.
Sidgwick’s psychical research never yielded the hard proof of
survival that he sought, and although at the end of his life he
concluded that it had been largely a waste of time, he allowed that
there were some positive results from it and that, at least in the
1890s, some promising new lines of research had emerged. The
investigation of personal survival turned out to be bound up with the
investigation of many other purportedly paranormal phenomena:
telepathy, telekinesis, hypnotism, automatic writing, trance
mediumship, apparitions of the living as well as the dead, the claims
of Theosophy, etc. After all, it was argued, a medium supposedly
relaying information from the dead might instead be in telepathic
communication with living sources of that information. Thus, in order
to establish that communication from the “other world” had
actually occurred, it was essential to be able to rule out the
possibility of telepathy (Gauld 1968, 2007).
The “Sidgwick Group,” as it was called—that is,
Henry and Eleanor Sidgwick, Arthur and Gerald Balfour, F. W. H. Myers,
Lord Rayleigh, Edmund Gurney, Frank Podmore, and a few
others—worked in close collaboration, and ended up establishing
to their satisfaction the reality of telepathic communication among
the living, the findings being presented in the series of massive (and
quite sophisticated) studies Phantasms of the Dead, Phantasms of
the Living, and the Census of Hallucinations. As Myers
explained the work:
To such transmissions of thoughts or feelings we have elsewhere given
the name of telepathy; and the records of an experimental
proof of the reality of telepathy will form a part of the present
work. But … we have included among telepathic phenomena a vast
class of cases which seem at first sight to involve something widely
different from a mere transference of thought.
I refer to apparitions; excluding, indeed, the alleged
apparitions of the dead, but including the apparitions of all
persons who are still living, as we know life, though they may be on
the very brink and border of physical dissolution. And these
apparitions … are themselves extremely various in character;
including not visual phenomena alone, but auditory, tactile, or even
purely ideational and emotional impressions. All these we have
included under the term phantasm; a word which, though
etymologically a mere variant of phantom, has been less often
used, and has not become so closely identified with visual
impressions alone. (Myers [1886], 1975: ix).
Psychical research, Myers goes on to suggest, can now claim “a
certain amount of actual achievement.” Thus,
Thus far the authors of this book, and also the main group of their
fellow-workers, are substantially agreed. (Myers [1886], 1975:
xx).
This last line indicates, in particular, that Henry Sidgwick, whose
name did not appear among the list of authors of these works, was in
substantial agreement with their claims, which certainly appears to be
the case. As Broad, a later sympathizer, summarized one of the main
conclusions of the most comprehensive of the studies, the Census
of Hallucinations: “About one visual hallucination in
sixty-three occurs within a period of twenty-four hours round
about the death of the person whose apparition has been
‘seen.’ If such deal-coincidences were purely fortuitous
concurrences of causally independent events the proportion would be
about one in nineteen thousand.” Broad concluded that
the Census was “a uniquely and meticulously careful
contribution to an important branch of their subject.” (Broad
1938: 144)
But these studies suggested that much of the supposed evidence for
personal survival was merely evidence for telepathic communications
from the living (albeit, perhaps dying), and Sidgwick consequently
found much of this work distressing rather than encouraging. It was
only in the 1890s, with the famous case of Leonora Piper, that he came
to think that there was something resembling a “prima
facie” case for survival. Piper was an American whose trance
mediumship produced purported communications from particular deceased
persons, and her claims withstood the combined scrutiny of the best
researchers in both the American and British S.P.R.s, including
William James, the Sidgwicks, Richard Hodgson, and Frank Podmore. As
Braude (2003) indicates, the Piper case is still being debated to this
day (see also Berger 1987). Evidence of this nature helped persuade
Eleanor Sidgwick, in the years following Henry’s death, that his
personality had survived physical death and succeeded in communicating
with her (Schultz 2004, 2017). In an extremely curious, even bizarre,
chapter of this history, Eleanor and her brothers, Arthur and Gerald,
along with various close friends and colleagues, apparently developed
a plot, supposedly with help from the “other side,” to
bring about the birth of a “spirit child” who could become
a new Messiah, ushering in a reign of global peace (Roy 2008; Gray
2011; Schultz 2017). What the actual, historical Henry might have
made of such an effort at applied esoteric morality is a very
intriguing question. 
If much of Sidgwick’s psychical research today looks rather
gullible, it must be allowed that his positive conclusions were always
very cautious and guarded, and that his work in fact had an
overwhelmingly negative, destructive effect, akin to that of recent
debunkers of parapsychology. The Sidgwick Group exposed one fraud
after another, including the fraudulent claims of Madame Blavatsky and
the Theosophical movement, though Theosophists continue to dispute
this. Indeed, Theosophy remains an influential “New Age”
form of the esoteric spiritualism that Sidgwick found attractive
(given its concern with the common mystical core of all religions) but
impossible to defend (Oppenheim 1985). Insofar as parapsychology has
ever enjoyed any standing as a rigorous field of scientific inquiry,
this is thanks to the efforts of Sidgwick. Furthermore, the work of
the Sidgwick Group helped pave the way for much of the developing
research in depth psychology generally, calling attention to the
efforts of Freud, Charcot, Richet and many others whose names are not
primarily associated with parapsychology (Gauld 1968, 2007).
Thus, Sidgwick’s parapsychological investigations were of
a-piece with his work on ethics and religion, and, especially in the
late 1880s, similarly frustrating. As he explained to his close friend
Symonds, he had “tried all methods in turn—all
that I found pointed out by any of those who have gone before me; and
all in turn have failed—revelational, rational, empirical
methods—there is no proof in any of them” (Sidgwick and
Sidgwick, 1906: 472). But Sidgwick was not eager to publicly proclaim
the negative results of his investigations, any more than he was eager
to publicly proclaim the skepticism about orthodox religion with with
which they were entangled. In the 1860s, in his work with the Free
Christian Union and religious investigations generally, he had been
more open, freely identifying himself as a Rationalist and a skeptic.
But in the aftermath of his resignation, he ceased to attack openly
the religious beliefs and organizations that he deemed indefensible.
As he later explained to an old friend:
Caught between the “Great Either-Or” of “Pessimism
or Faith,” Sidgwick may have regarded his position as “an
inevitable point in the process of thought,” but it was one he
took “as a soldier takes a post of difficulty,” and he
could not assume the responsibility of drawing others to it (Sidgwick
and Sidgwick, 1906: 354). He was not sure that the subject of ethics
was sufficiently like science and unlike theology to render his
academic position legitimate, even if he did not have to swear belief
in the Thirty-Nine Articles. But he did allow himself the hope that
“a considerable improvement in average human beings in this
respect of sympathy is like to increase the mundane happiness for men
generally, and to render the hope of future happiness less needed to
sustain them in the trials of life” (Sidgwick and Sidgwick,
1906: 358). Hence, the importance of political and educational reform.
It was “premature to despair.” Indeed, if Placido Bucolo,
the force behind an impressive series of conferences on Sidgwick
hosted by the University of Catania, is correct, Sidgwick’s
non-despairing Theistic heart shone through his work and activities
throughout his life (Bucolo, Crisp, & Schultz 2007, 2011). But
there is still a great deal of research to do on this subject, on the
politics and sociology of parapsychology (see Warner 2006; Schultz
2017), as well as the way in which Sidgwick distanced himself from
Kantian arguments for religious belief. Such research will likely
prove more fruitful if it resists the temptation to treat
the Methods as a stand-alone work, with a narrow, textualist
interpretive approach that Sidgwick himself would have rejected
(Schultz 2017, 2018)
Still, perhaps the larger point of Sidgwick’s worries about the
dualism and related issues is best captured by the gloss that, in the
second edition of the Methods, he put on the dualism and its
possible resolution by the appropriate Theistic premise:
It was, plausibly, this spectre of an unfriendly universe, of a
perverse Cosmos and a fragmented self in which reason is schizophrenic
or indeterminate, and the Wages of Virtue all too often dust, that
most deeply disturbed Sidgwick, even if he sometimes articulated the
issue in drier philosophical terms. And any successful but more
limited defense of one side or another of the dualism may well have
been, for him, only a very partial victory, a battle rather than the
war (Schultz 2004, 2012, 2017; Gray 2015). His deepest convictions
were more Tennysonian--the allusions to “wages” being to
Tennyson’s poem of that title, the last stanza of which
reads:
Sidgwick may have thought that the “deepest problems” of
human life had to do with the religious and ethical problems that
inspired his parapsychological research, but he nonetheless also
devoted an enormous amount of time and energy to both the theoretical
and practical sides of economics, politics, law, and ethics, which
were after all relevant to the problem of the dualism. In this he was
certainly in line with the tradition of Bentham and James and J. S.
Mill, all of whom presented utilitarianism as a comprehensive doctrine
that prioritized political, legal, and economic reform (Albee 1901;
Skorupski 1993; and Rawls [1993], 1996, 2007). If Sidgwick had his
own take on these subjects, his perspective was still that of a
theorist and reformer with broad “interdisciplinary”
concerns, rather than that of an ethicist obsessed with personal
ethics narrowly construed. His professional credentials as both an
economist and political scientist were impeccable, although the
professional organizations now associated with these disciplines were
only beginning to take shape in his era. He was an active member of
the section of the British Association concerned with political
economy and economics, and his book on The Elements of
Politics, first published in 1891, became a staple of political
science at Cambridge and elsewhere. He is best thought of as one of
the founding fathers of the “Cambridge School” of
economics, one whose contributions should be classed with those of
Alfred Marshall and A. C. Pigou (Backhouse 2006; Medema 2009; Cook
2009; Winch 2009; and Cord 2017). 
But Sidgwick’s reputation as an economist has often suffered
from an invidious comparison with Marshall, his Cambridge colleague
and rival, who is classed among the greatest figures in the history of
the discipline. Marshall was both a brilliant economic thinker and a
relentless discipline builder, the man who basically established
modern economics as an independent academic discipline at Cambridge.
As “University politicians” he and Sidgwick were often at
odds with each other, since Sidgwick on some points resisted his
efforts, believing that economics should remain integrated with the
study of politics. Almost immediately upon his appointment as
professor in late 1884, Marshall, in a famous incident, confronted
Sidgwick and ridiculed him for his “mania” for
“over-regulation” and his “failure to attract men on
a large scale,” the way Green had at Oxford. Marshall claimed
that Sidgwick was hampering his efforts, despite his greater knowledge
of economics. Sidgwick reflected on the charges, but concluded that
missionary zeal was not for him:
Sidgwick had known Marshall for a long time—since the
1860s—and had in fact helped his career. He had in effect
tutored Marshall in philosophy, stimulated his interest in educational
reform, fostered their mutual interest in political economy, and
helped call attention to the importance of Marshall’s early
work, privately circulating some of it. Initially, Marshall had joined
in the cause of women’s higher education, but he later opposed
it, despite his marriage to Newnham graduate Mary Paley. Thus, by the
1880s and 90s, relations between the two men were often quite strained
(Groenewegen 1995, and Schultz 2004).
Sidgwick had in fact long been a student of political economy.
“Mill’s influence,” he explained, led him “as
a matter of duty” to “study political economy thoroughly,
and give no little thought to practical questions, social and
political” (Sidgwick and Sidgwick, 1906: 36). In the early
1860s, he was absorbed in the study of Mill’s classic work, the
Principles of Political Economy, and much influenced by
Mill’s Cambridge disciple, the blind political economist Henry
Fawcett. From the late 1870s on, he regularly published works in this
field, producing his own Principles of Political Economy in
1883, heading the political economy section of the British
Association, contributing to Palgrave, and serving on various
government Commissions concerned with economic questions (he developed
considerable expertise devising intricate taxation schemes) His work
as an academic and policy advisor put him in touch with (directly or
indirectly) many of the leading economists of the day—not only
such Cambridge colleagues as Fawcett, Marshall, J. N. Keynes, and
Herbert Foxwell, but also such figures as Edgeworth, Leon Walras, N.
Senior, J. E. Cairnes, and W. S. Jevons. He was even familiar with the
work of Karl Marx, at a time when few trained economists even knew who
Marx was. Moreover, he was long involved with both the practical and
theoretical work of the Cambridge Charity Organization Society,
developing a sophisticated, eclectic approach to the issue of poor
relief.
But like Marshall and many economists down to the present, Sidgwick
drew a careful distinction between the descriptive side (the science)
of economic analysis and the normative or policy side (the art), which
especially concerns the proper role of government intervention in the
market system to improve “either the social production of wealth
or its distribution” (Sidgwick 1901: 33). He was also steeped
in the great methodological debates over the historical or inductive
versus the analytic or deductive approaches to the subject, and his
balanced efforts to combine the two—and strengthen comparative
studies as well—considerably distance his work from older
Benthamite defenses of Laissez Faire. For Sidgwick, “economic
man” is simply an abstraction that may be useful for explaining
or predicting some aspects of the behavior of people under certain
historical circumstances and in certain situations. Both the science
and art of economic analysis need to recognize the limitations of the
assumption that people always act out of self-interest and happily so.
Indeed, as he rather heatedly put it in his “The Scope and
Method of Economic Science”:
Sidgwick’s position certainly reflected the more sophisticated,
more historical, and even more socialistic views of the later J. S.
Mill, who had been influenced by both the Romantic movement and
Macaulay’s withering criticisms of the apriorism of
Benthamism—that is, of the Benthamite attempt to deduce the best
form of law and government from the assumption of universal
self-interest (Capaldi 2004). Sidgwick followed Mill in thinking that
political economy needed to pay attention to the complexity and
historical variety of human motivation and character, as well as the
condition of the working class. Perhaps characteristically, however,
Sidgwick appreciated the paradox involved in the successful
application of the historical method:
This is not to applaud the increasing individualism and
self-interested behavior of the modern world, which in fact rather
worried Sidgwick. Again like Mill, he hoped that the future would
bring a growth in human sympathy and moral motivation. He even hoped
that individuals would come to be motivated to work by their concern
to do their bit for the common good, to make their contribution to
society; “ethical” socialism, though not necessarily
governmental socialism, was for him a very attractive development.
But with respect to his contributions to the “science” of
economics, there has long been considerable controversy over how
successful Sidgwick was in going beyond Mill and appreciating the
“marginalist revolution” going on around him. Deane argues
that “the Principles owed more to the classical
tradition of J. S. Mill than to what contemporaries were then calling
the ‘new political economy’ of Jevons and Marshall”
(Deane 1987: 329). And Howey, in an influential work, insists that
economists “must add something to and take something away from
hedonism, as ordinarily construed, before it becomes marginal utility
economics. Jevons and Gossen could make the transformation; Sidgwick
never could” (Howey 1965: 95). On the other side, however,
Sidgwick’s economic work has been praised by more than one Nobel
Prize winner, including George Stigler. Stigler, after remarking on
how the work of Cournot and Dupuit on monopoly and oligopoly
“began to enter English economics, in particular though
Edgeworth, Sidgwick, and Marshall,” confessed that he was
“coming to admire Henry Sidgwick almost as much as the other
two. His Principles … has two chapters (bk II, ch. IX
and X) which are among the best in the history of microeconomics,
dealing with the theories of human capital and noncompetitive
behavior” (Stigler 1982: 41). Elements of the Chicago School of
Economics, particularly of law and economics, have been intriguingly
traced back to Sidgwick by Steven Medema (2004), who has also
helpfully brought out the impact of Sidgwick’s religious
concerns on his economic approach (2008, 2009). Many of the
contributions to Cord (2017) clarify and highlight the role Sidgwick
played in the development of economics, at Cambridge and in
general.
For his part, Sidgwick at least claimed that he was part of the new
movement, describing himself as a disciple of Jevons: “as Jevons
had admirably explained, the variations in the relative market values
of different articles express and correspond to variations in the
comparative estimates formed by people in general, not of the
total utilities of the amounts purchased of such articles,
but of their final utilities; the utilities, that is, of the
last portions purchased” (Sidgwick 1901: 82). But he did allow
that the differences with the older, Millian school had been
exaggerated, and he continued, despite his considerable mathematical
expertise, to do economics in a qualitative mode. Even so, he showed
considerable acumen in setting out and conceptually clarifying the
fundamental concepts of economics (wealth, value, labor, money,
efficiency, etc.), in bringing out the difficulties involved in
cross-cultural and trans-historical comparisons of wealth, and in
analyzing the various cases of market failure, from monopoly to
collective action problems to negative externalities. Indeed, his
accounts of market failure and the possible remedies—the
“art” of political economy—have received somewhat
more recognition. Even Marshall praised this side of Sidgwick’s
work, calling the relevant section of the Principles the best
thing of its kind “in any language” (Pigou 1925). It is
widely admitted that Marshall’s hand-picked successor at
Cambridge, A. C. Pigou, produced a form of welfare economics that
largely recapitulated Sidgwick’s contributions (Backhouse 2006;
Medema 2009; Cook 2009; Winch 2009; and Schultz 2017).
The form of Sidgwick’s Principles of Political Economy,
with its careful conceptual clarifications and distinction between
normative and descriptive arguments, and its successive qualifications
to individualistic, free market accounts of both, would prove to be
characteristic, figuring in many of his essays and in such works as
The Elements of Politics. As in the case of the
Methods, the structure of these works has often made it
difficult to see precisely where Sidgwick comes down on many issues.
Typically, he begins with a robust statement of the
“individualistic principle,” as, for example, in the
Elements:
Then, typically, he goes on to explain how any such principle reflects
various psychological and sociological presuppositions—for
example, that sane adults are the best judges of their own
interests—and that these are only approximate generalizations
and subject to crucial limitations. The psychological assumption that
“every one can best take care of his own interest” and the
sociological one that “the common welfare is best attained by
each pursuing exclusively his own welfare and that of his family in a
thoroughly alert and intelligent manner”—both essential to
the case for Laissez Faire—end up being very heavily qualified
and subject to so many exceptions that it is scarcely evident what
Sidgwick means when he calls individualism “in the main
sound.” The list of qualifications covers everything from
education, defense, child care, poor relief, public works, collective
bargaining, environmental protections, and more. He stresses two cases
that, he urges, perspicuously point up the problems with the
individualistic principle: “the humane treatment of lunatics,
and the prevention of cruelty to the inferior animals.” Such
restrictions do not aim at securing the freedom of the lunatics or the
animals, but are a “one-sided restraint of the freedom of action
of men with a view to the greatest happiness of the aggregate of
sentient beings.” An unfortunate—but alas,
revealing—note adds that the “protection of inferior races
of men will be considered in a subsequent chapter” (Sidgwick
1919: 141–42).
These qualifications and limitations then invariably involve a
discussion of the case for socialism and/or communism, a subject that
Sidgwick addressed at length in many works. His main objection to
socialistic interference was the familiar one that too much of it
would lead to splendidly equal destitution, as the old line has it,
and that for people as presently constituted economic incentives were
needed to spur them to produce. But again, he hoped that “human
nature” would change, growing more sympathetic and more amenable
to ethical socialism, leaving the door open to the possibility of
legitimating greater governmental interference with the market.
That is, as noted above, whatever his anxieties about economic
socialism, Sidgwick was openly enthusiastic about ethical socialism,
the possibility of humanity growing more altruistic and compassionate,
regarding their labor as their contribution to the common good. He was
under no illusions whatsoever, not only about the market failing to
reflect claims of desert or merit, but also about the limitations of
that abstraction, “economic man,” since historical and
cultural or national context could dramatically alter the
possibilities for moving beyond economic individualism, though again,
in some areas this emphasis on “national character” lent
itself to the racist and imperialistic tendencies of the British
empire (Schultz 2004; Schultz 2005). It is remarkable that
Sidgwick’s drift toward racism may have been in significant part
of result of his absorption in the work of Jevons, who held that a
“man of lower race, a negro for instance, enjoys possession
less, and loathes labour more; his exertions, therefore, soon
stop” (Jevons 1871: 177). Such views on matters of race, which
were more extreme than Mill’s, would increasingly reverberate
through late 19th-century political economy (Macmillan 1890), finding
expression in Sidgwick’s admirer Edgeworth, who would insist on
how “Capacity for pleasure is a property of evolution, an
essential attribute of civilization,” with
“civilization” being determined in part by race.
(Edgeworth 1881 [2003: 78]).
Clearly, in his political theoretical work, Sidgwick admittedly simply
assumed the utilitarian criterion as the normative bottom line, rather
than arguing for it against rational egoism. Unfortunately, as he also
stressed in many different works, no one could confidently predict the
direction of civilization. Although in his more historical works,
notably The Development of European Polity, Sidgwick
assembled evidence to suggest that a continued growth in federalism
and large-scale state organizations was likely, it was a very
carefully hedged conclusion and cast against a broad critique of the
social sciences. Much as he admired the sweep and ambition of such
pioneers of sociology as Spencer and Comte (whose emphasis on the
“consensus of experts” was appropriated for his
epistemological work), he regarded their “sciences” of the
laws of human development as absurdly over-blown, yielding wildly
different predictions about the future course of humanity. He
sincerely hoped that a more cosmopolitan attitude would be the wave of
the future, and that the growth of international law and cooperation
would decrease the likelihood of war, but he could not convince
himself that social science—with the partial exception of
economics—was beyond its infancy when it came to predicting
things to come (Bryce & Sidgwick 1919, and Schultz 2004,
2017).
Thus, although D. G. Ritchie famously charged that with Sidgwick
utilitarianism had grown “tame and sleek” and lost its
reforming zeal, others, notably F. A. Hayek, held that he had in
effect paved the way for the “New Liberalism” and even
Fabian socialism that soon overtook British politics, legitimating a
far greater degree of state intervention (Schultz 2004). Woodrow
Wilson, the future president of the U. S., admired Sidgwick’s
Elements, but found the more abstract, analytic side of his
work oddly “colorless” and in need of historical content.
These debates continue (Collini 1992, 2001; Kloppenberg 1992; Jones
2000; Bell 2007; and Winch 2009). At any rate, Sidgwick’s work
in politics and political theory, like his work in economics, does
reveal how far he was from Benthamism; he even criticized at length
the Austinian theory of sovereignty—which analyzed law in terms
of authoritative command and habitual obedience—so dear to the
Benthamites, in a critique that received high praise from the legal
historian (and Sidgwick student) F. W. Maitland.
Still, it must be allowed that Sidgwick’s political writings did
not achieve the inspiring tone of J. S. Mill, and that, for all of his
indebtedness to On Liberty, Considerations on Representative
Government etc., he tended to highlight rather different
concerns—concerns that often reflected his views on the dualism
of practical reason. Like the later Mill, he harbored many suspicions
about the wisdom of democracy and championed the need for a cultural
“clerisy” or vanguard of educated opinion, often sounding
a note not unlike that of Walter Lippmann in the twentieth century,
stressing how an educated elite should benevolently shape public
opinion. He much admired the work of his friend James Bryce, author of
The American Commonwealth, which pointed up both the vitality
and the dangers of the U.S. political system. But he devoted
comparatively little effort to proclaiming the benefits of freedom of
conscience and speech, was quite critical of Mill’s schemes for
proportional representation, and worried at length about how “to
correct the erroneous and short-sighted views of self-interest,
representing it as divergent from duty, which certainly appear to be
widely prevalent in the most advanced societies, at least among
irreligious persons.” In fact, for the government to supply
teachers of this view might even be “indirectly individualistic
in its aim, since to diffuse the conviction that it is every
one’s interest to do what is right would obviously be a valuable
protection against mutual wrong,” though it would probably
detract from the credibility of such teachers if they were salaried
employees of the state (Sidgwick 1919: 213–14). The more
sinister aspects of Sidgwick’s worries about what he termed the
“lower classes” and the “lower races,” and the
ways in which his work (including his parapsychology) intertwined with
a variety of late Victorian imperialistic projects, including those of
his colleague Sir John Seeley and of his brother-in-law Arthur
Balfour, have been brought out primarily by Schultz (2004, 2007, 2017)
and Bell (2007, 2016).
What Sidgwick’s political writings so effectively highlight,
however, is the crucial role of education in his practical and
theoretical work. Insofar as his more academic research carried a
practical political point, this concerned the need for expanding and
improving educational opportunities for all. Thus, his (highly
Millian) feminism was focused on higher education for women and the
foundation of Newham College, and his many attempts to improve the
curriculum of Cambridge University (by including Bentham, modern
literature, physiology and other new subjects) were correlated with
efforts to expand its audience and impact (Tullberg [1975], 1998, and
Sutherland 2007). And beyond formal educational institutions,
Sidgwick was simply indefatigable in promoting and participating in
discussion societies, ever aiming at the elusive “consensus of
experts” that his epistemology called for. If, towards the end
of his life, his participation in such vehicles as the “Ethical
Societies” reflected his despair over the possibility of
achieving such a consensus on the “deepest problems,” and
instead involved an effort to set such problems aside in the hope of
agreeing on the practical upshot of ethical questions (Sidgwick
1898), this was scarcely his characteristic attitude (Skelton 2011).
His support for John Addington Symonds, one of the English followers
of Walt Whitman and a pioneer of gay studies, is also suggestive of
how creative and wide-ranging his educational efforts could be
(Schultz 2004).
Sidgwick’s views on education and culture have not received
nearly as much attention as his ethical work. But they merit careful
consideration, given the way in which he resembled Mill and Dewey in
being a true philosopher-educator (Schultz 2004, 2011, 2017).
Judicious and balanced in his call for the inclusion of both older
humanistic and modern scientific elements in any form of education
worthy of the name, his vision could inspire the later educational
reformism of both Russell and Dewey, along with that of many others.
As he put it, in one of his most thoughtful essays, “The Pursuit
of Culture”: