Little is known of Heraclitus’ life; most of what has been handed down
consists of stories apparently invented to illustrate his character as
inferred from his writings (Diogenes Laertius 9.1–17). His native
Ephesus was a prominent city of Ionia, the Greek-inhabited coast of
Asia Minor, but was subject to Persian rule in his lifetime. According
to one account, he inherited the honorific title and office of
“king” of the Ionians, which he resigned to his
brother. He is generally considered to have favored aristocratic
government as against democracy, based on his own political
observations. 
His city lies close to Miletus, where the first thinkers recognized
in later tradition as philosophers lived; but there is no record of his
having made the acquaintance of any of the Milesian thinkers (Thales,
Anaximander, Anaximenes) or having been taught by them, or of his ever
having traveled.
 He is said to have written a single book (papyrus roll), and deposited
it in the great temple of Artemis at Ephesus. The story is
plausible enough: temples often served as depositories for money and
other valuables, and no libraries are known from the time of
Heraclitus. The structure of Heraclitus’ book is
controversial. It could have consisted of a relatively coherent
and consecutive argument. On the other hand, the numerous
fragments (over one hundred) that have come down to us do not easily
connect with each other, even though they probably constitute a sizable
fraction of the whole. Thus it is possible and even likely that
the book was composed more of sayings and epigrams than of continuous
exposition. In its form, then, it might have looked more like a
collection of proverbs such as were ascribed to the seven sages than
like a cosmological treatise of the Milesians. Theophrastus, who
knew his book, said that it seemed only half-finished, a kind of
hodgepodge he attributed to the author’s melancholy.
 Diogenes Laertius reports that the work was divided (he does not
say by whom) into three sections, one on cosmology, one on politics
(and ethics), and one on theology (9.5–6). All these topics are
treated in the extant fragments of Heraclitus, though it is often
difficult to see what boundaries the work might have drawn between
them, since Heraclitus seems to see deep interconnections between
science, human affairs, and theology.
 Unlike most other early philosophers, Heraclitus is usually seen as
independent of the several schools and movements later students
(somewhat anachronistically) assigned to the ancients, and he himself
implies that he is self-taught (B101). He has been variously
judged by ancient and modern commentators to be a material monist or a
process philosopher; a scientific cosmologist, a metaphysician, or a
mainly religious thinker; an empiricist, a rationalist, or a mystic; a
conventional thinker or a revolutionary; a developer of logic or one
who denied the law of non-contradiction; the first genuine philosopher
or an anti-intellectual obscurantist. No doubt the sage of
Ephesus will continue to remain controversial and difficult to
interpret, but scholars have made significant progress in understanding
and appreciating his work.
Heraclitus made every effort to break out of the mold of contemporary
thought. Although he was influenced in a number of ways by the thought
and language of his predecessors, including the epic poets Homer and
Hesiod, the poet and philosopher Xenophanes, the historian and
antiquarian Hecataeus, the religious guru Pythagoras, the sage Bias of
Priene, the poet Archilochus, and the Milesian philosophers, he
criticized most of them either explicitly or implicitly, and struck
out on his own path. He rejected polumathiê or
information-gathering on the grounds that it “does not teach
understanding” 
(B40).[1] 
He treated the epic poets as fools and
called Pythagoras a fraud.
 In his fragments Heraclitus does not explicitly criticize the
Milesians, and it is likely that he saw them as the most progressive of
previous thinkers. He does tacitly criticize Anaximander for not
appreciating the role of injustice in the world (B80), while he might
have expressed some admiration for Thales (B38). His views can be
seen to embody structural criticisms of Milesian principles, but even
in correcting the Milesians he built on their foundations. 
 Heraclitus’ most fundamental departure from previous philosophy
lies in his emphasis on human affairs. While he continues many of
the physical and cosmological theories of his predecessors, he shifts
his focus from the cosmic to the human realm. We might well think
of him as the first humanist, were it not for the fact that he does not
seem to like humanity very well. From the outset he makes it
clear that most people are too stupid to understand his theory. 
He may be most concerned with the human relevance of philosophic
theories, but he is an elitist like Plato, who thinks that only select
readers are capable of benefitting from his teachings. And
perhaps for this reason he, like Plato, does not teach his
philosophical principles directly, but couches them in a literary form
that distances the author from the reader. In any case he seems
to regard himself not as the author of a philosophy so much as the
spokesman for an independent truth:
Heraclitus stresses that the message is not his own invention, but a
timeless truth available to any who attend to the way the world itself
is. “Although this Word is common,” he warns,
“the many live as if they had a private understanding”
(B2). The Word (account, message) exists apart from
Heraclitus’ teaching, but he tries to convey that message to his
audience.
 The blindness of humans is one of Heraclitus’ main themes. 
He announces it at the beginning of his book:
He begins by warning his readers that most of them will not
understand his message. He promises to “distinguish each
thing according to its nature and show how it is,” a claim
similar to the Milesians’. Yet like sleepers his readers
will not understand the world around them. As this implies, in
his book Heraclitus does have some things to say about the natural
world, but much more to say about the human condition.
 No less important than Heraclitus’ message is the form in which
he imparts it to his audience. Aristotle noticed that even in the
first sentence of B1, quoted above, the force of the word
‘forever’ was unclear: did it go with the preceding or the
subsequent words, with ‘being’ or ‘prove’
(Rhetoric 1407b11–18)?  He regarded the ambiguity as a
weakness in Heraclitus’ communication. But if we attend to
Heraclitus’ language we see that syntactical ambiguity is more
than an accident: it is a common technique he uses to enrich his words
and to infuse them with a unique verbal complexity like that of
poetry. Charles Kahn (1979: 89) identifies two general traits of
Heraclitus’ style, linguistic density and resonance. The
former is his ability to pack multiple meanings into a single word or
phrase, the latter his ability to use one expression to evoke
another. To take a simple example:
 Deaths that are greater greater portions gain. (B25)
Heraclitus uses alliteration (four m-words in a row) and chiasmus
(an ABBA pattern) to link death and reward. The latter appears as
a mirror image of the former, and in sound and sense they fuse
together. Another fragment consists of three words in Greek:
 The character of man is his guardian spirit. (B119)
The second word, in the dative case “to” or
“for” man, stands between the names of two very unlike
objects, ‘character’ and ‘deity.’ 
Grammatically, it can attach to either indifferently, and seems
intended to be heard with both, so that it counts twice. Because
of its double role, the word forms a kind of syntactic glue between the
otherwise diverse subjects, joining them together in a unity. 
Traditionally having a good or a bad guardian spirit constitutes
one’s “luck”–one is eudaimôn or
dusdaimôn, fortunate or wretched, at the mercy of
one’s divine overseer. But Heraclitus turns one’s
luck into a function of one’s character, one’s ethical
stance, by making “man” the link.
 Ultimately, Heraclitus loads his words with layers of meaning and
complexities that are to be discovered in insights and solved like
riddles. As he implies in the second sentence of his
introduction, B1, his logoi are designed to be experienced,
not just understood, and only those who experience them in their
richness will grasp his message.
Although his words are meant to provide concrete vicarious
encounters with the world, Heraclitus adheres to some abstract
principles which govern the world. Already in antiquity he was
famous for advocating the coincidence of opposites, the flux doctrine,
and his view that fire is the source and nature of all things. In
commenting on Heraclitus, Plato provided an early reading, followed
tentatively by Aristotle, and popular down to the present (sharpened
and forcefully advocated by Barnes 1982, ch. 4). According to
Barnes’ version, Heraclitus is a material monist who believes
that all things are modifications of fire. Everything is in flux
(in the sense that “everything is always flowing in some
respects,” 69), which entails the coincidence of opposites
(interpreted as the view that “every pair of contraries is
somewhere coinstantiated; and every object coinstantiates at least one
pair of contraries,” 70). The coincidence of opposites,
thus interpreted, entails contradictions, which Heraclitus cannot
avoid. On this view Heraclitus is influenced by the prior theory
of material monism and by empirical observations that tend to support
flux and the coincidence of opposites. In a time before the
development of logic, Barnes concludes, Heraclitus violates the
principles of logic and makes knowledge impossible.
 Obviously this reading is not charitable to Heraclitus. There
are, moreover, reasons to question it. First, some of
Heraclitus’ views are incompatible with material monism (to be
discussed later), so that the background of his theories must be
rethought. Second, there is evidence that Heraclitus’ flux
theory is weaker than that attributed to him by this reading. 
Third, there is evidence that his view of the coincidence of opposites
is weaker than that attributed to him here. 
Barnes bases his Platonic reading on Plato’s own
statement:
The established scholarly method is to try to verify Plato’s
interpretation by looking at Heraclitus’ own words, if
possible. There are three alleged “river
fragments”:
 B12. potamoisi toisin autoisin embainousin hetera kai
hetera hudata epirrei.
B49a. potamois tois autois … 
B91[a]. potamôi … tôi autôi
…
Of these only the first has the linguistic density characteristic of
Heraclitus’ words. The second starts out with the same
three words as B12, but in Attic, not in Heraclitus’ Ionic
dialect, and the second clause has no grammatical connection to the
first. The third is patently a paraphrase by an author famous for
quoting from memory rather than from books. Even it starts out in
Greek with the word ‘river,’ but in the singular. 
There is no evidence that repetitions of phrases with variations
are part of Heraclitus’ style (as they are of
Empedocles’). To start with the word ‘river(s)’
goes against normal Greek prose style, and on the plausible assumption
that all sources are trying to imitate Heraclitus, who does not repeat
himself, we would be led to choose B12 as the one and only river
fragment, the only actual quotation from Heraclitus’ book. 
This is the conclusion of  Kirk (1954) and  Marcovich (1967),
based on an interpretation that goes back to  Reinhardt
(1916). That B12 is genuine is suggested by the features it
shares with Heraclitean fragments: syntactic ambiguity (toisin
autoisin ‘the same’ [in the dative] can be construed
either with ‘rivers’ [“the same rivers”] or
with ‘those stepping in’ [“the same people”],
with what comes before or after), chiasmus, sound-painting (the first
phrase creates the sound of rushing water with its diphthongs and
sibilants), rhyme and
 alliteration.[2]
 If B12 is accepted as genuine, it tends to disqualify the other two
alleged fragments. The major theoretical connection in the
fragment is that between ‘same rivers’ and ‘other
waters.’  B12 is, among other things, a statement of the
coincidence of opposites. But it specifies the rivers as the
same. The statement is, on the surface, paradoxical, but there is
no reason to take it as false or contradictory. It makes
perfectly good sense: we call a body of water a river precisely because
it consists of changing waters; if the waters should cease to flow it
would not be a river, but a lake or a dry streambed. There is a
sense, then, in which a river is a remarkable kind of existent, one
that remains what it is by changing what it contains (cf. Hume
Treatise 1.4.6, p. 258 Selby-Bigge). Heraclitus derives
a striking insight from an everyday encounter. Further, he
supplies, via the ambiguity in the first clause, another reading: on
the same people stepping into rivers, other and other waters
flow. With this reading it is people who remain the same in
contrast to changing waters, as if the encounter with a flowing
environment helped to constitute the perceiving subject as the
same. (See Kahn 1979.)  B49a, by contrast, contradicts the
claim that one can step into the same rivers (and also asserts that
claim), and B91[a], like Plato in the Cratylus, denies that
one can step in twice. Yet if the rivers remain the same, one
surely can step in twice–not into the same waters, to be sure,
but into the same rivers. Thus the other alleged fragments are
incompatible with the one certifiably genuine fragment.
 In fact, Marcovich (1967) has succeeded in showing how a misreading of
B12 could lead to an interpretation such as that embodied in A6 and
B91[a]. It is possible to see Cratylus, a late follower of
Heraclitus, supplying the wayward reading, and then adding his famous
rejoinder that one cannot step into the same river even once (although
the reading may go back earlier to Hippias:  Mansfeld 1990:
43–55). Since Plato is alleged to have heard Cratylus’
lectures, he may well have derived his reading from Cratylus’
criticism. 
 If this interpretation is right, the message of the one river fragment,
B12, is not that all things are changing so that we cannot encounter
them twice, but something much more subtle and profound. It is
that some things stay the same only by changing. One kind of
long-lasting material reality exists by virtue of constant turnover in
its constituent matter. Here constancy and change are not opposed
but inextricably connected. A human body could be understood in
precisely the same way, as living and continuing by virtue of constant
metabolism–as Aristotle for instance later understood it. 
On this reading, Heraclitus believes in flux, but not as destructive of
constancy; rather it is, paradoxically, a necessary condition of
constancy, at least in some cases (and arguably in all). In
general, at least in some exemplary cases, high-level structures
supervene on low-level material flux. The Platonic reading still
has advocates (e.g. Tarán 1999), but it is no longer the
only reading of Heraclitus advocated by scholars.
Heraclitus’ flux doctrine is a special case of the unity of
opposites, pointing to ways things are both the same and not the same
over time. He depicts two key opposites that are interconnected,
but not identical. Heraclitus sometimes explains how things have
opposite qualities:
Barnes thinks Heraclitus gets his doctrine of the universal
coinstantiation of contraries through fallaciously dropping qualifiers
(such as: ‘for fish,’ ‘for men’). But B61
shows he is perfectly aware of them, and we might rather say that he
understands them tacitly even when he does not utter them. When
he says,
he does not contradict himself. There are perfectly good
contexts in which everything he says is true. One can divide a
collection into its parts or join the parts into a unified
whole. 
 Most tellingly, Heraclitus explains just how contraries are
connected:
Contrary qualities are found in us “as the same
thing.”  But they are the same by virtue of one thing
changing around to another. We are asleep and we wake up; we are
awake and we go to sleep. Thus sleep and waking are both found in
us, but not at the same time or in the same respect. Indeed, if
sleeping and waking were identical, there would be no change as
required by the second sentence. Contraries are the same by
virtue of constituting a system of connections: alive-dead,
waking-sleeping, young-old. Subjects do not possess incompatible
properties at the same time, but at different times.
 In general, what we see in Heraclitus is not a conflation of opposites
into an identity, but a series of subtle analyses revealing the
interconnectedness of contrary states in life and in the world. 
There is no need to impute to him a logical fallacy. Opposites
are a reality, and their interconnections are real, but the correlative
opposites are not identical to each other.
The standard view of Heraclitus’ ontology since Aristotle is
that he is a material monist who holds that fire is the ultimate
reality; all things are just manifestations of fire. According to
Aristotle the Milesians in general were material monists who advocated
other kinds of ultimate matter: Thales water, Anaximander the
boundless, Anaximenes air (Metaphysics 983b6–984a8). So
Heraclitus’ theory was just another version of a common
background theory. There are problems already with
Aristotle’s understanding of the Milesians: Aristotle lacks any
textual evidence for Thales’ view and must reconstruct it out of
almost nothing; he sometimes treats Anaximander as a pluralist like
Anaxagoras who thinks the boundless is a mixture of qualities; at most
Anaximenes might exemplify material monism–but Plato reads him as
a pluralist (Timaeus 39 with Graham 2003b; Graham
2003a). In the case of Heraclitus, his own statements make
material monism problematic as an interpretation. According to
material monism, some kind of matter is the ultimate reality, and any
variation in the world consists merely of qualitative or possibly
quantitative change in it; for there is only one reality, for instance
fire, which can never come into existence or perish, but can only
change in its appearances. Heraclitus, however, advocates a
radical kind of change:
(Here soul seems to occupy the place of fire.)  The language of
birth and death in the world of living things is precisely the language
used in Greek metaphysics for coming to be and perishing. It
implies a radical transformation that rules out continuing identity
(cf. B76, B62). Indeed, interpreters of Heraclitus cannot have it
both ways: Heraclitus cannot be both a believer in radical flux (the
change of everything into everything else: fire into water, water into
earth, and so on) and an advocate of monism. Either he must
believe in a merely illusory or at most a limited kind of change, or he
must be a pluralist. 
 One further difficulty remains for the monist reading. In his
alleged version of monism, fire is the ultimate reality. Yet fire
(as the ancients recognized) is the least substantial and the most
evanescent of elemental stuffs. It makes a better symbol of
change than of permanence. Other alleged cases of material monism
offer a basic kind of matter that could arguably be stable and
permanent over long periods of time; but fire manifests “need and
satiety” (B65), a kind of ongoing consumption that can live only
by devouring fuel. Is not Heraclitus’ choice of a basic reality itself
paradoxical?  At best his appeal to fire seems to draw on material
monism in a way that points beyond the theory to an account  in
which the process of change is more real than the material substances
that undergo change.
Although Heraclitus is more than a cosmologist, he does offer a
cosmology. His most fundamental statement on cosmology is found
in B30:
In this passage, he uses, for the first time in any extant Greek
text, the word kosmos “order” to mean something
like “world.”  He identifies the world with fire, but
goes on to specify portions of fire that are kindling and being
quenched. Although ancient sources, including Aristotle (On
the Heavens 279b12–17) as well as the Stoics, attributed to
Heraclitus a world that was periodically destroyed by fire and then
reborn, the present statement seems to contradict that view, as Hegel
already noticed. If the world always was and is and will be, then
it does not perish and come back into existence, though portions of it
(measures of fire) are constantly being transformed. 
 Heraclitus describes the transformations of elementary bodies:
<Earth> is liquefied as sea and measured into the same
proportion as it had before it became earth. (B31[b])
Fire turns into water (“sea”), and then half of that
quantity turns into earth and half into “fireburst”
(prêstêr, a fiery, windy kind of storm
phenomenon). The portion that becomes earth turns back into
water, in the same quantity it had previously. Here Heraclitus
envisages a lawlike transformation of stuff from fire to water to
earth; the transformation is reversible, and in it the same relative
quantities of stuff are preserved. There is, then, a kind of
conservation of matter, or at least overall quantity of matter. 
What would make the world to be continuous would be the fact that when
one portion of fire turns into water, an equivalent portion of water
turns into fire. The overall equilibrium is preserved, even if
the water that is now in the sea is not the same water as was in it
before. This picture bears a similarity to the image of the
river, which remains the same despite its changing material
contents. 
 In this view of the world, the mutual transformations of matter are not
an accidental feature, but the very essence of nature. Without
change, there would be no world. Heraclitus seems to acknowledge
this in his praise of war and strife:
War is father of all and king of all; and some he manifested as
gods, some as men; some he made slaves, some free. (B53)
Conflicting powers of opposites, including those of elemental
bodies, make possible the world and all its variety; without that
conflict we would have only lifeless uniformity. In the former
passage Heraclitus is perhaps criticizing Anaximander for his view that
cosmic justice consists of a punishment of powers that overstep their
boundaries (Anaximander B1). Justice is not the correction of an
excess, but the whole pattern of the domination of one opposite
followed by that of the other. 
 There is, however, a guiding force in the world:
The fiery shaft of lightning is a symbol of the direction of the
world. Anaximander may have already used the image of the
shipmaster of the universe (Kahn 1960: 238). Heraclitus identifies it
with the thunderbolt, itself an attribute of Zeus the storm god. 
The changes wrought by and symbolized by fire govern the world. 
The ruling power of the universe can be identified with Zeus, but not
in a straightforward way: “One being, the only wise one, would
and would not be called by the name of Zeus” (B32). And
here the word used for ‘Zeus’ can be rendered
“Life.”  Like the Milesians, Heraclitus identifies the
ruling power of the world with deity, but (like them also) his
conception is not a conventional one. 
 Heraclitus provided some sort of discussion of meteorological and
astronomical phenomena. He studied the disappearance and
reappearance of the moon at the end and beginning of a month
(Oxyrhynchus Papyri LIII 3710 ii. 43–47 and iii. 7–11–the
clearest evidence that Heraclitus had a scientific interest in
astronomy). He explained the sun and moon as bowls full of
fire. As the moon’s bowl rotated it caused the
phases. Eclipses were the result of a rotation of the convex side
of the bowls to face the earth. We have no reports about the
earth itself, but we may suppose that, like his predecessors,
Heraclitus viewed it as flat. Evaporations from the earth and sea
apparently provided fuel for the heavenly bodies, which burned like oil
lamps. 
 Divine power is manifest in all phenomena: “God is day night,
winter summer, war peace, satiety hunger, and he alters just as
<fire> when it is mixed with spices is named according to the
aroma of each of them” (B67). Again Heraclitus seems to
stress the unity of divine power, even if humans assign different names
and attributes to it. All things that happen are good, but humans
do not perceive them to be so: “To God all things are fair, good
and just, but men suppose some things are unjust, some just”
(B102). Heraclitus does not attempt to provide a detailed
theodicy, but seeks to view all things sub specie
aeternitatis, in which conflict (including presumably human
conflict) keeps the world going (B80, cited above). 
Plato held that for Heraclitus knowledge is made impossible by the
flux of sensible objects. Yet Heraclitus does not repudiate
knowledge or the wisdom that comes from a proper understanding of the
world. To be sure, he believes most people are not capable of
wisdom; understanding is a rare and precious commodity, which even most
reputed sages do not attain to (B28[a]). Yet wisdom is possible,
and it is embodied in Heraclitus’ message, for those who can
discern it.
 Heraclitus seems to accept the evidence of the senses as in some way
valuable: “The things of which there is sight, hearing,
experience, I prefer” (B55). Sight is the best of the
senses: “The eyes are more accurate witnesses than the
ears” (B101a). Yet in contrast to those who view knowledge
as an accumulation of information or wisdom as a collection of sayings,
he requires much more than sensation and memory:
In this statement Heraclitus reviews the leading authorities of his
day, living (the last three) and dead, dealing with religious and
secular knowledge, and finds them all wanting. They spend too
much effort in collecting information and not enough in grasping its
meaning. “What intelligence or understanding do they [the
people] have?” asks Heraclitus. “They follow popular
bards and treat the crowd as their instructor, not realizing that the
many are base, while the few are noble” (B104). He
criticizes Hesiod on specifics: “The teacher of the multitude is
Hesiod; they believe he has the greatest knowledge–who did not
comprehend day and night: for they are one” (B57). In his
myths, Hesiod treats Day and Night as separate persons, taking turns
traveling abroad, while one remains at home. But this fails to
capture the interconnectedness of day and night, and falsifies
reality. Heraclitus criticizes Homer, Pythagoras and Archilochus
for their inadequacies. 
 In general, he holds that people do not learn what they should:
“Many do not understand such things as they encounter, nor do
they learn by their experience, but they think they do”
(B17). Indeed, they do not process the information they receive:
“Having heard without comprehension they are like the deaf; this
saying bears witness to them: present they are absent”
(B34). Heraclitus explains: “Poor witnesses for men are the
eyes and ears of those who have barbarian souls” (B107). A
barbarian was a non-Greek; just as a foreigner hears Greek words
without understanding their meaning, most people perceive without
understanding the world around them. Sense perception is
necessary for knowledge, but not sufficient; without the ability to
decipher information from the senses, one cannot understand the
world.
 What chance is there then to learn the secrets of the world? 
Heraclitus is not wholly pessimistic about human cognitive abilities:
“All men have a share in self-knowledge and sound thinking”
(B116). What is needed is not simply more sense experience or
more information, but an improved way of comprehending the message
(logos) that the world offers. In this context his
curious method of expression begins to make sense. He presents
his statements in the form of puzzles, riddles, aperçus. 
Many of them support two or more readings, and contain hidden
insights. To comprehend them the reader must grasp their
complexity and then discover their unity. To read Heraclitus
appropriately is to have a rich cognitive experience, as the
philosopher hints in his introduction (B1).
 Heraclitus often presents a simple concrete situation or image which
has implications for our understanding of the world: a river, a bow, a
road. He does not generally pronounce generalizations and deduce
consequences. Rather, his method can be seen as inductive: he offers
an example which suggests general principles. Unlike most
philosophers, he challenges the right brain rather than the
left.  He does not teach in the conventional sense; he offers his
readers materials for understanding and lets them educate
themselves. He cites with approval a model of religious
instruction:
The riddling statements of the Delphic oracle do not provide
straightforward answers, but force people to interpret them. His
truths come to the attentive reader as discoveries resulting from the
solution of a puzzle.
The aim of Heraclitus’ unusual approach is to produce readers
who have a proper grasp of the world and their place in it. 
“Sound thinking is the greatest virtue and wisdom: to speak the
truth and to act on the basis of an understanding of the nature of
things” (B112). Such an understanding can result only from
an ability to interpret the language of nature. The proper
understanding allows one to act in a harmonious way.
 Heraclitus urges moderation and self-control in a somewhat
conventional way (B85, B43). He also recommends the conventional Greek
goal of seeking fame: “The best choose one thing above all, the
everlasting fame of mortals; the many gorge themselves like
cattle” (B29). To die in battle is a superior kind of death
(B24). Those who drink to excess make their souls wet, and accordingly
harm them (B117), for a healthy soul is dry (B118).  Those who
experience better deaths attain better rewards (B25).  Those who
lie will be punished (B28[b]). “For men who die there await
things they do not expect or anticipate” (B27).  Some of
these remarks tend to suggest an afterlife with rewards and
punishment, although his belief in a continued existence is
controversial (see Nussbaum 1972). In any case, Heraclitus views the
soul as the moral and cognitive center of human experience.
 In political theory he maintains that one good man is worth ten
thousand ordinary people (B49). He criticizes his fellow citizens
for banishing a distinguished leader:
Evidently he trusts the few and distrusts the many. He sees
good laws as being reflections of universal principles:
The divine law, on Heraclitus’ view, is probably continuous
with the laws governing the cosmos, which maintain justice through
opposition (B80).
Although Heraclitus is not known to have had students, his writings
seem to have been influential from an early time. He may have
provoked Parmenides to develop a contrasting philosophy (Patin 1899;
Graham 2002), although their views have much more in common than is
generally recognized (Nehamas 2002). Empedocles seems to have
invoked Heraclitean themes, and some Hippocratic treatises imitated
Heraclitean language and presented applications of Heraclitean
themes. Democritus echoed many of Heraclitus’ ethical
pronouncements in his own ethics. From an early time Heraclitus was
seen as the representative of universal flux in contrast to Parmenides,
the representative of universal stasis. Cratylus brought
Heraclitus’ philosophy to Athens, where Plato heard it. 
Plato seems to have used Heraclitus’ theory (as interpreted by
Cratylus) as a model for the sensible world, as he used
Parmenides’ theory for the intelligible world. As
mentioned, both Plato and Aristotle viewed Heraclitus as violating the
law of non-contradiction, and propounding an incoherent theory of
knowledge based on a radical flux. Yet Aristotle also treated him
as a coherent material monist who posited fire as an ultimate
principle. The Stoics used Heraclitus’ physics as the
inspiration for their own, understanding him to advocate a periodic
destruction of the world by fire, followed by a regeneration of the
world; Cleanthes in particular commented on Heraclitus. 
Aenesidemus interpreted Heraclitus as a kind of proto-skeptic (see
Polito 2004). 
 Ever since Plato, Heraclitus has been seen as a philosopher of
flux. The challenge in interpreting the philosopher of Ephesus has
always been to find a coherent theory in his paradoxical
utterances. Since Hegel, he has been seen as a paradigmatic process
philosopher–perhaps with some justification. 
The recently published Derveni Papyrus, discovered in a tomb in
northern Greece, contains a commentary on an Orphic poem. The
commentator discusses some passages of Heraclitus in connection with
the poem, namely B3 + B94 (which may have been thus joined in
Heraclitus’ book) (column 4). See Betegh 2004. The Oxyrhynchus
Papyri (vol. 53, no. 3710) also show that Heraclitus was interested in
determining the days of the lunar month and thus in scientific
questions. See Burkert 1993.
In recent work, scholars have devoted special attention to
Heraclitus’ moral and political theory (Fattal 2011, Sider 2013,
Robitzsch 2018), to questions of logos and rationality (Hülsz
2013, Long 2013), to the material character of soul (Betegh 2007), and
to the theory of elemental change (Neels 2018).
 