Herbert Feigl was born on December 14, 1902, in the then Austrian
town of Reichenberg (nowadays Liberec, Czech Republic). Feigl’s
parents were Jewish, but not religious. His father, a trained weaver,
was said to be an ardent atheist; he was a skillful and highly
ingenious textile designer and became later in his career one of the
most influential leaders in the Austrian textile industry.
Feigl’s mother, who had a lifelong interest in the arts, filled
him with enthusiasm for classical music, particularly for the
symphonies of Anton Bruckner and Gustav Mahler. In 1921, Feigl began to
study mathematics, physics, and philosophy at the University of Munich.
Because of the anti-Semitic climate in Germany (and in particular in
Munich) he moved, in 1922, to the University of Vienna where he studied
under Moritz Schlick, Hans Hahn, Hans Thirring, and Karl Bühler.
In the very same year, he wrote an essay on the philosophical
significance of Einstein’s theory of relativity for which he
obtained a prize in a competition (with Schlick, Ernst von Aster and
Max von Laue as referees). In 1924, Feigl became one of the co-founders
of the Vienna Circle. In 1927, he finished his doctoral dissertation in
philosophy on the relationship between chance and law in the natural
sciences. Inspired by discussions with Karl Popper and Hans
Reichenbach, Feigl, in 1929, published the monograph Theorie und
Erfahrung in der Physik. In the same year, he gave a series of
lectures at the Bauhaus in Dessau, between which and the Vienna Circle
there were interesting parallels in both intellectual outlook and
political approach (see Galison 1990). In 1930 Feigl married Maria
Kasper, a fellow student at the University of Vienna, and had a son
(Eric Feigl).
For reasons of anti-Semitism and occupational hopelessness, Feigl,
in 1930, decided to emigrate to the United States. Funded by a
Rockefeller Research Fellowship, he first stayed for eight months at
Harvard University. Together with Albert E. Blumberg he wrote the
programmatic article “Logical Positivism: A New Movement in
European Philosophy” (published in the spring of 1931 in the
Journal of Philosophy). From 1931 to 1937 Feigl taught as a
lecturer and assistant professor at the University of Iowa. In 1937, he
was granted US citizenship. From 1938 to 1940 he served as an associate
professor at the University of Iowa. Eventually, in 1940, Feigl
received a full professorship at the University of Minnesota in
Minneapolis. There he founded in 1953 the Minnesota Center for the
Philosophy of Science which was the first center of that kind in the
United States and which is still one of the leading institutions for
research in the history and philosophy of science.
Apart from guest professorships in Berkeley (1946 and 1953), at
Columbia University (1950) and at the University of Hawai’i (1958),
Feigl had research stays in Mexico, Australia, and Austria. He was
president of the American Philosophical Association and vice president
of the American Association for the Advancement of Science. Among the
major works during his time in the United States are writings on
methodology, on the scientific realism debate and a couple of
contributions to the mind-body problem, the most well-known of which is
the essay “The ‘Mental’ and the
‘Physical’” (1958). After his retirement in 1971,
Feigl was still active as an organizer of philosophical discussions at
his private home. He died of cancer on June 1, 1988, in Minneapolis.
 
As already indicated, Feigl was a member of the Vienna Circle from
its very beginning. Together with Friedrich Waismann he had suggested
to Schlick the formation of an evening discussion group (see Feigl
1981, p. 60). Schlick took over the idea and installed a Thursday
evening colloquium in the Vienna Boltzmanngasse 5, the location of the
University’s Department of Mathematics. Among the co-founders of
the Circle were, besides Waismann and Feigl himself, Hans Hahn, Otto
Neurath, Olga Hahn-Neurath, Viktor Kraft, Felix Kaufmann, and the
mathematician Kurt Reidemeister. It was the latter who proposed the
reading and discussion of Ludwig Wittgenstein’s Tractatus
logico-philosophicus. As Feigl reported in an unpublished
interview,
However, the reading of Wittgenstein’s Tractatus was
only one of a number of topics discussed within the Circle. According
to Feigl, “about 60 % of our time was devoted to the problems of
the foundation of mathematics and the rest to philosophy of science and
epistemology” (ibid.). Between 1926 and 1928 it was the reading
of (the typescript of) Rudolf Carnap’s Der logische Aufbau
der Welt which dominated the discussion. 
As for Feigl’s own development, his doctoral dissertation
under Schlick’s supervision should be mentioned first. Submitted
in July1927, the purpose of this study was to examine the problem of
the application of the probability calculus, hence its title
“Chance and law: an epistemological analysis of the roles of
probability and induction in the natural sciences.” Heavily
inspired by Edgar Zilsel’s Das Anwendungsproblem (1916),
Feigl argued along pragmatic (Humean) lines. His central thesis was
that the problem of induction cannot be solved by making recourse to
the probability concept. Feigl, thereby criticizing especially the
point of view defended by Hans Reichenbach, proposed instead a
‘vindication’ rather than a ‘validation’ of
inductive reasoning. Relying on a frequency interpretation of
probability, he argued that the limiting value of an infinite sequence
can only be inferred inductively, which in turn implied that
probability is dependent on induction and not vice versa.
Concerning the principle of induction itself, Feigl (like his teacher
Schlick) saw no other possibility than to interpret it as a pragmatic
(or operational) maxim. On the whole, however, the approach laid down
in Feigl’s dissertation was, as Feigl himself later conceded (see
Feigl 1981, p. 6), severely limited by its neglect of the simultaneous
rise and development of quantum mechanics. 
It was in the 1929 book Theorie und Erfahrung in der Physik
that Feigl reflected on the philosophical significance of quantum
mechanics. In addition he elaborated on the more general issues of
scientific explanation and the hypothetico-deductive method in theory
construction, thereby informally anticipating ideas later developed in
more detail by Karl Popper and especially by Carl Gustav Hempel. On the
programmatic level, Feigl criticized both Kantianism and
conventionalism and argued, positively, for a ‘critical
realist’ approach to the relationship of theory and experience in
physics. The book, which received favorable reactions by practicing
physicists such as Albert Einstein and Wolfgang Pauli, was
Feigl’s only book in German language (and his only monograph at
all). Its exposed position with respect to programmatic outlook Feigl
retrospectively described as follows:
That Schlick was converted to “phenomenalistic
positivism” might be contested (see Geymonat 1985); but, beyond
the shadow of a doubt, Feigl’s realistic reconstruction of the
theories of physics had a minority status within the Vienna Circle.
After his emigration to the United States, Feigl devoted much of his
work to developing a stable realist stance. 
It is commonly supposed that logical empiricism and scientific
realism are systematically at odds. However, Feigl’s diverse
contributions to the scientific realism debate just suggest the
opposite: Influenced by the early ‘critical’ realism of his
teacher Schlick, Feigl (like Reichenbach and Eino Kaila) argued in
terms of a reconciliation of both positions, that is, he attempted to
combine logical empiricist methods with a scientific realist account of
theoretically postulated entities (see, in this connection, also Neuber
2012, esp. pp. 45–51, and especially Neuber 2018, ch. 5).
To begin with, in their 1931 article “Logical Positivism: A
New Movement in European Philosophy,” Feigl and Blumberg
presented the logical positivist approach as the synthesis of two
“significant traditions” (Feigl/Blumberg 1931, p. 281): the
classical “positivistic-empirical” current in European
philosophy, and the development of modern (mathematical) logic. The
most characteristic feature of the emerging “new movement”
was, according to Feigl and Blumberg, its conception of the
propositions of metaphysics as “meaningless” (ibid., p.
282). This diagnosis also pertained to Kant’s account of
synthetic a priori judgments, the existence of which was
explicitly contested. However, it must be seen that Feigl never went as
far as to reject the analytic/synthetic distinction as such. As he
later argued against Quine, “[t]he revolt against the dualism of
the analytic and the synthetic rests on a confusion of the logical
analysis of (artificially fixed) languages with the historical
investigation of (growing, shifting natural) languages” (Feigl
1956, p. 7–8). Thus, in the logical positivist account, analytic
propositions had to be sharply distinguished from synthetic
propositions. Whereas the latter had their place in experience and
experiential science, the former belonged to logic and mathematics.
More precisely, Feigl and Blumberg agreed with Wittgenstein that logic,
by its very nature, is purely tautological. It has nothing to do with
experience, but only with the internal structure of language. Here,
they saw the principle advantage over previous, traditional, empiricist
accounts of logic and mathematics. Moreover, Feigl and Blumberg
maintained that even the concepts of the empirical sciences are such as
can be subject to a purely formal, logical, reconstruction. Relying on
a principled distinction between “knowledge proper”
(Erkenntnis) and objectivity, on the one hand, and
“immediate experience” (Erlebnis) and
subjectivity, on the other, they referred the reader to Carnap’s
Der logische Aufbau der Welt, thereby implying that a
constitution of empirical concepts from a single primitive relation,
namely that of “Ähnlichkeitserinnerung”, by
“purely logical operations” (Feigl/Blumberg 1931, p. 286)
was at least in sight. The essential point in this connection was that
the propositions of empirical science were supposed to be translatable
into a series of propositions which exclusively referred to structural
features of experience, but not to the experientally given itself
(which was conceived of as completely subjective and thus
‘private’). It was therefore structure which stood in the
focus of the respective reconstruction of empirical knowledge.
Knowledge, according to Feigl and Blumberg, is to be defined as
“the communicable” (ibid.) and “[w]hat knowledge
communicates is structure […].” (ibid.) 
 
It was just a few years later that Feigl—rather
significantly—modified his point of view. Or, as he himself
reports:
The programmatic impact of the distinction drawn here by Feigl
between ‘logical positivism’ and ‘logical
empiricism’ might be doubted (see Uebel 2013). However, in order
to adequately understand the line of Feigl’s philosophical
development, the distinction is quite apt. Thus, in the first instance,
it was the liberalization of the logical positivist criterion of
meaning which caused a shift in Feigl’s general philosophical
outlook. According to the early, logical positivist, conceptions of
language and science, the meaning of a proposition must be anchored in
observable facts. More precisely, the meaning of a given proposition is
entirely exhausted by its verification on a purely observational basis.
Yet it turned out, as a major consequence of the Vienna Circle’s
protocol-sentence debate (see Uebel 2007), that this criterion was far
too strict. Direct verifiability was (by Carnap, Hempel, and others)
substituted through weaker criteria such as (at least indirect)
testability (see Carnap 1936/37) or confirmability and
disconfirmability (see Hempel 1935; 1945; 1950a). Nevertheless, the
logical positivists’ rejection of metaphysics remained
quintessentially intact. As Feigl points out in a paper titled
“Scientific Method without Metaphysical Presuppositions”
(1954), there are two senses in which the term
‘metaphysics’ appears objectionable also from the
liberalized, logical empiricist, perspective; namely a) the assertion
of transcendent, i.e., in principle untestable statements, and b) the
belief in factual truths that could be validated a prioiri, i.e., in
complete independence of the data of observation. In both cases, the
realm of the meaningful is distinguished from these two objectionable
regions.
Another, systematically more far-reaching aspect of Feigl’s
(self-ascribed) shift from logical positivism to logical empiricism was
his increasingly explicit embrace of a ‘realist’ approach
to science and scientific theory construction. In Feigl’s own
words:
It was as early as 1935 that Feigl, at the above quoted
International Congress for the Unity of Science in Paris, gave a talk
on “Sense and Nonsense in Scientific Realism” (see Feigl
1936; further Neuber 2011, p. 169). In 1943, then, he published a paper
titled “Logical Empiricism.” There, he argued that the term
‘real’ is employed with good reason (both in daily life and
in science) to designate “that which is located in space-time and
which is a link in the chains of causal relations” (Feigl 1949,
p. 16). In this sense, the reality of atoms (and other theoretically
postulated entities) is equally capable of empirical test as the
reality of rocks and trees. Accordingly, reality should be ascribed to
whatever is confirmed as having a place in the spatiotemporal-causal
system. After all, this—realistically inspired—point of
view directly emerged from the liberalization of the logical
empiricists’ criterion of meaning. It was indeed the result of
the insight that “most of our knowledge, and especially almost
all of the more interesting and important part of it, is highly
indirect. It is shot through with interpretation, construction, and
inference, and consequently is dependent on very general
assumptions” (ibid., p. 14). 
However, Feigl’s mature conception of a synthesis of
scientific realism and logical empiricism is to be found in his 1950
article “Existential Hypotheses” (published in
Philosophy of Science). There, it was semantics which
served as the vehicle for Feigl’s promotion of the realist
project. By ‘semantics,’ Feigl meant (in a nutshell) the
formal scrutiny of reference and truth (see Feigl 1950a, p. 36). As
such, it had nothing to do with the concrete methods of testing
hypotheses. Rather, “semantic realism,” as Feigl pointed
out at another place, “is concerned only with the most abstract
and formal features of the semiotic situation” (1950b, p. 192).
This implied, in particular, that a) reference must be sharply
distinguished from evidence, and that b) truth must be sharply
distinguished from verification. It was on this basis that Feigl saw
himself in a position to avoid “the reductive fallacies of
phenomenalism” (1950a, p. 35). By the “reductive fallacies
of phenomenalism,” he meant the logical constructionist accounts
of Bertrand Russell (1914) and the early Carnap (1928). In
Russell’s and Carnap’s view, the theoretical statements of
the empirical sciences were, at least according to Feigl,
“considered as translatable into statements concerning the data
of direct experience” (1950a, p. 35). This conception was, in
Feigl’s eyes, “fallacious” because the assumption of
complete translatability was, he thought, semantically misguided.
Theoretical sentences should be invested with what Feigl called their
(so to say ‘untranslatable’) “surplus meaning.”
This surplus meaning he considered to consist in the “factual
reference” of theoretical terms (ibid., p. 48). More concretely,
Feigl was convinced that terms like ‘atom,’
‘force,’ or ‘electromagnetic field’ cannot be
reduced to purely observational terms describing our direct
experiences. Rather, theoretical terms were supposed to refer to
unobservable, mind-independent entities, so that, for example, the
referent of the term ‘atom’ would be real atoms and not
samples of ‘logical constructions’ out of sense data (or
other kinds of directly perceivable things). Therefore, Feigl urged
that “we must distinguish between the radical empiricist’s
meaning of ‘meaning’ (i.e., epistemic reduction) and
another, more common-sensical meaning of ‘meaning’ (factual
reference)” (ibid., p. 49). 
It has (very aptly) been remarked that Feigl’s “semantic
realism is an anti-reductive position” (Psillos 1999, p. 12). It
is anti-reductive insofar as the theoretical language of science is
claimed to be autonomous in relation to the observational evidence
base. Consequently, the mind-independence of the ‘factual
referents’ of theoretical terms seems to be secured by the very
reference relation itself: the existence of theoretical entities like
atoms is obviously implied by the independent reference of theoretical
terms like ‘atom.’
Moreover, Feigl’s account of factual reference is intimately
linked with the concept of truth. In general, the meaning of a sentence
consists, according to the theory proposed by Feigl, in its truth
conditions (see Feigl 1950b, p. 191 and Feigl 1981, p. 43). These truth
conditions, in turn, are treated compositionally: they obtain when the
entities to which we refer stand in the relations to which we refer,
that is, independently of the conditions of the corresponding scenario
of verification. Accordingly, relations between the ‘factual
referents’ of theoretical terms serve as ‘truth
makers’ for theoretical statements. Feigl therefore concludes
that by adopting a “semantic metalanguage” (as he could
find it in the works of Tarski and the later Carnap) we are in a
position to employ “a conceptual model in which statements as
well as the states of affairs that render these statements true, can be
represented” (Feigl 1950a, p. 49). 
 
Still, there is an important qualification in Feigl’s account
of realism. This qualification has to do with the fact that Feigl takes
pains to separate his own semantic-scientific realism from traditional
metaphysical realism. By metaphysical realism, Feigl means all attempts
to systematically employ “transcendent, i.e., in principle
untestable, assertions” (Feigl 1956, p. 22). By his own account,
however, the testability or confirmability of an assertion is the
crucial criterion for its being meaningful. Feigl
writes: 
And at another place, he comments:
It should be noted that this passage is quoted from Feigl’s
reply to criticisms brought forward by his logical empiricist
colleagues Philipp Frank, Carl Gustav Hempel, and Ernest Nagel (the
context being a symposium on Feigl’s “Existential
Hypotheses”). Hempel, for instance, had argued that the notion of
the reference of theoretical terms is “unnecessary” because
it “can be eliminated, by means of Feigl’s own criterion of
factual reference” (Hempel 1950b, p. 173), namely the systematic
interconnections between theoretical statements on the one hand and
observations sentences on the other. In a similar vein, Frank had
objected that “after the introduction of the truth conditions a
statement in the language of ‘semantical realism’ can no
longer be distinguished from a statement in the language of
‘syntactical positivism’” (Frank 1950, p. 167). Quite
the same was brought forward by Nagel who argued that by heavily
relying on confirmability Feigl completely remains within the
‘received’ logical positivist agenda, so that his talk of
‘realism’ should be regarded as devoid of any distinctive
character. According to Nagel, “Feigl is pressing for a
distinction without a difference” (Nagel 1950, p. 179).
In order to counter these objections one would have to show how
semantics (i.e., Feigl’s theory of reference and truth) and
epistemology (i.e., Feigl’s insistence on confirmability) are
related to each other. There is some evidence that Feigl’s
adoption of Wilfrid Sellars’s idea of a ‘pure
pragmatics’ (see Feigl 1950a, pp. 49–50; 1981, pp. 254–255) could
play the essential role in this connection. However, Sellars’s
conception of a ‘pure pragmatics’ is itself rather
“eccentric” (Carus 2004, p. 320) and it is fairly hard to
see how, according to Feigl, a realist approach to science could be
defended on the basis of an essentially pragmatic justification (for
further details, see Neuber 2011, pp. 175–176, and especially Neuber 2017)
Feigl’s treatment of the mind-body problem is his probably
best well-known—and at the same time most
controversial—contribution to philosophy. It is often lumped
together with the views of U.T. Place, J.J.C. Smart, D.M. Armstrong,
and other Australian, ‘materialist,’ philosophers (see, for
example Kim 1998, pp. 1–2). Indeed, both Feigl’s and the
Australians’ approach toward the mind-body problem share a number
of similarities. On the whole, they are both versions of a
non-dualistic (anti-Cartesian), physicalistically inspired
‘identity theory.’ However, there are significant
differences between the Austrian (i.e. Feigl’s) and the
Australian version or the identity theory (see Stubenberg 1997).
Whereas the Australians take the physical as unproblematic and attempt
to reduce the mental to the physical, Feigl takes the mental as
unproblematic and attempts to integrate it into a sophisticated
physicalistic conception of the world.
It is important to note that Feigl’s version of the identity
theory is not without precursors. It has even been argued that
“[s]een against the backdrop of nineteenth-century German and
Austrian philosophy, Feigl’s approach was neither novel nor
audacious; he merely revived a tradition that had once been a
mainstream topic turned unfashionable; to be exact, he modified and
spelled out one specific traditional position” (Heidelberger
2003, p. 234). This might be exaggerated, but it can hardly be
contested that Feigl, in his treatment of the mind-body problem, was
(again) committed to the critical realist accounts of Alois Riehl (cf.
Riehl 1879, 1881, 1887; further Röd 2001) and especially of the
early (pre-Viennese) Schlick (see the entry on 
 Moritz Schlick). As Feigl himself
frequently pointed out, it was the early Schlick’s
“double-knowledge” or “double-language” theory
that exerted the greatest influence upon his own approach (see, for
example, Feigl 1981, p. 288). In a nutshell, Schlick, in his
General Theory of Knowledge (1918; 1925), had argued that the
difference of the mental and the physical is a difference between two
conceptual systems and not a difference between two areas of reality.
It was, in other words, an epistemological rather than a metaphysical
problem (cf. Schlick 1974, p. 300). According to Schlick, the
“relation between immediately experienced reality and the
physical brain processes is […] no longer one of causal
dependency but of simple identity. What we have is one and the
same reality, not ‘viewed from two different sides’ or
‘manifesting itself in two different forms’, but designated
by two different conceptual systems, the psychological and the
physical” (ibid., p. 299). It was this very line of thought that
confirmed Feigl in his conviction that “the mind-body problem is
not a pseudoproblem” (Feigl 1981, p. 349).
The essential question to be answered by an elaborated identity
theory is, in Feigl’s view, the following: “[H]ow are the
raw feels related to behavioral (or neurophysiological) states?”
(1967, p. 5) By posing the question that way, Feigl excludes a
reductive solution to the mind-body problem. More precisely, he
dissociates himself from the “reductive fallacies” (1981,
p. 16) of eliminative materialism and of radical behaviorism. On the
other hand, however, Feigl is eager to demarcate his own position from
overtly—metaphysically inspired—dualistic conceptions, such
as parallelism or epiphenomenalism. He explicitly opts for a
“monistic solution” (ibid., p. 298), arguing that the
dualistic position would lead to an ungrounded “duplication of
realities” (1967, p. 94), whereas the—scientifically
well-established—principle of parsimony “does oppose the
operationistic predilection for speaking of two (or more) concepts if
the evidential facts, though completely correlated, are qualitatively
heterogeneous” (ibid.)
On the constructive side, Feigl’s solution to the mind-body
problem might indeed be regarded as a direct continuation of the
earlier ‘double-language’ conception presented by Schlick.
Like in the case of the realism issue, Feigl attempts at a semantically
more sophisticated revision of the original Schlickian point of view.
One can even go further and say that it is the very same terminology
which is employed by Feigl in this connection. Thus, just like in the
case of realism, Feigl categorically distinguishes the evidential (or
confirmatory) basis from the factual reference (or content) of the
respective knowledge claims. Feigl writes:
Accordingly, it is mental states which are to be regarded as the
referents of both psychological and physical terms. More precisely,
Feigl assumes that, in the case of psychological terms, evidence is
derived from (direct) knowledge by acquaintance, whereas in the case of
physical (neurophysiological) terms evidence is derived from (indirect)
knowledge by description (see Feigl 1967, p. 94). Yet, the referent is
in both cases the same, so that we have a relation of
‘referential identity,’ as in the context of Gottlob
Frege’s example of the terms ‘morning star’ and
‘evening star’ that differ in sense (Sinn), but
not in reference (Bedeutung), which in both cases is
identical, namely Venus (see, for this analogy, Feigl 1981, pp.
346–347). Consequently, we have two kinds of evidence for one and the
same type of events. It is for this reason that Feigl’s identity
theory is committed to a dualism at the evidential basis. Or, as Feigl
puts it in “The ‘Mental’ and the
‘Physical’”:
In the footnote attached to this passage, Feigl refers the reader to
the views of Riehl, Schlick, Russell, and Roy Wood Sellars (among
others); and he then continues:
There are two peculiarities to be noticed in Feigl’s version
of the double-language theory. First, it must be seen that qualia (raw
feels) are, for Feigl, the—epistemologically—basic
reality. On his conception, we have privileged access to this
basic reality, so that (as Feigl points out in the postscript to
“The ‘Mental’ and the ‘Physical’”)
the “egocentric account” (ibid., p. 155) must be regarded
as the most immediate mode of getting into contact with reality,
whereas “all scientific accounts […] deal with Being only
indirectly and structurally” (ibid.; see also Feigl 1981, pp. 17
and 351). The privileged access to qualia (such as seeing red, feeling
pain, etc.) is, according to Feigl, accompanied by the use of indexical
terms (such as “here”, “now”, “I”,
etc.) that in turn form part of a “private” (egocentric)
language and which are systematically analyzed in the context of the
metalinguistic discipline of pure pragmatics (see Feigl 1967, p. 147).
Thus, in Feigl’s view, “I must be able to know (by
‘acquaintance’) some phenomenal qualities and relations
(redness, between-ness, etc.) in order to ‘hook’ (i.e.
connect) my private language to the intersubjective language of
science” (ibid.). At the same time, he sees no problem in
describing private mental states by intersubjective scientific
(neurophysiological) terms. “Privacy,” Feigl writes,
“is capable of public (intersubjective) description, and the
objects of intersubjective science can be evidenced by data of private
experience” (ibid., p. 81). After all, Feigl is convinced of the
“indispensability of a subjectivistically understood conception
of immediate (first person) experience” (Feigl 1981, p. 353),
which, on the one hand, entails a clear rejection of Ludwig
Wittgenstein’s arguments against the possibility of a private
language (see Feigl 1981, p. 355), and, on the other hand, marks a
significant contrast to the Australians’ strategy of
‘explaining away’ the phenomenal properties of mental
states (see, in this connection, Stubenberg 1997, pp. 135–136). The
possible objection that Feigl, by epistemologically privileging qualia,
runs into the trap of panpsychism can be countered by the argument that
all reality is, in fact, “at bottom qualitative”
(Stubenberg 1997, p. 143). Thus, not only mental states, but also the
diverse physical magnitudes (like mass, pressure, gravitational field
intensity, etc.) are distinguishable only by their qualitative
peculiarities (see Feigl 1967, pp. 43–44; see further Schlick 1974, pp.
283–285). But this does not imply that all reality is, like panpsychism
would have it, intrinsically psychic. Qualia form part of reality, but
reality comprises more than only qualia. The point is that qualia (raw
feels) are, for Feigl, epistemologically privileged as compared to
ordinary objects and the entities posited by science. “Reference
to one’s own immediate experience,” Feigl (in an overtly
Schlickian manner) writes, “is the (epistemological) prototype of
all designations of objects, properties or relations by the words of
our language” (1981, p. 355). 
 The second point to be noticed is that, according to
Feigl’s version of the identity theory, the mode of
ascertainment of the identity of the mental (raw feels) and
the physical (neural processes) is empirical in character. Had Feigl in
his first publication on the mind-body problem in 1934 assumed that the
relationship between the mental and the physical is that of a
logical identity (thereby implying that the language of
psychology can be fully translated into the language of physics,
viz. neurophysiology), he, in his later writings, no longer
conceived of that identity as a logically necessary, but as an
empirical (contingent) kind of identity. This meant, in the first
place, that the corroboration of the philosophically outlined
monism had to be provided, not by philosophical analysis again, but by
the factual sciences themselves. “On the whole,” Feigl
concluded:
The sort of modesty displayed in passages like the above is very
characteristic of Feigl’s way of thinking. Just as in his
discussion of the realism issue, he leaves it to the factual sciences
to judge about the adequacy of his preferred philosophical position.
His methodological outlook can therefore be characterized as
“metascientific” (rather than metaphysical), in the sense
that “a comprehensive reflection on the results of
science as well as on the logic and epistemology of scientific
method” (ibid., p. 349) is aspired to. However, the
decision between global philosophical stances, like realism and
phenomenalism or, as concerns the mind-body problem, monism and dualism
cannot be decided by empirical means, but only by a “pragmatic
justification” (ibid., p. 294). In the case of the identity
theory, this pragmatic justification is, as has been pointed out
before, guided by the principle of parsimony.
Feigl’s approach to the mind-body problem became subject of
extended controversy. While some authors directly contested the
identity thesis as such (see, for example, Abelson 1970 and Epstein
1973; further the replies in Grünbaum 1972 and Nathanson 1972),
others urged that Feigl should clarify his conception of the relation
of phenomenal predicates and “raw feels.” Especially
Feigl’s Minnesota collaborator Paul Meehl argued along these
lines, claiming that the main problem with Feigl’s view stems
from semantics (see Meehl 1966; further Aune 1966). On the whole,
it can be said that identity theory was discussed from various
philosophical perspectives. That Feigl left a considerable legacy can
hardly be denied in this connection. 
Feigl’s writings on practical issues like ethics, humanism,
and religion are rather less well known (but see, rather recently, the reconstruction in Siegetsleitner 2014, ch. 11). Still, they are worth
considering, especially since they contain some interesting
applications and extensions of the logical empiricist agenda. The
all-embracing idea, though, came from the eighteenth century: According
to Feigl, “a new age of enlightenment, scientific as well as
ethical, is our most imperative need” (1981, p. 406). Therefore,
“[t]he straightforward spirit of eighteenth-century Enlightenment
(e.g. Hume, Kant) needs reviving and ‘updating’”
(1981, p. 399). The programmatic frame for this ‘updating’
Feigl labeled “scientific humanism” (ibid., pp. 368, 405,
408, 418)—by which he understood the attempt at a
“synthesis of the scientific attitude with an active interest in
the whole scale of human values” (ibid., p. 368). It was this
conception within which he theorized about the relationships between
ethics and logic and between religion and empirical science.
 
As concerns the relationship between ethics and logic, Feigl draws a
principled distinction between two kinds of justification:
“vindication” and “validation” (see Feigl 1981,
pp. 14, 256–260, 385). While validation “involves reliance upon
the principles of logic” (ibid., p. 245), vindication has to do
with the pragmatics of evaluating certain types of behavior with
respect to certain ends. Thus the latter, pragmatic, form of
justification may be called ‘justificatio
actionis,’ whereas the former, logical, form of
justification may be called ‘justificatio
cognitionis’ (see ibid., p. 385). Feigl’s point, then,
is to show that specific ethical norms are capable of being validated,
but that general ethical principles (and the respective ethical
systems) are only capable of being vindicated. Feigl writes:
Two things should be noted here. First, in contrast to other logical
empiricist accounts of ethics (for example, in the fist place, A.J.
Ayer’s), Feigl’s conception is, as has been argued (see
Kellerwessel 2010), committed to a certain form of
cognitivism. That means that “moral judgments are to be
reconstructed as knowledge-claims and as subject to validation (or
invalidation) by virtue of their accordance (or non-accordance) with
the supreme norms of a given ethical system” (Feigl 1981, p.
388). Accordingly, within such a given ethical system, moral
reasoning can be justified by the “rules of deductive and
inductive inference” (ibid., p. 385) and thus be reconstructed
along cognitive, i.e. rational, lines. However, secondly, the
respective ethical system (and its “supreme norms”) itself
can only be vindicated by pragmatic maxims. Thus, Feigl allows
the possibility of a “pragmatic justification of the adoption of
an alternative frame” (ibid., p. 386), thereby implying that
there exists a plurality of alternative ethical systems. It is
interesting to see that Feigl refers the reader here to Carnap’s
distinction between “internal” and “external”
questions in his 1950 “Empiricism, Semantics, and Ontology”
(see Feigl 1981, p. 391, Fn. 3; see further Feigl 1981, pp. 13–14).
Indeed, there is a deep analogy between this distinction drawn by
Carnap and Feigl’s distinction between the validation
within an ethical system and the vindication of the
ethical system (and its supreme norms) itself. Furthermore, it can be
stated that Feigl, in his pragmatic argument for scientific
realism, was also inspired by Carnap’s distinction and
its relativization of the ontological dimension (see, for further
details, Neuber 2011, p. 179).
On the whole, scientific humanism is designed to avoid the extremes.
It qualifies, according to Feigl, as “a tenable middle ground
between the relativists and the absolutists in morals” (1981, p.
417). In contrast to relativism, it is assumed that certain basic human
values, such as justice, fairness or equality, are universally
applicable. However, in contrast to (for instance, Kantian) absolutism,
it is at the same time assumed that those values are related to human
interests and thus empirically variable. They “may have come out
of the natural development of human beings in the social context”
(ibid., p. 420), and they can only be justified pragmatically (by way
of vindication). But, Feigl maintains, that does not make them
arbitrary: “If we dig deeper into human nature we find that in
some social contexts certain moral ideals inevitably work themselves
out” (ibid., p. 418). In the “age of scientific
enlightenment” (ibid., p. 420) an ethically disinterested or even
cynical view of the world is therefore out of place: “Psychology
points in the direction of human needs and interests that must be
satisfied. And in the social context, certain traffic rules simply have
to be obeyed if we are to survive as a society. Thus we have ideals of
justice and equality.” (ibid.) 
Feigl’s broadly naturalistic view of human beings and the
world, together with the (liberalized) logical empiricist criterion of
meaning, entails a constructive but at the same time critical approach
toward religion. To be sure, Feigl did not deny the existence of
religious experiences (see, for example, Feigl 1981, 399–400). But he
did not “see […] the slightest reason for accepting
any sort of theology” (ibid., p. 399). Although some of
the dogmas of theology were seen by Feigl as “perfectly
meaningful” (ibid., p. 13), he conceived of them as being false
(or as being extremely unlikely). The option of a
“demythologized” (or modernized) theology is, Feigl further
maintained, “no longer a theology at all; it reduces to a moral
message, formulated by the use of allegorical, but essentially
exhorting, consoling, edifying, or fortifying language” (ibid.,
p. 406). By accepting scientific humanism, on the other hand, we are,
according to Feigl, in a position to “adopt an ethics without
supernatural foundation or supernatural sanctions” (ibid., p.
405). Religious experiences, in turn, are then explainable in purely
naturalistic terms. They do not serve as the basis of scientific or
everyday explanation of human behavior. Rather, they are themselves
subject of scientific explanation. Or, in Feigl’s own
words:
Feigl’s role in the development of twentieth-century
analytical philosophy is not to be underrated. His 1950 article on
“Existential Hypotheses” can, as has been argued (cf.
Neuber 2011), be regarded as a ground-breaking contribution to the
debate over scientific realism within the analytical tradition. In
particular his focusing on the semantic notions of reference and truth
turned out as instructive for the following development, as it is
represented in the (programmatically diverse) writings of Richard
Boyd, Larry Laudan, and specifically Hilary Putnam. In recent times,
the attempt has been made to revive Feigl’s point of view by
systematically exploiting the idea of “choosing the realist
framework” (see Psillos 2011). Similarly, Feigl’s analysis
of the mind-body problem exerted remarkable influence on the
philosophical discourse of the second half of the twentieth century.
Thus, according to Jaegwon Kim, “it was the papers by Smart and
Feigl that introduced the mind-body problem as mainstream metaphysical
Problematik of analytical philosophy, and launched the debate that has
continued to this day” (Kim 1998, p. 1). To be sure, alternative
approaches, such as Putnam’s ‘functionalism’ or
Donald Davidson’s ‘anomalous monism’ came up quite
early in the discussion. Nevertheless, Feigl’s (and
Smart’s) account “helped set basic parameters and
constraints for the debates that were to come—a set of broadly
physicalist assumptions and aspirations that still guide and constrain
our thinking today” (ibid., p. 2) 
 Besides these contributions to the theoretical discourse,
Feigl played an important role at the institutional level. He not only
founded and headed the Minnesota Center for Philosophy of Science, but
he also, in 1949, founded and co-edited the (still existing) journal
Philosophical Studies and, in 1956, the series Minnesota
Studies in the Philosophy of Science. Moreover, he edited such
standard setting volumes as Readings in Philosophical Analysis
(1949, together with Wilfrid Sellars) and Readings in the
Philosophy of Science (1953, together with May Brodbeck).
Furthermore, it should be emphasized that Feigl, together with Paul
Meehl, energetically promoted the revalorization of psychology
as a serious academic discipline. The Minnesota Center was an extremely
influential forum in this connection (for further details, see Smith
1986).
Being a scientific philosopher par excellence, Feigl once
declared:
This diagnosis, though provocative, is still accurate today.