Several relationships between nonbelief and evil appear when we view
them as providing evidence for atheism.
(A) It is customary to distinguish “logical”
(“deductive”) arguments from evil from
“evidential” (“inductive”,
“abductive”, “probabilistic”) arguments from
evil. There are different ways to draw that distinction. On one way
(Howard-Snyder 1996c), a logical argument from evil affirms of some
known fact about evil that it is incompatible with theism (e.g.,
Mackie 1955; Schellenberg 2007a), while an evidential argument from
evil does not—either because it affirms that the fact in
question, although incompatible with theism, is not known but only
reasonably believed to be the case (e.g., Rowe 1979), or because it affirms that
the fact in question, though known, is more surprising on theism than
on some competing hypothesis (e.g., Draper 1989; Oppy 2013). Likewise
for nonbelief. A logical argument from nonbelief affirms of some known
fact about nonbelief that it is incompatible with the existence of God
(Drange 1998), while an evidential argument from nonbelief does
not—either because it affirms that the fact in question,
although incompatible with theism, is not known but only reasonably
believed (Schellenberg 1993, 2015), or because it affirms that the
fact in question, though known, is more surprising on theism than on
some competing hypothesis (Maitzen 2006; Marsh 2013).
(B) It is a matter of dispute whether nonbelief provides evidence for
atheism independently of evil. Those in favor of independence invite
us to imagine a world with no pain, suffering, or moral
vice/wrongdoing. No one in such a world would appeal to evil as
evidence for atheism, but someone might appeal to nonbelief as
evidence for atheism (van Inwagen 2002, 2008; Schellenberg 2010a). Those in favor of
dependence tend to define “evil” more broadly. For
example, they might say that evils are just bad states of affairs,
whether pain, suffering, or moral vice/wrongdoing, on the one hand, or
nonbelief, on the other hand (Kvanvig 2002). Alternatively, they might
argue in an Augustinian spirit that, since evil just is a lack of a
good that should exist, and since belief of God is a good that should
exist, nonbelief is an evil.
(C) Even if nonbelief provides evidence for atheism independently of
evil, critical responses to arguments from nonbelief and evil share
important similarities. For example, just as some critics try to
explain why God permits evil, so some critics try to explain why God
permits nonbelief. Moreover, just as some critics argue that we are in
no position to say that there are no unknown reasons for God to permit
evil, so some critics argue that we are in no position to say that
there are no unknown reasons for God to permit nonbelief. Furthermore,
just as some critics deny the relevant facts about evil, so some
critics deny the relevant facts about nonbelief. In addition, just as
some people say evil provides evidence against theism only if we
conceive of God in certain ways, and so we should conceive of God
differently, so some people say that nonbelief provides evidence
against theism only if we conceive of God in certain ways, and so we
should conceive of God differently. Finally, just as some people grant
that evil gives atheism some weight and yet insist that other things
give theism much more weight, so some people grant that nonbelief
gives atheism some weight and yet insist that other things give theism
much more weight.
(D) We can see another connection between arguments from evil and
nonbelief by way of one of William Rowe’s evidential arguments
from evil. Obviously enough, there is horrific suffering in the world;
but, says Rowe, God exists only if there is a reason for God to permit
such suffering. However, since there is no reason that we know of,
it’s reasonable to infer that there is no reason, period (Rowe
1979). Thus, it’s
reasonable to infer that God does not exist. Some critics question the
reasonableness of Rowe’s inference from “there is no
reason we know of” to “there is no reason, period”,
on the grounds that it assumes that we are in a good position to tell
whether there is a reason, an assumption they regard as dubious since
it would not be the least bit surprising if there were a reason that
was accessible to God but not to us. These critics are too quick,
however. For we must distinguish two ways in which we might be in a
good position to tell whether something exists. The first way is
direct: we are in a position to see or mentally apprehend it for
ourselves. The second way is indirect: although we are not in a good
position to see or mentally apprehend it for ourselves, we are in a
good position to see or apprehend something else and, seeing or
apprehending that other thing, we are in a good position to infer
reasonably that the first thing exists. The critics are too quick
because they ignore the second, indirect way in which we might be in a
good position to tell whether something exists. This is where
nonbelief might come into play. For one might argue that if
God’s reasons for permitting a person to undergo horrific
suffering were inaccessible to them, then God would make it clear to
them that there is such a reason through clear assurances of
God’s love and care, clear enough so that they are in a good
position to believe that God has a reason to permit their suffering.
But many people who suffer do not believe that God has a reason to
permit their suffering, not least because they do not believe that God
exists. So it is that nonbelief arguably vindicates Rowe’s
assumption and inference (Bergmann 2001; Howard-Snyder 1992, 1996b;
Rowe 2001; Trakakis 2007b).
(E) An additional connection between evil and nonbelief consists in
trying to use various theistically friendly explanations of the facts
about evil to address concerns regarding the facts about nonbelief
and, conversely, trying to use various theistically friendly
explanations of the facts about nonbelief to address concerns
regarding the facts about evil. For example, one might argue that just
as deep responsibility for each other’s wellbeing explains
God’s permission of some sin and suffering, so it explains
God’s permission of some nonbelief (Swinburne 1998). Or, alternatively, if there
is a good reason for God to permit nonbelief, then God also has good
reason not to intervene systematically to prevent or undo the
consequences of wrongdoing (for if God did so intervene, God’s
existence would be clear enough to prevent nonbelief), and so God has
some reason to permit some of the suffering that is a natural
consequence of wrongdoing (Dumsday 2015c).
(F) Just as we must distinguish evil providing an argumentative basis
for atheism from evil providing a non-argumentative basis for atheism,
so we must distinguish nonbelief providing an argumentative basis for
atheism from nonbelief providing a non-argumentative basis for
atheism. In the case of evil, this might work by
“seeing right there in the evil that the world was
Godless or that the evil was so repugnant as to be irredeemable”
(Gellman 2013: 11). Likewise, in the case of nonbelief, this might
work by seeing right there in the nonresistant nonbeliever that the
world was Godless or that the nonresistant nonbelief was so repugnant
as to be divinely impermissible.
More than anyone else, Schellenberg has shaped the
contemporary debate over arguments from nonbelief. The main argument
from his 1993 book can be stated as follows:
For the defense of premise (2), Schellenberg’s reasoning
provides the following subargument:
(2d) is tantamount to premise
 (2) of the main argument.
In his post-1993 writings, Schellenberg clarifies that he means his
claims about God, love, and relationship to be necessary truths.
Moreover, the main argument of his 2007a replaces talk of
“culpability” with talk of “resistance”.
(“I now see this focus on culpability and inculpability as a
mistake”; 2015: 54.) And he emphasizes “meaningful
conscious relationship”. Finally, his 2015 and 2016 focuses on
the “openness” of “a perfectly loving God” to
“positively meaningful” and “reciprocal conscious
relationship”. Thus, the latest version of the argument
(slightly condensed):
Schellenberg argues for premise
 (4)
 on the basis of what he calls ultimism, the proposition that
there is a reality that is ultimate in three ways. A
metaphysically ultimate reality, he says, 
is something whose existence is the ultimate or most fundamental fact
about the nature of things, in terms of which any other fact about
what things exist and how they exist would have to be explained in a
comprehensive and correct account. 
An axiologically ultimate reality “embod[ies] the
deepest possible value”, and “would have to be the
greatest possible reality”. A soteriologically ultimate
reality is a reality in relation to which “the deepest or
ultimate human good can be attained” (2015: 19–21). The
idea of a personal reality that is triply ultimate—that
is, the idea of God in western philosophy, says Schellenberg—is
the idea of the greatest possible person; and, all else being
equal, a person perfect in love would be an “improvement”
over a person that was not perfect in love (2015: 89–103;
Schellenberg 2005d).
As for premise
 (5),
 suppose God perfectly loves Anna. That love would minimally involve
benevolence, caring for Anna’s well-being. But it would also
involve aiming “at relationship—a conscious and reciprocal
relationship that is positively meaningful, allowing for a deep
sharing” between them. Moreover, it would involve valuing that
relationship for its own sake, and not merely for the sake of
something else. Furthermore, it would never cease, and so God would
always value, seek, desire, promote, or preserve personal relationship
with Anna, although God would not force himself on her. At the very
least, says Schellenberg, all this requires that God will always be
open to personal relationship with her (2016:
17–22).
This notion of openness with those who are capable of
it—that is, with those who possess the cognitive and affective
properties required to participate in a personal relationship, which,
in the case of God, 
would involve such things as a capacity to feel the presence of God,
recognizing it as such; a capacity to exhibit attitudes of trust,
gratitude, and obedience to God, and so on (2016: 21n15) 
—is crucial. Schellenberg writes:
Expanding on what he means by “resistance of God”,
Schellenberg tells us that if we think
Of course, there are many other ways in which one might “shut
the door” or “close one’s eyes” and, as a
result, lack belief of God.
As for
 (6),
 by Schellenberg’s lights, Anna could not even begin to be in a
positively meaningful and reciprocal conscious relationship with God
unless she believed that God exists. Why? Because
The upshot is that, if God is open to being in a positively meaningful
and reciprocal conscious relationship with Anna, then, at any time
that she is capable of such a relationship, Anna will believe that God
exists—unless she has done something that results in her being
resistant to such a relationship at that time.
Although Schellenberg emphasizes the point that perfect love seeks
relationship for its own sake, and not merely for the sake of
something else, there are additional benefits one should bear in mind
that may be jeopardized by divine hiddenness. For consider the
benefits to Anna if she were in a positively meaningful, explicit,
reciprocal conscious relationship with God, even if just one that was
developmentally in its infancy. First, there would be moral benefits,
e.g., she would be able to draw on the resources of that relationship
to overcome flaws in her character, and so she would be more likely to
emulate the self-giving love with which she was loved, and thus more
likely to flourish as a finite person. Second, there would be
experiential benefits. She would be, e.g., more likely to experience
peace and joy stemming from her belief that she is properly related to
her Maker, and security in believing that, ultimately, all shall be
well even if she suffers in the meantime; and she would have the
profound pleasure of God’s loving presence. As a consequence of
these moral and experiential benefits, Anna’s relationships with
others would likely improve (Schellenberg 1993: 19ff).
As for the empirical
 premise—(7),
 and the earlier
 (1)—Schellenberg
 generalizes from (a) honest seekers of the truth who remain agnostics
and atheists, including those whose search leads them to convert to
nontheistic religions, (b) members of cultures that lack the idea of a
personal God altogether, e.g., the Chinese in the period from the
beginning of their history until the Christian Middle Ages, (c)
hunter-gatherers prior to recorded history, and (d) those who have
lost their theistic faith, and who would like nothing more than to
regain it. Furthermore, Schellenberg appeals to increased secularity,
especially in Western cultures: what is the probability that
all of the hundreds of millions of nonbelievers in the
secular West are, at the dawn of their capacity to relate personally
with God, resistant? Vanishingly small (2015: 76ff; 2007a: 205, 228ff).
It follows from Schellenberg’s premises
 (4)–(6)
 that, necessarily, if God exists, then, for any capable finite person
S and time t, it is not the case that S is at
t nonresistantly in a state of nonbelief in relation to the
proposition that God exists. In short, God’s existence entails
there’s never any nonresistant nonbelief. To assess this
implication we must assess the premises from which it follows. In this
section, we focus on premise
 (5)
 and a particular kind of assessment, something analogous to theodicy
in the literature on the problem of evil. To help us keep our focus,
suppose we grant premises
 (4)
 and
 (6).
 Moreover, since we want to assess premise
 (5)
 from as sympathetic a position as we can, suppose we grant
Schellenberg’s claim that one is open to a positively
meaningful and reciprocal conscious relationship with another, in a
manner consistent with perfect love, only if one never does anything
(by commission or omission) that would result in the other being
prevented from participating in that relationship, just by trying.
Given these suppositions, we might wonder whether premise
 (5)
 is true since we might wonder whether it is possible that God
perfectly loves such finite persons as there may be and yet, for at
least some of them, God does something (by commission or omission)
that results in them lacking belief of God—even though they have
the capacity for a positively meaningful and reciprocal conscious
relationship with God and they are not in a state of resistance to
God. In particular, we might wonder whether there are any
reasons for a perfectly loving God to do something (by
commission or omission) that would result in nonresistant nonbelief in
persons who are capable of relating personally with God in this
way.
There are many cases of this type to wonder about. Here are two.
First, imagine someone who has always lacked belief and who has always
lacked the capacity to relate personally with God but who is,
nonetheless, nonresistant to God. Such a person might be a child who
is at the dawn of her capacity to relate personally with God. Might
there be good enough reason, consistent with perfect love, for God to
do something (by commission or omission) that results in her being
prevented from belief, even as she transitions to being capable of
relating personally with God while remaining nonresistant? Second,
imagine a man who has had the capacity to relate personally with God
for some time, and who was once a fulfilled nonresistant believer but
who, for one reason or another, is now in a state of resistant
nonbelief. Many a university student might satisfy this description,
among others. Might there be good enough reason, consistent with
perfect love, for God to do something (by commission or omission) that
results in that man being prevented from belief of God even as, later
in life, he transitions back to being nonresistant?
Affirmative answers to these questions involve reasons for thinking it
would be better if they remained nonbelievers, at least for a time,
despite their transitions. For example, what if the child never ever
exercised any influence over whether she was nonresistant to God?
Perhaps, in that case, it would be better—for her, and for God,
and for their forthcoming relationship—if she were first to own
her good disposition toward God through choices in the face of
contrary inclinations, so that, among other things, her loving and
obeying God was of her own accord when she came to believe. Or perhaps
her non-resistance to God is grounded in improper motives, e.g., fear
of punishment, a desire for parental approval or social acceptance,
and the like, and so God gives her the opportunity to change her
motives so that, upon coming to believe, her love and obedience are
more properly motivated (Howard-Snyder 1996a, 2016). Or perhaps her
moral autonomy and freedom would be objectionably reduced if God were
to bring her to belief at this time (Hick 1966; Murray 2002; Swinburne
1979). Or perhaps,
despite her non-resistance, if she came to belief now instead of
later, the passion and intensity of her desire for God would be
significantly less than it otherwise would be. Or perhaps she is disposed, upon
coming to believe now, to think she has arrived at a proper
understanding of God, and she would become complacent or relate to God
at a superficial level. (Kierkegaard 1844: 28-29, 33-35; cf.
Schellenberg 1993: 160ff). Or perhaps certain intellectual temptations
would be lost on her if she were to believe now, and so she would not
have the opportunity to respond to them virtuously (Butler 1736: part 2, chapter 6; cf.
Schellenberg 1993: 168ff). Or perhaps upon coming to believe now, she
would be resentful or envious of God’s glory and greatness
(Dumsday 2012a). Or what if the university student, despite his
forthcoming return to non-resistance, was disposed to relate to God in
presumptuous or arrogant ways upon regaining belief, and not with due
contrition and humility, both of which are essential to a proper
relationship with God? Or what if he was disposed to be significantly
less apt to recognize the wretchedness of living life on his own,
without God, if he were to regain belief now instead of later? (Pascal 1670, Fragments 234, 378, 427, 446, 449; cf. Schellenberg 1993: 136ff). Or
what if God does not bring him to belief because he is ill-disposed to
the sort of moral transformation God intends for him, or he’s
into having a relationship with God just for the pleasure and
titillation of it? (Dumsday 2014b; Moser 2002, 2008b) Or what if God
does not bring him to belief because, as a general policy, God permits
some people in positions like his to continue in nonbelief in order to
increase diverse expressions of religious imagination, creativity, and
devotion, or in order to increase opportunities for people to pursue
knowledge of important matters together, even knowledge as important
as knowledge of God, or in order to promote assisting each other in
starting personal relationships with God (Dumsday 2010b; Schellenberg
1993: 181ff; Swinburne 1998); or because, under present circumstances,
bringing all non-resistant believers to belief would force the truth
of theism on the resistant (Dumsday forthcoming-a). And there are
other explanations offered as well.
Several points have emerged in the literature with respect to
assessing these reasons or explanations.
First, it’s doubtful that any single one of them offers a total
explanation of nonresistant nonbelief. Different kinds of nonresistant
nonbelievers, given the rest of their psychology, might call for
different explanations. Moreover, each of these explanations, taken
alone, might fail to provide a total explanation of any particular
kind or instance of nonresistant nonbelief, and yet each of them might
provide a partial explanation and, taken together with others, add up
to a total explanation. At least this is a possibility that must not
be overlooked. Thus, if we are to reject these explanations, and
others that might be proffered, we must claim that they fail,
collectively as well as individually, to account for why God might
permit nonresistant nonbelief.
Second, in light of the foregoing point, even if there are some
nonresistant nonbelievers, it may well be quite difficult to discern
whether they possess or fail to possess those motivations, attitudes,
and dispositions that allegedly explain their nonbelief in a
theistically friendly fashion. If the difficulty is severe enough,
then it might be that no one—whether theists, atheists,
agnostics, or what-have-you—is well-positioned to say that there
are some nonresistant nonbelievers.
Of course—and this is the third point—we might well argue
that these explanations provide no good reason, individually or
collectively, for God to permit nonresistant nonbelief. That’s
because the good states of affairs to which they appeal can be
accommodated within a developing, positively meaningful and reciprocal
conscious relationship with God, or because the benefits of such a
relationship with God exceed the goods to which these explanations
appeal, or because, more generally, this sort of relationship with God
is the greatest good and so God wouldn’t pursue lesser goods at
its expense (Howard-Snyder and Moser 2002a; Schellenberg 1993, 1996,
2005a, 2005b, 2007a, 2015; McBrayer and Swenson 2012; Trakakis
2007a).
Fourth, one might worry that the whole enterprise of providing a
theistically friendly explanation of nonresistant nonbelief is
misguided. After all, if God exists, why didn’t God create a
world in which there never was or ever will be any nonresistant
nonbelief? Why would God create or permit resisters and nonbelievers
in the first place? Surely he could have created persons who never
resisted and always believed.
Even if no theistically friendly explanation of nonresistant nonbelief
we know of completely satisfies us, we might yet wonder about
Schellenberg’s premise
 (4):
 necessarily, if God exists, then God perfectly loves such finite
persons as there may be.
On the one hand, we might wonder whether, if God exists, God perfectly
loves anyone, at least as defined by how we understand love.
In this connection, some critics have pointed out that many
“classical theists” affirm a conception of God according
to which God is transcendent and ineffable, and so beyond all human
comprehension, and so neither personal nor non-personal, and so
neither loving nor non-loving (Rea 2016; Ross 2002; Trakakis 2016). It
is certainly less than clear what a conscious, reciprocal relationship
would look like with the God of apophaticism. Moreover, even if there
is a personal God, God might be indifferent to finite created persons,
and so not love them—an implication of some versions of
Deism.
On the other hand, we might wonder whether, even if God is perfect in
love, God would perfectly love such finite persons as there may be.
For, in light of an idea suggested as worthy of consideration by Hud Hudson in private correspondence, 
to love perfectly is for one’s love to be in the right
proportion to the object of one’s love, everything
considered—loving to the degree that matches the degree of
worthiness to be loved. 
Therefore, even if God is perfectly loving, it does not follow that
God loves such finite persons as there may be since they may have
polluted themselves, rendered themselves utterly unlovable; “and
it is, of course, no symptom of a disordered love to fail to love the
unlovable”.
One might also wonder about premise
 (5):
 necessarily, if God perfectly loves such finite persons as there may
be, then, for any capable finite person S and time t,
God is at t open to being in a positively meaningful and
reciprocal conscious relationship with S at t. Whether
this is true might depend on what sort of love is perfect, whether it
is more like that of a mother for her child, or a grandparent for her
distant descendants, or a benevolent reconstructive surgeon for her
patient (Cuneo 2013; McGinnis 2016; Rea 2016; Schellenberg 2013). One
might argue that premise
 (5)
 is true only if perfect love is like the first, but wonder what
follows if it is like the second or third. In this connection, imagine
that what it is for God to perfectly love us is for God to provide for
our greatest good, and suppose that our greatest good consists in our
being virtuous, caring for our environment and other creatures. In
that case, it is not at all clear that a personal relationship of the
sort Schellenberg imagines is necessary. So long as God has made our
flourishing achievable, that is all that God’s perfect love
should lead us to expect.
Suppose we grant Schellenberg’s understanding of openness to
relationship as well as his premise
 (6),
 and suppose we concede that no theistically friendly explanation of
nonresistant nonbelief we know of is wholly satisfactory, either
individually or collectively. Even so, we might wonder whether we
should infer that a perfectly loving God would not permit nonresistant
nonbelief. After all, an open-minded and intellectually humble
inquirer will want to satisfy her natural curiosity about whether she
is in a position to tell whether there are any reasons for God to
permit nonresistant nonbelief that, although inaccessible to her,
would be accessible to God. For suppose that she were to discover
that, even if there is no good basis for thinking there is a God, and
even if she does not know of any wholly satisfactory reason for God to
permit nonresistant nonbelief, she should be in doubt about whether
she is in a position to tell whether there are any unknown reasons. In
that case, we would expect her open-mindedness and intellectual
humility to lead her to refrain from accepting that a perfectly loving
God would not permit nonresistant nonbelief and, in refraining from
accepting this, she would refrain from accepting premise
 (5).
This assessment of the argument from nonbelief has its parallel in the
problem of evil literature where it is (badly) named “skeptical
theism”. It has been explicitly used in relation to the argument
from nonbelief in Howard-Snyder 2016 and McBrayer and Swenson
2012. For criticism, see
Schellenberg 2007a, 2016.
Whether this assessment leads to objectionable skepticism elsewhere is
a matter of ongoing debate. For discussion as it relates to the
argument from evil, see Dougherty 2014; Dougherty and McBrayer 2014;
Howard-Snyder 2009; McBrayer 2010; McBrayer and Howard-Snyder 2013;
and Trakakis 2007b.
Even if we accept premises
 (4)
 and
 (5),
 we might yet wonder about Schellenberg’s premise
 (6),
 the claim that God’s openness to a personal relationship with
capable nonresistant persons entails that such persons will believe
that God exists. Schellenberg argues that one cannot even “get
started” in a personal relationship—a conscious,
reciprocal, positively meaningful relationship—without believing
that the other party exists. It seems, however, that we might not only
“get started” but get a long way into a conscious,
reciprocal, positively meaningful relationship without belief that the
other party exists. After all, might not a degree of confidence below
the threshold of belief, or acceptance, or imagination-based assent,
or belief-less assuming, or trust, or even hope suffice? (See Alston
1996; Audi 2011; Cohen 1992; Howard-Snyder 2013; McKaughan 2013;
Poston and Dougherty 2007; Schellenberg 2011, 2014.)
Even if states less than belief do suffice as the cognitive requirement for "getting started" in a relationship, however,
we might wonder whether they are as good as belief as a cognitive
foundation for a personal relationship with God; and, if they are not,
we might well question why a perfectly loving God provides less than
the best on this score. Furthermore, even if we grant, just for the
sake of argument, that a perfectly loving God might provide less than
the best on this score, we might have just as good a reason for
thinking that there are nonresistant
non-accepters/assenters/assumers/trusters/hopers who are capable of
relating personally with God as we do for thinking that there are
nonresistant nonbelievers in that condition (Schellenberg 2007b,
2016).
Last but not least, we might wonder about premise
 (7):
 are there really any nonresistant nonbelievers with a capacity to
relate personally with God? According to some critics, everyone at
least implicitly believes in God, although not under the name
“God” or under a description they might recognize as
belonging to God (Wainwright 2002). On the other hand, many religions
hold that some kind of basic knowledge of God is universal but can be
suppressed, sometimes called the “natural knowledge of
God” (Green 2013). Paul’s letter to the Romans claims that
“since the creation of the world God’s invisible qualities
have been clearly seen”. Calvin famously posits that there is a
sensus divinitatis that provides us with at least a basic
sense of the divine. According to Jonathan Edwards, there is
“sufficient light for the knowledge of God”, hence,
nonbelievers must fail to believe “divine things” owing to
“a dreadful stupidity of mind, occasioning a sottish
insensibility of their truth and importance” (quoted in
Wainwright 2002). This insensibility consists in a “proneness to
idolatry” and a “disregard of eternal
things”—dispositions to ignore familiar and obvious
considerations, to be swayed by ridicule and deference to people in
authority, to be prejudiced against religion, and so on, which impair
the God-given ability to reason properly about God. People bring such
impairments on themselves (Henry 2001, 2008; Lehe 2004; Moroney 2000).
However, if we deny the existence of nonresistant nonbelievers, we must square
our denial with the evidence marshalled on behalf of their existence
(Schellenberg 2005c).
According to Maitzen (2006),
Other countries and geographic regions display an uneven distribution
of belief and nonbelief, even though it is not as stark as it is in
Thailand and Saudi Arabia (Pew 2012).
According to Maitzen, even if we grant, just for the sake of argument,
the success of some of the theistically friendly explanations of
nonbelief in individuals, none of them explain the “geographic
patchiness” of nonbelief. That’s because those
explanations invoke motivations, attitudes, and dispositions that
“do not cluster by country or culture so as to show up twenty
times more often in Thailand than in Saudi Arabia” (Maitzen
2006: 184). After all, it’s not as though the Thai are twenty
times more likely than the Saudis to be resistant to belief of God, or
in need of prompting to recognize the wretchedness of life without
God, or in need of the sort of risk that’s required of a
passionate faith in God; it’s not as though the Thai are twenty
times more likely than the Saudis, upon coming to believe in God, to
be coerced into love, trust, and obedience, or disposed to act out of
improper motives like fear of punishment, or be presumptuous in their
relationship with God, and so on (2006: 180–185). Indeed, even
if we grant, just for the sake of argument again, that there is great
value in a diversity of belief and nonbelief of God, 
why doesn’t this valuable diversity flourish within the cultures
of Saudi Arabia and Thailand? Naturalistic explanations, including
cultural and political explanations offered by social science, have an
easier time of it, 
compared to theistic explanations since, on naturalism, 
the patchiness of theistic belief has everything to do with the
notoriously haphazard play of human culture and politics and nothing
to do with God: the messy, uneven data have messy, uneven causes.
(2006: 183) 
Moreover, it seems implausible that God would be selective in the way
God related to different people groups, as though God took
considerably more pains to make sure that those in the Middle East,
rather than Thailand or China or India, came to belief. One would
antecedently expect that God would have the motivation and wherewithal
to treat all people equally on this score, which is hard to square
with God’s love and justice. So it is that the demographics of
nonbelief are better explained naturalistically than theistically, and
so those demographics constitute evidence for atheism (cf. Zagzebski
1994).
By way of reply, Marsh (2008) draws on Molinism in order to display
how the demographics of nonbelief might be more likely on theism than
Maitzen suggests. According to Molinism, God knows what free creatures
would freely do in counterfactual situations, and God uses this
information in the way God governs the universe. So, suppose that God
knew that (i) there is a group of persons P 
that are such that, no matter what creative act God had performed, if
Ps had existed, Ps would have freely rejected God in
their earthly lives 
had they believed, and “those genuinely deprived of the
opportunity to believe in God in this world” belong to that
group (2008: 467). Furthermore, since God knows that 
these individuals wouldn’t come to love Him short of something
like a beatific vision, God sequesters them in order to secure their
eventual conversion, 
in an afterlife. God’s decision to sequester them “largely
cashes out in terms of the geographic circumstances in which they are
placed”, and keeps them “innocent for a later time, when
they will be in a position truly to love God” upon coming to
belief (2008: 468). Finally, suppose that, given the counterfactual
profiles of each individual essence, there is no better distribution
of belief and nonbelief than the actual one. In this theistically
friendly hypothesis, the demographics of nonbelief are at least as
expectable on theism as naturalism. Likewise for a Calvinist
explanation: 
Determinism is true and souls may be divided into two kinds, the Elect
and the Non-Elect. The Elects’ souls are born into societal
situations in which they are determined to come to the ante
mortem beliefs necessary for salvation; the non-Elects’ are
born into societal situations in which they’re not, indeed
they’re determined to fail to come to these beliefs. (Mawson
2012: 191–192)
Many theists will find Molinist and Calvinist explanations unappealing
since they depend on middle knowledge and double predestination
respectively. But another difficulty is that the strategy appears, at
least at first glance, more than a little bit offensive. One of the
great triumphs of modern ethics is the widespread acknowledgement of
the moral reprehensibility of considering some people groups inferior
to others. Postulating that non-theistic populations are comprised of
people who wouldn’t respond appropriately to God no matter what,
in this life, seems to flout this insight; and postulating that
non-theistic populations are comprised of people who are elect to
eternal damnation might be seen in the same light. (For further
discussion, see Maitzen 2008; Mawson 2009, 2012.)
Mawson 2012 argues that, on theism, the demographics of nonbelief are
expectable, given either of two auxiliary hypotheses. First, suppose
God wants everyone to believe, but God wants much more everyone to
believe without God’s having to interfere with the freedom of
people. Of course, one of the things that people can use their freedom
to do is either to spread theistic belief or to restrict the spread of
theistic belief. Given that people’s receptivity to theistic
belief is dependent on the culture in which they are brought up and so
forth, we’d expect to find that belief and nonbelief are
distributed unevenly. Second, what if God wants more than anything
everyone to believe, say, because it is necessary for salvation? In
that case, we must ask what “deadline” God has set for
satisfying that desire. Mawson writes: 
There are two plausible suggestions for “deadlines” for
God: either that he has set for each individual his or her own
deadline and set it as the moment of his or her death, or that he has
set us collectively one and the same deadline, the Eschaton/Last
Judgment. (2012: 194) 
If God’s “deadline” is the Last Judgment, then, once
again, it’s not the least bit surprising that, since
people’s receptivity to theistic belief is dependent on the
culture in which they are brought up and so forth, belief and
nonbelief are distributed unevenly. Oddly enough, Mawson does not
mention a third deadline, the one that Schellenberg has been on about
for nearly three decades: the dawn of an individual’s capacity
to relate personally with God. If that were God’s
“deadline”, would we still expect the uneven distribution
of belief and nonbelief we find across the globe?
Baker-Hytch (forthcoming) argues that the uneven distribution of
belief and nonbelief is about as likely on theism as on naturalism
since (i) the probability of that distribution on what we know about
“mutual epistemic dependence” is high, (ii) the
probability of what we know about mutual epistemic dependence on
“inclusive theism”—the view that the eternal destiny
of human beings is not determined by what they believe at
their natural deaths—is about the same as it is on naturalism,
and (iii) the probability of inclusive theism on theism is much higher
than is non-inclusive theism. See Talbot 2014 for a Christian defense
of (iii).
To say that we are mutually epistemically dependent is to say
that we are 
cognitively constituted in such a way that it is a practical necessity
that we rely upon testimony for much of what we know about the world
and in such a way, moreover, that we are liable to be significantly
influenced by what those around us believe, particularly when it comes
to matters that aren’t readily susceptible to empirical
investigation, including religious matters. (Baker-Hytch forthcoming:
3) 
Mutual epistemic dependence, so understood, says Baker-Hytch, is a
consequence of, among other things, “two types of cognitive bias
that play a significant role in determining how plausible we will tend
to find a given item of testimony”: context biases,
such as conformity, prestige, and similarity biases, which together
make it much more likely that we accept the testimony of those we
personally trust and respect in our communities, and content
biases, stemming from the dominance of intuitive processing over
reflective processing and the attractiveness of “minimally
counterintuitive” ideas, especially religious ones, which are
more likely to spread via testimony (Barrett 2011: 52–72;
Kahneman 2013; Boyer 2001: 87–100). Thus, given mutual
epistemic dependence, we would expect to see considerable divergence
in the content of religious beliefs and clustering of those beliefs
along geographic and cultural lines. So, (i) seems supported.
In defense of (ii), Baker-Hytch argues that mutual epistemic
dependence provides a balance between competing goods such as (a)
exercising interpersonal trust and being invulnerable to deception,
(b) sharing responsibility for one another’s acquisition of
epistemic goods and practicing epistemic self-reliance, and (c) having
opportunities to acquire, practice, and perfect the intellectual
virtues and freedom from intellectual obstacles and challenges. Since
mutual epistemic dependence provides a balance between goods such as
these, he claims it wouldn’t be surprising if God were to bring
it about; indeed, mutual epistemic dependence seems roughly as likely
on inclusive theism as it is on naturalism.
Marsh (2013) focuses on natural nonbelief of God, 
“natural” in the sense of being built into the physical or
biological structure of the world, and being generally outside the
scope of human agency and control. (2013: 355) 
The cognitive science of religion, combined with ethnographic data for
pre-industrial cultures (Barrett 2007; Bloom 2009;
Stark 2007), show that
early humans, including many anatomically and behaviorally modern
humans, originally lacked a concept of God and were religiously
restricted to concepts of limited, and sometimes mean, supernatural
agents. As a result, many [such humans] failed to believe in God or
anything like God. The nonbelief in question was both naturally
occurring and nonresistant. (Marsh 2013: 359) 
The “millions and millions” of instances of natural,
nonresistant nonbelief in early humans is much more surprising on
theism than on naturalism, since it is very surprising that “the
human mind would be naturally so insensitive to the truth about
religion” “given that a perfect God would desire to enter
into a divine-human relationship with early humans”, whereas
“[g]iven naturalism’s commitment to indifference about
whether early humans would be theists”, it’s much less
surprising.
Matters get only worse when one adds that (i) Darwinian
evolution—“the claim that natural selection, working on
random mutation, is the driving force behind much, if not most,
evolutionary change” (351)—helps to explain natural
nonbelief in early humans and (ii) Darwinian evolution is much more
likely on naturalism than theism. As for (i),
As for (ii), “Darwinism starts out more likely on naturalism
than on theism” because “Darwinism is highly optional on
theism”, as evidenced by the fact that “an omnipotent God
would have many non-Darwinian ways to create minds, bodies, and souls
and would not be limited to Darwinian or even physical
constraints”, whereas on naturalism, “the options for
developing life are much more constrained, especially in the relevant
time frame” (360–61).
So it is, says Marsh, that natural, nonresistant nonbelief in early
humans constitutes evidence for naturalism over theism and, when
combined with Darwinian evolution, that evidential force increases
substantially.
To date, Marsh’s
argument has not received sustained attention in the literature (though cf. Vandergriff 2016). Many of the considerations
adduced with respect to the other arguments from nonbelief will need to be weighed carefully in the context of Marsh’s argument as well.