Hobbes wrote several versions of his political philosophy, including
The Elements of Law, Natural and Politic (also under the
titles Human Nature and De Corpore Politico)
published in 1650, De Cive (1642) published in English as
Philosophical Rudiments Concerning Government and Society in
1651, the English Leviathan published in 1651, and its Latin
revision in 1668. Others of his works are also important in
understanding his political philosophy, especially his history of the
English Civil War, Behemoth (published 1679), De
Corpore (1655), De Homine (1658), Dialogue Between a
Philosopher and a Student of the Common Laws of England (1681),
and The Questions Concerning Liberty, Necessity, and Chance
(1656). All of Hobbes’s major writings are collected in The
English Works of Thomas Hobbes, edited by Sir William Molesworth
(11 volumes, London 1839–45), and Thomae Hobbes Opera Philosophica
Quae Latina Scripsit Omnia, also edited by Molesworth (5 volumes;
London, 1839–45). Oxford University Press has undertaken a projected
26 volume collection of the Clarendon Edition of the Works of
Thomas Hobbes. So far 3 volumes are available: De Cive
(edited by Howard Warrender), The Correspondence of Thomas
Hobbes (edited by Noel Malcolm), and Writings on Common Law
and Hereditary Right (edited by Alan Cromartie and Quentin
Skinner). Recently Noel Malcolm has published a three volume edition
of Leviathan, which places the English text side by side with
Hobbes’s later Latin version of it. Readers new to Hobbes should begin
with Leviathan, being sure to read Parts Three and Four, as well as
the more familiar and often excerpted Parts One and Two. There are many
fine overviews of Hobbes’s normative philosophy, some of which are
listed in the following selected bibliography of secondary works.
Hobbes sought to discover rational principles for the construction of
a civil polity that would not be subject to destruction from within.
Having lived through the period of political disintegration
culminating in the English Civil War, he came to the view that the
burdens of even the most oppressive government are “scarce
sensible, in respect of the miseries, and horrible calamities, that
accompany a Civill Warre”. Because virtually any government
would be better than a civil war, and, according to Hobbes’s analysis,
all but absolute governments are systematically prone to dissolution
into civil war, people ought to submit themselves to an absolute
political authority.  Continued stability will require that they also
refrain from the sorts of actions that might undermine such a
regime. For example, subjects should not dispute the sovereign power
and under no circumstances should they rebel. In general, Hobbes aimed
to demonstrate the reciprocal relationship between political obedience
and peace.
To establish these conclusions, Hobbes invites us to consider what
life would be like in a state of nature, that is, a condition without
government. Perhaps we would imagine that people might fare best in
such a state, where each decides for herself how to act, and is judge,
jury and executioner in her own case whenever disputes arise—and
that at any rate, this state is the appropriate baseline against which
to judge the justifiability of political arrangements. Hobbes terms
this situation “the condition of mere nature”, a state of
perfectly private judgment, in which there is no agency with
recognized authority to arbitrate disputes and effective power to
enforce its decisions.
Hobbes’s near descendant, John Locke, insisted in his Second
Treatise of Government that the state of nature was indeed to be
preferred to subjection to the arbitrary power of an absolute
sovereign. But Hobbes famously argued that such a “dissolute
condition of masterlesse men, without subjection to Lawes, and a
coercive Power to tye their hands from rapine, and revenge” would
make impossible all of the basic security upon which comfortable,
sociable, civilized life depends. There would be “no place for
industry, because the fruit thereof is uncertain; and consequently no
culture of the earth; no navigation, nor use of the commodities that
may be imported by Sea; no commodious Building; no Instruments of
moving and removing such things as require much force; no Knowledge of
the face of the Earth; no account of Time; no Arts; no Letters; and
which is worst of all, continuall feare, and danger of violent death;
And the life of man, solitary, poore, nasty, brutish, and short.”
If this is the state of nature, people have strong reasons to avoid it,
which can be done only by submitting to some mutually recognized public
authority, for “so long a man is in the condition of mere nature,
(which is a condition of war,) as private appetite is the measure of
good and evill.”
Although many readers have criticized Hobbes’s state of nature as
unduly pessimistic, he constructs it from a number of individually
plausible empirical and normative assumptions. He assumes that people
are sufficiently similar in their mental and physical attributes that
no one is invulnerable nor can expect to be able to dominate the
others. Hobbes assumes that people generally “shun death”,
and that the desire to preserve their own lives is very strong in most
people. While people have local affections, their benevolence is
limited, and they have a tendency to partiality. Concerned that others
should agree with their own high opinions of themselves, people are
sensitive to slights. They make evaluative judgments, but often use
seemingly impersonal terms like ‘good’ and
‘bad’ to stand for their own personal preferences. They are
curious about the causes of events, and anxious about their futures;
according to Hobbes, these characteristics incline people to adopt
religious beliefs, although the content of those beliefs will differ
depending upon the sort of religious education one has happened to
receive.
With respect to normative assumptions, Hobbes ascribes to each
person in the state of nature a liberty right to preserve herself,
which he terms “the right of nature”. This is the right to
do whatever one sincerely judges needful for one’s preservation; yet
because it is at least possible that virtually anything might be judged
necessary for one’s preservation, this theoretically limited right of
nature becomes in practice an unlimited right to potentially anything,
or, as Hobbes puts it, a right “to all things”. Hobbes
further assumes as a principle of practical rationality, that people
should adopt what they see to be the necessary means to their most
important ends.
Taken together, these plausible descriptive and normative
assumptions yield a state of nature potentially fraught with divisive
struggle. The right of each to all things invites serious conflict,
especially if there is competition for resources, as there will surely
be over at least scarce goods such as the most desirable lands,
spouses, etc. People will quite naturally fear that others may (citing
the right of nature) invade them, and may rationally plan to strike
first as an anticipatory defense. Moreover, that minority of prideful
or “vain-glorious” persons who take pleasure in exercising
power over others will naturally elicit preemptive defensive responses
from others. Conflict will be further fueled by disagreement in
religious views, in moral judgments, and over matters as mundane as
what goods one actually needs, and what respect one properly merits.
Hobbes imagines a state of nature in which each person is free to
decide for herself what she needs, what she’s owed, what’s respectful,
right, pious, prudent, and also free to decide all of these questions
for the behavior of everyone else as well, and to act on her judgments
as she thinks best, enforcing her views where she can. In this situation
where there is no common authority to resolve these many and serious
disputes, we can easily imagine with Hobbes that the state of nature
would become a “state of war”, even worse, a war of
“all against all”.
In response to the natural question whether humanity ever was
generally in any such state of nature, Hobbes gives three examples of
putative states of nature. First, he notes that all sovereigns are in
this state with respect to one another. This claim has made Hobbes the
representative example of a “realist” in international
relations. Second, he opined that many now civilized peoples were
formerly in that state, and some few peoples—“the savage
people in many places of America” (Leviathan, XIII),
for instance—were still to his day in the state of nature. Third
and most significantly, Hobbes asserts that the state of nature will
be easily recognized by those whose formerly peaceful states have
collapsed into civil war. While the state of nature’s condition of
perfectly private judgment is an abstraction, something resembling it
too closely for comfort remains a perpetually present possibility, to
be feared, and avoided.
Do the other assumptions of Hobbes’s philosophy license the existence
of this imagined state of isolated individuals pursuing their private
judgments? Probably not, since, as feminist critics among others have
noted, children are by Hobbes’s theory assumed to have undertaken an
obligation of obedience to their parents in exchange for nurturing,
and so the primitive units in the state of nature will include
families ordered by internal obligations, as well as individuals. The
bonds of affection, sexual affinity, and friendship—as well as
of clan membership and shared religious belief—may further
decrease the accuracy of any purely individualistic model of the state
of nature. This concession need not impugn Hobbes’s analysis of
conflict in the state of nature, since it may turn out that
competition, diffidence and glory-seeking are disastrous sources of
conflicts among small groups just as much as they are among
individuals. Still, commentators seeking to answer the question how
precisely we should understand Hobbes’s state of nature are
investigating the degree to which Hobbes imagines that to be a
condition of interaction among isolated individuals.
Another important open question is that of what, exactly, it is about
human beings that makes it the case (supposing Hobbes is right) that
our communal life is prone to disaster when we are left to interact
according only to our own individual judgments. Perhaps, while people
do wish to act for their own best long-term interest, they are
shortsighted, and so indulge their current interests without properly
considering the effects of their current behavior on their long-term
interest. This would be a type of failure of
rationality. Alternatively, it may be that people in the state of
nature are fully rational, but are trapped in a situation that makes
it individually rational for each to act in a way that is sub-optimal
for all, perhaps finding themselves in the familiar ‘prisoner’s
dilemma’ of game theory. Or again, it may be that Hobbes’s state
of nature would be peaceful but for the presence of persons (just a
few, or perhaps all, to some degree) whose passions overrule their
calmer judgments; who are prideful, spiteful, partial, envious,
jealous, and in other ways prone to behave in ways that lead to
war. Such an account would understand irrational human passions to be
the source of conflict. Which, if any, of these accounts adequately
answers to Hobbes’s text is a matter of continuing debate among Hobbes
scholars. Game theorists have been particularly active in these
debates, experimenting with different models for the state of nature
and the conflict it engenders.
Hobbes argues that the state of nature is a miserable state of war
in which none of our important human ends are reliably realizable.
Happily, human nature also provides resources to escape this miserable
condition. Hobbes argues that each of us, as a rational being, can see
that a war of all against all is inimical to the satisfaction of her
interests, and so can agree that “peace is good, and therefore
also the way or means of peace are good”. Humans will recognize
as imperatives the injunction to seek peace, and to do those things
necessary to secure it, when they can do so safely. Hobbes calls these
practical imperatives “Lawes of Nature”, the sum of which
is not to treat others in ways we would not have them treat us. These
“precepts”, “conclusions” or
“theorems” of reason are “eternal and
immutable”, always commanding our assent even when they may not
safely be acted upon. They forbid many familiar vices such as iniquity,
cruelty, and ingratitude. Although commentators do not agree on whether
these laws should be regarded as mere precepts of prudence, or rather
as divine commands, or moral imperatives of some other sort, all agree
that Hobbes understands them to direct people to submit to political
authority. They tell us to seek peace with willing others by laying
down part of our “right to all things”, by mutually
covenanting to submit to the authority of a sovereign, and further
direct us to keep that covenant establishing sovereignty.
When people mutually covenant each to the others to obey a common
authority, they have established what Hobbes calls “sovereignty
by institution”. When, threatened by a conqueror, they covenant
for protection by promising obedience, they have established
“sovereignty by acquisition”. These are equally legitimate
ways of establishing sovereignty, according to Hobbes, and their
underlying motivation is the same—namely fear—whether of
one’s fellows or of a conqueror. The social covenant involves both the
renunciation or transfer of right and the authorization of the
sovereign power. Political legitimacy depends not on how a government
came to power, but only on whether it can effectively protect those
who have consented to obey it; political obligation ends when
protection ceases.
Although Hobbes offered some mild pragmatic grounds for preferring
monarchy to other forms of government, his main concern was to argue
that effective government—whatever its form—must have absolute
authority. Its powers must be neither divided nor limited. The powers
of legislation, adjudication, enforcement, taxation, war-making (and
the less familiar right of control of normative doctrine) are connected
in such a way that a loss of one may thwart effective exercise of the
rest; for example, legislation without interpretation and enforcement
will not serve to regulate conduct. Only a government that possesses
all of what Hobbes terms the “essential rights of
sovereignty” can be reliably effective, since where partial sets
of these rights are held by different bodies that disagree in their
judgments as to what is to be done, paralysis of effective government,
or degeneration into a civil war to settle their dispute, may
occur.
Similarly, to impose limitation on the authority of the government
is to invite irresoluble disputes over whether it has overstepped those
limits. If each person is to decide for herself whether the government
should be obeyed, factional disagreement—and war to settle the
issue, or at least paralysis of effective government—are quite
possible. To refer resolution of the question to some further
authority, itself also limited and so open to challenge for
overstepping its bounds, would be to initiate an infinite regress of
non-authoritative ‘authorities’ (where the buck never
stops). To refer it to a further authority itself unlimited, would be
just to relocate the seat of absolute sovereignty, a position entirely
consistent with Hobbes’s insistence on absolutism. To avoid the
horrible prospect of governmental collapse and return to the state of
nature, people should treat their sovereign as having absolute
authority.
When subjects institute a sovereign by authorizing it, they agree, in
conformity with the principle “no wrong is done to a consenting
party”, not to hold it liable for any errors in judgment it may
make and not to treat any harms it does to them as actionable
injustices. Although many interpreters have assumed that by
authorizing a sovereign, subjects become morally responsible for the
actions it commands, Hobbes instead insists that “the external
actions done in obedience to [laws], without the inward approbation,
are the actions of the sovereign, and not of the subject, which is in
that case but as an instrument, without any motion of his own at
all” (Leviathan xlii, 106). It may be important to Hobbes’s
project of persuading his Christian readers to obey their sovereign
that he can reassure them that God will not hold them responsible for
wrongful actions done at the sovereign’s command, because they cannot
reasonably be expected to obey if doing so would jeopardize their
eternal prospects. Hence Hobbes explains that “whatsoever a
subject...is compelled to do in obedience to his sovereign, and doth
it not in order to his own mind, but in order to the laws of his
country, that action is not his, but his sovereign’s.”
(Leviathan xlii. 11) This position reinforces absolutism by permitting
Hobbes to maintain that subjects can obey even commands to perform
actions they believe to be sinful without fear of divine
punishment.
While Hobbes insists that we should regard our governments as having
absolute authority, he reserves to subjects the liberty of disobeying
some of their government’s commands. He argues that subjects retain a
right of self-defense against the sovereign power, giving them the
right to disobey or resist when their lives are in danger. He also
gives them seemingly broad resistance rights in cases in which their
families or even their honor are at stake. These exceptions have
understandably intrigued those who study Hobbes. His ascription of
apparently inalienable rights—what he calls the “true
liberties of subjects”—seems incompatible with his defense
of absolute sovereignty. Moreover, if the sovereign’s failure to
provide adequate protection to subjects extinguishes their obligation
to obey, and if it is left to each subject to judge for herself the
adequacy of that protection, it seems that people have never really
exited the fearsome state of nature. This aspect of Hobbes’s political
philosophy has been hotly debated ever since Hobbes’s time. Bishop
Bramhall, one of Hobbes’s contemporaries, famously
accused Leviathan of being a “Rebell’s
Catechism.” More recently, some commentators have argued that
Hobbes’s discussion of the limits of political obligation is the
Achilles’ heel of his theory. It is not clear whether or not this
charge can stand up to scrutiny, but it will surely be the subject of
much continued discussion.
The last crucial aspect of Hobbes’s political philosophy is his
treatment of religion. Hobbes progressively expands his discussion of
Christian religion in each revision of his political philosophy, until
it comes in Leviathan to comprise roughly half the book. There
is no settled consensus on how Hobbes understands the significance of
religion within his political theory. Some commentators have argued
that Hobbes is trying to demonstrate to his readers the compatibility
of his political theory with core Christian commitments, since it may
seem that Christians’ religious duties forbid their affording the sort
of absolute obedience to their governors which Hobbes’s theory requires
of them. Others have doubted the sincerity of his professed
Christianity, arguing that by the use of irony or other subtle
rhetorical devices, Hobbes sought to undermine his readers’ religious
beliefs. Howsoever his intentions are properly understood, Hobbes’s
obvious concern with the power of religious belief is a fact that
interpreters of his political philosophy must seek to explain.
Scholars are increasingly interested in how Hobbes thought of the
status of women, and of the family.  Hobbes was one of the earliest
western philosophers to count women as persons when devising a social
contract among persons.  He insists on the equality of all people,
very explicitly including women. People are equal because they are all
subject to domination, and all potentially capable of dominating
others.  No person is so strong as to be invulnerable to attack while
sleeping by the concerted efforts of others, nor is any so strong as
to be assured of dominating all others.
In this relevant sense, women are naturally equal to men.  They are
equally naturally free, meaning that their consent is required before
they will be under the authority of anyone else.  In this, Hobbes’s
claims stand in stark contrast to many prevailing views of the time,
according to which women were born inferior to and subordinate to
men. Sir Robert Filmer, who later served as the target of John
Locke’s First Treatise of Government, is a well-known
proponent of this view, which he calls patriarchalism.  Explicitly
rejecting the patriarchalist view as well as Salic law, Hobbes
maintains that women can be sovereigns; authority for him is
“neither male nor female”. He also argues for natural
maternal right: in the state of nature, dominion over children is
naturally the mother’s.  He witnesses the Amazons.
In seeming contrast to this egalitarian foundation, Hobbes spoke of
the commonwealth in patriarchal language. In the move from the state
of nature to civil society, families are described as
“fathers”, “servants”, and
“children”, seemingly obliterating mothers from the
picture entirely. Hobbes justifies this way of talking by saying that
it is fathers not mothers who have founded societies. As true as that
is, it is easy to see how there is a lively debate between those who
emphasize the potentially feminist or egalitarian aspects of Hobbes’s
thought and those who emphasize his ultimate exclusion of women.  Such
debates raise the question: To what extent are the patriarchal claims
Hobbes makes integral to his overall theory, if indeed they are
integral at all? 