The fundamental aspects of Hobbes’ materialism are well known.
Hobbes believed that everything that exists is a body, and that bodies
are sometimes in motion and sometimes at rest. Furthermore, he held
that the only essential property of body is extension, or magnitude.
All other apparent properties of bodies, such as those of color,
taste, and firmness, are the result of motions from bodies being
continued through media to humans’ sense organs. These motions,
when continued into the bodies of perceivers, are constitutive of
conceptions, or
 ideas.[2]
 Ideas of the objects of sense are caused by motions from things
outside of perceivers and those continued motions constitute ideas and
serve to individuate one idea from another. Thus, all ideas in the
human mind are either from sense perception or derived from ideas
gained from sense perception (Leviathan I; LEV 22).
This account of the origin and nature of ideas shows Hobbes’
clear empiricist leanings; however, Hobbes does not hold that knowers
should uncritically accept what the ideas of sense objects seem to
represent. Like many other philosophers in the seventeenth century,
Hobbes held that our knowledge of the external world was not direct
but was instead mediated by ideas. This recognition that “we
compute nothing but our phantasms or ideas” (Hobbes
1642–43 [1973: 450]; cf. OL
 I.82)[3]
 resulted in two worries about human knowledge.
First, knowers must examine what resemblance ideas in the mind have to
objects in the outside world. This worry seems similar, at first
glance, to the concerns of Descartes’ meditator in the
Meditations on First Philosophy (1641), but Hobbes aimed to
provide a solution that made no reference whatsoever to God or to
anything at all immaterial, such as a soul. In the early work
Elements of Law, composed in 1640 and published in 1650 (EL),
Hobbes offered arguments that attempted to show that ideas are
distinct from that which they purport to represent and he claimed that
as a result we could know that the so-called secondary qualities, such
as color, taste, and sound, were not in bodies. To do this, he used
everyday experience to provide evidence for his claims: 
Every man hath so much experience as to have seen the sun and other
visible objects by reflection in the water and in glasses, and this
alone is sufficient for this conclusion: that colour and image may be
there where the thing seen is not. (Elements of Law II.5; EL
3) 
He used similar considerations in Leviathan I, concluding
that we can know, for example, that color and sound are not in bodies
since if they were “they could not bee severed from them, as by
glasses, and in Ecchoes by reflection” (LEV 24).
A second worry that follows from Hobbes’ view that we have only
mediated access to bodies in the world relates to the possibility of
gaining knowledge of the causes of natural events. Most of the ideas
that knowers possess of bodies are received passively. When interested
in the cause of some phenomenon, all one may examine are ideas caused
by the motions of the bodies involved. However, when interested in,
say, the cause of billiard ball B being put into motion after
apparent contact with moving billiard ball A, one does not find
an idea of A being the cause of B’s motion. Even
if one were to look to a lower ‘level’, as it were,
smaller than billiard balls by use of a microscope, one would not find
any idea of A’s motion causing B’s motion. Hobbes
diagnosed this lack of causal knowledge by highlighting that human
agents are not the makers of natural phenomena. He seemed to think
that makers gain this causal knowledge by attending to their
constructions through the process of creating. Since we lack the ideas
of the causes of individual phenomena from our experience, Hobbes
claimed that we cannot know their actual causes at all. All that we
may know are possible causes. Hobbes asserted in Six Lessons to
the Professors of Mathematiques (1656) that because “of
natural bodies we know not the construction but seek it from the
effects” we can know “only of what [the causes] may
be” (EW VII.184).
This second worry brings to the fore Hobbes’ condition for the
possibility of scientific knowledge, namely, the possession of
(actual) causal knowledge. He claimed that 
we are said to know [scire] some effect when we know what its
causes are, in what subject they are, in what subject they introduce
the effect and how they do it. Therefore, this is the knowledge
[scientia] τοῦ
διότι or of causes. (OL I.59) 
Having scientific knowledge required one to know the actual causes of
a phenomenon, not its mere possible causes. However, the only way to
possess such causal knowledge is to act as a maker, as God did in the
case of natural things.
This restriction that Hobbes made allowed him to consider only
geometry and civil philosophy as bodies of scientific knowledge, since
in only these two disciplines do humans make the objects that they
study. In Six Lessons to the Professors of Mathematiques,
Hobbes distinguished these two disciplines from all others by
connecting them to making: 
Geometry therefore is demonstrable for the lines and figures from
which we reason are drawn and described by ourselves and civil
philosophy is demonstrable because we make the commonwealth ourselves.
(EW VII.184)
In the three following sections, this entry will consider ways in
which these two bodies of scientific knowledge are used within other
disciplines to provide an epistemic grounding for the explanations
therein. In natural philosophy, or physics, Hobbes borrowed
geometrical principles to provide the cause—the reason
‘why’—for many phenomena, while the making of the
commonwealth, and its laws, out of the state of nature was the genesis
of civil philosophy.
There has been debate among scholars of Hobbes’ thought about
the relationship of the different parts of his philosophy to one
another. Much of the focus has been upon the methodological statements
in Part I of De Corpore, and scholars have traditionally
divided over whether Hobbes understood philosophy as unified or
disunified. However, more recent scholarship has drawn attention to
Hobbes’ practice of explanation, such as the explanations found
in De Corpore Part IV, and has argued that aspects of both
the unified and disunified views track Hobbes’ discussions and
practice while those views on their own miss that Hobbes explicitly
borrowed principles from mathematics to use in natural philosophy (and
provided citations to show this activity). This section will discuss
these three approaches to understanding how the parts of Hobbes’
system fit with one another and then provide an example of an
explanation in Hobbes’ natural philosophy from De
Corpore XXV.
First, the unified view. A significant number of scholars have argued
that Hobbes understood his philosophy as unified by deductive
connections between the different parts (for example, Martinich 2005;
Peters 1967; Shapin & Schaffer 1985; Watkins 1965). A stronger
version of this unified view understands Hobbes to be a type of
reductionist, wherein descriptions of macroscopic bodies, such as
humans and rocks, ultimately reduce to microscopic bodies responsible
for all phenomena (for example, Hampton 1986; Ryan 1970). For example, Alan
Ryan articulates the reductionist view as follows:
Hobbes believed as firmly as one could that all behaviour, whether of
animate or inanimate matter, was ultimately to be explained in terms
of particulate motion: the laws governing the motions of discrete
material particles were the ultimate laws of the universe, and in this
sense psychology must be rooted in physiology and physiology in
physics, while the social sciences, especially the technology of
statecraft, must be rooted in psychology. (1970: 102–103)
There is some textual support for understanding the parts of
Hobbes’ system as either deductively or reductively linked
together since he did at times talk of the parts of philosophy as
beginning in first philosophy and leading from one to another. For
example, he asserted in De Corpore VI.6 that by beginning at
first principles, one will move from first philosophy to geometry, and
from geometry to physics. He continued by claiming that “after
physics we come to morals” and, indeed, Hobbes claims that moral
philosophy must be studied after physics because the passions have
“their causes in sense-experience and imagination” (CSL
299; OL I.64).
However, immediately following these statements that seem to indicate
that Hobbes took his philosophy to be tightly knit together, he argued
that “civil and moral philosophy do not so adhere to one
another, but that they may be severed” (EW I.73). This
separation is permissible, Hobbes claimed, because in addition to
learning moral philosophy from first principles each individual could
simply study the motions of their own mind and gain knowledge of the
same principles. That such separation could occur is difficult to
explain for a strong version of the unified view because it makes
it appear that Hobbes thought that one could develop civil philosophy
simply by introspecting, entirely independently of any work in moral
philosophy, natural philosophy, and first philosophy.
A further difficulty for the unified view is that even if Hobbes did
see the connection between, say, physics and moral philosophy as
deductive, it is not obvious how that deduction would work because
moral philosophy must add content about human passions (endeavors)
that is not contained within—and thus not deducible
from—physics. For example, although the concept
‘endeavor’ is introduced in physics, for it to be used in
moral philosophy the concepts of ‘appetite’ and
‘aversion’, which are properties of human bodies, must be
added to it for use (Malcolm 2002: 147). One way to avoid this
difficulty for the unified view would be to provide evidence that
Hobbes made explicit the reduction relationship between concepts like
‘appetite’ and ‘aversion’ and the concept of
‘endeavour’, showing how one can reduce claims about human
bodies to claims about microscopic bodies. Hobbes does not appear to
do this anywhere in the corpus. However, even if a strong version of
the unified view faces this difficulty, the presence of
‘endeavor’ throughout Hobbes’ philosophy shows that
it was a foundational concept (see Jesseph 2016).
The second major view of the relationship of the parts of
Hobbes’ philosophy to one another is what we can call the
disunified view (for example, see Robertson 1886; Taylor 1938;
Warrender 1957). Some of the motivation behind the disunified account
seems to be a desire to free Hobbes from what is prima facie a case of
deriving normative claims relating to the commonwealth in civil
philosophy from descriptive claims related to human psychology and,
ultimately, more general claims in natural philosophy (especially
Taylor 1938). However, in its attempts to rescue Hobbes from a version
of the so-called naturalistic fallacy, the disunified account fails to
take seriously Hobbes’ claims about the unity of his philosophy.
Furthermore, it neglects that many of Hobbes’ contemporaries
(for example, Bramhall) saw Hobbes’ views in natural philosophy
as having far-reaching consequences for other areas of philosophy.
A third view has more recently been offered that seeks to carve a
middle path between the unified and disunified interpretations. We can
call this view the mixed-mathematics view (for example, Adams 2016,
2017; Biener 2016). This understanding of Hobbes’ system agrees
with the worry raised above for the unified account that
‘higher’ levels, such as geometry, do not contain the
concepts used in ‘lower’ level explanations. For example,
although geometrical principles are used in Hobbes’ optical
explanations those geometrical principles do not contain concepts such
as ‘light’ or ‘color’. Some evidence for this
lack of containment claim can be found on the well-known “Table
of the Several Subjects of Science” in Leviathan IX.
The “sciences” on this table are listed on the right-most
section and their subjects are to the immediate left. The subject of
the science of optics, for example, is all of the “consequences
from vision”, and these stem from “Physics or consequences
from qualities”. The science of geometry, however, has as its
subject the “consequences from quantity, and motion
determined… by figure” and these stem not from physics
but from “consequences from the accidents common to all bodies
natural; which are quantity and motion”.
Instead of seeing this “adding to” as evidence for the
disunified view, the mixed-mathematics view understands Hobbes having
seen certain disciplines as providing causal principles (what he
called the ‘why’) while other disciplines provided the
facts relevant to a given domain (what he called the
‘that’). Textual support for this understanding of
Hobbes’ system can be found in Hobbes’ methodological
statements about natural philosophy as well as in his practice of
explanation.
As mentioned already, Hobbes identified scientific knowledge
(scientia) with knowing causes, and in his discussions he
used language germane to Aristotle’s distinction between the
‘why’ and the ‘that’. We have seen already
Hobbes’ commitment to knowing through the causes, but the
complete passage from De Corpore VI.1 provides further detail
about Hobbes’ views on the two types of knowledge, as
follows:
We are said to know [scire] some effect when we know what its
causes are, in what subject they are, in what subject they introduce
the effect and how they do it. Therefore, this is the knowledge
[scientia] τοῦ
διότι or of causes. All other knowledge
[cognitio], which is called τοῦ
ὅτι, is either sense experience or imagination
remaining in sense experience or memory (De Corpore VI.1; CSL
287–289).
Two types of knowledge thus emerge. There is knowledge from sense
experience, retained as imagination and eventually as memory, and
there is scientific knowledge. When reflecting in De Homine
on the status of claims in physics, Hobbes claims that what he calls
“true physics” must be a mixture of both of these types of
knowledge:
[…] since one cannot proceed in reasoning about natural things
that are brought about by motion from the effects to the causes
without a knowledge of those things that follow from that kind of
motion; and since one cannot proceed to the consequences of motions
without a knowledge of quantity, which is geometry; nothing can be
demonstrated by physics without something also being demonstrated
a priori. Therefore physics (I mean true physics) [vera
physica], that depends on geometry, is usually numbered among the
mixed mathematics [mathematicas mixtas]. [.] Therefore those
mathematics are pure which (like geometry and arithmetic) revolve
around quantities in the abstract so that work [in them] requires no
knowledge of the subject; those mathematics are mixed, in truth, which
in their reasoning some quality of the subject is also considered, as
is the case with astronomy, music, physics, and the parts of physics
that can vary on account of the variety of species and the parts of
the universe. (MC 42; OL II.93)
These two statements concerning the status of different types of
knowledge and the requirement to mix “quantities in the
abstract” with “some quality of the subject” in
physics can aid in making sense of Hobbes’ actual explanatory
practice. What does it mean for physics to be “mixed
mathematics”? For Hobbes it means that for many explanations one
will first establish that some fact is the case by appealing to sense
experience, but to give the reason why one must borrow a principle
from geometry.
At several places in De Corpore, Hobbes appears to carry out
the mixed-mathematics ideal by showing, with a citation, that he used
a causal principle from geometry within an explanation that included
details about the “quality of the subject”. For example,
in De Corpore XXV, the chapter with which Hobbes began Part
IV, Hobbes appears to have done just this when he explained sensation.
In that explanation, he appealed both to “qualities of the
subject”, such as the claim based upon experience that “we
may observe… that our phantasms or ideas are not always the
same” (EW I.389), and by citing and using causal principles from
earlier in the work (see discussion of this explanation in Adams
 2016).[4]
Such behavior—borrowing and citing a principle within an
explanation—would be difficult to explain on the picture offered
by the unified view since Hobbes offers no justification for this
practice other than phrases such as “I have shown
besides…”. There is no deduction anywhere offered within
Hobbes’ actual explanatory practice that would give reason to
think that Hobbes understood the use of these principles from
elsewhere in the work in that way. Likewise, it is difficult to make
sense of this activity within Hobbes’ actual practice if we
adopt the disunified view of Hobbes’ philosophy, since by using
principles from elsewhere in the system, and especially by explicitly
citing them, Hobbes is signaling that the parts of his system did fit
together, even if not in the strong reductive sense of the unified
view. The next section will describe Hobbes’ view that work in
first philosophy and geometry must be done prior to experiments.
Hobbes’ conflict with Robert Boyle concerning the nature of
natural philosophy in general, and the air-pump experiments in
particular, took place over several years and in a series of
 publications.[5]
 Hobbes wrote Dialogus Physicus (1661; a second version
appeared in
 1668)[6]
 as a dialogue aimed at criticizing Boyle’s New Experiments
Physico-Mechanical (1660). Boyle responded to various criticisms
in works such as An Examen of Mr. T. Hobbes his Dialogus Physicus
de Natura Aëris (1662), An Examen of Mr. Hobbes’
Doctrine about Cold (1665), and Animadversions upon Mr.
Hobbes’ Problemata de Vacuo (1674). The most comprehensive
and influential treatment of this period of Hobbes’ life is
Shapin and Schaffer’s Leviathan and the Air-Pump
 (1985).[7]
 This section will focus upon Hobbes’ criticisms of the air-pump
experiments in the Dialogus Physicus with an aim of showing
how they illuminate our understanding of Hobbes’ natural
philosophy.
Most generally both Boyle and Hobbes viewed the natural world as
composed of bits of matter in motion. Even if there were some points
of agreement between the versions of mechanical philosophy offered by
both Boyle and
 Hobbes,[8]
 there are important differences. A crucial difference between the two
relates to the status (or lack thereof) of Laws of Nature. While Boyle
talked about the laws of nature as established by God (see entry on
 Boyle, section Laws of Nature),
 Hobbes restricted discussion of laws to the laws of human conduct
discovered by those who escape the state of nature and create a
commonwealth. In contrast to laws of the natural world, Hobbes
articulated a priori principles of motion at the foundation
of his physics in De Corpore VIII.19 and IX.7. Rather than
being known as laws of motion, issued by some divine lawmaker, these
Hobbesian principles of motion are explicated by thought experiments
and seem to rely upon a version of the principle of sufficient reason
(Jesseph 2006: 132). Although Hobbes held that they were true of all
human experience, since Hobbes holds that we cannot know the actual
causes of natural phenomena he would have to admit that nature might,
unbeknownst to us, act otherwise. However, despite these differences,
the primary dissimilarity that emerges between Hobbes and Boyle
concerning the air-pump experiments is one of method as it relates to
the status of experiments/experience (see entry on
 Boyle, section Philosophy of Experiment).
Given that Hobbes was convinced of the impossibility of knowing the
actual causes of natural phenomena, he held that any phenomenon admits
of multiple possible explanations. This should not be taken to imply
that Hobbes saw all explanations, and thus all possible causes or
suppositions, as standing on equal footing. Instead, Hobbes held that
work in first philosophy and geometry must be completed prior to
attempting to make any explanations in natural philosophy. This seems
to be what Hobbes meant when he said that “nothing can be
demonstrated by physics without something also being demonstrated
a priori” (MC 42; OL II.93). When giving an
explanation, Hobbes held that one should ideally appeal to those
causes that are demonstrable from geometry when mixed with facts and
rule out those that are not intelligible according to geometrical
principles.
In contrast, Boyle’s method prescribed that instead of bringing
causal principles to an experiment and expecting to explain some
phenomenon by appeal to those principles, one should attempt to arrive
at a supposition that would explain a phenomenon only after repeated,
careful experiments. Thomas Sprat detailed the care taken in the design
of experiments and the manner in which Royal Society members were
formed into committees that shared parts of an experiment so that
“[b]y this union of eyes, and hands” they were able to
gain “a full comprehension of the object in all its
appearances” (Sprat 1667: 85).
We can make sense of Hobbes’ direct criticisms of Boyle’s
prioritization of experiment with this methodological difference in
mind. Hobbes’ view of the foundational role played by first
philosophy and mathematics over experiment/experience is clear when he
claimed in Dialogus Physicus that 
…ingenuity is one thing and method is another. Here method is
needed. The causes of those things done by motion are to be
investigated through a knowledge of motion, the knowledge of which,
the noblest part of geometry, is hitherto untouched. (DP 347; OL IV.236)
According to Hobbes, then, one must have geometrical principles
already in place to aid in choosing a supposition before engaging in
experiments. Unlike the Royal Society’s aim to have multiple
members examine the same object, Hobbes emphasized the need for
individual conceptual clarity, something that could be accomplished
from an armchair.
This criticism from Hobbes, and Boyle’s rebuttals relying upon
evidence from experiments, could be seen as a conflict of
Boyle’s experimental natural philosophy against a form of
speculative natural
 philosophy.[9]
 However, it is important to avoid taking Hobbes’ criticisms of
Boyle’s method to imply that Hobbes completely eschewed
experiment/experience while engaging in natural-philosophical
explanations. Instead, Hobbes viewed experiment/experience as playing
the role of establishing that some phenomenon occurs, what we have
seen he called the ‘that’, but one should never hope,
according to Hobbes, to glean a possible cause from mere observations,
even if those observations were carefully documented and repeated many
times.
Indeed, in the Dialogus Physicus Hobbes, speaking through
speaker A, often granted the observational reports of the
experimenters without question. For example, speaker A does not
question what the experimenters claim they observed regarding a
bladder that had been placed inside the air-pump and weighed, noting
“They can be certain that the scale in which the bladder is, is
more depressed than the other, their eyes bearing witness” (DP
369; OL IV.261). Instead of criticizing the experimenters’
reliance upon observations, speaker A argues that the experimenters
cannot know, in the case of this explanation, what the cause of the
scale being depressed is because their posited cause (the
“natural gravity” of the air) does not allow them to
explain why the scale is depressed after the air-pump is engaged. In
contrast, speaker A offers a possible cause that is borrowed, with an
explicit citation, from Hobbes’ geometrical account of
“simple circle motion” and “fermentation”
developed in De Corpore 21.5 (Adams 2017).
Hobbes thought that he would be renowned as the founder of civil
philosophy just as he saw Copernicus as having initiated the
“beginning of astronomy”, Galileo as having opened the
“gate of natural philosophy universal” with an account of
the “nature of motion”, and William Harvey as having first
discovered the “science of man’s body” (see the
dedicatory epistle to De Corpore; EW I.viii). He asserted
that while “Natural Philosophy is… young”, civil
philosophy itself is “no older than… [his] own book De
Cive” (EW I.ix). As a student of historical texts in their
original
 languages,[10]
 Hobbes was well aware of many works from antiquity to his own time
addressing issues relevant to civil philosophy. By claiming civil
philosophy was his invention, he intended to deny that any of those
preceding works counted as philosophy.
What did Hobbes see as distinguishing his work in civil philosophy
from all predecessors? As points of contrast, Hobbes mentioned the
Sophists who “taught … [only how] to dispute” and
Christian theologians who introduced “school divinity”, by
which Hobbes meant the blending of teachings from Scripture with
Aristotle’s philosophy. For the latter, Hobbes saw the best
“exorcism” to be the distinction between the subject
matters of religion, which were the “rules for honouring
God”, and philosophy, which was concerned with the
“opinions of private men” (EW I.xi). What distinguished
religion from philosophy in this sense, Hobbes continued, is that
philosophy provides either demonstrations from definitions or
demonstrations from “suppositions not absurd”.
So far it seems that there are two criteria relevant to civil
philosophy that Hobbes saw as setting his apart from all other
attempts. First, Hobbesian civil philosophy is a science
(scientia) because human makers have the ability to know the
actual causes of the objects of study since they construct them.
Second, to count as philosophy and not mere superstition or sophistry,
Hobbesian civil philosophy must provide demonstrations.
How exactly Hobbes’ use of ‘demonstration’ should be
understood as it relates to civil philosophy has been a subject of
debate among Hobbes scholars over the past several decades. Much of
the focus of this debate has been concerning the Laws of Nature in
Leviathan XIV and XV. Why restrict the scope of demonstrable
civil philosophy to two chapters of Leviathan? Why not
include, for example, Leviathan Parts III (“Of A
Christian Commonwealth”) and IV (“Of The Kingdom of
Darkness”)? Alternatively, why not also include chapters from
Part II (“Of Commonwealth”), especially chapter XVII
(“Of the Causes, Generation, and Definition of a
Commonwealth”)? One motivation for focus upon chapters XIV and
XV is that in those chapters Hobbes seems to have indicated that he
saw a deductive relationship between the laws of nature by using the
language one might expect in a demonstration. For example, Hobbes
described the second law of nature as being “derived from”
the first law (LEV 200). The remainder of this section will focus on
two ways of understanding Hobbes’ civil philosophy as a
demonstration.
One way of understanding Hobbes’ claim that civil philosophy is
demonstrable connects it to Euclidean geometry. This view has been
called the “definitivist” or “definitional”
view because of its emphasis on the importance of definitions in
Hobbes’ philosophy. One articulation of the definitivist view
understands Hobbes’ definition of ‘law of nature’ in
Leviathan as playing a role similar to an axiom in Euclidean
geometry (Deigh 1996). In Leviathan XIV, a law of nature is
defined as 
a Precept, or generall Rule, found out by Reason, by which a man is
forbidden to do, that, which is destructive of his life, or taketh
away the means of preserving the same; and to omit, that, by which he
thinketh it may be best preserved. (LEV 198)
The definivist further claims that like Euclidean axioms Hobbes did
not view this axiom—the definition of ‘law of
nature’—as requiring demonstration; instead, he derived
the first law of nature from it and then derived the others one from
another. Why is Hobbesian civil philosophy a demonstrable science on
this view? Simply put, it is a demonstrable science because it follows
the method of Euclidean geometry, viewed by Hobbes and others as the
model of scientific knowledge on account of its clarity and
 rigor.[11]
A virtue of the definitivist view is that it takes seriously
Hobbes’ claim that civil philosophy is demonstrable. However, a
difficulty faced by the definitivist view, along with any other that
understands Hobbes as drawing inspiration from Euclid, is that Hobbes
himself harshly criticized Euclidean definitions, arguing that
Euclid’s definitions “ought not be numbered among the
principles of geometry” because they did not contain the causes
of what was to be constructed (EW VII.184). Furthermore, Hobbes
criticized the nature of the objects of Euclidean geometry. For
example, Hobbes argued against understanding lines as being without
breadth since there are no such bodies in nature (EW VII.202).
Additionally, Hobbes himself did not ground his own geometry in
undemonstrated axioms and held that even Euclidean axioms needed to be
demonstrated (OL I.72; OL I.119).
A second difficulty for the definitivist view lies in its inability to
accommodate the laws of nature as commands (Hoekstra 2003: 115). If
the laws of nature were derived from the definition of ‘law of
nature’, it would be difficult to see how they could then take
the form of instructions to perform some action. Indeed, the laws of
nature take the form of instructions to do this or that, such as the
first law of nature 
That every man, ought to endeavour Peace, as farre as he has of
obtaining it; and when he cannot obtain it, that he may seek, and use,
all helps, and advantages of Warre. (LEV 200) 
Beyond the first and second laws of nature, the remaining laws contain
instructions concerning what should be done to accomplish peace, that
is, they command it, such as the third law of nature which commands
“That men performe their Covenants made” (LEV 220).
An alternative account, what has been called the “maker’s
knowledge” view of Hobbes’ civil philosophy, attempts to
connect Hobbes’ demonstrations and definitions in geometry with
civil philosophy. This view avoids the two difficulties faced by the
definitivist account mentioned above and holds that Hobbesian civil
philosophy is demonstrable by appealing to Hobbes’ own
understanding of what constitutes a demonstration (Adams 2019). The
remainder of this section will discuss two features of the
“maker’s knowledge” account of Hobbesian civil
philosophy.
First, a requirement for geometrical definitions, which Hobbes
stressed in multiple contexts, is that they must provide the causes of
the things being defined. For example, Hobbes claimed that the
definition of ‘line’ should be as follows: “a line
is made by the motion of a point” (OL I.63). Likewise, a plane
is made by the motion of a line. Perhaps Hobbes understood all of the
laws of nature to be like this type of geometrical definition, but
instead of the definition of something like ‘line’ they
served as the definition of (and thus how to make) peace. That is,
when following all of the laws of nature one could make peace just as
by following the generative instructions contained in the definition
of ‘line’ one could make a line.
Second, a demonstration for Hobbes did not involve the derivation of
features by means of deduction. Such deductions would provide one with
knowledge of what was already contained in the starting proposition,
making it difficult to see how commands could be derived from the
definition of ‘law of nature’ in Leviathan XIV.
However, Hobbes explicitly said that demonstrations should be
synthetic, wherein one builds the complex thing to be demonstrated out
of simpler constituent parts. A demonstration, Hobbes asserted, should
be understood as a showing of some construction to someone else (OL
I.76) and, as a result, he claimed that “entire method of
demonstrating is synthetic” (OL I.71). By
‘synthesis’ Hobbes means that one shows how something is
put together to reach the desired end, one shows how that thing is
made.
The maker’s knowledge view of Hobbes’ civil philosophy
draws insight from these two points and understands Hobbesian civil
philosophy as demonstrable in the following way. Hobbes begins civil
philosophy at a starting point in the “natural condition”
of human bodies in Leviathan XIII, continues by considering
how those bodies could be moved (by commands in the laws of nature) in
ways that would be conducive of peace and, finally, are brought
together to compose the commonwealth.