Hole representations—no matter whether veridical—appear to
be commonplace in human cognition. Not only do people have the
impression of seeing holes; they also form a corresponding concept,
which is normally lexicalised as a noun in ordinary languages. (Some
languages even discriminate different types of hole, distinguishing
e.g. between superficial hollows, inner cavities,
and see-through
perforations.) Moreover, data from developmental psychology
and the psychology of perception confirm that infants and adults are
able to perceive, count, and track holes just as easily as they
perceive, count, and track paradigm material objects such as cookies
and tins (Giralt & Bloom 2000; Nelson & Palmer 2001; Horowitz
& Kuzmova 2011). These facts do not prove that holes and material
objects are on equal psychological footing, let alone on equal
metaphysical footing. But they indicate that the concept of a hole is
of significant salience in the common-sense picture of the world,
specifically of the spatiotemporal world.
If holes are entities of a kind, then, they appear to be
spatiotemporal particulars, like cookies and tins and unlike numbers
or moral values. They appear to have a determinate shape, a size, and
a location. (‘These things have birthplaces and histories. They
can change, and things can happen to them’, Hofstadter &
Dennett 1981: 6–7.) On the other hand, if holes are particulars,
then they are not particulars of the familiar sort. For holes appear
to be immaterial: every hole has a material
“host” (the stuff around it, such as the edible part of a
donut) and it may have a material “guest” (such as the
liquid filling a cavity), but the hole itself does not seem to be made of
matter. Indeed, holes seem to be made of nothing, if anything
is.  And this gives rise to a number of conundrums. For example:
Further problems arise from the ambiguous status of holes in
figure-ground displays (Bozzi 1975). Thus, for example, though it
appears that the shapes of holes can be recognized by humans as
accurately as the shapes of ordinary objects, the area seen through a
hole typically belongs to the background of its host, and there is
evidence to the effect that background regions are not represented as
having shapes (Bertamini & Croucher 2003; Bertamini & Casati
2015). So what would the shape of a hole be, if any?
These difficulties—along with some form of horror
vacui—may lead a philosopher to favor ontological parsimony
or revisionism over naive realism about holes. A number of options are
available: 
On the other hand, the possibility remains of taking holes at face
value. Any such undertaking would have to account, not only for the general
features mentioned in section 1, but also for a
number of additional peculiarities (Casati & Varzi 1994). Among
others:
As is often the case, the choice between all these
alternatives—whether holes are to be subjected to Ockham’s
razor, reduced to other entities, or taken at face value—will
depend on one’s general metaphysical inclinations (Lewis &
Lewis 1996). It may also depend on controversial details concerning
the nature of space and spacetime, e.g. whether they are relational or
substantival (Braddon-Mitchell & Miller 2015). It is, more
generally, an instance of the sort of decision philosophers have to
make when they scrutinize the ontology inherent in the common-sense
picture of the world and the concepts, words, and purposes through
which it is described and apprehended.