Compared with more widely discussed attitudes like beliefs and
desires, the phenomenon of hope presents some unique challenges for
both theories of the mind and theories of value. Hope is not only an
attitude that has cognitive components—it is responsive to facts
about the possibility and likelihood of future events. It also has a
conative component—hopes are different from mere expectations
insofar they reflect and draw upon our desires. A classic analysis of
hope—the so called “standard account” (see
 section 3)—takes
 hope to be a compound attitude, consisting of a desire for an outcome
and a belief in that outcome’s possibility. But not all outcomes
that we believe to be possible and that we desire are thereby objects
of our hope. In order to hope one not only has to consider an outcome
possible, one also has to affectively engage with this outcome in a
distinctive way. This raises the question as to whether hope can be
reduced to beliefs and desires.
Popular discourse often takes hope to be synonymous with optimism. But
while optimism can be usefully analyzed as a desire for an outcome
together with a belief that the outcome is more likely than not (or
more likely than the evidence leads other people to believe), many
philosophers argue that hope, properly understood, is independent of
probability assessments (see section
3). One can hope for outcomes that one considers to be very
unlikely and that one does not expect to happen, such as a miraculous
cure of an illness. In such cases, optimism is not an appropriate
response.
It is an open question whether the contribution of hope to human
agency is to be identified with that of the underlying desires or
whether hope makes an independent contribution to motivation or
reasoning. If one assumes that hope cannot make any independent
contribution to practical reasoning but still motivates, this raises
the suspicion that it distorts rational agency. While such an
assessment can be found across the history of philosophy, many past
and contemporary philosophers provide analyses of hope that add
further elements to the belief-desire analysis and use these elements
to explain why acting on one’s hopes is (sometimes)
rational.
Historically, evaluations of hope change together with the prevailing
view of the relationship between human action and the future. As long
as the human condition is seen as essentially unchangeable, hope is
more often treated as arising from mere epistemic uncertainty and as
having ambivalent effects on human happiness. In philosophical
contexts where either the possibility of a future life beyond this
world or the idea of human progress is emphasized, hope is more often
seen as an appropriate and even virtuous attitude that enables humans
to direct their agency towards these possibilities (see Miceli and
Castelfranchi 2010).
In early Greek thought, hope is often seen as an attitude of those who
have insufficient knowledge or are easily swayed by wishful thinking.
It thus has a primarily negative reputation (Vogt forthcoming) as an
attitude that (at least potentially) misleads actions and
agents. Already Solon focuses on empty hopes (see Lewis 2006: 85;
Caston and Kaster 2016). In the dialogues of Thucydides, it is
similarly noted that those who hope typically have a poor
understanding of their situation, fail to come up with good plans, and
things go badly for them in war (The Peloponnesian War,
5.102–3, 5.113). A slightly more nuanced perspective is often
seen to be reflected in Hesiod’s version of the tale of
Pandora. When all the evils had escaped from Pandora’s jar,
famously, only hope (elpis) remained (“Works and
Days”, §90).  This seems to suggest that hope can also
sustain human agency in the fact of widespread evil. It must be noted,
however, that there are many competing interpretations of
why elpis remained in the jar (Verdenius 1985): Was it to
keep hope available for humans or, rather, to keep hope from man? Is
hope consequently to be regarded as good (“a comfort to man in
his misery and a stimulus rousing his activity”, Verdenius 1985:
66) or as evil (“idle hope in which the lazy man indulges when
he should be working honestly for his living”, Verdenius 1985:
66)? These different interpretations of Pandora’s myth are taken
up throughout the history of Philosophy (especially among
existentialist authors, see
 section 2.5).
In the Timaeus, Plato also adopts a rather negative attitude
towards hope by recounting a myth according to which the divine beings
give us “those mindless advisers confidence and fear, (…)
and gullible hope” (Timaeus, 69b). In the
Philebus, by contrast, he seems to also allow for a more
favorable view of the role of hope in human life. The relevant
discussion of hope takes place in the context of an argument about
“false pleasures”. Against Protarch’s objection that
only opinions can be true or false, but not pleasures, Socrates
develops an analogy between opinion and pleasure (Philebus,
36d). In this context, he describes “pleasures of
anticipation”, that is, expectations of future pleasures, that
are called hopes (Philebus, 39e3). As Frede (1985) argues, in
the case of such pleasures of anticipation what we enjoy at present is
only a thought. As there can be a discrepancy between the thought that
we enjoy and what is in fact going to happen, the pleasure can be
true—in which case it seems appropriate to say that the
corresponding hope can be rationally endorsed—or false (Frede
1985: 174f.). The Philebus also presents hope as essential to
human agency: Plato seems to suggest that all our agential
representations are concerned with the future which connects them to
hope (Vogt forthcoming).
Another ancient account which does not attribute a merely negative
role to hope is Aristotle’s whose treatment of hope in the
context of his discussion of the virtue of courage has received some
attention (Gravlee 2000; Lear 2008). On the one hand, Aristotle
describes the relationship between hope and courage as a contrast. He
identifies two sources of hopefulness that are non-courageous: First,
it is possible to be hopeful “at sea […] and in
disease”, but this hope does not involve courage, insofar as, in
such situations, there is neither “opportunity of showing
prowess” nor is death “noble” in these cases,
according to Aristotle (Nicomachean Ethics 3.6, 1115a35ff.).
Second, one can be hopeful based on one’s experience of good
fortune (Nicomachean Ethics 3.8, 1117a10ff.). In this case,
the belief in the probability of a good outcome is not well grounded,
but founded on mere induction. Both kinds of hopefulness that are
non-courageous. On the other hand, there is also a connection between
hope and courage via the concept of confidence (Gravlee 2000). For
example, Aristotle says: 
The coward, then, is a despairing sort of person; for he fears
everything. The brave man, on the other hand, has the opposite
disposition; for confidence is the mark of a hopeful
disposition (Nicomachean Ethics 3.7, 1116a2) 
Thus, even though not every hopeful person is courageous, every
courageous person is hopeful. Hopefulness creates confidence, which,
if derived from the right sources, can lead to the virtue of courage.
Gravlee (2000: 471ff.) identifies two further considerations that are
relevant for hope’s value in Aristotle’s thought. First,
hope underlies deliberation, which is needed for any exercise of a
virtuous disposition. Second, hopefulness is also presented as
valuable in its connection with youth and the virtue of
megalopsychia (high-mindedness): hopefulness spurs us to the
pursuit of the noble.
Perhaps unsurprisingly, hope received a less favorable treatment by
the Stoic philosophers. In particular, Seneca emphasizes hope’s
relation to fear (an idea that is later taken up by Spinoza, see
 section 2.3):
 
[t]hey are bound up with one another, unconnected as they may seem.
Widely different though they are, the two of them march in unison like
a prisoner and the escort he is handcuffed to. Fear keeps pace with
hope. Nor does their so moving together surprise me; both belong to a
mind in suspense, to a mind in a state of anxiety through looking into
the future. Both are mainly due to projecting our thoughts far ahead
of us instead of adapting ourselves to the present. (Seneca, Letter
5.7–8; in: 1969: 38)
According to Seneca, we should avoid both fear and hope and instead
focus on the present and cultivate tranquility of the soul.
While pre-Christian accounts see hope mostly as an attitude to reality
that is based on insufficient insight into what is true or good and
that can, therefore, contribute to virtuous action only accidentally,
if at all. By contrast, Christian philosophers such as Augustine and
Thomas Aquinas analyze hope as one of the most central virtues of a
believer: Hope, precisely in virtue of its capacity to justify action
in a way which is not bound to knowledge, is a part of rational
faith.
Already in Saint Paul’s argument for the extension of the
Christian community beyond the Jewish law, hope plays a central role.
Paul states that we can only hope for what is uncertain (Romans 8:24;
see also Augustine, City of God, book XIX, §IV,
1960:139). Nevertheless, such hope can be the product of the
experience of suffering, if this experience is seen through the lens
of faith (Romans 5:3–5) and if the desire to be saved from this
suffering is supported by confidence in not being
disappointed. Instead of backward-looking law-conformity (associated
by Paul with the Jewish faith), it is such forward-looking hope that
characterizes the appropriate relation to God. As an illustration,
Paul describes Abraham as “hoping against hope” (Romans
4:18), emphasizing the way in which hope goes beyond the evidence.
Augustine of Hippo discusses hope systematically in chapter two of his
Enchiridion on Faith, Hope and Love (c. 420). Hope is there
distinguished from faith—which is also based on incomplete
evidence—by two features: First, hope is necessarily directed to
future events, whereas faith can also relate to past events (such as
Christ’s resurrection). Second, hope only relates to what is
good for the hopeful person, whereas faith can also relate to what is
bad (such as punishment for one’s sins). Finally, hope, faith
and love are seen as interconnected—only if one loves the future
fulfillment of God’s will and thus hopes for it, can one arrive
at the correct form of faith (Enchiridion, II.7). As love
provides the normative outlook that underlies hope and faith (and
thus, in some sense, the desire-component of hope), love is seen as a
more central virtue than hope (Enchiridion, XXX.114).
The hope for a life after death also plays an important role in
Augustine’s political philosophy. In the City of God,
Augustine distinguishes the actual earthly city from the heavenly city
that only exists in the hope placed in God (City of God, book
XV, §XXI, 1966: 541)—the latter provides a reference point
for a Christian view of politics. Hope, however, not only provides for
a perspective on politics which surpasses the narrow perspective of
classical politics (Dodaro 2007), an appropriate theorizing of hope
also modifies the understanding of traditional political virtues, as
it redirects their purpose from the earthly to the heavenly city. One
example of such a modification concerns punishment: through hope, a
Christian statesman will redirect punishment away from an exclusive
concern with proportionality towards the potential reform of the
criminal (City of God, book V, §XXIV, 1963: 263).
In one of his letters to Macedonius, a public official, Augustine
finally emphasizes that the hope for a future life underlies all true
human happiness, both on the level of the individual and of the state
(Letter 155, Political Writings, §4–8,
pp. 91–94). Thus, hope is not just of concern for individual
believers but also for statesmen that are concerned with collective
happiness, as paying attention to hope allows them to pursue a
political constitution that allows true virtue of citizens to emerge
(see also Dodaro 2007).
While Augustine is more or less exclusively concerned with the
significance of hope for our pursuit of a good Christian life, Thomas
Aquinas’ Summa theologiae contains a very extensive
discussion of hope that also covers forms of hope that are not
connected to faith. As for the analysis of what hope is (as such,
independently from its theological significance), Aquinas argues that
hope is one of the “irascible passions” (i.e., passions
which counteract our immediate impulses, SsS III,26; ST I-II 40.1).
Hope, he argues, is always directed at a good that lies in the future.
However, in contrast to mere desire, the objects of hope are unlikely
outcomes or outcomes that are hard to achieve but which are
nevertheless in the realm of possibility (ST I-II 40.1). As this last
part requires a cognition of possibility, hope is also always partly
grounded in experience (ST I-II 40.5).
Regarding the rationality of hope, Aquinas has a nuanced view. On the
one hand, he admits that a lack of experience can make one unaware of
obstacles. This tendency (and drunkenness, ST I-II 40.6) can promote
(irrational) hope. On the other hand, he assumes that hope can promote
rational agency: as hope incorporates both knowledge of the possible
and knowledge of the difficulties to reach the desired outcome, it can
motivate agents to devote energy to their activities.
Because of this ambivalence, hope in the ordinary sense is not a
virtue for Aquinas. As a passion, humans can display an excess and a
deficiency of hope (ST II-II 17.5); furthermore, passions are not
virtues by definition. This changes, however, as soon as we examine
theological hope, i.e., the hope we can put in God. First, as directed
towards God, such hope does not know any excess. Second, we cannot
understand theological hope as a passion. We must analyze it as a
habit of the will. While hope as a passion can only be incited by
sensible goods (and subsequently motivates action insofar the subject
takes herself to be capable to realize that good), we can also hope
for God’s assistance (ST II-II 17.1) in reaching eternal
happiness (ST II-II 17.2). As eternal life and happiness are not
sensible goods, this kind of hope cannot be a passion but must reside
in the will (ST II-II 18.1). Insofar it is a habit, hope is not under
one’s control but itself given by grace (ST II-II 17.1). From
this account, it follows that one cannot place one’s hope (in
this sense) in other people and one cannot hope, except indirectly,
for the happiness of others—one can only hope in God.
Because of these two features, hope is a theological virtue (ST II-II
17.5; see also 1 Corinthians 13). While love (or charity) is directed
to God for the sake of unity, faith and hope are directed towards God
with a view to some good to be obtained from that unity: faith relates
to God as a source of knowledge, hope relates to God as a source of
goodness (ST II-II 17.6).
The rationality of theological hope can only be properly understood,
according to Aquinas when we acknowledge that hope has to be preceded
by faith (which underlies the belief in the possibility of salvation),
but, given faith, hope for the good of salvation is rational. Despair,
as caused either by the absence of faith or the desire to be saved, is
sinful (ST II-II 20.1). As hope is, by definition, future-directed, it
only is possible for human beings who are uncertain of whether they
are blessed or damned, whereas love can persist even after their
ultimate fate has been revealed (ST II-II 18.2–3).
In 17th and 18th-century philosophy, hope is
discussed by most philosophers as a part of their general theories of
motivation and cognition and often discussed as a
“passion”, i.e., as a fundamentally noncognitive attitude
(even though it might have a belief-component). This implies a
rejection of Aquinas’ division between different kinds of
passions in favor of a moral psychology which classifies emotions and
desires together as passions that generate action, of which hope is
usually conceived as a species. Almost all authors mentioned in the
following also embrace some version of the idea defining for the
“standard account” that hope is based on uncertainty in
belief together with a representation of an object as desirable. As a
result, hope is seen by most philosophers in this period (with the
exception of Spinoza) as a motivating factor in human agency that is
neutral, as it can lead to both rational and irrational action.
According to René Descartes, hope is a weaker form of
confidence (Passions of the Soul, [1649] 1985: 389) and
consists in a desire (a representation of an outcome to be both good
for us and possible) together with a disposition to think of it as
likely but not certain (Passions of the Soul, [1649] 1985:
350f, 389). This means that hope and anxiety always accompany each
other (in contrast to both despair and confidence which are absolute
opposites). Hope also underlies the more complex passions of boldness
and courage (Descartes [1649] 1985: 391). While hope for the approval
of others can move us to virtue and thus be commendable (Descartes
[1649] 1985: 401), it is, like all passions, a product of the
movements of the “spirits” and thus not completely under
the control of our soul (Descartes [1649] 1985: 345) which means that
it may work against the good of the soul-body union.
Thomas Hobbes adopts a similar analysis. For him, hope is a complex
passion or a “pleasure of the mind”, i.e., a pleasure that
arises not from direct sensation but from thinking. For Hobbes, the
simplest building block underlying hope is appetite, and
“appetite with an opinion of obtaining” is hope
(Leviathan, 36, I.VI.14). As in Descartes, hope serves as a
building block for more complex mental phenomena, such as courage or
confidence (Leviathan, 36f, I.VI.17/19). But hope also plays
a role in the mental activity of deliberation which is defined as the
alternation of hope and fear with appetites and aversion
(Leviathan, 39, I.VI.49). Hope—a term which Hobbes
often uses more or less synonymously with (justified)
expectation—plays an important role in the political application
of his moral psychology: not only is the equality in the state of
nature defined as an equality of hope (Leviathan, 83,
I.XIII.3)—which makes it rational for everyone to pursue their
individual advantage—the laws of nature also command one to seek
peace where one has hope for obtaining it (Leviathan, 87,
I.XIV.4). Both the collective agency problem in the state of nature
and the solution to it thus depend on what hopes individuals can
rationally entertain.
Baruch de Spinoza defines the passion of hope as a form of pleasure
(Ethics III, P18, Spinoza [1677] 1985: 505) or joy that is
mingled with sadness (due to the uncertainty of the outcome, see
Short Treatise, book II, ch. IX, Spinoza [c. 1660] 1985: 113).
In contrast to more modern definitions, Spinoza distinguishes the
pleasure that is involved in hope from desire. Hope (in the
Ethics) is thus not necessarily connected to desire, but
rather a way in which the mind is affected by the idea of a future
event.
In contrast to Hobbes and Descartes, Spinoza understands hope as
fundamentally irrational. He argues that it must be the result of
false belief inasmuch as it does not correctly represent that
everything is governed by necessity (Short Treatise, book II,
ch. IX, [c. 1660] 1985: 113). Additionally, in the Ethics,
Spinoza describes hope as one of the causes of superstition,
especially as it is always accompanied by fear (Ethics III,
P50, [1677] 1985: 521). Such fear necessarily precludes it from being
intrinsically good (Ethics IV, P47, [1677] 1985: 573). This
is also the reason why we should attempt to make ourselves independent
from hope.
Spinoza agrees with Hobbes, however, by ascribing political
significance to hope. As he explains in the Theological-Political
Treatise, the fact that men are governed by hope and fear makes
them easy victims of superstition and false belief
(Theological-Political Treatise, [1670] 2002: 389); however,
good laws can also take advantage of this and motivate people by
arranging outcomes such that they can be motivated by hope
(Theological-Political Treatise, [1670] 2002: 439). The same
importance he places on hope also underlies his social contract
argument. Like Hobbes, he argues that the only reason why men remain
faithful to the social contract or to carry out the orders of a
sovereign has to be found in their hope of obtaining a certain good
this way (Theological-Political Treatise, [1670] 2002: 529).
Even a people as a whole is always united by common hopes and fears
(Political Treatise, [1675] 2002: 700), but hope rather than
fear is dominant in the case of free peoples (ibid.).This
leads Spinoza to proclaim hope and fear as the basis of political
power in the Political Treatise ([1675] 2002: 686).
David Hume’s account is another example of an analysis of hope
as a passion, modified, however, by the specific approach he takes to
human psychology. For Hume, hope is a “direct passion”
that is produced when the mind considers events that have a
probability between absolute certainty and absolute impossibility.
Hume describes probability-beliefs as an effect of the mind
entertaining contrary views—of an event or object as either
existent or nonexistent—in quick succession after another. Each
of these views gives rise to either joy or sorrow (when the object is
something good or bad) which linger longer in the mind than the
original imagination of the object’s existence or non-existence.
When considering objects that are probable, but not certain, the mind
is thus affected by a mixture of joy and sorrow that, depending on the
predominant element, can be called hope or fear. 
It is after this manner that hope and fear arise from the different
mixture of these opposite passions of grief and joy, and from their
imperfect union and conjunction. (Treatise, [1738] 2007: 283)
As Hume sees hope as a necessary effect of the consideration of an
uncertain event, it follows that we cannot but hope for any positive
outcome about which we are uncertain. The uncertainty in question can
be based on the actual uncertainty of the event but also on uncertain
belief.
While hope is primarily discussed as a feature of the psychology of
individual humans in the 17th and 18th century
and, as a noncognitive attitude, taken to be neither essentially
rational nor irrational, it is given much greater significance by
Immanuel Kant who adopts a much more substantial (and complex) view of
the connection between hope and reason, not only allowing for
reasonable hope but even for hope as something which might be
rationally demanded in certain contexts.
Kant’s definition of hope as “unexpected offering of the
prospect of immeasurable good fortune” (AE 7:255) in the
Anthropology still seems to remain within the traditional
discourse about hope. However, Kant eventually promotes hope to occupy
a central place in his philosophical system by focusing on hope as an
attitude that allows human reason to relate to those questions which
cannot be answered by experience. In the Critique of Pure
Reason, Kant states the question “For what may I
hope?” as one of the fundamental questions of philosophy, after
“What can I know?” and “What should I do?”
(A805/B833). This question, as far as its answer depends on claims regarding the
consequences of moral righteousness and the existence of God, is
“simultaneously practical and theoretical” (A805/B833) and
it is answered by religion (AE 9:25). Kant’s account of hope
consequently connects his moral philosophy with his views on religion.
He emphasizes the rational potential of such hope, but he also makes
clear that rational hope is intimately connected to religious faith,
i.e., the belief in god.
Kant considers three primary objects of hope in his writings: (1)
One’s own happiness (as part of the highest good), (2)
one’s own moral progress (in the Religion) and (3) the
moral improvement of the human race as a whole. 
(1) In the Canon of the Critique of Pure Reason,
Kant states clearly: “all hope concerns happiness”
(A805/B833). However, it is not the hope for one’s own happiness
simpliciter that is at stake, but the hope for happiness that
one deserves because of one’s moral conduct (A809/B837). Kant
argues that there is a necessary connection between the moral
law and the hope for happiness. However, this connection exists only
“in the idea of pure reason”, not in nature (A809/B837). A
proportionality between happiness and morality can only be thought of
as necessary in an intelligible, moral world, where we abstract from
all hindrances to moral conduct. In the empirical world of experience,
there is no guarantee for a necessary connection between moral conduct
and happiness. Thus, Kant concludes, we may reasonably hope for
happiness in proportion to morality only if we introduce the
additional non-empirical assumption of “a highest reason, which
commands in accordance with moral laws, as […] the cause of
nature” (A810/B838). This way, Kant connects morality and
happiness in the object of hope and secures its possibility in a
highest reason, i.e., in god. Kant calls the connection between
“happiness in exact proportion with the morality of rational
beings, through which they are worthy of it” the highest
good (A814/B842). A peculiarity of Kant’s treatment of hope
in the Canon is that hope for the highest good is apparently
considered necessary for moral motivation (A813/B841)—a thesis
he rejects in his later writings.
Kant’s account of hope for happiness presents hope as very
closely connected to Kant’s concept of faith. This becomes
obvious in the Critique of Practical Reason. Kant argues that
in order to believe in the possibility of the highest good—and
we have to believe in this possibility, as it is prescribed by the
categorical imperative—we have to believe in or
postulate the existence of god and immortality of the soul.
Kant himself uses both the concept of belief or faith and the
concept of hope in explaining the content of the postulate of
immortality: we must presuppose immortality in order to
conceive of the highest good as “practically possible” and
we may therefore “hope for a further uninterrupted continuance
of this [moral] progress, however long his existence may last, even
beyond this life” (AE 5:123). Thus, Kant can be understood as
arguing in favor of a traditional religious form of hope—hope
for a life after death or immortality of the soul. However, he points
out that immortality is not a ‘mere’ hope (i.e., a hope
for an outcome where we lack evidence for the claim that it is really
possible), but that reason makes it necessary (as a consequence of the
categorical imperative) to assume that immortality is possible. This
claim that it is rationally necessary to assume something seems to be
stronger than the claim that we may (or even must) hope for it.
Whereas some Kant interpreters do not clearly distinguish between hope
and faith (Rossi 1982, Flikschuh 2010), Andrew Chignell emphasizes
that hope is an attitude that is distinct from faith or belief and
that Kant follows an “assert-the-stronger” policy: he
asserts the strongest justified attitude towards p (justified
belief), even if one holds also weaker attitudes towards p
(hope) (Chignell 2013: 198). O’Neill interprets Kant as
holding that hope provides a reason for religious belief:
Belief in God and immortality is not “merely possible”,
but a matter of “taking a hopeful view of human destiny”
(O’Neill 1996: 281). According to O’Neill, the reason for
faith is the hope that moral action is successful, i.e., that our
moral intention can make a difference to the natural order.
Another possible interpretation is that Kant uses “hope”
to describe a certain kind of belief. Such a belief would refer to an
object that is theoretically possible, but in regard to which it is
undecidable whether it exists and practically necessary to
assume its existence. He holds that there can be practical (moral)
reasons—that the highest good must be realizable—that make
hope (for god’s existence and immortality) not only valuable and
rational, but even rationally required.
(2) In the Religion, Kant envisages one’s own moral
progress as an object of hope. He assumes that human beings have a
propensity to evil, i.e., they occasionally prioritize maxims of
self-love over moral ones (see AE 6:32). Consequently, our task as
moral agents is to perform a “revolution of the will” by
adopting the moral law as one’s fundamental maxim. This
revolution is an object of hope:
Man cannot attain naturally to assurance concerning such a [moral]
revolution… for the deeps of the heart (the subjective first
grounds of his maxim) are inscrutable to him. Yet he must be able to
hope through his own efforts to reach the road which leads
hither…because he ought to become a good man. (AE 6:46, see
also 6:48, translation from Kant [1793] 1960: 51)
Kant claims that this hope may include the hope for divine assistance
in performing the revolution (AE 6:171). But if Kant is understood as
claiming that we require assistance from God in order to
become morally good (Chignell 2013: 212ff.), this claim stands in
tension with Kant’s fundamental assumption that human beings are
free and fully responsible for being good or evil. Chignell therefore
proposes that Kant might 
regard it as metaphysically possible for us to receive divine
assistance in the intelligible realm while doing something for which
we are fully responsible. (Chignell 2013: 216)
(3) In his political and historical writings, Kant considers another
object of reasonable hope: the hope for historical progress towards a
morally better, peaceful future. We find a similar relationship
between rational belief and hope as with regard to God and
immortality: Kant sees the moral improvement of the human race both as
an object of an assumption or rational belief, which
is connected to a moral duty, and an object of hope (AE
8:309). Similar to the objects of the practical postulates, God and
immortality, the assumption of moral improvement of the human race
cannot be proven. Nevertheless, it is rational to believe or hope for
it because it is a necessary presupposition for a moral duty (the duty
to help morally improve the younger generation). Kant assigns
“hope for better times” an important function for moral
motivation by claiming that without it, the desire to benefit the
common good would “never have warmed the human heart” (AE
8:309). Viewing human history with a “confirmation bias”
(Kleingeld 2012: 175), i.e., with a view on the realization of moral
demands, encourages the attempt to fighting evils “instead of
succumbing to despair” (ibid.).
Independently of these systematic issues regarding hope in
Kant’s philosophy, it is worth summarizing some general features
that Kant touches upon concerning hope. Regarding a
descriptive account of what it means that a person hopes that
p, one can extract two necessary conditions from Kant’s
remarks that are in line with the standard account of hope: the object
of hope must be uncertain, and the person must wish for it. Both
conditions are can be found in the following passage from
Perpetual Peace:
[R]eason is not enlightened enough to survey the entire series of
predetermining causes that foretell with certainty the happy or
unhappy consequences of humankind’s activities in accordance
with the mechanism of nature (although it does let us hope that these
will be in accord with our wishes). (AE 8:370)
In regard to the normative conditions under which hope is
rational, in Theory and Practice Kant claims that a
particular hope (or intention formed on the basis of hope) is not
irrational as long as its object cannot be proven to be impossible (AE
8:309f.). Besides this negative criterion, the main positive reason
Kant considers in favor of hope is that certain hopes are
(necessarily) connected with a moral duty. Therefore, even though the
third question of philosophy is “For what may I
hope?”, Kant in many passages discusses for what we
must hope (see O’Neill 1996: 285).
In Post-Kantian philosophy, the role of hope is disputed. One can
identify two more or less distinct approaches. On the one hand, there
are authors like Arthur Schopenhauer, Friedrich Nietzsche and Albert
Camus who reject hope, not so much as epistemically irrational but as
expression of a misguided relationship to the world that is unable to
face the demands of human existence. On the other hand, authors like
Søren Kierkegaard and Gabriel Marcel take hope to be a means to
overcome the limitations of ordinary experience.
Kierkegaard examines hope primarily as it is connected to religious
faith. However, whereas Kant aims to show that our belief in god and
hope for the highest good is possible within the limits of reason,
Kierkegaard is keen to emphasize that (eternal) hope must transcend
all understanding. As an antipode to despair, hope plays a positive
role in Kierkegaard’s work, culminating in his admonition:
“a person’s whole life should be the time of hope!”
(Kierkegaard [1847] 1995: 251). In Works of Love, Kierkegaard
defines hope in its most general form as a relation to the possibility
of the good: “To relate oneself expectantly to the possibility
of the good is to hope” (Kierkegaard [1847] 1995:
249).
Most interpreters of Kierkegaard emphasize a distinction between
“heavenly” (or eternal) hope and “earthly” (or
temporal) hope (Bernier 2015; Fremstedal 2012; McDonald 2014). In some
passages, Kierkegaard indeed seems to assume that there is also
“natural hope” (Kierkegaard [1851] 1990: 82) or hope
“for some earthly advantage” (Kierkegaard [1847] 1995:
261). However, strictly speaking, Kierkegaard considers this the
“wrong language usage” (Kierkegaard [1847] 1995: 261). He
completes his definition as follows: “To relate oneself
expectantly to the possibility of the good is to hope, which
cannot be any temporal expectancy but is an eternal hope”
(Kierkegaard [1847] 1995: 249). On Kierkegaard’s view,
hope—strictly speaking—is thus always directed towards the
eternal, “since hope pertains to the possibility of the good,
and thereby to the eternal” (Kierkegaard [1847] 1995: 249). This
is connected to Kierkegaard’s account of time. Hope, as a form
of expectation, is an attitude towards the possible. While
expectation, generally speaking, relates to the possibility of both
good and evil (Kierkegaard [1847] 1995: 249), hope relates only to the
possibility of good. The possibility of the good, on
Kierkegaard’s account, is a feature of the eternal (“in
time, the eternal is the possible, the future”).
While the expectation of earthly goods is often
disappointed—either because it is fulfilled too late or not at
all (Kierkegaard [1843–1844] 1990: 215)—eternal hope
cannot in principle be disappointed (Kierkegaard [1847] 1995:
261–3, Kierkegaard [1843–1844] 1990: 216). Eternal hope
means “at every moment always to hope all things”
(Kierkegaard [1847] 1995: 249). Kierkegaard mostly equates eternal
hope with Christian hope (McDonald 2014: 164).
In order to understand the relation between earthly and heavenly hope,
it is helpful to consider the dialectical progression of hope that
Kierkegaard presents in the Nachlaß (Malantschuk (ed.)
1978: 247). There is a kind of hope that occurs spontaneously in
youth, which appears to be a pre-reflexive hope, a kind of immediate
trust or confidence (Fremstedal 2012: 52). It is followed by the
“supportive calculation of the understanding”, i.e., by
hope involving the reflection about the probability of the hoped-for
outcome. This (earthly) hope is often disappointed by the lateness or
non-arrival of the expected goods. This disappointment is necessary in
order to acquire eternal hope, which “is against hope, because
according to that purely natural hope there was no more hope;
consequently this hope is against hope” (Kierkegaard [1851]
1990: 82).  Kierkegaard’s interpretation of Abraham’s
story in
Fear and Trembling can be understood as illustration of this
kind of hope (Lippitt 2015).
Whereas earthly hope is judged by the understanding according to its
probability, eternal hope exceeds the limits of understanding. It is
therefore commonly judged as irrational or as “lunacy”
(Kierkegaard [1851] 1990: 83). Kierkegaard does not explicitly take up
the question of when hope is rational—presumably because eternal
hope exceeds reason—but he frames the question of good or bad
hope in terms of “honor” and “shame”
(Kierkegaard [1847] 1995: 260f.). He observes that a person who
entertained an earthly hope that has not been fulfilled is very often
criticized as imprudent (or “put to shame” (Kierkegaard
[1847] 1995: 260)) because this is supposed to show that she
“miscalculated” (ibid.). Kierkegaard objects to this
perspective of “sagacity” that judges hope only with
regard to its fulfillment. Rather, we should pay attention to the
value of the hoped-for ends (Kierkegaard [1847] 1995: 261). Eternal
hope, on this account, “is never put to shame”
(Kierkegaard [1847] 1995: 260, see also 263). Further, and in line
with the Christian tradition, he argues that the value of hope depends
on its relation to love: we hope for ourselves if and only if we hope
for others, and only to the same degree. Love 
is the middle term: without love, no hope for oneself; with love, hope
for all others—and to the same degree one hopes for oneself, to
the same degree one hopes for others, since to the same degree one is
loving. (Kierkegaard [1847] 1995: 260)
Thus, similarly as in Kant’s account, one’s hope stands in
a proportional relationship with an ethical demand. However,
Kierkegaard does not see hope limited by our meeting an
ethical demand. 
Rather, Kierkegaard sees the proportional relation as determining
whether we are in fact hoping, and the actual degree of our
expectancy. Our hope for ourselves is only realizable in and through
our hope for another. (Bernier 2015: 315)
As already mentioned, Schopenhauer represents the opposite approach in
post-Kantian philosophy. Even though he holds that it is natural for
humans to hope (Parerga and Paralipomena II, 1851:
§313), he also claims that we generally ought to hope less than
we are inclined to, calling hope a “folly of the heart”
(ibid.). Ambivalent remarks concerning the value of hope (he
interprets Pandora’s box as containing all the goods,
Parerga and Paralipomena II, 1851: §200) can be found
throughout his writings, but on the whole, criticism prevails. There
are two aspects to his critical evaluation of hope: hope’s
influence on the intellect and its role for happiness. In
Schopenhauer’s dichotomy of the will and the intellect, hope is
an expression of the will or, more precisely, an inclination. One
reason why hope is problematic with respect to its influence on the
intellect is that it presents what we wish for as probable (The
World as Will and Representation, vol. 2, [1818] 1958: 216,
218). Schopenhauer concedes that hope sharpens our perception insofar
as it makes certain features of the world salient. But he links this
thesis to the stronger claim that hope may make it
(often) impossible to grasp things that are relevant. Hope
thus distorts cognition in a problematic way because it hinders the
intellect to grasp the truth. However, Schopenhauer also concedes the
possibility of a positive effect of hope, namely as motivation and
support of the intellect (The World as Will and
Representation, vol. 2, [1818] 1958: 221).
With regard to its contribution to personal happiness, Schopenhauer
mentions a positive role of hope in his comparison of the life of
animals with that of humans. He states that animals experience less
pleasure than humans, because they lack hope and therefore the
pleasures of anticipation. But hope can not only lead to
disappointment when the hoped-for object is not realized, it can even
be disappointing when it is fulfilled if the outcome does not provide
as much satisfaction as to be expected (The World as Will and
Representation, vol. 2 [1818] 1958: 573). Schopenhauer also
criticizes Kant’s idea that we may hope for our own happiness in
proportion to our moral conduct (the highest good). This conception of
hope, according to Schopenhauer, leads Kant to remain implicitly
committed to a form of eudaimonism (Basis of Morality II,
§3, 34).
Thus, even though Schopenhauer occasionally hints at positive aspects
of hope, his overall evaluation of hope is negative. This is
consistent with his view that life is filled with unavoidable
frustration and suffering, and that suffering can be reduced only by
getting rid of one’s desires. Ideally, this amounts to the
“negation of the will to life” (The World as Will and
Representation, vol. 1, [1818] 2010: 405). The “temptations
of hope” (The World as Will and Representation, vol. 1,
[1818] 2010: 419) function as obstacles for the negation of the will,
whereas hopelessness can help to transform one’s mind and
acquire “genuine goodness and purity of mind” (The
World as Will and Representation, vol. 1, [1818] 2010:
420). Interestingly, Schopenhauer does have sympathies with the idea
of salvation, which lies in the denial of the will (Schopenhauer
[1818] 1958: 610), that is, he seems to subscribe to a kind of
transcendent hope for an end of all suffering (Schulz 2002: 125).
Even though he does not say so, one could characterize his view as a
“hope for the end of hope”.
Nietzsche is perhaps the most famous critic of hope in the
post-Kantian tradition. In the third preface to Zarathustra,
he warns: “do not believe those who speak to you of
extraterrestrial hopes!” (Zarathustra, [1883–85]
2006: 6) Similarly, in Beyond Good and Evil (1886) he opposes
all notions of hope “in hidden harmonies, in future blessedness
and justice” (Beyond Good and Evil, [1886] 2008: 562).
In his interpretation of Pandora’s myth (Human, All Too
Human, 1878: §71), he calls hope
“the worst of all evils because it prolongs the torments of
man”. However, a closer look reveals that, outside of his
criticism of religious and metaphysical hopes, he also hints at a
positive perspective on hope: “that mankind be redeemed from
revenge: that to me is the bridge to the highest hope and a
rainbow after long thunderstorms” (Zarathustra,
[1883–85] 2006: 77). Nietzsche counts hope amongst the
“strong emotions” (Nietzsche [1887] 2006: 103), next to
anger, fear, voluptuousness and revenge. Furthermore, he repeatedly
characterizes hope using the metaphor of a rainbow: “hope is the
rainbow over the cascading stream of life” [“Die Hoffnung
ist der Regenbogen über den herabstürzenden jähen Bach
des Lebens”] (as cited in Bidmon 2016: 188). However, the
metaphor of the “rainbow” is ambivalent. On the one hand,
it is connected to Nietzsches vision of the “overman”:
“Do you not see it, the rainbow and the bridges of the
overman?” (Zarathustra, [1883–85] 2006: 36). On
the other hand, however, the rainbow is elusive and withdraws
itself—Nietzsche calls it an “illusory bridge”
(Zarathustra, [1883–85] 2006: 175; see also Bidmon 2016:
188f.). In Beyond Good and Evil, he finally claims that we
should “fix our hopes” in “new philosophers”,
“in minds strong and original enough to initiate opposite
estimates of value” (Beyond Good and Evil, [1886] 2008:
600). In Human all too human, he similarly envisages change
of the social order as an object of hope: 
[W]e are only reasonably entitled to hope when we believe that we and
our equals have more strength in heart and head than the
representatives of the existing state of things. (Human All Too
Human, 1878: §443) 
Reasonable hope is thus grounded in a trust in one’s capacity to
bring about the desired outcome. However, Nietzsche adds that usually
this hope amounts to “presumption, an
over-estimation” (ibid.).
Camus follows Nietzsche in declaring (religious) hope the worst of all
evils (Judaken and Bernasconi 2012: 264). His critique of hope is
linked to the idea that the human existence is
“absurd”. The “elusive feeling of absurdity”
(Camus 1955: 12) is characterized by a discrepancy: the human mind
asks fundamental questions about the meaning of life, but “the
world” does not provide answers. Camus’ understanding of
the absurd is best captured in the image of Sisyphus, who exemplifies
life’s absurdity in his “futile and hopeless labor”
(Camus 1955: 119). The assumption that life is absurd goes hand in
hand with the denial of religious hope for salvation. In his early
writing Nuptials ([1938] 1970), Camus opposes religious ideas
about the immortal soul and hope for an afterlife. In fact,
“[h]ope is the error Camus wishes to
avoid” (Aronson 2012). Even though Camus is often regarded as an
“existentialist”, he distances himself from this
movement. One reason is precisely his disagreement with the account of
hope of the existentialists, Kierkegaard in particular, of which he
says that “they deify what crushes them and find reason to hope
in what impoverishes them.  That forced hope is religious in all of
them” (Camus 1955: 32).
As already mentioned, one kind of hope that Camus flatly rejects is
religious hope for a life beyond death. A second kind of hope,
primarily discussed in The Rebel, is the hope founded on a
great cause beyond oneself, i.e., “hope of another life one must
‘deserve’” (Camus 1955: 8). The problem with hoping
for social utopias, according to Camus, is that they tend to be
dictatorial. A further reason to reject such hopes seems to be that
they distract from the life of the senses, from the here-and-now and
from appreciating the beauty of this life. We also do not need hope to
cope with the hardships of life and death: instead of hoping for a
life after death (or committing suicide), one should be conscious of
death as “the most obvious absurdity” (Camus 1955: 59) and
“die unreconciled and not of one’s own free will”
(Camus 1955: 55). Sisyphus exemplifies the attitude of lucidity and
consciousness that Camus recommends. Even though he does not hope for
a better future,—or rather because he does not hope for
a better future—“[o]ne must imagine Sisyphus happy”
(Camus 1955: 123).
Despite his criticism of hope, Camus states that it is (nearly)
impossible to live without hope, even if one wishes to be free of hope
(Camus 1955: 113). Presumably this claim is only descriptive,
stating a fact about human psychology. However, in a letter to his
friend and poet René Char, Camus called The Rebel a
“livre d’espoir” [book of hope] (Schlette 1995:
130). On that note, it has recently been suggested that Camus allows
for a positive view of hope—a kind of “étrange
espoir” [strange hope] that is directed towards the
possibilities inherent in the present (Schlette 1995: 134) and that is
characterized by humanism and solidarity with all human beings (Bidmon
2016: 233).
Whereas the positive role of hope in Camus is at best hidden, it
surfaces prominently in the writings of Marcel. At the heart of
Marcel’s account of hope is the distinction between
“‘I hope…’, the absolute statement, and
‘I hope that…’” (Marcel [1952] 2010: 26).
Marcel is mostly interested in a general, absolute hope, which he
conceives as “the act by which […] temptation to despair
is actively or victoriously overcome” (Marcel [1952] 2010:
30f.). One way in which Marcel characterizes the “mystery”
(Marcel [1952] 2010: 29) of hope is by alluding to the connection
between hope and patience (Marcel [1952] 2010: 33). Hope implies the
respect for “personal rhythm” (ibid.) and
“confidence in a certain process of growth and
development” (Marcel [1952] 2010: 34). Marcel takes up the
question of the rationality of hope in asking whether hope is an
illusion that consists in taking one’s wishes for reality
(Marcel [1952] 2010: 39). He answers that this objection against the
value of hope applies primarily to hopes that are directed towards a
particular outcome (“to hope that X”), but it does not
apply when hope transcends the imagination. Because the person who
hopes simpliciter does not anticipate a particular event, her
hope cannot be judged with regard to whether it is likely to be
fulfilled. Marcel illustrates this with the example of an invalid
(Marcel [1952] 2010: 40). If this person hopes that he will be healthy
at a certain point in time, there is the danger of disappointment and
despair if it does not happen. However, absolute hope, Marcel
explains, implies a “method of surmounting”: the patient
has true hope, if he realizes that “everything is not
necessarily lost if there is no cure” (Marcel [1952] 2010: 40).
Being a “theistic Existentialist” (Treanor and Sweetman
2016) like Kierkegaard, Marcel ultimately connects this possibility of
absolute hope to the existence of god. Absolute hope is necessarily
connected to faith in God and is a “response of the creature to
the infinite Being to whom it is conscious of owing everything that it
has” (Marcel [1952] 2010: 41).
Even though hope rarely features explicitly in pragmatist writings, it
has been suggested that pragmatist accounts of hope can be found in
the works of William James and John Dewey (Fishman and McCarthy 2007;
Green 2008; Koopman 2006, 2009; Rorty 1999; Shade 2001). As Patrick
Shade notes, the issue of hope is “implicit in most pragmatic
philosophies”, as it is related to central pragmatist topics,
such as meliorism and faith, and particular hopes for social progress
(Shade 2001: 9f.).
Indeed, James’ concept of faith in The Will to Believe
is closely linked to hope. In his essay, James aims to offer a
“justification of faith, a defense of our right to adopt a
believing attitude in religious matters” (James [1897] 2015: 1).
Even though his primary subject is religious faith, he points out that
a structural similar justification of faith or trust can be applied to
social questions. It can be rational to believe that the other is
trustworthy or likes us, even though we may not be able to prove it.
Three criteria have to be fulfilled for faith to be rational: the
question cannot be decided scientifically, the belief may be true, and
we are better off (even now) if we believe. In his argument, James
draws a link to the concept of hope when claiming that the skeptic or
agnostic attitude is not more rational than the attitude of faith. The
skeptic holds “that to yield to our fear of its being error is
wiser and better than to yield to our hope that it may be true”
(James [1897] 2015: 27). James criticizes this attitude: “what
proof is there that dupery through hope is so much worse than dupery
through fear?” (James [1897] 2015: 27).
In Dewey’s writings, the topic of hope has been connected to his
account of meliorism (Shade 2001: 139). Meliorism is 
the idea that at least there is a sufficient basis of goodness in life
and its conditions so that by thought and earnest effort we may
constantly make things better. (Dewey [1916] 1980: 294) 
Dewey distinguishes meliorism from optimism: Meliorism 
attacks optimism on the ground that it encourages the fatalistic
contentment with things as they are; what is needed is the frank
recognition of evils, not for the sake of accepting them as final, but
for the sake of arousing energy to remedy them. (ibid.) 
The object of hope or meliorism, for Dewey, is first and foremost
democracy, which is “the simple idea that political and ethical
progress hinges on nothing more than persons, their values, and their
actions” (ibid.: 107).
The contemporary debate about hope in analytic philosophy is primarily
concerned with providing a definition of hope, explicating standards
of rationality and explaining the value of hope. The debate takes as
its starting point what has been called the “orthodox
definition” (Martin 2013: 11) or the “standard
account” (Meirav 2009: 217), which analyses hope in terms of a
wish or desire for an outcome and a belief concerning the
outcome’s possibility. R.S. Downie is representative of this
position:
There are two criteria which are independently necessary and jointly
sufficient for ‘hope that’. The first is that the object
of hope must be desired by the hoper. […] The second […]
is that the object of hope falls within a range of physical
possibility which includes the improbable but excludes the certain and
the merely logically possible. (Downie 1963: 248f.)
Similarly, J. P. Day writes: 
“A hopes that p” is true iff “A
wishes that p, and A thinks that p has some
degree of probability, however small” is true. (Day 1969:
89)
The desire-condition captures the fact that the subject is attracted
to the outcome. Concerning the belief-condition, there is general
agreement that we cannot hope for what we believe to be either
impossible or certain. For a
descriptive account of hope, only the belief of the
hoping person about the possibility of the object is relevant,
independently of whether this belief is true: a person can hope for an
object she believes to be possible even if the object is in fact
impossible. While most accounts employ the idea that a hoping person
holds a positive belief to the effect that the outcome is possible,
the most minimal position would require only the absence of
the belief that the outcome is impossible (or certain) (see Pettit
2004: 153 for both formulations).
Most authors implicitly assume that the hoped-for event is in the
future. In ordinary usage however, people often express hopes
regarding past events of which they do not have complete knowledge. An
example is the hope that someone did not suffer excessively
when they died. While some authors consider this use of language to be
parasitic on the future-directed case (McGeer 2004: 104), others argue
that these are genuine cases of hope (Martin 2013: 68).
Another question in this context concerns the concept of possibility
that is at issue: It seems clear that we cannot hope for the logically
impossible, but can we hope for the physically impossible, e.g., that
the dead will rise tomorrow? Downie, for example, holds that logical
possibility is not enough (Downie 1963: 249), whereas Chignell
does not exclude the possibility of hope for something which is
physically impossible (Chignell 2013: 201ff.). Whatever the answer to
this question, all views (except Wheatley 1958) allow for cases of
hope in which the outcome is extremely improbable; in other words, no
lower bound to the probability is required for hoping (Meirav
2009: 219).
Similarly, few authors doubt that the desire and belief component to which
the orthodox definition refers are necessary conditions for hope (although
Segal and Textor 2015 deny this). However, convincing objections have
been raised against the idea that the standard definition provides
sufficient conditions for hope. Ariel Meirav (2009) and Philip Pettit
(2004) raise the most important objections.
Meirav argues that the standard definition fails to distinguish hope
from despair: two people can have identical desires and beliefs about
the possibility of an outcome, and yet one of them may hope for the
outcome while the other despairs of it. According to Meirav’s
“External Factor Account” (Meirav 2009: 230), hope also
involves an attitude towards an external factor (e.g., nature, fate,
God) on which the realization of the hoped-for end causally depends.
“If one views the external factor as good, then one hopes for
the prospect. If one views it as not good, then one despairs of
it” (Meirav 2009: 230). Meirav links this definition to a claim
about the rationality of hope: the rationality of hope depends on the
rationality of the belief in the goodness of an external factor
(Meirav 2009: 233).
Another concern is that the standard account fails to explain how hope
can have special motivating force in difficult circumstances,
especially when the probability of the desired outcome is low (Pettit
2004; Calhoun forthcoming). This objection is based on the idea that
hope is closely connected to our agency. Victoria McGeer claims that
even in cases where we cannot bring anything about to promote the
hoped-for end, hope is “a way of positively and expansively
inhabiting one’s agency”, and our “energy is
[…] oriented toward the future” (McGeer 2004: 104). In
order to capture the motivating power of hope, Pettit distinguishes
the “superficial” kind of hope described by the orthodox
definition from a more “substantial” hope (Pettit 2004:
154). He construes substantial hope as acting on a belief that the
agent does not really hold: 
Hope will consist in acting as if a desired prospect is going to
obtain or has a good chance of obtaining, just as precaution consists
in acting as if this were the case with some feared prospect. (Pettit
2004: 158) 
However, this definition seems to render hope an intrinsically
irrational attitude because it appears to require the hopeful person
to act as if she had a false belief. In typical cases, a
hopeful person does not describe herself as acting as if the
chances were higher, but as taking the chances as they are as
good enough to try (Martin 2013: 23).
Cheshire Calhoun argues that “in hope we live under some kind of
as-if idea of the future”. Whereas Pettit suggests that act as
if the prospect has a good chance of obtaining and Martin as if the
prospect is merely possible, Calhoun argues that hope involves a view
of the future in terms of success. The third component of hope besides
desire and belief, according to her, is “a phenomenological
idea of the determinate future whose content includes
success.” This phenomenological idea, she argues, has
motivational effect independently of the agent’s desires. This
component is not a fully reason-responsive state, as it has
non-rational sources like habituation to success or failure.
In a recent proposal, Adrienne Martin aims to remedy the faults of the
standard definition in yet a different way and gives an account of
hope’s rationality. Similar to Walker (Walker 2006: 48), Martin
holds that hope should not be analyzed in terms of necessary and
sufficient conditions, but rather as a “syndrome” with
paradigmatic marks (Martin 2013: 62). These marks involve two more
elements in addition to belief and desire or attraction: First, the
agent must see or treat her belief about the possibility of the
outcome’s occurring as licensing hopeful activities,
i.e., as not advising against some specific activities. Second, the
agent must treat her attraction to the outcome as a practical
reason to engage in the activities characteristic of hope. Martin
calls her account the Incorporation Thesis, which refers to
the fact that the hoping person incorporates the desire-element into
her rational scheme of ends. On Martin’s account, the
rationality of hope is primarily a practical question. Whereas the
attraction to the outcome is (on her view) not subject to rational
norms at all, the belief in the outcome’s possibility is
responsive to theoretical reasons pertaining to the possibility of the
outcome. However, whether one sees the belief in the possibility as
licensing hopeful activities and, consequently, whether one takes
one’s attraction as a practical reason to engage in hopeful
activities is governed by norms of rational end promotion (Martin
2013: 51). In this respect, her account is similar to Pettit’s
position, which emphasizes the instrumental value hope has for the
pursuit of our ends (Pettit 2004: 161).
A further dimension of value is suggested by Luc Bovens’ (1999)
theory. He argues that in cases where hoping has no instrumental value
(because we cannot contribute to bring about the desired state), hope
can still have intrinsic value. In Bovens’ view, this
intrinsic value pertains to hope because hoping involves mental
imaging. This characteristic of hope is responsible for its intrinsic
value in three respects: First, hope has intrinsic value because
mental imaging is pleasurable in itself (Bovens 1999: 675f.). Second,
hope has epistemic value because it increases one’s
self-understanding. Third, hope has intrinsic worth because it is
constitutive of love towards others and towards oneself, which are
intrinsically valuable activities. It is in virtue of mental imaging
that hope is intimately connected to love, because spending mental
energy in thinking about the well-being of another person is
constitutive of loving her.
Another approach to the value of hope has been developed using the
framework of virtue epistemology. Nancy Snow (2013) proposes three
respects in which hope can be understood as an intellectual virtue:
(1) hope motivates the pursuit of epistemic ends such as knowledge;
(2) hope imparts qualities to the epistemic agent, such as resilience,
perseverance, flexibility, and openness, that further the successful
pursuit of those ends; and (3) hope functions as a kind of method in
the pursuit of intellectual projects. (For a critical assessment of
Snow’s approach, see Cobb 2015.)
It must also be mentioned that the standard account does not exhaust
the meaning of “hope” as it has been treated in the
philosophical tradition, in particular as it does not allow for
indeterminate hopes. For example, Marcel’s distinction between
“hope that” and hope without a determinate object has
recently been taken up (with or without explicit reference to Marcel)
by otherwise different accounts. Joseph Godfrey calls hope without
object “fundamental hope” and bases his account on an
analysis of Bloch, Kant and Marcel (Godfrey 1987). Patrick
Shade’s pragmatist theory distinguishes particular hopes and
hopefulness as “an openness to possibilities that are meaningful
and promising for us” (Shade 2001: 139). Jonathan Lear similarly
describes “radical hope” as a sense of a future in which
“something good will emerge” (Lear 2008: 94), even though
all particular hopes were destroyed, and Matthew Ratcliffe takes such
radical hope as an example for “pre-intentional hope”,
which is 
a kind of general orientation or sense of how things are with the
world, in the context of which intentional states of the kind “I
hope that p” are possible. (Ratcliffe 2013: 602)
Psychologists and psychoanalysts have systematically investigated hope
since the 1950s (Frank 1968). In many of these first studies, hope was
seen as a combination of the perception of an outcome as important for
an agent to achieve and as having a certain probability (Stotland
1969). While this
understanding of hope deviates from the standard philosophical account
(see section 3) by requiring a minimal probability, it continues to
play a major role in the current psychological literature.
A very influential psychological approach to hope is Charles
Snyder’s hope theory (for an overview, see Rand and Cheavens
2009). Snyder defines hope as follows:
Within a goal-setting framework, we propose that there are two major,
interrelated elements of hope. First, we hypothesize that hope is
fueled by the perception of successful agency related to goals. The
agency component refers to a sense of successful determination in
meeting goals in the past, present, and future. Second, we hypothesize
that hope is influenced by the perceived availability of successful
pathways related to goals. (Snyder et al. 1991: 570)
On this basis, Snyder and others have developed a “hope
scale” that measures several components of agency and pathways
perception (ibid.).
Several objections have been raised against this analysis of hope. One
is that the “perception of agency” relates both to the
past and the future and therefore measures a general trait of
hopefulness rather than the hope for specific outcomes. As a response,
psychologists have developed further “domain-specific”
hope scales (Lopez et al. 2000: 61). A second question concerns the
issue of whether Snyder’s definition of hope is sufficiently
distinct from optimism (see Miceli and Castelfranchi 2010; Aspinwall
and Leaf 2002). Snyder wants to distinguish hope from optimism by
linking hope to beliefs about self-efficacy (Snyder 2002; Magaletta
and Oliver 1999) and reserving the term “optimism” only
for generalized expectancies about positive outcomes. However, the
ordinary use of the term is better captured by the idea that hope can
be upheld even if one does not assign a high probability to the
outcome.
While the political importance of hope as a psychological state is
acknowledged by pre-modern and modern philosophers and while religious hope for a
life after death is a major topic in medieval political philosophy,
the emergence of a modern worldview that conceives of history as
contingent and thus conceives of the future as a space for potential
fundamental change, also changes the significance of hope.
While this connection can be most clearly seen in Kant’s
analysis of the role of hope in our relation to human history (see
 section 2.4),
 Hannah Arendt makes a related point in passing in the Human
Condition. According to Arendt, the “natality” of
human beings allows them to make new beginnings in their actions and
thus subvert the tendency of the public space to disintegrate into
routinized behaviour. Therefore, “natality” is a
precondition of genuine political action and a necessary condition for
the possibility of hope (Arendt 1958: 247). The capacity of hope and
the capacity to act politically are thus essentially intertwined.
In modern political philosophy, hope is significant for both the
Marxist and the pragmatist-liberal (see
 section 2.6)
 tradition of thought. Both traditions have produced
thinkers—Ernst Bloch and Richard Rorty, respectively—who
accord hope a central place in their political thought. In
contemporary political philosophy, hope is not a central topic, but
there are interesting attempts to assess its significance for liberal
ideal and nonideal theory (see White 1991; Smith 2005b; Moellendorf
2010).
Bloch‘s The Principle of Hope is certainly not only the
most radical attempt to build a critical political philosophy on a
highly unorthodox theory of hope, it also constitutes a decisive break
with standard analyses of hope found in the philosophical
tradition.
Regarding the nature of hope, Bloch argues that it has both an
affective component (as the opposite of fear) and a cognitive
component (being the opposite of remembrance) through which it
anticipates a state of affairs that not only does not yet exist, but
that also is not yet cognitively completely available to the subject.
On the affective side, Bloch describe affects as a subclass of drives
which are the basic material of his (psychoanalytically inspired)
psychology. In contrast to basic drives, affects are self-reflexive in
two ways: when agents become conscious of their affects this can add
to the motivating power of the latter (Fink-Eitel 1988: 323); and
through the consciousness of its affects, the subject becomes also
capable of reflecting upon itself. Among the affects, we can
distinguish between “filled” emotions (which have as their
object something which is already completely available in the
lifeworld of the agent) and “expectant emotions”
(Erwartungsaffekte) that relate to something not yet
available, among them hope and fear. In this schema, hope is a
positive expectant emotion (Bloch [1954–59] 1986: I:111), and in
contrast to the negative affects, to which we are subject
involuntarily, it is something in regard to which we have a degree of
freedom. Bloch therefore claims that, as a free, future-directed form
of anticipation, hope is the most human of all affects (Bloch
[1954–59] 1986: I:74).
In regard to the cognitive component, Bloch describes hope as
providing new forms of access to reality in a way that defies short
summary. In general, however, one can say that hope is always related
to the “not-yet-conscious” that in turn reflects
“objective possibilities”. The terms “not-yet
conscious” and “preconscious” (Bloch [1954–59]
1986: I:115) are part of an oppositional reading of classic
psychoanalysis that, according to Bloch, understands the unconscious
predominantly as encompassing thoughts which are no longer
conscious or repressed (ibid.), but neglects the possibility that some
unconscious thoughts are not yet capable of being conscious. This also
leads Bloch to introduce a future-directed counterpart to the concept
of repression (Bloch [1954–59] 1986: I:128). Whereas repressed
memories are repressed by forces within the subject, resistance to
not-yet conscious thought is to found in the very material or content
of that thought, namely objective, future possibilities—events
or outcomes that are, by definition, not yet achieved and habitualized
and thus not available in the lifeworld for the subject’s
conceptualization. This resistance to conscious reflection is also
always partly due to socio-economic causes; not all projects are
equally achievable in all historical moments and thus their becoming
fully available to consciousness is blocked by their (present)
impossibility (Bloch [1954–59] 1986: I:130).
The content or material of the not-yet-conscious is defined by what
Bloch calls the “Front”. This concept is related to
Bloch’s processual metaphysics according to which objective
tendencies and possibilities in reality interact with
“closed” matters of fact, such that the moment of
potentiality surpassing into actuality always opens up opportunities
for the interventions of active decision-making. The right way to
relate to these “Front” opportunities is, according to
Bloch, “militant optimism”, i.e., not a mere assumption
that things will develop in a desirable direction, but an active
relation to real tendencies with the goal to realize them (Bloch
[1954–59] 1986: I:201).
Arguing from these premises, Bloch develops an integrated theory in
which hope is not merely a subjective combination of desires and
beliefs about probabilities or facts, but rather a reflection of
metaphysical possibilities in the world and part of a range of human
capacities that make it possible to relate to that which is not yet,
but which is already prefigured in the objective potentials of
reality. In the Principle of Hope, Bloch offers a
wide-ranging overview of historical and current forms in which hope,
optimism and utopia have been and are captured by visions of potential
states of affairs—the list of topics discussed ranges from
medial representation of desires, social and geographic utopias to
literary and artistic ways in which the possible can be captured and
philosophical theories of the goods.
The theoretical framework in which these analyses are embedded and in
the service of which they are employed, is a revised form of Marxism.
Bloch’s Marxism relies on a dialectical materialism which has
two aspects that Bloch calls the “cold” and the
“warm stream”: the first designates the materialist
insight that all historical developments are conditioned and
constrained by concrete, existing material conditions, “strict
determinations that cannot be skipped over” (Bloch
[1954–59] 1986: I:208), whereas the second acknowledges the
processual constitution of reality which is adequately captured by
hope and expectation. On this version of Marxism, hope becomes a
central element of the stance of the social theorist and critic. In
particular, Bloch understands Marx’s account of a unity between
theory and practice in the Theses on Feuerbach to suggest a
social theory that occupies the “horizon of the future”
(Bloch [1954–59] 1986: I:285) and a materialism which centrally
integrates hope. This materialism, Bloch argues in the final pages of
The Principle of Hope, can overcome the division between
powerless fantasy and a mechanical determinism which underlies mere
predictions of the future and guide political action that is directed
towards a real, material, objective possibility—classless
society—which is, at the same time, still acknowledged to be
dependent on human decision (Bloch [1954–59] 1986: III:1372).
Such activity, according to Bloch, must be guided by militant optimism
or hope. Political hope is thus not only valuable, it is also
necessary to achieve social change for the better.
While Rorty agrees with Bloch that hope, rather than knowledge about
historical inevitability or moral truth, is an appropriate basis for
progressive political theory, the argument that he develops for this
claim could not be more different from the one Bloch advances. Whereas
Bloch tries to underpin both his descriptive analysis of hope and the
dialectic materialism that is to guide political action with a
metaphysical vocabulary that aims to identify the ultimate reality to
which hope refers, Rorty arrives at his endorsement of hope as an
important element in contemporary liberal politics through a rejection
of political models that are based on the idea of (perhaps privileged)
knowledge or insight.
In Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature, Rorty identifies hope
as a central element of a hermeneutic rather than an epistemological
approach to philosophy:
Hermeneutics sees the relations between various discourses as those of
strands in a possible conversation, a conversation which presupposes
no disciplinary matrix which unites the speakers, but where the hope
of agreement is never lost so long as the conversation lasts. This
hope is not a hope for the discovery of antecedently existing common
ground, but simply hope for agreement, or, at least, exciting and
fruitful disagreement. (Rorty 1979: 318)
As Rorty also emphasizes in later writings, this hope is not based on
any foundations—such as knowledge about
probabilities—rather, it is an attitude by which interlocutors
express both their commitment to certain forms of future interaction
and their belief in its possibility. Although Rorty never provides a
formal analysis of hope (the closest he comes to such a definition is
his approving reference to Dewey’s analysis of hope as
“the ability to believe that the future will be unspecifiably
different from, and unspecifiably freer than, the past”, Rorty
1999: 120), his use of the term is consistent with the standard
definition. In this sense, “political deliberation presupposes
hope” (Rorty 2002: 153). He adds to this definition an important
ethical component, however, insofar he focusses on forms of hope that
concern intersubjective interactions: to approach others with the hope
for agreement is an expression of the liberal virtue of civility
(Rorty 1979: 318).
The concept of hope gradually becomes more important throughout
Rorty’s work. In Contingency, Irony and Solidarity,
Rorty contrasts two forms of liberalism: The “liberal
metaphysician” expects social cooperation to be based on
scientific or philosophical insight that penetrates individual
idiosyncrasy and aims at the adoption of a universal, final vocabulary
that then leads to solidarity. By contrast, the “liberal
ironist” renounces the idea of a final vocabulary. By
acknowledging that only the contingent overlap between “selfish
hopes” can be a source of solidarity (Rorty 1989: 93), a liberal
ironist also must give up the idea that there is something
intrinsically, universally human that will provide a source of
solidarity. Instead, we have to engage in an attempt to create
solidarity out of shared experiences and interests (Rorty 1999:
87).
Rorty sees the pragmatists, and Dewey in particular (see
 section 2.6),
 as the theorists who have best captured these different aspects of
hope. On the epistemic dimension, they embrace a form of hope that
“doesn’t need reinforcement from ‘the idea of a
transcendental or enduring subject’” (Rorty 1982: 206) or
“backup from a philosophy of history” (Rorty 1998: 243).
On the political dimension, pragmatist experimentalism allows for
liberal hope—a hope for a “global, cosmopolitan,
democratic, egalitarian, classless, casteless society” (Rorty
1999: xii)—without grounding it in a historical teleology or an
abstract utopianism. This liberalism also succeeds in capturing the
attractive aspects of both Christianity and Marxism without succumbing
to their metaphysical vices.
The most interesting aspect of Rorty’s theory is that the main
virtue he ascribes to hope (compared to knowledge) as a basis for
politics is that it “does not require foundations” (Rorty
et al. 2002b: 58) , and certain hopes may even be
“unjustifiable” (Rorty 1982: 208). As Nicholas Smith
(2005a) notes, Rorty does not intend this to designate an unjustified
hope (hope for which there is no adequate justification, although such
justification is possible). Rather, he must either mean a form of hope
for which the question of justification does not arise or a form of
hope that is strictly unjustifiable in the same sense as hope for the
impossible. While there are traces of the latter sense to be found in
Rorty’s work (Smith 2005a: 94), he consistently seems to use the
former meaning in his political writings. But the absence of a need
for a metaphysical justification of hope does not imply that we cannot
make a distinction between more or less reasonable forms of hoping. As
Smith (2005a: 95) further argues, Rorty acknowledges that hopelessness
is always based on the absence of a narrative of political progress.
For this reason, if such a narrative is available, this seems to
provide rational support for political hope.