Little is known about Iamblichus’ life and career, since
Eunapius of Sardis’ biography of Iamblichus (Lives of
Philosophers and Sophists V [Goulet 2014]) is merely
hagiographical in nature. His birthplace is traditionally taken to be
Chalcis ad Belum (modern Qinnasrin), although support has recently
been voiced in favor of a different Chalcis, Chalcis sub Libanum
(Aliquot 2010: 307 and n. 7). What is uncontroversial is that
Iamblichus hailed from a very influential Syrian family, the
Sampsigeramids of Emesa (Damascius, Philosophical History,
Athanassiadi 1999: 334.10–14 [Zintzen 1967: 2.8–10]), who had gained
access to the Imperial throne along with Elagabalus
(218–222).
Eunapius gives Anatolius and then Porphyry as Iamblichus’ two
teachers, and there are no decisive reasons to doubt this: on the one
hand, it is evident that he was influenced by the kind of theological
arithmology Anatolius championed; on the other hand, Porphyry
dedicated his treatise On the “Know thyself” to
Iamblichus (Stobaeus, Anthology III, 21, 26) and provides
information about the philosopher’s son (Life of
Plotinus 9). Since this son is said by Porphyry to have married a
Roman aristocrat, it is very likely that Iamblichus studied in Rome
under Porphyry, who would have carried on the philosophical circle
Plotinus had founded in 244. Dalsgaard Larsen’s (DL-1972: I,
38–39) supposition of a prolonged stay at Alexandria is dubious
at best.
After a break with Porphyry that seems impossible to date with
precision, Iamblichus settled in Syria. Although he is known to have
owned an estate in Antioch’s suburb of Daphne, it is now
accepted that he settled in Apamea, where Plotinus’ first
disciple Amelius had previously moved. There, welcomed by a wealthy
notable, Sopater, he founded a flourishing school: we know about a
dozen of his students (see below,
 Section 2.4),
 among whom the most conspicuous are Sopater himself, who died
because of a plot at Constantine’s court; Aedesius, who moved
the school to Pergamon; and Dexippus, the only disciple of whom we
still have a philosophical work (a commentary on Aristotle’s
Categories). Apart from Eunapius, evidence about
Iamblichus’ whereabouts in Apamea is to be found mainly in
Libanius (e.g. Ep. 1389.13–14) and, above all, in the
letters by an anonymous Syrian sophist
whose correspondence with Iamblichus was
preserved among the genuine letters of the emperor Julian (e.g. Pseudo-Julian, Ep. 78 and 79 Wright).
Few of Iamblichus’ works are preserved in the direct manuscript
tradition. Four of these texts pertain to a summa On
Pythagoreanism (conflicting testimonies exist about its title:
cf. O’Meara 1989: 32–33): On the Pythagorean
Life; the Protrepticus; On General Mathematical
Science; and an Introduction to Arithmetic based on
Nicomachus of Gerasa’s treatise of the same name. Sadly, they
are for the most part impersonal works: the Protrepticus
consists in lengthy quotations from previous hortatory literature, and
its interest mostly lies in the fact that it provides evidence for
valuable lost works (most notably Aristotle’s own
Protrepticus and the so-called Anonymus Iamblichi),
while On the Pythagorean Life plagiarizes previous
biographies of the master, although it certainly contains valuable
insights on Iamblichus’ conception of the “divine
man”. Neither of these works seems to have had any impact over
the subsequent course of philosophy, whereas On General
Mathematical Science was at least a formative influence on
Proclus’ commentary to Euclid’s Elements, as well
as on Syrianus’ commentary on Metaphysics
Μ–Ν. It also
provides the basic material for the reconstruction of
Iamblichus’ philosophy of mathematics (see below,
 Section 4).
 For a general characterization of On Pythagoreanism and its
context, see Huffman (2006 [2019: sect. 4.4]).
The most important extant treatise by Iamblichus, however, is the
Reply of Master Abamon to Porphyry’s Letter to Anebo, and
Solutions to the Difficulties Contained Therein (abbreviated to
Reply to Porphyry and traditionally known as De mysteriis
Ægyptiorum since Marsilio Ficino’s original Latin
translation: see SS-2013: ix–xxi). The work is a defense of
Pagan religious practice (sacrifice, prayer, divination etc.) against
the objections raised by Porphyry, and to serve this purpose it
introduces several philosophical developments on the divine nature and
orders, as well as the pretensions of the human soul. The whole debate
is framed with a fictional Egyptian scenario: Porphyry had raised his
objections in an epistle addressed to Anebo, an Egyptian priest, while
Iamblichus wrote his reply under the assumed guise of the Egyptian
prophet Abamon. While it had limited direct transmission (the only
ancient testimonium being Proclus, In Timaeum I,
386.8–13 [D-1973: Fr. 38], although Taormina (2014) expressed
reservations), its importance as a touchstone against which one can
safely compare what can be gathered from other sources is
invaluable.
The bulk of what remains of Iamblichus’ work consists in approx.
800 fragments and testimonia. Of these, the extensive excerpts given
by Stobaeus of a work On the Soul as well as a dozen
Letters, which have been the object of multiple independent
editions, stand out as the most coherent, if not necessarily the most
original. By far the most influential part of his philosophical
output, his Commentaries on key works by Plato and Aristotle
are all lost, although in almost two cases (his commentary on the
Categories, transmitted by Simplicius; that on the
Timaeus, transmitted by Proclus), quotations are so numerous
that one can safely establish the main features of the exegesis given.
Of the other works Iamblichus wrote commentaries on, the most
important ones are the Alcibiades, the Philebus and
the Parmenides, while the existence of a separate, continuous
commentary on Aristotle’s De anima was questioned by
Blumenthal (1974). A richly annotated edition of the Platonic
fragments was given by D-1973, while DL-1972 collected all fragments
known to Dalsgaard Larsen as an appendix to his monograph, although
his work can barely be described as an edition. Another collection
focusing on Aristotelian exegesis was recently produced by Romano
[R-2012].
Iamblichus’ significance in Late Antique philosophy can hardly
be overestimated. Karl Praechter described him as the second founder
of Neoplatonism after Plotinus and argued that Iamblichus’
position was similar to that of Chrysippus in ancient Stoicism
(Praechter 1910: 143). This statement aptly expresses
Iamblichus’ historical and philosophical significance, but needs
much qualification: unlike the Stoa, “Neoplatonism” is not
an ancient philosophical school, but a modern historical category
(whose reliability scholars are sometimes inclined to question: see
Catana 2013). Iamblichus is likely, as was mentioned above
 (Section 1.1)
 to have been a student of Porphyry who was, in turn, a student of
Plotinus. Iamblichus’ school was, however, completely separate
from that of Plotinus, both in time and in place: consequently,
despite late, ideological attempts to reconstruct a continuous
“golden chain” of Neoplatonist exegetes (see, e.g.,
Hierocles, De Providentia, apud Photius cod. 214,
173 a; Proclus, Platonic Theology I, p. 6.16–7.8),
there is no institutional continuity between Plotinus and Iamblichus
and, from this point of view, the situation is obviously different
from that of the ancient Stoa. Iamblichus is not the second founder of
the Neoplatonic school for the simple reason that there is no unitary
Neoplatonic school in Late Antiquity. What scholars call Greek
Neoplatonism is actually a multifaceted philosophical movement that
covers some three centuries and includes several schools scattered
throughout the Roman Empire: these schools certainly shared doctrines
and methods, but their relations were sometimes close, sometimes much
more tenuous. Certainly, Iamblichus accepts and further develops some
distinctive features of Plotinus’ philosophy and he can be seen
as a follower of Plotinus and Porphyry: this holds in particular for
Iamblichus’ general metaphysical and philosophical approach, for
his account of the One and of the first principles, for his exegesis
of some works such as Plato’s Parmenides and
Aristotle’s Categories. On the other hand,
Iamblichus’ original position vis-à-vis Plotinus
and Porphyry emerges clearly with respect to both his theories and his
methods (see Taormina 1999).
One of the most conspicuous of Iamblichus’ contributions to
emerging Neoplatonism regards his views on exegesis. A typical Late
Antique intellectual in this respect, Iamblichus considers the written
work of authoritative figures to be sacred and claims to be a mere
interpreter of their true, deeper meaning (nous).
Four overarching principles govern Iamblichus’ exegetical
practice. First, the idea that every authoritative work is fully
self-consistent and strives to demonstrate a certain thesis which acts
as its “goal” or “target” (skopos).
This principle is applied rigorously: for instance, since the
skopos of the Timaeus is the theory of nature, this
means that even the work’s prologue, however autonomous it may
seem at first glance, should be interpreted in this way (In
Timaeum [D-1973: Fr. 3]). This amounts to considering literary
works living organisms, in accordance with what Plato writes in
Phaedrus 264C (see Coulter 1976: 73). Guidelines to
determining a given work’s skopos are found in a late
anonymous composition, the Prolegomena to Platonic Philosophy
(§§ 21–23).
The same source (§ 26) provides a list of twelve Platonic
dialogues (10 + 2) which, according to Iamblichus, offer an overview
of his philosophy and thus encompass the whole theory of reality. The
list starts with the Alcibiades, taken as an introduction to
philosophy and thought to contain the first ten dialogues, as if it
were a “seed” (In Alcibiadem [D-1973: Fr. 1).
The remaining dialogues are subsequently arranged according to the
different branches of philosophy (as Porphyry had done with
Plotinus’ Enneads), while the Aristotelian distinction
between praxis and theōria is simultaneously
taken into account. Praxis or ethics is exemplified by the
Gorgias and the Phaedo, the former representing
politics, the latter catharsis (in accordance with Iamblichus’
conception of virtues, on which see below,
 Section 7.2).
 Then comes theōria where, as it seems, the
Cratylus and the Theaetetus are taken to provide
Plato’s account of logic (the former teaching names, the latter
concepts); then come the Sophist and the Politicus,
which supposedly deal with physics—however strange this may seem
to us—and finally the Phaedrus and the
Symposium, which deal with theology. The crowning dialogue in
the first cycle is the Philebus, because its skopos
is the all-transcendent Good. Then, as a recapitulation of the first
cycle, we find a second one consisting in only two works (both of
which, remarkably, feature main characters other than Socrates): the
Timaeus and the Parmenides, the former subordinated
to the latter as physics is to theology, although both display a
degree of perfection and thus are expected to embrace the whole of
Plato’s philosophy. This curriculum principle, then, was
supposed to bring an author’s œuvre into
accordance with itself, just as the skopos postulated organic
unity in a single text.
All that was left at this point was to establish harmony between
different authors; and this is where sumphōnia or
“agreement” comes into play. Building on Porphyry’s
efforts (as opposed to Plotinus’ views), Iamblichus fully
integrated Aristotle into Platonism (see
 Section 5
 below); he also took into account Pythagoras and the
pseudo-Pythagorean corpus (see
 Section 4.3).
 References to other schools are scarce and mostly critical.
Iamblichus’ philosophical authorities, then, are Plato,
Aristotle, and the Pythagoreans; they were complemented by several
texts held to be divinely inspired, of which the two most important
ones are the Chaldean Oracles (a second-century collection of
verse oracles which provide a Platonic-influenced revelation mostly
based on the Timaeus, and which develop a dualistic view
about matter and a divine energy called “fire”) and the
pseudo-Orphic Rhapsodies in 24 books. The Chaldean
Oracles at least are known to have been commented upon by
Iamblichus, in a huge commentary comprising at least 28 books
(Damascius, De Principiis II, 1.5–8). (on
Iamblichus’ religious views, see below,
 Section 6.3.)
Iamblichus brought about a shift towards religion and theology in
Neoplatonism which proved crucial for the later development of this
movement and for its Christian appropriation. The Reply to
Porphyry, where Iamblichus rejects Porphyry’s
over-confident intellectualism in theological and religious matters,
is certainly our major source on debates in early Neoplatonism.
Scholars have traditionally described Iamblichus’ stance as
irrational, contrasting it with Plotinus and Porphyry’s rational
and philosophical approach (see Dodds 1951: 285–298). Recent
scholarship, however, has effectively questioned this view (see
Tanaseanu-Döbler 2013). In his Reply to Porphyry (I, 2
[SS-2013: 4.5–5.11]) Iamblichus distinguishes three disciplines,
each with its own distinctive methods: philosophy, theology, and
theurgy. Theurgy certainly goes beyond reason and philosophy, but
Iamblichus’ appeal to theurgy and rituals is based on
sophisticated philosophical views and arguments dealing with the
nature of divine beings and the status of human souls (see below,
 Section 6).
 It would therefore be misleading to draw a strict opposition between
theurgy and rational methods. What is distinctive about Iamblichus
vis-à-vis Plotinian Platonism is the thorough
integration of theological traditions into his account of reality.
This emerges in two related areas. Whether or not he wrote a work by
this title, Iamblichus is the first Neoplatonist to develop a
“Platonic theology” (see Proclus, Platonic
Theology III, 44.1–5 [Saffrey & Westerink
1968–1997]). This approach will be carried further in Athenian
Neoplatonism, especially by Proclus. Plotinus had already connected
the hypotheses about the One in the second part of Plato’s
Parmenides with his distinction of metaphysical principles
(see Enn. V, 1.8). Iamblichus goes one step further in that he
connects the metaphysical reading of this dialogue with the gods of
the Greek pantheon. His interpretation of Plato’s
Parmenides can therefore be described not only as
“metaphysical” but also as “theological”. In
addition to this, Iamblichus provides a harmonising account of the
different theological traditions, again paving the way for the later
developments in Athenian Neoplatonism (see below,
 Section 3.2).
 In his Reply to Porphyry Iamblichus establishes a triad of
foundational traditions: the Egyptian, the Chaldaic and the Greek,
represented by the philosophical wisdom of Pythagoras and Plato. The
term “Chaldaic” refers to the Chaldaean Oracles
(see above,
 Section 2.2).
 The extant evidence suggests that Plotinus and Porphyry accorded
limited significance to the Oracles which, instead, become a
crucial source for Iamblichus: he wrote an extensive commentary on
this work and the revealed Platonizing theology of the
Oracles is an integral part of his thought. The Egyptian
tradition is represented by the so-called Hermetic books and,
according to Iamblichus, this is the genuine source of Greek
philosophy (Reply to Porphyry I, 2 [SS-2013:
4.7–9]).
Iamblichus’ philosophical stance is connected to some views
which separate him from Plotinus and Porphyry and lay the ground for
later Neoplatonism, in particular that of Proclus and of the so-called
Athenian school of the fifth and sixth century AD. These views
concern: the status of embodied souls (according to Iamblichus there
is no superior part of our soul which resides in intelligible being);
the role of religious acts revealed by the gods to enable the
soul’s ascension to the intelligible realm (as already noted,
for Iamblichus, philosophical and intellectual contemplation alone are
not sufficient and theurgy is necessary); a harmonising account of the
various theological traditions and the privileged role assigned to
Pythagoras and to the Chaldaean Oracles; an account of
principles and of the metaphysical hierarchy which, while based on
Plotinus’ and Porphyry’s doctrines, includes more degrees
and intermediate levels; and, finally, a tendency towards
scholasticism and the systematization of exegetical methods.
A picture of Late Antique philosophy jumping from Iamblichus to
Proclus would however be misleading. Actually, more than one century
separates Iamblichus’ death from the foundation of the
Neoplatonist school at Athens by Plutarch of Athens. Some crucial
details escape us: for example, we don’t even know how and when
Iamblichus’ teaching entered the philosophical schools in Athens
(Goulet 2012). In addition to this, Iamblichus’ posterity in the
fourth century does not suggest that his philosophical approach was
immediately and unanimously followed. Praechter (1910) regarded those
disciples of Iamblichus’ who settled in Pergamon, gathering
around Iamblichus’ student Aedesius, as forming a school (the
“school of Pergamon”), where rational methods were
abandoned in favor of theurgy and religious practices. In addition,
these philosophers are sometimes regarded as forming an ideologically
engaged Pagan group threatened by Christian persecution after
Constantine. Such views are somewhat oversimplistic. Our main source
for reconstructing this phase of Neoplatonism is Eunapius’
Lives of Philosophers and Sophists (Goulet 2014). As already
noted, Eunapius is a tendentious source, with his own hagiographical
agenda and with little taste for philosophical technicalities.
Whatever we make of this, he says that Iamblichus’ students
formed a large crowd and that those who were eager to learn flocked to
him from all parts (see Eunapius Lives VI, 4 [Goulet 2014:
12–14]). This and other passages suggest that Pagan
philosophical teaching definitely did not go underground under and
after Constantine (the elite of the Roman Empire was still largely
Pagan at that time). Eunapius’ list of Iamblichus’
students confirms the echo of his teaching: the list includes Sopater
the Syrian (see above,
 Section 1.1),
 Aedesius, Eustathius from Cappadocia, Theodorus, and Euphrasius (see
Eunapius Lives V, 5 [Goulet 2014: 12.14–20]). Among
these, Theodorus is likely to coincide with Theodorus of Asine who,
while being a student of Iamblichus, is said to have held different
philosophical views and reverted to an intellectualist Platonism of
the Plotinian sort. Aedesius’ school too certainly hosted
different positions and internal debates. So Eusebius of Myndus was a
member of that school, but apparently held an attitude closer to that
of Plotinus and he was inclined to reject theurgical and magical
practices. On the other hand, theurgy was adopted by Aedesius’
Iamblichean disciples such as Chrysanthius of Sardis, Maximus of
Ephesus, and Priscus of Thesprotia. Maximus and Priscus were
charismatic figures who are mainly known as masters and counsellors of
the Emperor Julian (Julian studied philosophy at Pergamon around 350).
Iamblichus’ teaching actually forms the philosophical background
of Julian’s project of restoration of Paganism, as shown by
Julian’s own writings and by the short treatise On the Gods
and the Cosmos by one Salustius (possibly Saturninius Secundus
Salutius, a dignitary at Julian’s court). It is worth noting,
however, that even committed theurgists like Maximus did not abandon
rational methods (we know about Maximus’ work on
Aristotle’s Categories and Prior Analytics).
In addition to internal debates among Iamblichus’ disciples,
fourth-century philosophy includes an overtly anti-Iamblichean trend.
This is the case with Themistius (orator, commentator of Aristotle and
authoritative member of the Senate in Constantinople), who did not
endorse Iamblichus’ philosophy and did not show any sympathy for
his theurgic and Pythagorean teaching. He actually sharply criticizes
the new philosophical approach represented by the “man of
Chalcis” (an allusion to Iamblichus: see Themistius,
Or. 23, 295b). Themistius engaged in a controversy with
Maximus of Ephesus over Aristotle’s logic in Constantinople,
where Julian acted as arbiter (Ammonius, In Analytica Priora., p.
31.11–23).
Furthermore, Themistius regarded the Pythagorean Archytas’
treatise on the categories as spurious and argued that the author was
not a Pythagorean at all (Boethius, In Categorias, PL 64, 162 A).
By doing so Themistius actually removed the main support for
Iamblichus’ Pythagorean and metaphysical reading of Aristotle.
Iamblichus’ philosophy, then, was only gradually accepted and it
was regarded with both consensus and disagreement in its immediate
posterity. Certainly, Iamblichus’ philosophical approach did not
entail any abandonment of rational methods, not even among those who
enthusiastically embraced theurgy.
As a general rule, Iamblichus’ system is best characterized as a
refined version of Plotinus’. Building on hierarchical hints
already present in the Enneads as well as the work of his own
teacher Porphyry, Iamblichus set about producing a far more complex
picture of reality, while keeping the same fundamental patterns in
place.
Iamblichus’ account of the One is difficult to ascertain, since
the crucial testimony (Damascius, De principiis II,
1.4–16.19 Combès & Westerink) is somewhat oblique. What
lies beyond doubt is that Iamblichus reacted against Porphyry’s
introduction of a first principle “coordinated” with the
Intelligible Triad by positing two levels above it: on the one hand, a
“wholly unspeakable principle”—which Theodorus of
Asine and Damascius incorporated into their own theology, although
Proclus did not: on the subject, see Linguiti 1988—and, on the
other hand, a principle “uncoordinated with the triad”. In
this respect, Iamblichus seems to have wished to distinguish between
two almost contradictory aspects of the first principle: its
transcendence with respect to everything else (negative theology),
i.e., absoluteness in a literal sense; and its causative aspect
(cataphatic theology). Iamblichus, then, appears to have conceived of
his “unspeakable principle” as a safeguard against any
objection based on indefinite regress in the chain of causes, while
the principle that is “uncoordinated to the triad” is akin
to Plotinus’ One, insofar as it lies above the Intellect.
Below the One is located the intelligible triad of Limit, the
Unlimited, and the One-Being. This arrangement shows the influence of
Plato’s Philebus 16C (with the uncoordinated One as the
Cause, and the One-Being as the mikton): this is accounted
for in Van Riel 2008. Damascius assimilates this sequence to another
one attributed to “the Pythagoreans”: Monad-Dyad-Triad,
and, ultimately, to the system of principles inferred from the
Chaldean Oracles: Father-Power-Intellect. It is likely that
the same interpretation was already to be found in Iamblichus, given
that both Pythagoras and the Chaldeans rank high in his list of
authorities.
Whether Iamblichus introduced the doctrine of “henads”
into the teachings of the Neoplatonic School remains controversial
(see Mesyats 2012; Opsomer in Opsomer et al. 2018: 1365–1366). The henads
(literally “unities”) are the very first plurality
emanating from the One: since they are located beyond Being itself,
they are meant to bridge the gap between the absolute One and the
intelligible world. Iamblichean authorship of this theory would make
it predate Syrianus and Proclus—its first explicit
proponents—by almost a century, and indeed several hints point
in that direction, in particular the fact that, according to Proclus,
Iamblichus identified “God and the gods” as the subject of
the first hypothesis of Plato’s Parmenides. These
“gods” might be self-sufficient items located right below
the One and, judging by the—admittedly very
allusive—testimonies of Proclus (references in Saffrey &
Westerink 1968–1997: III, pp. XVII–XXVI) and Damascius,
might indifferently be called “henads” or
“intelligible gods”, in contradiction with Syrianus’
and Proclus’ later terminological distinctions.
There is also another hint in support of this interpretation.
Damascius explicitly states that according to Iamblichus divinity is
closely correlated to degrees of unity: the intelligible gods are
“crystallised, as it were, around the One” (De
principiis II, 36.17). According to this conception, the higher a
god is situated on the scale of reality, the more
“unified” and undifferentiated it is, and the less
accessible to the intellect and to conceptual knowledge: one can only
know such realities by resorting to intuition. This doctrine is hinted
at in various passages of Iamblichus’ Reply to Porphyry
(where unity, “friendship”—philia—and
goodness are all described as fundamental attributes of the gods:
“whatever Being might be in them, this is equivalent to their
unity”, I, 19 [SS-2013: 45.8–10]) and is also compatible
with his stressing the fact that knowledge of the gods is innate,
lying as it does within the heart of every individual (I, 3 [SS-2013:
5.14–20]). From an historical point of view, this gradual
diffusion of unity also represents a major contribution to the
representation of reality as a continuum, thereby somewhat bridging
the rift that, following Plotinus, had emerged between the One and the
Intellect. “Unification” too (henōsis) also
becomes a key philosophical term, and this opens up the possibility of
an anti-intellectual slant, as can be found in a famous extract of the
Reply to Porphyry (II, 11 [SS-2013: 73.1–16]).
Iamblichus’ best-known philosophical doctrine might be the
distinction he introduced between the “intelligible”
(noēton) and the “intellective”
(noeron). Before Iamblichus, noeron—not a very
common word before the second century A.D.—was used to refer to
any thinking entity, and Porphyry employs it mostly in association
with the soul. From Iamblichus onwards, it becomes a technical term
which exclusively designates the order of gods located right below the
Intelligible, and endowed with demiurgic functions. The word is found
with such a meaning in fourth-century authors in the tradition of
Iamblichus, such as the emperor Julian and Salustius.
The idea of distinguishing “seen” and “seeing”
principles (objects and subjects of intellectual knowledge) dates back
to the early interpretation of Plato’s Timaeus, where
the Demiurge appears to behold a Model located outside himself in
order to gather from it all the data necessary for the creation of the
Cosmos: Middle Platonists thus used to distinguish between the
Demiurge, Ideas, and Matter. As opposed to, e.g., Longinus (see Syrianus, In Metaphysica, 105.25–28),
Plotinus had decisively argued that
intelligibles are actually not to be found outside the Intellect.
Iamblichus instead falls back on more traditional positions and
expressly subordinates the Demiurge to the Intelligible Model. As, on
the other hand, Iamblichus follows Plotinus’ steps in developing
a doctrine of the One, this results in the Demiurge now being assigned
a secondary rank, as he is surpassed by a plethora of other deities,
including the Intelligible Model (In Timaeum [D-1973: Fr.
42–46]). He is but the third member of the
“paternal” triad, itself part of a larger
“intellective” Hebdomad (Proclus, In Timaeum I,
308.17–309.13: compare this triad to Fr. 4 [D-1973] In
Philebum = Damascius, In Philebum § 105). From this
point onwards, until the closing of the Neoplatonic schools,
identifying the Demiurge with the First Principle is out of the
question.
On the other hand, Iamblichus fully embraces Plotinus’ idea that
intelligibles are endowed with life, power, activity etc. and
therefore multiplicity (at least implicitly). This allows him to
superpose the divine names found in theology (Orpheus, the Chaldeans,
and the dialogues of Plato dealing with the intelligible) upon a
conceptual armature: for instance, the Platonic Demiurge is to be
identified with the Zeus of the Hellenic tradition. This effort
reveals itself most conspicuously in Julian, and will find its
crowning in Proclus’ Platonic Theology. As a general
rule, to every philosophical concept in the intelligible world there
corresponds some divine level or entity: the idea of such a
correspondence and its application to the sequence of predicates
present in the hypotheses of Plato’s Parmenides is
generally assigned to Proclus’ master Syrianus, but several
hints suggest that it was actually introduced by Iamblichus. One
explicit instance of such a term-to-term correspondence is the
localization of the genera of Being within the intellective order
rather than the intelligible one, because of the former’s higher
degree of multiplicity (Proclus, Platonic Theology I,
52.2–13). This important doctrine implies that the Demiurgic
intellect is now conceived as some kind of “container” of
all intelligible ideas, with the reservation that it is less unified
than the Model is.
Through a comparison between Julian and Proclus (see Lecerf 2012), one
may conclude that Iamblichus had conceived of a variety of Demiurges,
the main one (identified with Zeus) acting as a principle or
“monad” for the others. While Zeus creates the world insofar as it is governed by rational laws and populated with beings
pertaining to species and genera (themselves of intelligible nature),
other demiurgic entities are tasked with informing matter and bodies
(which undergo a process of generation and corruption) according to
such laws.
Iamblichus already uses the terminology “hypercosmic” vs.
“encosmic” or “pericosmic” (e.g., Reply to
Porphyry VIII, 8 [SS-2013: 200.25–27]), inherited from
Middle Platonism but destined to become technical in later
Neoplatonism. In anticipation of this later use, they are meant to
bridge the gap between the Demiurge and the sublunar realm, although
their exact role remains unclear (the aforementioned passage speaks of
the help they give to souls in their ascent). Such lower entities seem
to be produced according to a geometric progression (cf. In
Timaeum [D-1973: Fr. 79]). The terminological continuity allows
one to conceive of Iamblichus’ system as the matrix for later
variations, particularly Proclus’ one, although it is to be
noted that no text bears witness to the presence of Proclus’
intermediate “intelligible-intellective” and
“hypercosmic-encosmic” levels in Iamblichus.
The hierarchies of “higher genera” will be considered in
 Section 6.1.
Iamblichus’ notion of Nature displays little originality when
compared to that of other Neoplatonists. It acts as a productive power
for cosmic beings, originating in the celestial gods (Reply to
Porphyry III, 28 [SS-2013: 127.2–12]), but it does not act
according to reason. This ambiguity explains why, depending on the
context, it can be considered either a positive entity, insofar as it
is part of a reality governed by Providence, or a deceitful, almost
evil force, a view strongly influenced by the Chaldean
Oracles (see, e.g., V, 18 [SS-2013: 166.18–24]): it comes as no surprise
that, in this respect, Nature is also closely associated with Fate.
The same ambivalence is to be found with regard to astrology, which
Iamblichus deems useful, yet not the best way to determine the
identity of our personal daimōn (IX, 4–5 [SS-2013:
205.1–207.9]).
Matter also displays both these traits—integration into the
world order and a connection with corporeality and evil.
Iamblichus’ Reply to Porphyry is replete with allusions
to matter as a taint and source of corruption: “what is mixed
with the irrationality and darkness associated with bodies and matter
is overcome with ignorance” (VI, 4 [SS-2013: 182.7–10]).
By contrast, “divine fire” strives to eradicate
materiality and generation (V, 12 [SS-2013: 161.2]). In such passages,
Iamblichus inherits the strongly negative views on matter developed by
Middle Platonists such as Numenius and further developed by Plotinus.
However, a testimony from John Lydus (De Mensibus
175.1–176.7 Wünsch) states, apropos Matter, that “nothing imperfect
stems from the paternal (i.e., demiurgic) triad”. Thus the
possibility of a monistic interpretation remains open: this evidence
is studied by Taormina (2016). Accordingly, several testimonies (e.g.,
Simplicius, In Categorias 418.3–8) also state that Iamblichus attributed no real existence
to Evil, only a parhupostasis.
Iamblichus’ work exerted a very profound influence on the
subsequent course of Neoplatonic philosophy. In particular, he stands
out as an important theologian owing to the shift he brought about
with respect to Plotinianism. With Iamblichus, Plotinus’
economical approach to metaphysical principles was developed into
full-fledged metaphysical laws: in this respect, Iamblichus emerges as
a remote forerunner of Medieval scholasticism. He himself vindicated a
“scientific theology” (Reply to Porphyry I, 4
[SS-2013: 10.18]) and established a canon of texts that gave it the
justification of tradition. 
Perhaps the most conspicuous trait of Iamblichean metaphysics is its
highly vertical conception of causality. For Iamblichus, an effect
does not enjoy any ontological independence with respect to its cause:
anything it adds amounts to failure and nothingness. This idea
predates Iamblichus, but he was the first Pagan philosopher to apply
it with absolute consistency. Most of his system follows from this one
axiom, particularly his doctrine of the soul (see
 Section 6).
 The principles’ supervision always lurks in the background:
see, e.g., the idea that the intelligible gods “contain”
the visible gods (i.e., planets; Reply to Porphyry I, 19
[SS-2013: 45.14–20]). The idea of the vacuity of effects leads
to the notion that their sole purpose is to render themselves apt to
receive the influx of their causes: Iamblichus calls this
epitēdeiotēs or “receptivity”. This
process of adaptation accounts for most of the diversity in the
phenomenal world. Another important law states that “everything
is in everything according to its property”: Damascius ascribes
it to both Iamblichus and Porphyry (In Philebum § 130 =
Iamblichus In Philebum [D-1973: Fr. 5]). The last words are the
most important: superior beings keep their prerogatives in spite of
the existence of a universal homology, which means for example that
causes are present to their effects as causes, i.e., are not
encompassed by them or relegated to their status. In this way,
Iamblichus manages to preserve at the same time the benefits of divine
immanence (the world is not abandoned by the gods) and the requirement
of divine transcendence, which he feels the need to constantly affirm,
lest he be accused of debasing divinity.
Iamblichus’ programme of a scientific theology is based on newly
developed terminology, of which we have already seen several examples.
It also relies on new structures such as divine orders
(diakosmoi, taxeis), a notion foreign to Plotinus.
Their proliferation does not bother Iamblichus in the least, since
centrifugal tendencies are curbed by constantly reasserting the
fundamental unity of reality. This is provided for through the return
of the same processes in a more or less absolute form (for instance,
what exists in a unified manner in the universal Paradigm as a whole
appears again in individual paradigms, yet only partially: see In
Timaeum [D-1973: Fr. 43]). Recurring metaphysical laws serve the
same purpose, as do schemes such as the regrouping of divine entities
in accordance with meaningful numbers, e.g., triads, a structure that
adequately accounts for uni-multiplicity in reality since it treats as
one single process the succession of an immobile first state
(monē), a dynamic procession (proodos) and a
return or “conversion” to the first element
(epistrophē; see In Timaeum [D-1973: Fr. 53]).
Triads are thus a prime example of what modern commentators have named
the “law of mean-terms”, i.e., the need for a tertium
quid to provide a mediation between two levels. Continuity is
thereby introduced in the picture, although the latter remains
resolutely holistic. The whole stands in relation to its parts as a
cause to its effect: in this sense, it may be said that Iamblichus
created and almost deified the Neoplatonic system as a unified and
coherent account of reality, avoiding any recourse to dualism.
As we have seen, Iamblichus posited at the top of his system, below
the One but above the Intelligible—and thus at a supra-essential
level—the dual principles of Limit (peras) and the
Unlimited (or Infinite: apeiron). These principles belong to
the Pythagorean tradition (see, e.g., Philolaus Fr. 1 Huffman and
Nicomachus, Introduction to Arithmetic II, 18, 4), although the main catalysts
responsible for their integration into the Neoplatonic system were two
indirect accounts, Plato’s Philebus (see above,
 Section 3.1)
 and Aristotle, Metaphysics Α, 5 (987a15–19):
(the Pythagoreans) thought that finitude and infinity were not
attributes of certain other things, e.g., of fire or earth or anything
else of this kind, but that infinity itself and unity itself were the
substance of the things of which they are predicated (trans. Ross).
Closer to Iamblichus, one must also mention the precedent of Eudorus
of Alexandria (apud Simplicius, In Phys.
118.22–28), as well as Plotinus’ acknowledgment of
something apeiron within the Intellect (Ennead II, 4
[12]).
The importance of this Pythagoreanizing slant can hardly be
overstated. In agreement with Iamblichus’ vertical conception of
reality, it means that everything below this dyad is to be regarded as
a mix of determination and indetermination: and this includes gods, as
well as Forms such as those contained within the Model, some of which
are claimed to partake in movement and alterity (see In
Timaeum [D-1973: Fr. 46]), while less elaborate versions of
Platonism would rather view them as solely determinate, viz.
thinkable. In a text from Simplicius’ commentary on the
Categories (135.10–16 [DL-1972: Fr. 37]), the
productive capacity of the One appears to reflect these two
dimensions: 
Since the power of the One, from which all quantity is generated, is
extended unchanged … and gives definition to each thing as it
proceeds from itself, in that it pervades the whole in an entirely
undivided manner, it brings the continuous into being, by making its
progression single and uninterrupted …: but in that it comes to
a halt in its progression at each of the forms and defines each
… it brings about the discrete (trans. Fleet).
Consequently, Iamblichus came to the conclusion that all things
partake in opposition, a phenomenon most conspicuous in the sublunary
world, as the philosopher notes in the context of an allegorical
exegesis of the prologue to Plato’s Timaeus (In
Timaeum [D-1973: Fr. 10]). Thus, it appears that
Iamblichus’ goal in introducing the Limit–Unlimited pair
was to account for the genesis of multiplicity and alterity, Limit
providing definition and intelligibility, while the Unlimited enables
infinite flux and iteration within all individual items partaking of
the same form: this interpretation is, at any rate, in line with the
epitēdeiotēs or “receptivity” axiom
(see
 Section 3.5
 above), which states that the effect receives the causal influx
according to what it is itself, and thus always imperfectly. This may
be seen as Iamblichus’ equivalent of Plotinus’
intellectual vitalism (the notion that the intelligible world is
intrinsically active, being Life itself): it allows for considerable
metaphysical dynamism. To be sure, Limit retains axiological
precedence over the Unlimited, but indetermination can no longer be
conceived of as a mere by-product of matter’s resistance to
form. Rather, while it is true that higher principles are more
characterized by Limit and lower ones by the Unlimited, each and every
thing reflects, to some extent, both of these principles.
Limit and the Unlimited are also principles active among mathematical
entities (On General Mathematical Science, chap. 13). Here
they play a role similar to that of the pairs Monad and Dyad, Odd and
Even, or Same and Other according to Nicomachus of Gerasa, the
neo-Pythagorean author of the Introduction to Arithmetic and
one of Iamblichus’ intellectual heroes; similar pairs studied by
the mathematical sciences are “continuous” and
“discrete” (sunekhes, diōrismenon),
“magnitude” and “plurality”
(megethos, plēthos: cf. Nicomachus,
Intr. arith. I, 2, 4–5), all of which concur
to form a dynamic picture of reality. The four mathematical
sciences—arithmetic, which takes precedence over the others;
geometry, music and astronomy—each study a corresponding kind of
being, and were the object of On Pythagoreanism vol. IV and
VIII–X respectively (see the plan of the work as outlined by
O’Meara 1989).
Iamblichus’ interest in mathematics is part of a larger trend
that includes authors such as Theon of Smyrna and Calcidius, but
excludes Plotinus and, to a lesser extent, Porphyry. For Iamblichus,
mathematics is both a scientific discipline and concerns a realm of
being, intermediate between the intelligible and the sensible: the
latter view is influenced by Aristotelian ontology as well as by the
Platonic analogy of the Line (Republic, 509d–511e), but
with the Pythagorean proviso that mathematical entities “exist
in themselves” and that each number possesses a distinct
essence.
The study of mathematics allows the soul to disengage itself from the
material world, thus providing a starting point towards higher being.
More interestingly, mathematics is assigned symbolic significance in a
variety of fields: vol. V–VII of On Pythagoreanism (now
lost) dealt with the mathematical teachings that can be drawn
concerning ethics, physics and theology respectively (the anonymous
Theologoumena arithmeticae might provide some insight into
Iamblichus’ view of the relation between arithmetic and
theology, as they include extensive quotes from Nicomachus as well as
Iamblichus’ first teacher Anatolius). Mathematics is therefore
versatile and multivalent in its essence (see, e.g., On General
Mathematical Science, chap. 15; 18), and thus closely associated
with the soul (ibid., chap. 9). It is also very likely that
Syrianus’ distinction of various types of
“number”—in descending order: eidetic, mathematical,
physical, cf., e.g., In Metaphysica
122.11–16—stems from Iamblichean teachings.
Iamblichus’ writings on mathematics were influential, and are
used, e.g., in Syrianus’ commentary on the Metaphysics
and Proclus’ commentary on Euclid. His views on the
quadrivium, drawing upon Nicomachus, were also adopted by
Martianus Capella and Boethius, and through them became an integral
part of education in the Middle Ages.
While Iamblichus took great pains to study mathematics in detail, its
true meaning, according to him, is not of a “technical”
nature: rather, it is meant to constitute a form of philosophical
ascesis:
If we intend to practice mathematics in a Pythagorean
manner, it is necessary to pursue with zeal its divinely inspired,
elevating, purifying and perfective way. (On General
Mathematical Science, chap. 22)
Indeed, as part of his sumphōnia programme, Iamblichus
strove to fully integrate Pythagorean teaching into the Hellenic
dogmatic tradition, making Pythagoras the recipient of a divine
revelation handed down by Orpheus through the mysterious figure of
“Aglaophamus” (De Vita Pythagorica 146). Book II
of On Pythagoreanism, the Protrepticus, while using
a variety of sources, also taps into the Pythagorean repertoire with
wisdom texts such as the Golden Verses. Building on the then
widely accepted axiom that the truth had already been revealed in
remote times and then merely reformulated—if not
twisted—by recent writers, he accepted as authoritative the
pseudo-Pythagorean corpus for which he (along with Stobaeus, who knew
the Iamblichean œuvre quite well) is one of our main
sources: on Iamblichus’ library of Pythagorean texts, see Macris
2002. Iamblichus made the most conspicuous use of these texts in his
lost Commentary on the Categories, where ps.-Archytas’
On the All was repeatedly quoted as the source of the
Aristotelian treatise (see below,
 Section 5.1).
In order to assess Iamblichus’ reliability as a witness of
ancient Pythagoreanism, one has to take into account a variety of
factors, including his attitude towards the information available to
him (ranging from literal dependence to creative elaboration for his
own ideological and systematic purposes). This is crucial, since the
Pythagorean Life in particular is one of our major sources on
this subject (for details, see the studies collected in Huffman 2014;
von Albrecht et al. 2002).
Iamblichus wrote an extensive commentary on the Categories,
fragments of which have been preserved by Simplicius and Dexippus (a
student of Iamblichus): in addition to literal quotes, Iamblichus is
behind much of Simplicius’ extant exegesis of this treatise. We
also have evidence that Iamblichus wrote a commentary on
Aristotle’s Prior Analytics and we know about his
exegetical work on the De interpretatione and the De
caelo (see Opsomer 2015). From the first century BC onwards,
Platonist philosophers had been familiar with Aristotle’s
Categories: Platonists such as Eudorus of Alexandria and
Nicostratus raised objections against Aristotle’s doctrine;
Plotinus wrote a very important treatise On the Genera of
Being, where he critically discussed Aristotle’s categories
(Ennead VI, 1–3). To the best of our knowledge,
however, no Platonist wrote a commentary on Aristotle’s
Categories before Porphyry, who was the author of two
commentaries on this treatise: a short and extant elucidation in a
question-and-answer format and a very extensive commentary in seven
books dedicated to someone called Gedalius, which is now lost. In
addition, Porphyry wrote an introduction to logic, the
Isagoge, which is closely connected to the
Categories. With Porphyry, then, Aristotle’s
Categories became an integral part of the Platonist
curriculum and this was a crucial move for the subsequent history of
Late Antique and medieval philosophy. As is often the case,
Iamblichus’ exegetical work relies on Porphyry but introduces
some changes which are probably aimed to supplement (and possibly
supplant) Porphyry’s approach. Simplicius informs us that
Iamblichus followed the great and now lost commentary written by
Porphyry, while adding two distinctive features. First Iamblichus
“applied his Intellective Theory (noera theōria)
everywhere, to almost all of the chapter-headings” (Simplicius,
In Categorias, 2.13–15 [DL-1972: Fr. 2], trans. Chase; see
Dillon 1997). Iamblichus employs the same expression, noera
theōria in the opening section of the Reply to
Porphyry (I, 2 [SS-2013: 4.16]), in a passage where he
characterizes the mode of inquiry that is typical of theology.
Secondly, Iamblichus took Archytas’ treatise On the All
to be Aristotle’s source and he developed a thoroughly
Pythagorising interpretation of the Categories (Simplicius,
In Categorias, 2.15–25 [DL-1972: Fr. 2]; see Hoffmann 1980).
Archytas’ treatise is actually a forgery which scholars now date
to the first century BC. Iamblichus, however, took it to be a genuine
work by Archytas and in doing so he claimed a Pythagorean origin for
Aristotle’s theory. To sum up, Iamblichus’ exegesis of the
Categories was an integral part of his Pythagorean
philosophical programme and in interpreting the Categories
Iamblichus made use of his metaphysical and theological views.
Apparently, Iamblichus pushed his reading of Aristotle along
Platonic/Pythagorean lines so far that (as later sources report) he
did not refrain from assuming that Aristotle was not opposed to Plato
on the theory of Ideas (see Elias/David, In Categorias,
123.2–3).
Iamblichus’ interpretation characteristically included a
definition of the “target” (skopos) of
Aristotle’s treatise, which Iamblichus regarded as focusing on
signifying expressions insofar as they signify things via concepts
(see Hoffmann 1987). This view was not new and Simplicius traces it
back to the previous tradition starting from the early Peripatetic
commentators (Simplicius, In Categorias, 13.15–18).
Iamblichus, however, added two distinctive features. First, he gave a
more systematic account of the target of Aristotle’s treatise
(for example, Porphyry too claimed that Aristotle’s
Categories focus on simple signifying expressions insofar as
they signify things, but to the best of our knowledge he did not refer
to concepts). In addition to this, Iamblichus’ discussion of
semantics incorporated a Neoplatonist account of language and
signification grounded in Neoplatonic metaphysics and psychology
(Simplicius, In Categorias, 12.16–13.12: see Griffin 2012).
Iamblichus referred to analogy (analogia) as a resource that
explains how Aristotle’s account of categories can be applied to
intelligible beings too. For example, Simplicius reports that
according to Iamblichus the property of being receptive of contraries
while being one and the same in number (see Arist., Cat., 5,
4a10–11) applies to all levels of substance (both sensible and
intelligible) via analogy (kata analogian, Simpl., In
Categorias, 116.25–26 [DL-1972: Fr. 33]): in intelligible
substance contraries belong to substance simultaneously whereas in
sensible substance they exist successively. Accordingly, different
levels of being reveal corresponding structures (where lower degrees
in the hierarchy entail increasing multiplicity and dispersion). This
metaphysical framework accounts for Iamblichus’ views about
genera and predication. Iamblichus is critical of the previous
Peripatetic tradition: he criticizes Alexander of Aphrodisias for
mistakenly regarding corporeal and incorporeal beings as species
ranked under the same genus (that of substance, ousia)
(Simplicius, In Categorias, 83.20–23 [DL-1972: Fr. 24]).
Iamblichus’ point is that the Peripatetic reading of the
Categories does not account for the hierarchical structure of
reality. On Iamblichus’ view, full weight should instead be
given to the hierarchical notion of the genus as a unity of derivation
from a principle (actually the genus is both the principle itself and
the hierarchy of items depending on it). This structure does not
entail that levels ranked in the same genus share any common item.
Rather, different and hierarchically ordered levels are connected via
analogy, so that lower items mirror higher ones while not sharing any
common item with them. Analogy, then, allows Iamblichus to combine two
complementary aspects of his metaphysics: on the one hand the vertical
hierarchy that separates different levels of beings, on the other hand
the continuity that connects these different levels together within a
unified whole. Iamblichus’ approach emerges in his account of
essential or synonymous predication (the predication of items within
the same category). Porphyry argued that in this kind of predication
subject and predicate denote two different items, the
akatakakton (uncoordinated or unallocated) and the
katatetagmenon (coordinated or allocated) (Simplicius, In
Categorias, 53.6–9; 79.24–30). The meaning of these
expressions is debated. The “allocated genus” is to be
identified with the in re universal shared by particulars;
the unallocated may be either the separated and Platonic ante
rem universal or the abstracted and post rem universal
concept. Whatever we make of Porphyry’s view, Iamblichus started
from Porphyry’s exegesis and gave a different slant to it (see
Chiaradonna 2007). In doing so Iamblichus suggested that
Aristotle’s essential predication is a way of expressing the
participation of corporeal beings in their transcendent genera
(Simplicius, In Categorias, 53.9–18 [DL-1972: Fr. 16]). More
precisely, “Socrates is man” would be a way of expressing
the fact that the corporeal Socrates participates in the transcendent
Form of Man. Separate genera provide the basis for essential
predication, though they are not properly predicated in themselves
(what is predicated is rather the participated item). Interestingly,
Iamblichus refers to the technical notion of ptōsis
(“case”), which is associated with Aristotle’s
account of paronymy in the Categories: a ptōsis
is an inflected form of a term (such as “grammatical” or
“courageous”) which is paronymous with the noun form and

derives from it (“grammatical” and

“courageous” are both adjectival forms which derive from
“grammar” and “courage” respectively). So
Iamblichus held that in the predicative statement “Socrates is
man”, “man” improperly occurs in the predication
instead of its ptōsis: Iamblichus is probably referring
here to an adjectival construction like “human”. Such a
paronymous form would correctly refer to the participation of Socrates
in his transcendent Form. Simplicius informs us too that Iamblichus
focused on Aristotle’s account of motion and activity: Plotinus
had criticized Aristotle for not regarding motion as a single category
and had argued that motion in sensible beings is a form of complete
activity (Simplicius, In Categorias, 303.35–306.12 [DL-1972:
Fr. 86]). Iamblichus rejects Plotinus’ account and aims to
integrate Aristotle’s account of sensible motion as
“incomplete actuality” into a Platonist philosophical
framework (see Taormina 1999: chap. III).
Iamblichus’ exegesis of the Categories (in particular
his account of genera of hierarchical structures and his use of
analogy) sheds light on other areas of his philosophy and forms the
background of Iamblichus’ criticism of Porphyry’s account
of divine hierarchy in the Reply to Porphyry (Chiaradonna
2018). There Iamblichus rejects Porphyry’s account of divine
hierarchy as misleading, since Porphyry regarded classes of divine
beings as species ranked under the same genus and determined by
“properties” (idiōmata) that act as specific
differentiae (Reply to Porphyry, I, 4 [SS-2013:
7.21–8.6]). In so doing, Porphyry ruins the very idea of
hierarchy: divine comes to be a common genus which is
predicated of all of its species, in the same way as animal
is predicated of (say) horse and dog. Against
Porphyry, Iamblichus calls for a qualified use of logical notions
which makes the hierarchical relation between different classes of
divine beings clear. Each level differs from the others as a whole and
not in the same way as different species are divided under the same
common genus. As said above, in his interpretation of the
Categories Iamblichus argued that the genus is a hierarchical
relation in which items from different levels are analogically
connected to their origin. This can be set in parallel with what
Iamblichus says in the Reply to Porphyry: 
But if one were to apply an analogical principle of identity to
different genera, for example to the many genera of gods, and again to
those among the demons and heroes, and lastly in the case of souls,
then one might succeed in defining their specific characteristics.
(Reply to Porphyry, I, 4 [SS-2013: 10.25–11.4], trans.
CDH-2003)
According to Iamblichus, “soul” is but the last and
weakest link in the chain of “higher genera”
(kreittona genē). In the Reply to Porphyry,
those entities are enumerated in full:
gods—archangels—angels—demons—heroes—archons
ruling the world—enmattered archons—souls. This is a token
of Iamblichus’ receptiveness towards the religious speculation
of his day, although most of this theological bestiary was in fact
already present in Porphyry’s Letter to Anebo.
Iamblichus’ acceptance of “evil demons” (cf.
O’Neill 2018) is particularly interesting, since it seems to
undermine Iamblichus’ monism and providentialism, and is best
explained as reflecting the influence of the Chaldean
Oracles.
In contradistinction with the gods, the soul receives a plethora of
negative traits: it is imperfect, intermittent, it leans towards
matter; and while the causes of Order and Beauty exist in full
communion with the gods, the soul can never be given more than a mere
share of it (Reply to Porphyry I, 6–7 [SS-2013:
15.14–17.7]). The immutability of this celestial hierarchy is
striking, and foreshadows the later works of Hierocles, Proclus, and
pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite. Although the soul’s
versatility—its ability to “make use of varied forms and
life-principles”—allows it to attach itself to superior
beings and lay claim “to receiving perfection as an angelic,
immaculate soul” (Reply to Porphyry II, 2 [SS-2013:
51.10–52.11]), on closer reading it appears to be unable to
escape its condition by virtue of its own essence: its ascent is never
complete (it is an endeavor, ephesis or
henōsis, with a suffix expressing verbal action) and it
presupposes, moreover, the gods’ “goodwill and
illumination”. Porphyry had previously drawn a similar
distinction between demons that are so “by essence”
(kat’ ousian) or by mere “relation”
(kata skhesin), the latter being those humans who, by virtue
of their excellent life, are allotted demonic status. On the other
hand, the human soul is also unable to be relegated to the rank of
animals via metempsychosis (cf. the title of one of Iamblichus’
psychological works preserved by Nemesius of Emesa, On the Nature
of Man, chap. 2, p. 35.7–11 Morani). Some points, however,
remain unclear, such as how exactly Iamblichus’ generic
distinction between human souls and “divine” ones would
fit within such a structure; or what we are to make of the souls of
exceptional, even semi-divine characters such as Pythagoras or the
theurgists. Similar preoccupations underlie Frs. 82 and 83 In
Timaeum [D-1973], interpreting Timaeus 41d.
Lastly and perhaps most importantly, the soul is irremediably inferior
to the intellect. Rejecting any internalist interpretation of
intellectual processes, Iamblichus regards them as the result of the
soul’s illumination by a transcendent entity. Our information on
this matter is to be gathered mostly from the late Aristotelian
commentators, pseudo-Simplicius (see In De anima
313.1–10, with a reference to the “unparticipated”
intellect which, if genuinely Iamblichean, would predate Proclean
terminology) and Priscian of Lydia (Metaphrasis in
Theophrastum): these relatively neglected texts are the object of
the pioneering work Steel 1978. Indeed, such a position implies some
knowledge of the philosophical debates on this issue within the
Aristotelian tradition (Theophrastus, Alexander). Its significance is
enormous, insofar as it directly leads to the rejection of
Plotinus’ doctrine of the undescended soul: that is, the idea
that something of the soul always remains in the intelligible world.
Thus, rejecting the notion that the soul shares homeomereia
with the remaining intellectual entities, Iamblichus writes: 
the doctrine opposed to this separates soul, insofar as it is born
second with regard to the intellect as a distinct hypostasis, and
interprets what, in it, partakes of intellect as something dependent
from intellect, although it is susceptible of individual existence;
and it separates it from all the higher genera. (De anima,
sect. 7 [DF-2002]) 
Iamblichus also fiercely attacks Plotinus (as well as Theodorus of
Asine) for the assumption that “there is something in us that is
impassible and always thinking” (In Timaeum [D-1973:
Fr. 87]; on this text see Rist 1975 and Dillon 2005). However, here
again the attitude of the superior souls with regard to their descent
is somewhat obscure: according to Damascius (In Parm. IV,
24.1–7 Combès & Westerink), Iamblichus taught that the
first class of souls “descends while not descending”, and
that the descent “only effects a presence alongside what is
here”. This problem was tackled by van den Berg (1997; opting
for the existence of unaffected pure souls and thus positing
Iamblichus as an intermediary between Plotinus and Proclus) and
Taormina (2012; emphasizing that every soul remains separated from the
intelligible and only relates to it through participation). It is, in
any case, clear that Iamblichus conceived of the soul’s presence
in this world as something natural and normal, not as a transitory
exile, even less as “always an evil” (the theory of
Cronius, Numenius and Harpocration, criticized in De anima
sect. 29 [DF-2002]).
It is fair to say that Iamblichus—in this respect closer to
Porphyry—focuses more closely than Plotinus on the soul’s
indwelling within the body and on the actions it performs alongside
it. In what remains of his treatise On the Soul, he reviews
all sorts of historical theses about the composition, powers and
activities of the soul, and does not hesitate to engage his
Neoplatonic predecessors.
In the available testimonies (Priscian in particular: see the
assessment in Huby 1993), the soul is constantly associated with the
notion of “life”. The latter is approached here not so
much as an essential psychic property (as had been the case in the
Phaedo), as in terms of the corporeal
“life-principles” (zōai, most often in the
plural) that the soul is said to project outside of itself in order to
get a hold on the external world: 
insofar as it puts forth other levels of life that incline towards generation and consort with the body, thus far (soul) is involved in the order of the
cosmos (Letter to Macedonius, apud Stobaeus,
Anthology II, 8, 45 [DP-2009: 25]). 
In this manner, psychic
activities that involve a relationship with external objects (such as
sense-perception) presuppose a dialectic relationship between the
soul’s essence and the multiplicity of powers it deploys: the
individual and immaterial entity “soul” goes out of itself
to grasp enmattered items, before going back (literally
“converting”, epistrephein) in order to compare
the data thus aggregated to (stable) Forms, which lend it
intelligibility. As a result, 
the particular soul, as being in the middle of all the kinds of things
of this world, and being divided together with them and being
multiplied along with them, not only remains but also changes, living
through so many partial lives. And not only with regard to its
dispositions, but also with regard to its substance it changes
somewhat. (Priscian, Metaphrasis 32.15–19 [trans. Huby
1993: 8]) 
The imagination, being torn between sensibility and abstract
intellection, whose difference it helps bridge, functions in a similar
way and contributes to making the soul the median entity par
excellence.
Sensibility, then, would seem to be proof of the soul’s radical
inability to remain in itself, as opposed to the intellect, which is
immobile and in actuality by its own nature (another sign of the fact
that the unity of the soul is no longer considered self-evident is the
introduction of the so-called “vehicle” of the soul, a
spiritual garment that acts as an interface between the soul and
bodies: on this subject, cf. Finamore 1985). What stands out as most
remarkable is the notion that the soul’s essence is also
challenged in the course of sensitive acts. Iamblichus here inherits
the Aristotelian terminology of Essence/Substance
(ousia)—Power (dynamis)—Activity
(energeia): a single essence—say, the human
soul—acts as a substratum for a plurality of powers (sensitive,
intellective, imaginative, etc.), and those powers are in turn
actualized in a greater plurality of activities (sense-perception,
aisthēsis, of x, y, or z;
intellection, noēsis, about x, y, or
z). These three terms are hierarchised, insofar as the soul can
remain inactive: but in Aristotle, this hierarchy remains largely
implicit, contrary to Iamblichus and his unequivocal conception of
vertical causality (see above,
 Section 3.5).
 In applying his own principles, Iamblichus argues that, since the
effect is nothing outside of its cause, any flaw connatural to the
effect would also have to be preassumed in the cause. Since, then, the
soul’s activities show instability and imperfection,
this inability to act consistently and permanently points to a break
in its very essence (cf. De anima sect. C [DF-2002] =
pseudo-Simplicius, In De anima 89.33–35).
This is Iamblichus’ notion of the “changing self”,
as first expounded by Steel 1978. Such a conception of the human soul
represents a major break in the Platonic tradition, which until then
had been prone to emphasize the soul’s inner dignity and
divinity: on the other hand, it is a very convenient way to account
for human fallibility. One could interpret it as a literal exegesis of
Timaeus 35a: the Demiurge creates the soul’s essence as
a mix of indivisible and divisible Being, so that—one might
think—it is no more indivisible than it is divisible. By the
same reasoning, Iamblichus concludes that the soul is at the same time
changing and unchanging, dying and undying. This, at least, is what
characterizes “particular” souls (merikai or
en merei: a terminology propagated by Iamblichus—see
Reply to Porphyry V, 2 [SS-2013: 149.26]—before it
became usual in later authors). The case of divine souls is less
clear-cut, since they are able to mend the gap between essence and
activity (De anima sect. 20–21; see also 18). It is
unclear whether—and how—this picture can be reconciled
with Iamblichus’ allusions to “two souls”, one
originating in the intelligible, the other given to us by celestial
influences (Reply to Porphyry VIII, 6 [SS-2013:
199.1–12]).
Belittled as it is in the grand scheme of things, and unable to
achieve any perpetual union with the intelligible world, the human
soul is deemed connatural to “nothingness” (Reply to
Porphyry III, 18 [SS-2013: 108.16–17]). It now needs
external help from the gods—that is, grace—in
order to perform any relevant action. Broken in its essence,
it is, however, able to regain some ground through its
activity. Co-action with the gods, “godlike
action” (theourgia, i.e., theurgy), is the purpose of
the Iamblichean soul, which it attains through religious acts such as
prayer, offerings, sacrifice, etc., that is the very liturgy that
Porphyry had attacked in the Letter to Anebo. Hence the
necessary connection between two fields, psychology and the philosophy
of religion, which was clearly set out by Shaw (1995). Ritual is given
precedence over philosophical ascesis or discursive thinking, although
Iamblichus would say that he is merely giving philosophy its due place
rather than abolishing it: it is also true that he underlines the need
for the religious practitioner to be virtuous, individual sanctity
being a requisite to make the medium apt to receive the gods’
influx. But Iamblichus heavily stresses that the key to the whole
process always lies in the gods: very interestingly,
“human”, “artificial” or “natural”
contributions are equally side-lined and relegated to the status of
mere auxiliary causes (see, e.g., Reply to Porphyry III, 9
[SS-2013: 89.7–9]). He is also adamant about the human inability
to extort any effect from the higher beings (i.e., via
“magic”), since they are by nature impassible.
It remains beyond doubt that his stance on the matter is
anti-intellectualist in nature and thus in stark contrast with the
teachings of Plotinus and Porphyry. One does not start with
self-knowledge, as Porphyry had set out to demonstrate in a treatise
On the phrase: “Know thyself”, which he had
dedicated to Iamblichus, no doubt cognizant of all the implications of
this (Fr. 273 Smith = Stobaeus, Anthology III, 21, 26). Instead,
knowledge of the gods encompasses self-knowledge (Reply to
Porphyry X, 1 [SS-2013: 212.2–3]) and should be taken as
the correct starting-point. What remains intellectualistic in
Iamblichus’ approach is the conviction that not acting in the
light of theological knowledge leads to the failure of the ritual
process (ibid. II, 10 [SS-2013: 68.25–69.20]).
Accordingly, the best theurgist is also the best theologian: and since
Iamblichus’ theology is highly philosophical in nature, insofar
as it strives to identify the Pagan gods with metaphysical forces or
concepts and submits them to the authority of the Platonic One, it
seems necessary that, in Iamblichus’ system, precedence be given
to Neoplatonist religious specialists deriving their information from
the appropriate literature. In this respect, theurgy represents a
rationalization of the irrational, rather than the converse. It is
also important to note that the conflict between the
Plotino-Porphyrian approach and Iamblichus’ one does not simply
amount to a conflict between philosophy and religion; rather, it
opposes two different modes of access to the divine, with
Iamblichus’ predecessors laying emphasis on silent ascesis and
the shedding of our external identity, and accordingly viewing
corporeality and materiality as something inherently negative.
According to Iamblichus, the gods help mankind overcome its inherent
weakness by revealing symbols to them that will establish some sort of
connection: one of the criticisms he lays on Porphyry is that his
views will “leave earth deprived of the presence of the superior
beings” (Reply to Porphyry I, 8 [SS-2013:
21.12–13]). These symbols may differ in nature: items, rituals,
myths, theological revelations such as the Chaldean Oracles,
etc.; and most of them are placed under the patronage of a particular
deity, thus creating a “chain” (seira) of, say,
sun-like entities. In this manner, Iamblichean ontology necessarily
leads to cultural traditionalism; it also opens up the possibility of
a grandiose sumphōnia of all Pagan schools or currents,
be they Hellenic or “barbarian”, the latter actually being
assigned even more prestige insofar as the Egyptians, Assyrians,
Phoenicians etc. enjoy greater antiquity
and—supposedly—avoided innovation, contrary to the Greeks
(Reply to Porphyry VII, 5 [SS-2013: 192.22–24]). A
whole new field thus opened up for Platonists in which they could
exercise their exegetical virtuosity in search of remarkable
analogies. It is no wonder, then, that Iamblichus’ views were
heartily embraced by later proponents of a “Pagan
revival”, of whom the most prominent was Julian the Apostate: a
Roman emperor as well as the pupil of Maximus of Ephesus, who was a
philosopher in the tradition of Iamblichus in addition to being the
most infamous theurgist of his time.
Neoplatonism has often been regarded as a theological and
other-worldly philosophy which assigns little (if any) significance to
politics and conceives of ethics merely as an ascetic path for the
separation of the soul from the body. This view has recently been
questioned by D.J. O’Meara and the significance of Neoplatonist
political philosophy is gaining increasing attention (see
O’Meara 2003; Schramm 2013). Iamblichus wrote a whole treatise
On virtues, which is lost but whose content can be inferred
from later sources. In addition to this, references to ethics and
politics can be gathered from his extant works, especially the letters
preserved by Johannes Stobaeus (see DP-2009; TP-2010). It is a notable
fact that some of Iamblichus’ interlocutors were influential
figures in the fourth-century Roman empire, as is for example the case
with Sopater of Apamea (see above,
 Section 1.1).
 It is somewhat difficult to clearly grasp Iamblichus’ position
on these issues, since his treatise on virtues is lost, the later
testimonia are cursory and Iamblichus’ letters are for the most
part introductory and refrain from philosophical technicalities.
The extant evidence nonetheless suffices to outline some of
Iamblichus’ views. Two letters focus on providence, fate and
free will against the background of Iamblichus’ account of
causation, which sees the One as the principle of all being and the
lower levels of reality as characterized by increasing degrees of
multiplicity (see the letters to Macedonius and Sopater: Johannes
Stobaeus I, 5, 17 and I, 5, 18). Iamblichus identifies the sphere of
operation of fate with nature, i.e., “the immanent causal
principle of the cosmos and that which immanently comprises the
totality of causes of the realm of generation” (DP-2009: 35). These views are reminiscent
of the Stoic deterministic model of causation, but Iamblichus also
emphasises that the soul contains within itself a free and independent
life and is able to emancipate itself from worldly influences (see
Johannes Stobaeus I, 8, 45a).
This theological and metaphysical framework also grounds
Iamblichus’ views about politics. In his letters he describes
the art of rulership as a kind of divinisation based on wisdom:
through wisdom human beings are assimilated to gods and political
rulership is an image of divine rulership in cosmos (see Johannes
Stobaeus III, 3, 26). Leadership is connected with philanthropy, which
makes the ruler mild, pleasant and approachable. Such views outline a
characteristically theocratic view. Elsewhere, however, Iamblichus
suggests a more modest view about rulership: he emphasises the
importance of law, which he sees as the genuine expression of a divine
model, the ruler being only its guardian (see Johannes Stobaeus IV, 5,
77). Such views can certainly be traced back to Plato: the passages
about kingship can be set in parallel with Plato’s account of
philosopher-kings in the Republic, whereas those about the
primacy of laws obviously recall Plato’s political views in the
Laws. But parallels are abundant even outside the Platonist
tradition (e.g., in Stoicism and in Dio Chrysostomus, in the
Pseudo-Pythagorean writings) and the introductory tone of
Iamblichus’ letters makes it difficult to isolate characteristic
Neoplatonist elements. According to some interpreters, however,
Iamblichus’ interest in politics is likely to be connected to
his views about the embodied soul. As O’Meara remarks, 
Human soul, alienated from its divine origins, finds its identity in
its relation to body. As a consequence, the material, bodily aspects
of the human condition were to be of much greater relevance for the
divinization of soul in later Neoplatonism than in Plotinus. (2003:
39) 
In fact, Neoplatonist philosophical ideas shaped not only
Iamblichus’ views about politics, but also those of the Emperor
Julian, whose Neoplatonist background (ultimately deriving from the
Iamblichean teaching of his masters at Pergamon) informs both his
account of law and rulership (see Julian’s Letter to
Themistius) and his theological foundation of the Roman Empire
(Elm 2012).
In Ennead I, 2, Plotinus holds that virtues bearing the same
names (that is the four cardinal virtues of Plato’s
Republic: wisdom, temperance, courage and justice) exist in
different grades at different levels: the lower level is that of the
so-called civic or political virtues, whereas the higher degrees
include the soul’s purification and the result of it, that is
the contemplation of Intellect on the part of the soul. In
Sentence 32, Porphyry draws on Plotinus and offers a
classification of virtues: these are divided into civic, purificatory,
contemplative and paradigmatic virtues. Iamblichus’ lost
treatise On virtues was certainly based on these previous
discussions and offered a systematic discussion that laid the ground
for later Neoplatonist accounts of the so-called scala
virtutum. The late anonymous Prolegomena to Plato’s
philosophy ascribes the distinction of five levels of virtues to
Iamblichus: natural, moral, political, purificatory, and contemplative
(see Prolegomena § 26.30–36). This distinction is
connected to the order or reading of Plato’s dialogues: so the
Gorgias focuses on the political virtues, the Phaedo
on the purificatory. All this is most likely to derive from
Iamblichus, who then associated his canon of twelve Platonic dialogues
with the different levels of the scala virtutum (see above,
 Section 2.2).
 While crucial, the testimony of the Prolegomena is
nonetheless partial: we know from Damascius and Marinus of Neapolis
that Iamblichus’ distinction had two further levels at the top:
those of “paradigmatic” and “theurgic” or “hieratic” virtues. Iamblichus,
therefore, probably distinguished seven levels of virtues: natural,
moral, political, purificatory, contemplative, paradigmatic, theurgic
or hieratic. The views about the soul and theurgy outlined above help
explain why Iamblichus, unlike Plotinus and Porphyry, posited theurgic
or hieratic virtues at the top of his classification: such virtues are
the highest degree of the soul’s ascension to the divine, which
human beings cannot achieve merely through their intellect.
It is worth noting that the author of the Prolegomena sets
out the hierarchy of virtues as an order “according to
depth” (kata bathos). The term bathos has a
technical meaning in Iamblichus: it is borrowed from mathematics and
is opposed to platos insofar as it describes the vertical
order of items in a hierarchy, as opposed to the horizontal one (see
Taormina in TP-2010: 245). This suggests that Iamblichus arranged his
classification of virtues according to the vertical pattern described
above, which points to his distinctive account of the hierarchy of
beings.