For Avicenna, the proper subject of natural philosophy, in its
broadest or most general sense, is body insofar as it is subject to
motion. Beyond general physics (al-samāʿ
al-ṭabīʿī), the physical sciences are further
divided into various special sciences distinguished according to
either the kind of motion investigated or the kind of body treated.
While Avicenna himself does not explicitly identify his decision
procedure for dividing the special natural sciences, it is evidenced
in the way that he divides up the books of his monumental encyclopedia
of philosophy and the sciences, The Cure (al-Shifāʾ).
For example, his book On the Heavens and Earth (Fī
l-Samāʾ wa-l-ʿālam) from The Cure
generally treats rectilinear and circular motion; On Generation and
Corruption (Fī l-Kawn wa-l-fasād) deals with change as
it occurs in the Aristotelian category of substance, whereas On
Actions and Passions (Fī l-Afʿāl
wa-l-infiʿālāt) concerns how bodies are affected
and affect one another with respect to, for example, the primary
qualities of hot-cold and wet-dry, which they possess. Avicenna
distinguishes additional special natural sciences according to the
specific sort of body being considered, namely, whether the body is
inanimate—generally the subject matter of Meteorology
(al-Maʿādin wa-l-āthār
al-ʿulwiyya)—or the body is animate—the subject
of psychology (literally, the science of the soul or animating
principle). Avicenna further divides the study of living bodies into
general psychology (ʿilm al-nafs), botany
(al-nabāt) and zoology (ṭabāʾiʿ
al-hayawān). The focus of the present study is limited
primarily to Avicenna’s general natural philosophy, although at times
the discussion is supplemented with developments in the special
physical sciences. 
The hallmark of natural philosophy and indeed of any science (sing.
Gk. epistēmē, Ar. ʿilm) for Avicenna and
the entire Aristotelian tradition is to uncover and to grasp the basic
causes (sing. ʿilla) of the phenomenon under
consideration. Like Aristotle before him, Avicenna identifies four
sorts of causes: the matter, form, agent (or efficient cause) and end
(or final cause) (Avicenna, [Ph], 1.10 and Avicenna, [MPh], bk. 6). For
Avicenna the material cause is a wholly inert substratum for form. The matter explains any passivity or potentiality to be acted upon that a
body might have. The form (ṣūra) is the cause,
primarily, of a body’s being the actual kind or species that it is and
performing the various actions associated with that species;
secondarily, a form might be the cause of the accidental features and
determinations that belong to that body (Avicenna occasionally uses
hayʾa for this second sense of form). In general then,
the form is the cause of any actuality, that is positive features or
actions, that the body has or does. The efficient cause accounts for a
body’s undergoing motion and change (or even for its existence), while
the final cause is that for the sake of which the form occurs in the
matter. 
Unlike Aristotle, Avicenna also recognizes a broader division of
causes into physical causes and metaphysical causes (Avicenna, [Ph],
1.10 [3]). The distinction is best approached by considering the
Aristotelian division between substances and accidents as found in the
ten categories. (Within the Aristotelian tradition, including
Avicenna, the ten categories purport to provide the broadest
classification of ways things are found (mawjūd) in the
world; Avicenna, [Cat], 1.1 and [MPh], 3.1.) The primary category is
that of substance, which for Avicenna is the existence that belongs to
a thing through itself, for example, the existence that belong to a
human as human or a dog as dog (Avicenna, [MPh], 2.1 [1–2]).
Accidents are what exist in another, namely, in a substance, and
include a substance’s quantity, quality, relation, where, when,
position, possession, activity and passivity. Metaphysical causes
involve what accounts for the existence and continual conservation of
a substance, or, more exactly, of a concrete particular. Physical causes in
contrast involve those factors that bring about changes in the
accidental features of bodies, primarily changes of quality, quantity,
location and position. For example, a father is responsible for seeing
that his semen becomes located within the mother, and the mother
ensures that the right womb temperature for the fetus is maintained
and that the fetus is fed. Location, temperature, possession of
nutriment and the like belong to categories of accidents, not to that
of substance. Consequently, for Avicenna the father and mother are
most properly physical agents, that is, the cause of accidental
changes that prepare the matter for the form. As such the parents are
not the cause of the existence of the offspring’s species form by
which it is the specific substance it is. Instead, the metaphysical
agent—the one who imparts the species form to the matter such
that there comes to be a substance of the same kind as the
parents—is a separate (immaterial) agent, which Avicenna calls
the Giver of
 Forms (Avicenna, [Ph], 1.10 [3]; [AP], 2.1; [MPh], 6.2 [5] & 9.5 [3–4]).[1]
Regardless of whether one is considering physical or metaphysical
causes, any motion or change (whether of some specific existence itself or just of
some new accident), Avicenna explains, requires three things: (1) the
form that comes to be as a result of the change, (2) the matter in
which that form comes to be and (3) the matter’s initial privation of
that form (Avicenna, [Ph], 1.2 [12–13]). These three—the
form, matter and privation—are frequently referred to, following
Aristotle, as “principles of nature” (cf. Aristotle,
Physics, 1.7). While Avicenna happily agrees that these three
factors are present in every instance of something’s coming to be
after not having been, he is not as happy as to whether all three of
these features are equally “principles” (sing.
mabdaʾ). His concern is that, strictly speaking, causes
and principles exist simultaneous with their effects, whereas
privation is only ever prior to the change and passes away
with the change (Avicenna, [Ph], 1.3 [14]; McGinnis 2012, Lammer
2018, §3.3). More properly speaking, Avicenna contends, privation
is a precondition for change rather than a principle. Still, he
concedes that if one is lax in one’s use of “principle” so
as to understand a principle as “whatever must exist, however it
might exist, in order that something else exists, but not
conversely” (ibid) privation would count as a principle
of change. Avicenna reasons thusly: The elimination of the privation
from something as changeable renders that thing no longer changeable,
whereas the elimination of that changeable thing itself does not
eliminate the privation. In other words, insofar as something is
changeable, it depends on or requires that there be some privation.
Conversely, privation does not depend on and does not require that
there be anything changeable. For example, for Avicenna, the celestial Intellects—think Angelic host—are not subject to change; nonetheless, they all possess some privation of existence and perfection, which is found in God. Thus privation has a certain ontological
priority to the changeable. There can be privation without the
changeable, but there cannot be the changeable without privation. 
Closely related to causes and principles is the notion of a nature
(Gk. phusis, Ar. ṭabīʿa), for Aristotle
defined a nature as “a principle of being moved and being at
rest in that to which it belongs primarily, not accidentally but
essentially” (Aristotle, Physics, 2.1, 192b21–3).
Before commenting Aristotle’s definition of nature, Avicenna begins his chapter “On Defining Nature” from The Cure
(Avicenna, [Ph], 1.5) by distinguishing between the
motions and actions that proceed from a substance owing to external
causes and those that proceed from a substance owing to the substance
itself. For instance, water becomes hot as a result of some external
heat sources, whereas it becomes cool of itself. Avicenna next
identifies two sets of parameters for describing those motions and
actions that proceed from a substance owing to that substance itself.
They may either proceed from the substance as a result of volition or
without volition. Additionally they may proceed either uniformly
without deviation or non-uniformly with deviation. Thus there are four
very general ways for dividing and describing all the motions and
actions that are found in the cosmos.
(1) Motions and actions may proceed as a result of volition and do so
in a uniform and unvarying way, such as the motion of the heavenly
bodies. The internal cause in these cases, Avicenna tells us, is a
celestial
 soul.[2]
 (2) Other motions and actions may proceed as a result of volition but
do so in a non-uniform and varying way, like the motions and actions
of animals; the internal cause in these cases is an animal soul. (3)
Again, other motions and actions may not proceed as a result of
volition and are non-uniform and varying, like plant growth; the
internal cause in these cases is a plant soul. Finally (4) some
motions and actions may proceed without volition while doing so in a
uniform and unvarying way, like the downward motion of a clod of earth
and the heating of fire; the internal cause in these cases is a
nature. 
Next, he turns to Aristotle’s own account of nature and begins by chiding Aristotle for his cavalier assertion that trying to prove that natures exist is a fool’s errand, since it is self-evident that things have such (internal) causes. While we are immediately aware
of motions and actions that seemingly proceed from substances of
themselves, that there truly exist internal causes of these
actions and motions is certainly in need of demonstration. Indeed, one
who first encounters the motion of a magnet, Avicenna gives as an
example, might imagine that its motion is a result solely of itself
rather than of iron in the vicinity. Moreover, during Avicenna’s time
the question of whether natures existed at all was a hotly debated
topic between philosophers in the Graeco-Arabic tradition, like
Avicenna, and thinkers in the Kalām tradition, the tradition of
Islamic speculative theology and cosmology. 
Proponents of the Kalām tradition, such as
al-Bāqillānī (950–1013) and al-Ghazālī (1058–1111), had
a two-stage critique. First, anticipating Hume by at least 700 years,
these thinkers noted that observation alone could not distinguish
between causal connections and mere constant conjunctions. (A
contemporary example often found in statistic classes is that the
summer sun’s heat seems to be causally connected with ice
cream’s melting, whereas eating ice cream is only constantly
conjoined, at least in the US, with an increase in violent crimes.)
Observation alone, these thinkers warn us, cannot determine, for
example, whether the cotton’s burning, which follows upon
placing fire in the cotton, or intoxication, which follows upon
imbibing alcohol, is causally connected with the natures of fire and
alcohol respectively, or whether these sets of events are merely
constantly conjoined. Indeed the concurrence of two events may be a
result of God’s habit or custom (ʿāda or
sunna) of causing the one event together with the other. While
one might think that appealing to God to explain the various mundane
events that we constantly observe around us is extravagant, Kalām
thinkers countered that it was in fact the philosophers who are
ontologically profligate, for the theologians assume only one class of
causes, namely, willful agent(s), whereas the philosophers are
committed to two ontologically distinct classes of causes, if not
more. This point leads to the second stage of the Kalām critique
of natures. God’s (omnipotent) causal power extends to every
actual or even possible event. God’s causal power is either
sufficient to produce these effects or it is not. If God’s power
is not sufficient, then either the deity needs the added
“boost” of natural powers, or it needs natures as a tool
or instrument, etc.  This later position flirts with impiety. If,
however, God’s causal power is sufficient to produce every
effect and there are also natures, functioning as internal causes,
every event is over-determined. Indeed it is not clear at all what
causal role natures have to play. A principle of parsimony, so the
Kalām critique concludes, suggests that natures be jettisoned and
one reserve all causal power to God alone. While Avicenna addresses
the issue of the existence of natures and offers up a demonstration
for their existence in the Metaphysics (4.2, 9.2 & 9.5;
also see Dadikhuda 2019), he also notes that the science of physics is
not the proper place to undertake such an enterprise. That is because
the existence of a science’s subject matter, Avicenna notes
following Aristotle, is never demonstrated within that very science
itself but only in a higher science. 
Having set aside the issue of whether natures exist and for present
purposes posits that they do, Avicenna now unpacks Aristotle’s
definition. Before considering his analysis, however,
it should be noted that there is a certain ambiguity in Aristotle’s
overall treatment of nature. The ambiguity involves whether nature
should be taken in a passive sense: is nature a cause of a substance’s
being moved? Or, alternatively, should nature be taken in an
active sense: is a nature a cause of a substance’s (self) motion? In
Physics, 2.1, the text where Aristotle defines nature, he
suggests, although does not explicitly claim, that nature can be
understood in both senses: a passive nature, which corresponds with a
substance’s matter, and an active nature, which corresponds with the
form of that substance, and so is a cause of its motion. In contrast,
later in the Physics, he argues that natures should be
understood exclusively as passive (Aristotle, Physics, 8.4,
225b29–256a3). This conclusion follows upon Aristotle’s principle
that everything that is moved must be moved by something, which he
established at Physics, 7. The principle is significant for a
key element in Aristotle’s his natural philosophy, namely, his proof
for an unmoved mover. (The unmoved mover is intended to explain why
there is motion at all.) The aforementioned principle is significant
because if all natural substances were capable of self motion, it is
no longer clear that there is a need for an unmoved mover to account
for the motion of the cosmos. This ambiguity in Aristotle account of
nature, namely, whether nature is an active source of moving or a
passive factor of being moved, was the source of much discussion among
Aristotle’s subsequent Greek commentators, who included
 Alexander of Aphrodisias
 (ca. 200 CE) and the late Christian, Neoplatonic Philosopher
 John Philoponus
 (ca. 490–570). (For more detailed studies of this tradition see
Macierowski & Hassing 1988, Lang 1992, 97–124 and Lammer 
2015, 2018, ch. 4). 
Aristotle’s definition of nature as it came down to
Avicenna in Arabic literally translates into English as “the
primary principle of motion and rest in that to which it belongs
essentially rather than accidentally” (quoted in Avicenna, [Ph],
1.5
 [4]).[3]
 A “principle of motion,” Avicenna tells us, means
“an efficient cause from which proceeds the production of motion
in another, namely, the moved body” (ibid). Immediately we
recognize that a nature for Avicenna can be understood as an active
cause that produces motion. Such a position is to be contrasted with
Aristotle’s claim at Physics 8.4 that a nature is not an
internal cause of a thing’s motion, but of its being
 moved.[4]
 Next we learn that “primary” in the definition means that
the nature causes the motion in the body without some further
intermediary cause. As for “essentially,” (Gk. kath
hauto, Ar. bi-dhātihi) it is an equivocal notion with
two senses, Avicenna tells us. In one sense, “essentially”
is predicated relative to the mover, while in another sense it is
predicated relative to what is subject to motion, namely, the body.
Thus, on the one hand, when “essentially” is said relative
to the mover, a substance’s nature, as efficient cause, essentially
produces those motions and actions that typify the substance as the
kind that it is. On the other hand, when “essentially” is
said relative to the body, it refers to the body’s essentially being
subject to those naturally characteristic motions and actions. In
effect, by distinguishing the two relative senses of
“essentially,” Avicenna has made room for Aristotle’s
definition to include nature as an active and as passive principle. To sum up, for
Avicenna, a substance’s nature is the immediate efficient cause for
all of the naturally characteristic actions and motions it produces
(active nature) as well as explaining why the body is subject to those
characteristic actions and motions (passive nature). 
With the distinction between nature as active and nature as passive in
place, it becomes clear why Avicenna identifies the proper subject
matter of natural philosophy with body insofar as it is subject to
motion, for the science of physics studies nature in both of its
active and passive senses. Nature as passive refers to that which is
subject to motion, namely, bodies, while nature as active refers to
the causes and conditions of the motions and actions that bodies
naturally undergo. In this section, I begin with Avicenna’s general
introduction to bodies. I then take up his critique of atomism,
specifically as that theory was developed within Kalām.
Thereafter, I turn to Avicenna’s theory of the continuity of
magnitudes and his conception of infinity, concluding with a brief
survey of his theory of the elements. 
Sensible body (jism or occasionally jirm), one can assume, is an aggregation of parts. Starting from this assumption, Avicenna next says of the body that it either (1) has actual parts or (2) has no actual parts. Avicenna effectively divides the logical space for a discussion of the aggregation of body into two categorical propositions: either “Some parts in a body are actual” or “No parts in a body are actual.” These are logically contradictory propositions, and so along one dimension they exhaust all logically possible options. In the case of “some parts,” the obvious question is, “How many?” where “finite” and “infinite” exhaust the possible options. Of course, the question, “How many?” is irrelevant when applied to no or 0 parts. Thus, there are three possible positions: body is an aggregate of (1) a finite number of actual parts, a position identified with that of the atomists; (2) an infinite number of actual parts, a position identified with that of Ibrāhīm al-Naẓẓām (c. 775–c. 845); (3) no actual parts, a position associated with the Aristotelian tradition and the contention that bodies are continuous and so not an aggregate of actual parts, even if potentially divisible ad inifinitum.
Avicenna makes short work of (2), al-Naẓẓām’s
position (Avicenna, [PR], namaṭ 1, ch. 2; and
[Ph], 3.4 [1]). The parts are units of the whole, which must have
either no magnitude or some magnitude. If the units have no magnitude,
then while multiplying them may increase the number of units present
in a body, it will not increase the size of the body. Consequently,
bodies would not have any magnitude, an obviously false conclusion. If
the units have some magnitude, be it ever so small, and the body is
composed of an actual infinity of these units, then complains
Avicenna, “the relation of the finite units to the infinite
units would be the relation of a finite to a finite, which is an
absurd contradiction” (Avicenna, [PR],
namaṭ 1, ch. 2, p. 162). For instance, assume that
al-Naẓẓām’s unit measures some extremely small yet
positive amount of distance, for example, 1.5 x 10-35 of a
meter, then:
Thus ∞ : 1.5 x 10-35, that is, an infinite is
proportional to a finite, which, as Avicenna notes, is absurd. 
Avicenna’s more important target was Kalām atomism, which is significantly different from the Democritean atomism, which Aristotle had criticized. Thus, let us consider it quickly before turning to Avicenna’s critique of atomism.
Aristotle had in his physical writings addressed and critiqued atomism
(e.g., Aristotle, Physics, 6.1 and On Generation and
Corruption, 1.2). In the time between Aristotle and Avicenna,
however, there were a number of developments in atomic theory both by
Epicurus, one generation after Aristotle, and by Muslim theologians,
that is, proponents of Kalām, most of whom were atomists
(Dhanani 1994, 2015). As a result, Avicenna’s critique of atomism
needed to address new innovations and challenges. One such innovation,
which can be traced back to the Greek world, is a distinction between
physical divisibility and conceptual divisibility. Thus, for example,
the atoms of
 Democritus
 (d. 370 BCE) have as one of their properties shapes. If atoms have a
shape and to have a shape is to have definite limits, then one might
reason that Democritean atoms have distinct limits into which they can
at least be conceptually divided, even if not physically divided.
Aristotle in fact exploited this point in his critique of Democritus.
In contrast, the minimal parts of
 Epicurus
 (d. 270 BCE) had no shape, and so were not subject to the same
criticism. Indeed, Epicurean minimal parts are purportedly not merely
physically indivisible but also conceptually indivisible. To provide a
rough and ready image of an Epicurean minimal part, one might think of
the surface thickness of a plank, and the plank itself as the
aggregation of such surfaces. For example, then, when the surfaces of
two planks are brought together tightly, intuitively one may think
that the two surfaces remain two distinct physical things; the bottom
of the top plank, for instance, is distinct from the top of the bottom
plank. When some enormous number of these surfaces is aggregated, a
plank with a definite thickness, one might imagine, results. So how
thick are these surfaces? One cannot fathom, but again being so thin
that dividing it further is inconceivable is the very point of
Epicurus’ minimal parts. Whatever the chain of transmission, it was something much like
Epicurus’ minimal parts that Muslim atomists identified with their
atoms, or more precisely, indivisible parts (sing. al-juzʾ
alladhī lā yatajazzaʾu)—a spatial magnitude
that was not merely physically indivisible but also conceptually
indivisible. 
Another difference between the theory of atomism that Aristotle
addressed and the one that Avicenna does is the very nature of the
atoms themselves. Democritus’ atoms with their differences in shapes
as well as differences in possible arrangement and positions are best
considered as corpuscles, that is, small bodies. Thus when speaking of
Democritus, we can speak of “corpuscular atomism.” Such is
not necessarily the case with Epicurean minimal parts or Kalām
atoms, which, while making up the parts of bodies, were not themselves considered
bodies. While there is some dispute about this point concerning
Epicurus, Kalām atomists are fairly consistent in saying that the
sole property of their atoms is that they occupy space
(mutaḥayyiz) but otherwise lack any other determinations.
In fact, Kalām atoms might best be thought of as a matrix making
up all space, with the individual atom representing the smallest
spatial magnitude necessary for the occurrence of some co-incidental
event, determination or accident, like being red or hot or wet or even
possessing power. In this respect, Kalām atoms are comparable to
the pixels on a modern-day TV or computer screen. The two are
comparable in that both are the smallest relevant units in which a
sensible effect occurs, whether some color for modern pixels or any
accident more generally for Kalām atomists. Consequently, this
variety of atomism might be called “pixelated atomism” to
contrast it with the corpuscular atomism that had been the target of
Aristotle’s criticisms. The significant point is that Avicenna could
not simply appeal to Aristotle and his attack on corpuscular atomism
when critiquing atomism as he found it. 
Regardless of what form of atomism one endorsed, a common argument in
atomism’s favor appeals to the notion of a sensible body’s being an
aggregation of parts. The argument is directed against the idea that a
continuous magnitude, which for the philosophers included the natural sensible bodies that make up the world, can be potentially divisible ad infinitum (cf. Aristotle, Physics 3.7, 207b16). The most
general form of the argument rests on two principles: (1) the
impossibility of an actual infinity, a premise that even most
Aristotelians accepted; and (2) an analysis of potentiality in terms
of an agent’s power, namely, to say that some action φ is
potential is to say that there exists an agent who has the power
actually to do φ. As part of a reductio-style argument, one is
asked to assume (3), bodies are potentially divisible infinitely. In
that case, from (2), there must exist some agent (e.g., God) that can
actually bring about the division. So let the agent enact the
potential division. Either the result is an actually infinite number
of parts or a finite number of parts. From (1), recall, an actual
infinity is impossible. Therefore, the totality of potential parts
that actually can be produced from the division is finite, but it was
assumed that they were infinite, a contradiction. Since (1), (2) and
(3) are mutually incompatible, one of these assumptions must be false.
The atomists point to the assumption of infinite divisibility and a
potentially infinite number of parts. Thus, the argument concludes,
the parts from which sensible bodies are aggregated must be finite,
whether actually or potentially. 
Avicenna’s response to this argument against the potentially infinite
divisibility of bodies is considered when discussing his theory of
 continuity.
 Prior to that, his reasons for rejecting atomism must be examined. To
start, Avicenna accepts that division with respect to body is of two
sorts: physical division and conceptual division. In physical
division, there is the actual fragmentation of a body, with the parts
of the body becoming physically separated and at a distance from one
another. An example would be when one takes a single quantity of water and
places part of it in one vessel and the other part in another vessel.
Avicenna concedes that it well may be the case that bodies have some
physical limit beyond which they no longer can be physically divided
and still remain the same sort of body. To provide an example of
Avicenna’s point, our quantity of water can be divided as water until
one reaches a single water molecule; division beyond that point, while
producing hydrogen and oxygen atoms, does not produce smaller
particles of water. A single water molecule, then, is physically
indivisible as water; it no longer remains as water after any further
division. Still, inasmuch as a single water molecule occupies some
space, however small, one can conceive of half of that water molecule,
and so it is conceptually divisible qua magnitude. Whether there
actually are such physically indivisible units, Avicenna insists,
requires proof, which I consider when looking at
 Avicenna’s elemental theory.
 
The form of atomism that Avicenna rejects is that there exist minimal
parts that cannot even be conceptually divided further. These are the
minimal parts of Epicurus and the atoms of Kalām. Avicenna’s
arguments against this conception of atomism takes two forms: one,
arguments showing that there is a physical absurdity with such atoms
and, two, arguments showing that this form of atomism is incompatible
with our best mathematics, namely, that of Euclidean geometry. The
following two examples give one a sense of how Avicenna’s
physical-style and mathematical-style criticisms work (Avicenna,
[PR], namaṭ 1, ch. 1 and [Ph], 3.4; Lettinck
1988). While all the arguments considered are specifically directed
toward a theory of pixilated atomism, they apply equally well to
corpuscular atomism. Additionally, Avicenna has a series of arguments,
not considered here, showing the absurdities that would follow on the
purported motion of corpuscular atoms. 
While some of Avicenna’s physical-style arguments are quite complex
and sophisticated, showing that the aggregation of bodies would simply
be impossible on the Kalām atomists’ view (an example can be
found in Section 2.3 of the entry on
 Arabic and Islamic natural philosophy and natural science),
 the following thought experiment is perhaps more intuitively obvious.
Posit a sheet of conceptually indivisible atoms between yourself and
the sun. Certainly the side facing the sun is distinct from the side
facing you, for if the side that the sun is illuminating is the very
same side upon which you are gazing, there is no sense in which the
sheet of atoms is between you and the sun. Thus on the
assumption that it is physically possible for this sheet to exist
between you and the sun, all the atoms composing the sheet have a
sun-side and a you-side, and these two sides are distinct.
Purportedly, conceptually indivisible atoms have been divided, a
contradiction. 
Avicenna’s mathematical-style critique of Kalām atomism
frequently appeal to issues associated with incommensurability. In
this vein he argues that such geometrical commonplaces as diagonals
and circles would be impossible on the assumption of conceptually
indivisible atoms. For example, in the pixilated atomism of the
Kalām, the atoms might be thought to form a three-dimensional
Cartesian coordinate system with each atom corresponding to some
ordered triplet on this space. A two-dimensional plane, then, would
look something like a chessboard. Avicenna now has us describe a right
isosceles triangle on this chessboard, setting the two equal sides,
for instance, at 3 units. Given the Pythagorean Theorem, A2
+ B2 = C2, we should be able to solve for the
length of the hypotenuse, which is √18 ≈ 4.25. Avicenna,
next observes that assuming Kalām atomism, the hypotenuse of our
triangle must fall either well below the solution given by the
Pythagorean theorem—namely, it would be 3 units if one just
counts the 3 squares along the diagonal of a 3x3 chessboard—or
significantly exceed it—for instance 6 units, if the atoms can
somehow be stair stepped. Alternatively, one might consider units
smaller than the atoms, but such a move is to give up atomism.
Kalām atomism, then, cannot even approximate the answer of the
Pythagorean Theorem, and yet the Pythagorean Theorem is arguably the
most well-proven theorem in the history of mathematics. Given the
choice between a dubious physical theory and our best mathematics,
Avicenna sides with Euclidean geometry and its assumption of
continuous
 magnitudes.[5]
Having rejected atomism, with its central claim that sensible bodies
must be aggregates of a finite number of conceptually indivisible
parts, Avicenna must explain and defend his preferred account of
bodies. Avicenna adopts a modified form of Aristotle’s theory of the
continuity of bodies. Aristotle himself had provided no fewer than
three different accounts of continuity (Gk. sunecheia, Ar.
ittiṣāl):
Precisely because these three accounts are different, Avicenna starts
his own discussion of continuity, claiming that “being
continuous is an equivocal expression that is said in three
ways” (Avicenna, [Ph], 3.2 [8]). Two of these senses, he
continues, are relative notions, while only one, i.e., (3) above,
identifies the true essence of what it is to be continuous. In fact,
he even goes as far as to say that account (1) is not truly a
definition of being continuous at all; rather, it is a necessary
accident of the continuous that must be demonstrated, a point to which
I return when I look at what Avicenna considers to be the proper
account of continuity.
As for the relative notions of continuity, the explanations can be
quick. First, discrete objects might be said to constitute a
continuous whole relative to a motion. For example, all the connected
cars on a moving locomotive are clearly distinct and separate things,
and yet they move together as a continuous whole. Second, discrete
objects might be said to be continuous according to Aristotle’s
definition (2) relative to some shared extremity. For example, for any
angle ∠ABC greater than or less than 180°, the lines AB and BC
share one and the same extremity, B, and yet are distinct and jointed.
Neither of these senses is strictly speaking the target of the
atomist’s critique nor the thesis concerning the continuity of bodies
and magnitudes that Avicenna (or other Aristotelians) is keen to
defend. Thus for Avicenna only (3), that two things are continuous if
and only if there is a common boundary at which they join together,
captures the proper definition of continuity. 
A continuous sensible body (or any magnitude), Avicenna insists, must
ultimately lack any parts and instead must be considered entirely as a
unified whole. Admittedly, one can posit parts in this unified whole,
like the left-part and the right-part, but such accidental parts are
wholly the result of one’s positing and they vanish, claims Avicenna, with
the cessation of the positing. 
To press Avicenna’s point a bit further, a continuous body has no
parts in it, not even potential parts, if by “potential
parts” one means points or the like latent within the body
waiting for some power to actualize them or divide the body at them.
To appreciate Avicenna’s point here fully, a few words must be said
about his conception of the form-matter constitution of bodies and the
relation of his view of continuity to psychological processes. 
Like Aristotle and other Aristotelians both before and after him,
Avicenna is convinced that bodies are constituted of matter and form.
If one considers just body as such, that is, disregarding any specific
kind of body it might be, then this absolute body, Avicenna tells us,
is a composite of matter (hayūlā) and the form of
corporeality (ṣūra jismiyya). Avicenna conceives
matter as wholly passive, having no active qualities or features. (For
discussion’s of Avicenna theory of matter see Hyman 1965; Buschmann
1979; Stone 2001; McGinnis 2012; but also see Lammer 2018,
§3.2 for corrections of some of these earlier views.) In fact,
Avicennan matter has no positive characterizations of its own at all
by which it can be defined; rather, for Avicenna, matter is best
understood solely in relation to the forms by which it is actualized
and informed. Avicenna’s matter, then, is intimately linked with
relative privation (ʿadam), that is, some lack, which under the right
conditions can be realized. Given matter’s essentially privative
character, it, then, cannot be the explanation for a sensible body’s
having the positive characteristics of being unified and one, nor the
cause of that body’s being extended so as to be subject to division.
Instead, according to Avicenna, what makes a body a unified whole and
subject to division is its form of corporeality. 
For a determinate body to exist at all, Avicenna believes, it must
have a determinate shape, and so be three dimensional, and so be
localized in space. Both of these features are the result of its
corporeal form (For a fuller discussion see Hyman 1965; Shihadeh 2014;
Lammer 2018, §3.1). When the form of corporeality comes to inform
matter, there comes to be a single unified body, existing on account
of its particular and individual form of corporeality. Should the body
be physically divided, the particular and individual form of
corporeality is not so much divided as destroyed and replaced with two
new particular and individual forms of corporeality corresponding with
two new bodies. It is essentially the form of corporeality that
unifies and makes a body numerically and actually one. Additionally,
while the form of corporeality makes the body actually one,
it also makes the body potentially many. That is to say, the
form of corporeality is the cause of a body’s being three-dimensional
such that one can posit such divisions as right-side and left-side in
it. 
We are now led to the role of psychological processes in Avicenna’s
account of a continuous body’s infinite divisibility. While it is true
for Avicenna that continuous bodies can conceptually be divided
without end, such a feature is not the result of any positive
attribute within the body. This potentiality for division does not
correspond with any positive features latent within the body. Instead
the potentiality for infinite division refers to a privation in the
matter of the body. The matter, extended and possessing quantity as a
result of the form of corporeality, does not preclude or prevent one
from positing imagined divisions within the body as small as one
wants. Indeed, this psychological process of imaging or positing
divisions in principle has no end. Thus, looking at, for example, a
meter stick, one can posit a halfway point, then the halfway point of
one side and then a further halfway point and so on as long as one
likes; however, as soon as one stops the process of imagining halfway
points, the imagined points (regardless of how many one has imagined)
do not magically remain but altogether cease with the cessation of
their being posited. The body remains as it always was, a unified
whole, whose unity is only ever lost by actual physical division, not
conceptual division. 
With this conception of continuity in place, the Kalām argument
against potential divisibility ad infinitum dissolves. Again that
argument assumed two principles: (1) the impossibility of an
actual infinity; and (2) an analysis of potentiality in terms
of an agent’s power, namely, the view that some action φ is
potential if and only if there is an agent who has the power actually
to do φ. In point of fact, Avicenna rejects both principles (his
conception of infinity is discussed at
 2.4);
 for now he simply questions the theologians’ inference from
something’s being potential to the possibility of its being realized
all at once at some moment or other. The original Kalām argument
assumed that a potential infinity of divisions existed in a continuous
body. In that case, the argument continued, let God actualize that
potential, and one is confronted with an actual infinity. Avicenna in
contrast understands the potential infinite divisibility of bodies in
terms of an ongoing process of positing successive divisions within
the magnitude, a process that by definition has no end. Of course,
there is a contradiction here in assuming that some agent, even God,
can get to the end of some process that has no end, but such a
contradiction does not tell against Avicenna’s theory of continuous
bodies. In fact, Avicenna’s conception of potential infinite
divisibility is compatible with (2), since there is no immediate
contradiction in saying that God eternally and without ceasing posits
ever-decreasing halfway points in some magnitude. Still even in this
case, there never is an actual infinity of such halfway points, as the
proponents of Kalām atomism maintain.
With the introduction of continuity and its corresponding notion of
infinite divisibility one is also obliquely introduced to the notion
of infinity (lā nihāya). Avicenna, following
Aristotle’s account of the infinite (apeiron) at
Physics, 3.6, defines it as “that which whatever you take
from it—and any of the things equal to that thing you took from
it—you [always] find something outside of it” (Avicenna,
[Ph], 3.7 [2]). In natural philosophy, the immediate issue is whether an
infinity exists either in quantities that posses some position or in
numbers in an ordered series (Avicenna, [Ph], 3.7 [1]). The
mutakallimūn, that is, the proponents of Kalām, were for the
most part opposed to predicating the infinite of anything other than
God. This opposition included both actual infinity and potential
infinity, as we have seen. While it is notoriously difficult to give a precise account
of the difference between the actual as opposed to the potential
infinite, a rough characterization is this: In the case of an actually
infinite magnitude, all the parts of that magnitude are somehow
simultaneously and fully present, whereas in the case of the
potentially infinite there is an going process or succession in which
the units come to be, never wholly existing as actual at some given
point or moment. While Avicenna happily accepts the reality of
potential infinities, he denies that there are material instances of
either actually infinite qualities, like infinitely large bodies, or
numbers, like infinitely large sets of bodies, all of which exist
 simultaneously.[6]
Avicenna has a number of arguments attempting to show that an actual
infinity in nature is impossible (for a presentation and assessment of some of these arguments see Zarepour 2020). These arguments can be divided into
those that appeal to motion as part of the proof, and those that do
not appeal to motion. Here I merely consider one of Avicenna’s
non-motion proofs against an actual (spatial) infinity. The argument,
which I present, is not the preferred proof in either The Cure
or The Salvation, although he had toyed with it in The
Cure (Avicenna, [Ph], 3.8 [5–7]). Still it is his preferred
and indeed only argument against an actual infinity in his shorter and
last philosophical encyclopedia, Pointers and Reminders
(Avicenna, [PR], namaṭ 1, ch. 11, p.
 183–90).[7]
 Moreover, the proof is a uniquely Avicennan one. 
The argument asks one to posit some actually infinite ray, AB and then
another actually infinite ray, AC, so as to form an acute angle
∠BAC. Next Avicenna asks one to consider the gap, BC, between the
two rays. The farther from A that BC is, the larger BC becomes. Since the
two rays are actually infinitely extended, BC should, in principle,
also be actually infinite; however, BC always lies between AB and AC
and of necessity terminates at them, so BC is finite. Thus, there is a
contradiction: BC is both finite and infinite and, claims Avicenna,
what produced the contradiction is the assumption that there is
actually infinite space. Whether Avicenna’s new argument is successful
became a matter of intense debate in post-classical Islamic natural
philosophy, with such notables as Abū l-Barakāt
al-Baghdādī (1080–1165) and Najm al-Dīn
al-Kātibī al-Qazwīnī (ca. 1203–1277) finding
it wanting, whereas Naṣīr al-Dīn
al-Ṭūsī (1201–1274) and Mullā
Ṣadrā (1571–1636) considered it defensible (McGinnis 2018). 
Avicenna’s arguments against an actual infinity in nature are in
general all directed against the possibility of infinite spatial
magnitude. Consequently, since space must be finite (i.e., limited),
all bodies must be limited, and in being limited they have shape. This
conclusion holds for the cosmos as a whole as well. As for the shape
of the cosmos, while such a topic takes us slightly afield from a
discussion of infinity, it does round out Avicenna’s abstract
discussion of body. For a number of reasons, Avicenna thinks that the
shape of the cosmos must be spherical. While in some ways Avicenna
takes this claim to be a matter of empirical observation, he also
argues that since the nature of the heavenly bodies is completely
homogeneous and unvarying, there cannot be dissimilarities in a
heavenly body such that a part of it would be angular and another part
rectilinear or such that part of it has one sort of curve and another
part a different sort (Avicenna, [DC], 3; also Avicenna, [Ph], 1.8
[2] provides the general argument, albeit there it is applied to showing the
sphericity of the Earth). Inasmuch as the cosmos is spherical, it must
have some center, which, at least from the point of physics, Avicenna
identifies with the Earth. (Strictly speaking the Earth is a bit off
center in accordance with the demands of the Ptolemaic astronomy,
which Avicenna adopts.) 
We thus now have a general picture of Avicenna’s conception of body in
the abstract. Body is not composed of conceptually indivisible atoms
but must be continuous and finite. In the next section I briefly
consider body not in the abstract, but particular kinds of bodies,
namely, the so-called elements. 
When Avicenna speaks of elements (sing. usṭuquss) and
(elemental) components (sing. ʿunṣur), he means
simple bodies, that is, bodies that are not composed of other sorts of
bodies in the way that flesh, blood and bones, for example, are
composed of more basics elements. Despite being simple, the elements
are form-matter composites (Avicenna, [DC], 1). On account of their
form and matter, elements have two powers: an active power following
upon the element’s form and a passive power following upon its matter.
Additionally, Avicenna specifies different kinds of elements based
upon three kinds of natural motions. The three kinds of natural motion
are (1) motion around the center, (2) motion toward the center and (3)
motion away from the center (Avicenna, [DC], 2). Celestial bodies are
in turn identified with those bodies whose natural motion is around
the center. Terrestrial bodies are identified with those undergoing
rectilinear motion either toward or away from the center. By
convention, what moves away from the center moves upward, while what
moves toward the center moves downward. Avicenna believes that moving
around the center, circular motion, is generically simple inasmuch as
he thinks that there is no contrary to circular motion (Avicenna,
[Ph], 4.6 [7–11] & [DC],
 2).[8]
 Consequently, the very nature of a celestial body is to move
circularly (Avicenna, [PR], namaṭ 2, ch. 12). As
for the terrestrial bodies, moving upward and downward are also
generic descriptions; however, Avicenna continues, each of these
genera also has two species, corresponding with the different termini
of the motion. Thus, for example, those bodies that move downward are
generically alike in that they move away from the surrounding
celestial sphere; however, they can differ in that some have the
center as their proper place or terminus for their motion, whereas the
terminus of other downward-moving bodies falls short of the center.
Any body that has the center as its proper place has absolute downward
motion, while a downward-moving body whose terminus falls short of the
center has relative downward motion. The same holds mutatis
mutandis for bodies that move upward. Those that have the limit
of the surrounding celestial spheres as their terminus have absolute
upward motion, while those whose terminus falls short of that limit
have relative upward motion. 
In order to explain the specific differences of the terrestrial
elements, Avicenna, following a long tradition, which can be traced
back at least as far as Hippocrates (460–370 BCE), appeals to
certain basic qualitative powers. These qualitative powers are
hot/cold, which are seen as active powers following upon the form, and
wet/dry, which are seen as passive powers, following upon the matter
(Avicenna, [DC], 1). Additionally, Avicenna claims, the downward
motion of those elements so naturally inclined, namely, earth and
water, is the result of their being qualitatively cold and being
directed to their natural places, that is, toward the center.
Analogously, the upward motion of those elements so naturally
inclined, namely, fire and air, is the result of their being
qualitatively hot and being directed to their natural places, that is,
away from center. The elements, earth and water’s natural inclination
(mayl) downward is referred to as their heaviness, while fire
and air’s natural inclination upward references their lightness
(Avicenna, [DC], 2). As for the qualities, wet and dry, these passive
powers refer to a body’s susceptibility or lack thereof to the
impressions and actions of some form. For example, what is wet or
fluid more easily receives the impression of a form (just think of wet
clay). In contrast, what is dry, while more readily retaining any
impressions made in it, does not easily yield to being impressed (now
think of kiln-dried clay). Given these differences in motions and
qualitative powers, Avicenna, again following in this tradition,
identifies four terrestrial elements: (1) fire, which is hot and dry
with an absolute upward motion, (2) air, which is hot and wet with a
relative upward motion, (3) water, which is cool and wet with a
relative downward motion and (4) earth, which is cool and dry with an
absolute downward motion. Finally, and for completeness, (5) celestial
bodies are neither hot nor cold (and so neither heavy nor light) nor
wet nor dry, but instead are solely identified in term of their
natural circular motion. 
In section
 2.2.2,
 it was noted that while Avicenna denied the possibility of
conceptually indivisible atoms, he allowed for the possibility of
physically indivisible natural minimums. In other words, there might
be limits beyond which some specific kind of natural body cannot be
divided further and remain that same kind of body. It was further
noted that a proof was required whether there actually were such
natural minimums. We are now in a position to consider Avicenna’s
proof for this thesis (Avicenna, [Ph], 3.12). Recall that for Avicenna
there are two forms of division. One involves merely positing imagined
divisions within a magnitude, so as never actually to destroy the
continuity of the body. The second involves actually fragmenting and
separating parts of the body such that the parts are at a distance
from one another. Avicenna’s proof for natural minimums involves this
second form of division, namely, bringing about a separation of the
parts. It additionally presupposes the theory of elements just
presented and particularly the qualitative powers that are the
necessary concomitants of the terrestrial elements. 
While the details and argumentation of Avicenna’s theory are complex,
the heart of the theory can be grasped through the following example.
(For a discussion of the history and details of Avicenna’s account of
natural minimums see McGinnis 2015.) Avicenna first observes that the
smaller something is compared with its surrounding environment, the
faster and more easily that environment acts on what is surrounded.
For example, a blast furnace melts a kilogram of ore more readily than
it does a metric ton of ore. Now, the example continues, isolate some
relatively small quantity of water, e.g., a milliliter, in a beaker.
The water qua the element water has the essential qualities of being
cold and wet. Additionally, inasmuch as the water is isolated, and so
not part of a lake or the like, it is surrounded by ambient air,
which, according to the elemental theory that Avicenna adopts, is hot
and wet. Provided that the quantity of water is sufficiently large, it
can counteract the heating influences of the surrounding air; however,
as one physically separates off smaller and smaller quantities of the
water, the natural heat of the surrounding air more readily and
effectively acts on the diminishing quantity of water. At some point,
the heat of the surrounding air fully overcomes the coolness of the
small quantity of water such that the coolness is replaced with the
same degree of heat as the surrounding air. In that case, there is no
longer a cold-wet element but a hot-wet element, and so there comes to
be air. What the example indicates is that there are natural limits of
smallness beyond which the qualitative concomitants of a given element can no
longer be sustained in isolation, and instead a new set of
concomitants, now associated with dominant ambient element, come to be. These limits beyond
which a particular kind of body cannot be physically divided and
remain the same kind of body are the natural minimums. 
Again the proper subject matter of physics is body inasmuch as it is
movable. We have just looked at Avicenna’s conception of body and
associated issues. I now turn to his theory of motion, followed by
discussions of some of the conditions necessary for motion, like time
and place. Avicenna’s theory of motion is best understood against the
background of Aristotle’s account of motion and developments
surrounding that account that emerged in the later Greek world. (For detailed
discussions of Avicenna’s theory of motion see Hasnawi 2001;
McGinnis 2006a; and Ahmed 2016). 
In Physics, 3.1, Aristotle defines motion (Gk.
kinēsis, Ar. ḥaraka) as the
entelecheia of potential as potential. Aristotle himself
apparently coined the term entelecheia, which might mean either
“actualization,” as in a process, or
“actuality,” as in the completion of a process. Given the
ambiguity of this term, it was a matter of some concern among later
Greek commentators to understand Aristotle’s precise meaning. The
details of the Greek debate need not concern us unduly, since the
issue for philosophers in the medieval Islamic world was all but
settled by the choice of the Arabic translator of Aristotle’s
Physics, who rendered entelecheia as
“perfection” or “completion”
(kamāl). Consequently, for philosophers such as Avicenna,
motion was understood as a sort of actuality or perfection, as opposed
to an actualization or a process. 
Greek commentators provided additional glosses on the term
entelecheia, which proved significant in Avicenna’s own account
of motion. Drawing upon other Aristotelian texts (e.g., De
anima, 2.5), these commentators identified both a first actuality
and second actuality. A first actuality is like the student who
actually knows a particular language but is not speaking it at that
moment, whereas the second actuality is like that student when
actually speaking that language. Avicenna follows suit and formally
defines motion as “a first perfection of what is in potential
insofar as it is in potential” (Avicenna, [Ph], 2.1 [3]). To
clarify, Avicenna notes that in every category there are those things
that are actual and other things that, while actual in one respect,
are potential in another. In the case of motion with respect to
x (where x is some possible location or quantitative or
qualitative feature of a body), the body before the motion is in
potentiality to x—as well as any number of other places or states,
y, z, etc. After the motion, the body is in a state of
second actuality with respect to x, that is, x has been
fully and completely reached or actualized. During the motion, then, the body is
in a state of first actuality with respect to x. Avicenna
understands this first actuality as a type of “being directed
toward” x (mutawajjih) as opposed to being
directed toward y or z. There is motion as long as the
body is directed toward x and there still remains some
potentiality with respect to x, that is, the place or state of x
has not been fully reached or actualized. For example, as long as I sit in my
home, there are any number of places that I might visit; however, once
I get up and begin going to the pub, as long as I remain directed
toward the pub but have not yet reached it, there is the motion that
is my walking to the pub. 
Thus far, Avicenna’s discussion of motion is little more than a
sophisticated commentary on Aristotle’s definition of motion.
Avicenna’s analysis goes beyond Aristotle’s inasmuch as Avicenna
recognizes that “motion” is an equivocal term with two
senses. He identifies these two senses of motion, namely, traversal-motion and medial-motion. As for motion qua traversal, we sometimes speak of
motion as the whole continuous magnitude stretching from the initial
potential state to the final actual state, such as my complete walk
from my home to the pub. Now at no point does the whole of my walk
exist in the way that the whole of the spatial distance covered
between my house and the pub exists. Indeed, no sooner do I step
outside the door of my home on my way to the pub than the initial
potential state (being in my house) ceases to be and is replaced with
some new medial potential state (being on my porch). The same is true
for each subsequent state of the walk. Instead, observes Avicenna, the
whole and complete walk only ever exists as whole and complete in the
mind, namely, I remember my being at home and then relate that mental
impression with my being in the pub. In other words, motion qua
traversal has no extra-mental existence but only ever has a mental
 existence.[9]
In contrast, medial-motion corresponds with motion inasmuch as it
exists extra-mentally in the moving body itself. In other words,
medial-motion refers to the form that every moving body must have at
any moment it is in motion in order to explain its being in motion.
Avicenna describes this form thus:
This is the form of motion existing in the moved thing—namely,
an intermediacy between the posited starting and end points inasmuch
as at any limiting point at which it is posited, it did not previously
exist there nor will it exist there afterwards, unlike [its state at]
the points of the two extreme limits (Avicenna, [Ph], 2.1 [6]).
While Avicenna is careful to avoid using any overtly temporal
language, like “time,” “instant” or
“now,” what he has described is motion at an instant as
opposed to the extended conception of motion captured in traversal-motion. In other words, motion as it exists extra-mentally occurs
just in case a body exists at some point or in some state for only an
instant. For if a body is at some point or in some state for only an
instant, then at any subsequent instant it must be at some new point
or in some new state, and consequently must have changed or undergone
motion. Such a position is not to concede that spatial, kinematic or
temporal magnitudes are composed of points. They are not, for again
natural magnitudes are continuous according to Avicenna. Instead,
Avicenna means that as one can considers a smaller and smaller uniform
motion over a smaller and smaller spatial magnitude, the elapsed time
of the motion becomes proportionally smaller too. At the limit
(ṭaraf) of this process of considering smaller and
smaller increments of motion, there is motion at an instant, or, more
in keeping with Avicenna’s description, at any point you posit the
body in the continuum, it was not there before nor will it be there
after. “This,” Avicenna concludes, “is, in fact, the
first perfection,” which is motion (Avicenna, [Ph], 2.1 [6]).
Avicenna dedicates two chapters of the Physics of The
Cure (2.2 & 2.3) to motion’s relation to the categories: one
to motion’s genus and the other to the species of motion. As for the
first issue, Avicenna attempts to identify to which category motion
generically belongs inasmuch as the categories supposedly provided the
most generic ways that (material) things might exist. While in the end
he concedes that given the canonical ten categories, motion seems most
aptly to fall under passion (Gk. paskhein; Ar.
infiʿāl), he is also uncertain whether Aristotle’s
ten categories are truly exhaustive and at least suggests that motion
might be sui generis (Avicenna, [Ph], 2.2 [8]; Hasnawi 2004;
and McGinnis 2006a). 
As for the species of motion (Avicenna, [Ph], 2.3), Aristotle and the
tradition up to Avicenna had recognized only three specific kinds of
motion. These include motion with respect to the categories of
quantity, quality and place. Motion with respect to quantity involves
augmentation and diminution, while motion with respect to quality
includes such changes as alterations in color, temperature and the
like. Finally, on the traditional categorization, there is change of
place, that is, locomotion, which for a number of reasons was believed
to be the most significant or even primary species of motion. Avicenna
accepts all three kinds of motion identified by the tradition. He
additionally adds to these three, motion with respect to the category
of position, that is, the rotation of an object that remains in the
same place, like a spinning orb. The reason for his addition is
obvious on consideration; for clearly an orb spinning in place is not
changing its quantity or quality and by supposition it is remaining in
the same place, yet clearly it is moving. Thus what kind of change is
it undergoing? Only the relative position of its parts, claims
Avicenna, is changing, and thus he concludes rotating objects must be
changing with respect to the category of position. 
The introduction of positional motion, however, brings with it a new
challenge. According to Avicenna, motion always involves a terminus
a quo, that is, a “from which,” (mā minhu)
and a terminus ad quem, that is, a “to which”
(mā ilayhi) (Avicenna, [Ph], 2.1 [12 & 20–22]).
His reason for insisting on this point is that motion, as noted, is
the actuality of potential as potential, where the initial state of
potentiality corresponds with the terminus a quo and the final
state of actuality corresponds with the terminus ad quem. The
difficulty is that there need be no starting and ending point for
rotation, particularly if, as Avicenna believes, the rotation of the
heavens has neither beginning nor end. Avicenna’s response to this
challenge involves a sophisticated analysis of the various ways of
understanding actuality and potentiality (including an appeal to the
first and second actuality already noted but also introducing a notion
of remote and proximate potentiality). Without going into the details,
the general intuition of his response is simple enough (for a detailed
account see McGinnis 2006b). As a matter of supposition, one can posit
within the continuous rotational motion of, say, a celestial sphere
some point, for example, the sun’s position when it is directly
overhead. In positing that point, one by supposition indicates an
initial terminus a quo of the motion, but that same point also
indicates a terminus ad quem for that motion (although the two
termini are in a sense also different since there is a difference in
time between the two instances of being at that point). Thus, for
example in our case, a complete sidereal day is actualized when the
sun moves from a position directly overhead—the terminus a
quo—and then returns to that position—the terminus
ad quem. Of course, nothing about this analysis requires that the
rotation must cease once this sort of terminus ad quem, which
is a proximate potency, has been actualized. Indeed it can be posited
as a new terminus a quo for a new rotation. In short,
rotational motion still has a terminus a quo and a terminus
ad quem corresponding with a potentiality and actuality, even
though such motion need have no absolute beginning or ending point.
An added benefit of Avicenna’s introduction of this new species of
motion is that it provides him an easy answer to what has been called
“la grande question” of ancient celestial physics
(Hasnawi 1984). As a bit of background to the problem, Aristotle
defined a thing’s “where,” or place, with the outermost
containing limit of the surrounding body (Aristotle, Physics,
4.4, 212a20) and Avicenna followed Aristotle faithfully on this point
(Avicenna, [Ph], 2.9 [1–3]; Lammer 2018,
§§5.1–2). Thus, only a body that has a body outside of
it and containing it can have a place. Consequently the outermost
celestial sphere “beyond” which there is absolutely
nothing, by definition cannot have a place. The problem, then, is
this: We observe the outermost celestial sphere apparently making a
complete rotation once approximately every twenty-four hours, but what
specific sort of motion is the outermost celestial sphere undergoing?
Aristotle and the earlier tradition had identified only three species
of motion: motion with respect to quantity, quality and place. Clearly
the motion of the heavens is neither a change in quantity nor a change in quality, but
it is also not a change of place, since, as we have seen, the
outermost celestial sphere has no place. Avicenna’s introduction of
positional motion provides an obvious solution: the outermost
celestial sphere is moving with respect to the category of position.
Moreover, Avicenna’s solution is not ad hoc, since he has integrated
his account of positional motion into his general analysis of motion
and motion’s relation to the categories. 
Again physics is the study of bodies insofar as they are subject to
motion. We have just seen Avicenna’s account of motion and before that
considered his views about bodies and magnitude more generally. A
discussion of Avicenna’s treatment of certain necessary conditions
associated with motion and moving bodies is now in order. These
necessary conditions are, one, how to identify the place of a body
and, two, the time required for motion. 
An account of place is particularly significant given that motion with
respect to place was frequently viewed as the primary species of
motion (although Avicenna would rank positional motion along side
local motion, if not above it). The reason for giving priority to
place or position is that change in quantity involves the increase or
decrease of the place that a body occupies; and change in
quality involves a body’s coming into proximity with some cause that
brings about the alteration, where “coming into proximity”
refers to a change of place either in the body or in the cause
(Avicenna, [Ph], 4.9). 
As noted when discussing positional motion, Avicenna follows the
Aristotelian tradition and identifies the technical definition of
place (Gk. topos, Ar. makān) with “the
surface that is the extremity of the containing body” (Avicenna,
[Ph], 2.9 [1]). The general structure of his argumentation for this
thesis involves showing that all other candidates for what place might
be are wanting in some way. To this end, Avicenna provides us with, as
it were, the logical space for an account of place (Avicenna, [Ph],
2.6 [2]). Place can be either intrinsic or extrinsic to body, that is,
essential or accidental to it. If place is intrinsic to a body, then
it is either (1) the matter or (2) the form of the body, whereas if it
is extrinsic, then the place is either (3) what the body exactly
encompasses, that is, an interval (buʿd) or (4) what
exactly encompasses the body, that is, the surface that is the
extremity of the containing
 body.[10]
 Avicenna quickly eliminates (1) and (2). That is because a body can
change with respect to place, that is, depart from one place to
another, whereas a body cannot depart from either its matter or form
without undergoing generation and corruption. Hence only (3) and (4)
are truly live options. Account (4) is just the Aristotelian one,
which Avicenna himself prefers. As for (3), namely that a body’s place
is the interval it occupies, Avicenna believes that it ultimately
stands or falls with whether a void (khalāʾ), an
empty interval, is possible. Avicenna dedicates a long chapter
(Avicenna, [Ph], 2.8) to showing that a void is impossible. If his
argument there is successful, then (4), namely, place is the innermost
limit of the containing body, remains the only viable definition of
place. 
Aristotle before Avicenna had also dedicated a long section of his
Physics (4.6–9) to a refutation of the void. Aristotle’s
arguments might all best be described as physical ones inasmuch as
they all appeal to physical concerns associated with the void. More
specifically, Aristotle’s arguments attempt to show that motion would
be impossible on the assumption of a void. Avicenna reproduces many of
Aristotle’s physical arguments, often giving them his own unique
twist. Additionally, however, Avicenna develops what might be called a
conceptual critique of the notion of void. In this critique, Avicenna
attempts to show that the very idea of a void is conceptually vacuous
or a vain intelligible. The criticism begins with a logical/physical
principle: Anything that actually exists within the natural order can
be defined in terms of a genus and difference. (The general idea is
that the things that make up the physical world must be of some kind
or species if they exist at all, and it is the genus and difference
that identify the kind or species.) He then adds one further
qualification: Inasmuch as these actual existents positively make up
the world around us, their genus and difference must refer to positive
(as opposed to negative) notions; a species properly understood
answers the question “what is it?” and a genus or
difference given in negative terms simply would not tell us what
something is, but what it is not. (For a discussion of
Avicenna’s theory of genus and difference and how it relates to his
criticism of the void see McGinnis 2007b.)
With these preliminaries in place, Avicenna’s conceptual critique
begins (Avicenna, [Ph], 2.8 [1–4]; also see McGinnis 2007a,
2007b; and Lammer 2018, §5.3). He first asks whether the
void actually exists or is absolutely nothing. If one says that the
void is absolutely nothing, Avicenna happily agrees; for if it is
absolutely nothing, then it does not actually exist. Those who affirm
that the void actually exists, then, cannot simply say that it is
nothing, but must provide some positive features about it. Avicenna
next notes that void space is frequently described as being of either
a greater or lesser extent, for the void space between two cities on
Earth, for example, is less than the void space between the Earth and
the heavens. This property of being more or less is none other than
that of quantity. Thus if a void should exist, it would possess some
quantity either essentially or accidentally. If quantity belongs to
void accidentally, and every accident must belong to a substance, then
void is joined to a substance possessing quantity. The quantity in
question is necessarily three-dimensional, but as noted when
discussing continuity, three-dimensionality follows upon the form of
corporeality. The form of corporeality, however, causes the existence
of a body. Thus void would belong to a body as an accidental feature of it,
a seeming contradiction. 
In contrast, if the quantity is not accidental to the void but is
essential to it, then void would be a species of quantity. Avicenna
now challenges the defenders of void to provide some positive
difference that would make up void’s species. It cannot be that void
is a material quantity, since again a material quantity is body. If
one claims that void is immaterial quantity, Avicenna demands some
non-negative difference, for while there are immaterial substances,
like angels, one can provide a positive characterization of them as
intellectual substances. Avicenna offers a number of
suggestions, but finds every attempt wanting or ultimately telling us
what void is not rather than what it is. Since no definition of void
can be given in terms of a positive genus and difference, Avicenna
concludes that our idea of void is nothing but empty imaginings. 
Again, place had to be either (1) the matter or (2) the form of the
body, or either (3) what the body exactly encompasses or (4) what
exactly encompasses the body (i.e., the surface that is the innermost
extremity of the containing body). As noted (1) and (2) are
non-starters, and as just argued, (3) involves a conceptual confusion.
Consequently, Avicenna concludes place must be the innermost surface
of the surrounding body.
Among the conditions associated with motion, time (Gk. chronos,
Ar. zamān) is at least as important as that of place and
void, for it is a necessary concomitant of motion. (A number of
studies on various aspects of Avicenna’s temporal theory exist and
include Shayegan 1986; McGinnis 1999; Mayer 2007; and Lammer 2018,
ch. 6.) In order to appreciate time’s relation to motion, there is a
more basic question that must be answered first: Does time exist? An
affirmative answer will seem obvious to many, but Aristotle at
Physics, 4.10 had offered a series of objections, four in all,
that cast doubt on the reality of time. Moreover, in his own positive
account of what time is, Aristotle does not address all of the
objections or even provide a general proof that time must exist in
light of the objections. One may then criticize Aristotle’s account of
time in light of his own theory of science: Aristotle has proceeded to
a theory of what time is before providing us with a proof
that time
 is.[11]
After presenting the objections to and opinions about time, Avicenna
begins his own account of time (Avicenna, [Ph], 2.10–13) by
filling this lacuna in Aristotle’s presentation. Avicenna’s general
strategy is to take as empirically obvious certain facts about motion
and then show that these facts cannot be explained unless there is
associated with motion a certain magnitude, which we commonly identify
with time. Only having shown that time exists does Avicenna then
provide a scientifically adequate explanation of what time essentially is. 
Avicenna’s
 proof that time exists assumes these initial facts about moving
bodies:
On the basis of these facts, Avicenna observes that associated with
moving bodies there is a certain possibility or capacity
(imkān) to traverse some spatial magnitude. Moreover, this
capacity corresponds with the starting and stopping of the motion
(that is, a kinematic magnitude). When the body is moving slower, a
greater amount of this possibility is required to cover the same
spatial magnitude as that of a faster moving body. Given this
possibility’s relation and correspondence with both spatial and
kinematic magnitudes, Avicenna concludes that this capacity must be
some magnitude that stands in some relation to the distance and speed.
This magnitude is neither the magnitude of the body, whether the
body’s bulk or weight, nor the magnitude of the motion, whether the
speed or motivity, nor the magnitude of the distance traversed.
Instead, this magnitude—again, the possibility belonging to a
moving body to cover more or less distance at a fixed
speed—concludes Avicenna, is what we call time
(zamān). 
While identifying time with a certain possibility to traverse some spatial magnitude, provides one with a criterion for recognizing time, it does not provide a proper scientific definition of what time essentially is, that is, a definition in terms of genus and difference. Thus, having shown that time exists, Avicenna next turns to defining time and showing what time essentially is. In general, Avicenna follows Aristotle and defines time as a “number of motion when it is differentiated into prior and
posterior parts” (cf. Aristotle, Physics 4.1,
219b1–2). Time’s genus, then, is a certain number, that is, some measurable aspect or magnitude, belonging to motion. Its difference is having essentially prior and posterior elements. Here is it important to note that for Avicenna, priority and posterity (taqaddum and taʾakhkhur) are generic notions, with a number of different species, like priority in eminence or location or time. For Avicenna, the prior and posterior in Aristotle’s definition refers to what is prior and posterior in the distance traversed as determined by the directedness of the motion over that distance. Thus, the charges of some, particularly Galen, that Aristotle’s definition of time is circular, since it appeals to purportedly temporal notions of before and after, is avoided. (See Lammer 2018, ch. 6.2).
In all three of Avicenna’s philosophical
encyclopedias—The Cure, The Salvation and Pointers and
Reminders—he notes that, more precisely, time is a magnitude
of circular motion with respect to the prior and posterior.
His insistence on circular motion rather than just motion in general
is that only circular motion can potentially have neither beginning
nor end. In other words, only circular motion can be infinitely
extended into the past and future.
While Avicenna has any number of arguments for the eternity of time
and the world, his proof for the existence of time in terms of a
possibility to traverse greater or lesser spatial magnitudes at a
fixed velocity provides the basis for one of his central physical
arguments for that thesis. The argument, which is a reductio ad
absurdum has one assume that God created time, and so motion and
moving bodies, at some first moment, x, in the finite past, for
example, 10,000 years ago. Prior to x nothing but God existed,
not even time. (Here let years be measured in solar rotations as
measured by the apparent motion of our sun. Also allow that
the present moment marks the completion of the 10,000 solar rotations, so that right now is the second terminal point for this motion.) Avicenna
next observes that it is certainly possible that God could have made a
time, and so motion and moving bodies, 20,000 solar rotations in
duration, where this possible duration again reaches to the present
moment as its second terminal point. In this second scenario, 10,000 years of the full 20,000 year
duration would exactly correspond with the 10,000 years in the first
scenario, namely, the period extending from the present moment back to
x. The remaining duration of this possible 20,000-year motion
would correspond with the possibility for 10,000 solar rotations,
which now would terminate at x rather than beginning at
x. (We can intuitively say that this remaining possibility is
prior to or earlier than x, although Avicenna is careful not to
beg any questions.) Now to say that there is a possibility for 10,000
solar rotations (prior to x) is just to say that (prior to
x) there exist a possibility for a sun (or other body) to
traverse a certain distance (that is, number of rotations) at a fixed
speed. From Avicenna’s earlier proof for the existence of time,
however, recall that the possibility for a moving body to traverse a
given distance at a fixed speed refers to time. Consequently, since
this possibility exists, time must exist. Yet in order for time to
exist, as Avicenna argued, motion and moving bodies must exist.
Therefore, concludes Avicenna, when nothing but God existed, time,
motion and a moving body also would have necessarily existed, a
blatant contradiction. It is the assumption that time is finite,
claims Avicenna, that gives rise to the contradiction. Since this same
argument applies to any finite duration of time, during which one may
suppose the world to exist, Avicenna concludes that time, and so
motion and moving bodies, must have existed infinitely into the past.
(For the same reason  mutatis mutandis time, and so motion and
moving bodies, also must exist infinitely into the future.)
While I have only scratched the surface of the riches of Avicenna’s
natural philosophy, the above discussions provide a number of the most
basic points of his thought. 