Someone displays instrumentally rationality insofar as she adopts
suitable means to her ends.  But how should “rationality”
be understood?  Here it is important to distinguish between two things
that the casually phrased question, “What would it be rational
for an agent to do or intend?” could mean:
As with any philosophical distinction, this contrast between
“rational coherence” and “reason” might be
questioned.  But it is accepted by many of the authors who have
written on the subject, and it will help to organize the discussion of
the subject matter.
In principle, the answers to these questions might perfectly 
coincide: that what agents have reason, or ought, to do just is what it 
would be rationally coherent for them to do, and vice versa.  In several
 ways, however, the answers might be expected to diverge.
First, even if what one ought to do is just to make one’s
responses globally coherent, what it takes to make one’s
responses locally coherent might differ from what it takes to
make them globally coherent.  According to the Subjective Desire-Based
Theory, for example, what agents have reason, or ought, to do or
intend is just what, given what they believe their circumstances to
be, would best satisfy their strongest, present intrinsic desires
taken as a whole.  Suppose that the agent’s strongest, present
intrinsic desire is for health.  Nevertheless, out of habit, he
intends to have a smoke, believing that lighting up is a necessary
means.  According to the Subjective Desire-Based Theory, it is not the
case that he ought to intend to light up.  And it might be said that
if he were globally coherent, the agent would not intend to light up.
But if he does form an intention to light up, he at least achieves a
kind of local coherence.
Second, what the agent has reason, or ought, to do or intend may
depend not on what she believes her circumstances to be, but
on something more “objective.” There are several
possibilities.  What an agent has reason, or ought, to do, might be
what the evidence (where this depends on something other than her
attitudes) available to the agent suggests about her circumstances,
what the evidence of the person making the reason- or ought-claim
suggests about the agent’s circumstances, what the evidence of the
person assessing the claim suggests about the agent’s circumstances,
or all of the relevant facts about the agent’s circumstances.
Consider the Objective Desire-Based Theory, which says that agents
have reason, or ought, to do or intend just what, given what their
circumstances actually are, would best satisfy their strongest,
present intrinsic desires taken as a whole.  Suppose the agent’s
strongest, present intrinsic desire is to drink a gin and tonic, and
she so intends.  However, she mistakenly believes that the stuff in
this bottle is gin, when it is in fact petrol.  So she believes that
mixing the stuff with tonic is a means to drinking a gin and tonic.
According to the Objective Desire-Based Theory, she does not have
reason to intend to mix the stuff with tonic and drink it.  But if she
does so intend, she might be said to have achieved a kind of rational
coherence, both local and global.
Third, one might hold not a Desire-Based Theory, but a Value-Based
Theory, according to which whatever ultimate ends an agent
has reason, or ought, to achieve depend not on what
she desires or wills, but instead on what is of
independent value.  Suppose the madman’s strongest, present intrinsic
desire is to set off a nuclear war, and he so intends.  Moreover, the
madman knows that intending to press this button is a necessary and
sufficient means to setting off a nuclear war.  It might be said that,
in intending to press this button, the madman would achieve a kind of
coherence, both local and global.  And according to the Desire-Based
Theories, the madman ought so to intend.  According to a Value-Based
Theory, however, it presumably is not the case that he ought so to
intend.
There are several reasons, therefore, to expect at least some 
divergence between what one has reason, or ought, to do or intend, and 
what it would be rationally coherent for one to do or intend.  But that 
is perfectly compatible with partial convergence, even of a 
non-accidental character.  As we will discuss below, some suggest that 
among the things that agents have reason, or ought, to do or intend is 
precisely to make their responses rationally coherent.  Just as we ought
 not to torture, or ought to care for our children, we ought to be 
rationally coherent.
We’ll begin by discussing how means-end relations matter for what
one ought, or has reason, to do or intend. (For an opinionated survey,
see Kolodny 2018.) But we should first consider how
“means” is understood. While “means” are often
taken to be tools or resources, for our purposes, we will view means
as actions, intentions, choices, decisions, etc. that might make use
of such tools or resources.  It is natural to think of means to an
end, so understood, as actions that help to cause the end to
occur. But often philosophers count as means to an end whatever may
help to bring it about. M may bring about E by causing
it, as flicking this switch causes the illumination of this room,
but M may also bring about E by helping to constitute
it, as playing this measure partially constitutes the playing of this
sonata, or fulfilling preconditions for it, as registering for this
conference fulfills preconditions for attending it, or preventing
things that might prevent it, as vaccination prevents disease that
might prevent successful completion of the school year. Means are also
often probabilistic.  Something may also count as a means to an end
even if it is not guaranteed to help to bring about the end, but only
has some chance of doing so.  Usage of “end” is also often
ambiguous.  Sometimes “end” is used to refer to
an action, such as the action of illuminating this room.  But
sometimes “end” is used to refer to a state of
affairs that is either desired or valuable, such as the state of
affairs of this room’s being illuminated. We’ll here use
“end” to refer to an action.
Reasons for action are often said to “transmit” from ends to means, 
in the sense that if there is reason for an end, then, because of this, 
there is reason for the means. This idea is captured in Joseph Raz’s 
Facilitative Principle:
 [w]hen we have an undefeated reason to take an 
action, we have reason to perform any one (but only one) of the possible
 (for us) alternative plans that facilitate its performance. (Raz 
2005b) 
 Insofar as what one ought to do depends on what one has reason 
to do, one might expect a similar transmission of “ought” from end to 
means.  If one ought to achieve an end, then one ought to take the 
means, or at least means of certain kinds.
Principles of instrumental transmission of this kind are compatible 
with different views about what ends we have reason to achieve.  For 
example, it may be accepted by either a Desire-Based, or a Value-Based, 
Theory.
What the correct principle, or principles, of instrumental
transmission are is controversial.  Most commonly, principles describe
transmission to necessary means.  However, some speak of sufficient
means, and others speak of neither.  For example, Raz’s Facilitative
Principle speaks of “facilitating plans.” Some
transmission principles say that “oughts” transmit from
end to means, others say that the full force of the reason for the end
transmits to the means, others say that the strength of the reason for
the end that transmits to the means is proportional to other factors,
and others, like Raz’s Facilitative Principle, say only that some
reason for the end transmits to the means.
To illustrate the problems facing an account of instrumental 
transmission, it may be useful to work with some very simple principles,
 which lack many of the qualifications and nuances of Raz’s Facilitative
 Principle and other principles discussed in the literature:
There are several problems that principles of instrumental
transmission need to avoid.  First, means to an end can
be costly, or otherwise objectionable.  Suppose that I ought
to take a job in Alaska.  One (sufficient) means is to fly there;
another (sufficient) means is to take free passage on a merchant ship.
But flying costs more than I would earn there.  Presumably, I ought
not fly.  It may be said that I have some reason to fly, but that it
is outweighed.  This is an argument against Ought Sufficiency.  
However, with other kinds of costs, or objectionable features, it
may sound wrong to say even that one has reason for the means.
Suppose I have reason to alleviate pangs of hunger.  One sufficient
means to this is eating a sandwich; another sufficient means is
killing myself  (Broome 2005b). Some will resist the conclusion that I
have any reason at all to kill myself.  This is an argument against
Strong Reasons Sufficiency and Weak Reasons Sufficiency.  Or suppose I
have reason to improve college policy.  But a necessary means to this
is to kill the old don who resists any change (because unanimous
approval is required).  Some will resist the conclusion that I have
any reason at all to kill the don. This is an argument against Strong
Reasons Necessity and Weak Reasons Necessity.  However, it may not be
an argument against Ought Necessity.  It may be said that the fact
that improving policy requires killing the don is itself a strong
reason against improving policy, in light of which it is not true that
one ought to improve it.  In that case, Ought Necessity does not imply
that one ought to kill the don, which seems intuitive. In any event,
the force of the intuition on which the argument rests may be
resisted.  Granted, it sounds odd to say that one has reason to kill
oneself.  But this may have a pragmatic explanation.  Why bother to
identify any reason to kill oneself when it is vastly outweighed by
the reasons against doing so?  (Raz 2005a; Schroeder 2005a, 2007).
Second, problems arise from repeated applications of
transmission principles.  For one thing, means to means to an
end may actually undermine the end.  Suppose, to take an example of
Ryan Millsap’s (2009a—see the Other Internet Resources), Kenny
has reason to bake both a loaf of bread and a cake for a display on
Marie Antoinette.  A (necessary) means to that end is baking a loaf of
bread.  Plausibly, he has reason to bake a loaf of bread.  A
(sufficient) means to that means is baking a giant loaf,
which uses all of the flour.  But that would prevent him from baking a
cake, and so prevent him from achieving the end.  So, presumably, he
does not have reason to bake a giant loaf, even though it is a means
to something that he has reason to do.  For another thing, if we
accept both Weak Reasons Necessity and Weak Reasons Sufficiency, then
repeated applications of these principles may imply that if there is
reason for something, then there is reason for everything.  Suppose
there is reason to E, and let F be anything.
If E-ing or F-ing is a necessary means to E-ing,
and if F-ing is a sufficient means to E-ing
or F-ing, then, repeated application of those principles
implies that there is reason to F (Millsap 2009b—see the
Other Internet Resources). Note that similar problems arise if we
accept both Ought Necessity and Ought Sufficiency.
Third, a means to an end might have a very low probability 
of helping to bring that end about.  Suppose, to take an example from 
Jackson and Pargetter 1986, Professor Procrastinate has been asked to 
review a book, which he both ought, and has reason, to do.  A 
(necessary) means to reviewing it is accepting the commission to review 
it.  However, even if he accepts the commission, he is very unlikely to 
review it.  Professor Dispatch, in a parallel universe, is in the same 
situation, except that he is very likely to review it if he accepts.  
Perhaps Procrastinate, like Dispatch, has some reason to review it.  But
 Procrastinate may not have as much reason as Dispatch to accept; not 
all of the reason for the end may be transmitted to this (necessary) 
means.  And it may not be the case that Procrastinate ought to accept.  
This is an argument against Strong Reasons Necessity and Ought 
Necessity, since even if one takes a necessary means, there may still be
 a low probability of helping to bring that end about. However, it is 
not an argument against the Sufficiency principles, assuming that 
sufficient means, if taken, are sure to help to bring the end about.
Nevertheless—this is the fourth and final
problem—sufficient means may be superfluous to an end,
where this means something like that, even if those means were
omitted, the end would still be achieved.  Suppose that Drug 1 is a
sufficient means to relieving the patient’s pain.  A doctor is sure to
give Drug 1.  Giving Drug 2, in addition, would at first neutralize
the effect of Drug 1, but then recombine with it to produce a third
drug, which will relieve the patient’s pain.  Giving Drug 2 would be
superfluous to relieving the patient’s pain, although it would help to
bring it about, by being part of the cause of the relief of the
patient’s pain.  Does the doctor then also have any reason to give
Drug 2?  At first, one might be tempted to say that the doctor does
indeed have reason to give Drug 2, but that this reason is outweighed
by the cost of giving Drug 2.  But observe that no matter how low we
make that cost, it still outweighs any reason to give it.  This
suggests that there is no reason at all to give it. Note that
necessary means cannot be superfluous, since if necessary means were
left out, the end would not be achieved.
Now we consider instrumental rationality understood as a matter of
rational coherence.  It is often said that someone is being locally
instrumentally incoherent insofar as he intends an end, believes,
roughly, that something is a means to it, but refuses to intend that
means.  More precisely, it seems that this is so only when the
relevant belief is about necessary means.  Suppose that I
intend to go to Alaska, but believe that flying there is a sufficient,
but not necessary, means to going to Alaska.  Am I being
instrumentally incoherent in refusing to intend to fly there?  Not
obviously: perhaps I believe that going by sea is cheaper, and I
intend that.
Some suggest that this focus, on intentions and beliefs about
necessary means, inspired by Kant’s initial discussion of
hypothetical imperatives (see §4.4 below), is
overly narrow  (see Smith 2004 and Wedgwood 2011).  Not simply
intentions, but also desires, should be considered, and not simply
beliefs about necessary means, but also beliefs about non-necessary
means should be considered.
More precisely still, the relevant belief must be
that intending the means is itself necessary.  Suppose your
dentist intends to remove your tooth, and believes that a necessary
means to removing your tooth is causing you pain.  Is she being
instrumentally incoherent in refusing to intend to cause you pain?
Not necessarily: she might believe that she will remove your tooth
even if she does not intend to cause you pain.  But she will,
presumably, believe that she will remove your tooth only if
she intends to use her instruments.  So, though she wouldn’t
be irrational in not intending to cause you pain, she would be
irrational in not intending to use her instruments (Broome 2003;
Searle 2001; Kamm 2000, 2007).
Moreover, the relevant belief must be that intending the
means now is necessary.  Suppose a beginning student intends
to earn a doctoral degree and believes that, when the dissertation is
completed, intending to submit the final paperwork is necessary for
earning the degree.  It is not clear that she is being instrumentally
incoherent in refusing to intend, now, to submit that paperwork.  She
may trust that, when the time comes, she will intend it (Setiya 2007).
This suggests, as Raz notes, that opportunities for instrumental
incoherence may actually be very rare. 
There seems to be considerable agreement, then, on what we might call the:
But it is unclear exactly what requirement one violates.  
Additionally, it is unclear whether the requirement violated would be 
“normative” in the sense that one ought not to violate it.  In other 
words, it is unclear whether, in being instrumentally incoherent, one 
violates a requirement of reason, in the sense of “reason” 
identified earlier.  In the remainder of this section, we’ll consider 
some possible answers to these questions.
First, (§3.1) we might say that there
isn’t any requirement of reason to be instrumentally coherent as
such, but whenever one is instrumentally incoherent, one violates
some independent requirement of reason.  Second,
(§3.2) we might say that there is
a requirement of reason to be instrumentally coherent as such.  Third,
(§3.3) we might deny that one
necessarily violates a requirement of reason in being instrumentally
incoherent; perhaps the normativity of instrumental coherence is
merely apparent, or the requirement merely evaluative (it may be a
standard of proper functioning without giving anyone reason to comply
with it).  Fourth, (§3.4) one might
think, given the ways in which intention is thought to involve belief,
that in being instrumentally incoherent, one violates a requirement
of theoretical rationality. 
There are, of course, other answers that could be given.  (For 
instance, we briefly discuss a constitutivist approach to instrumental 
incoherence, attributed to Kant, in §4.4)  But 
consideration of these approaches will give a reasonably comprehensive 
picture of the recent attempts to explain the Violation Claim. 
One answer is that when one is instrumentally incoherent one
violates some independent requirement of reason.  That
is, either one has some specific attitude
(or pattern of attitudes) that one ought not to have or
one lacks some specific attitude (or pattern of attitudes)
that one ought to have.  The source of the problem, according to this
answer, is not that when one is instrumentally incoherent,
one violates some requirement of reason to be instrumentally
coherent as such.  The source of the problem is instead that
when one is instrumentally incoherent, then it is guaranteed that
one’s having (or lacking) one attitude (or pattern of attitudes)
violates some independent requirement of reason.  (See
Kolodny 2007b, 2008a; Kiesewetter 2018, esp. Ch. 10; Lord 2018,
esp. Ch. 2.)
Certainly, this can happen in some cases, at least accidentally.
Suppose our madman intends to start World War III, believes that he
will start World War III only if he intends to launch a nuclear
missile, but refuses to intend to launch a nuclear missile.  The
Violation Claim might be explained in this case by pointing out that,
whatever his other attitudes may be, he ought not to have the
intention to start World War III, but does have that intention.  But
why should we suppose that, in general, whenever one has an
instrumentally incoherent set, one either has an attitude (or
pattern) that one ought not to have, or lacks an attitude (or
pattern) that one ought to have?
This would be so, in general, if the following were the case:
It would also be so, in general, if the following were the case:
Ought Pattern 2 speaks of “oughts” for patterns of
intention, rather than for single intentions.  The reason for this is
that one’s having an intention to X can affect one’s reason for
having an intention to Y.  This can happen in the following
way.  First, one’s reason to intend to Y plausibly depends,
among other things, on how likely one is to succeed in it.  Second,
how likely one is to succeed in it in turn depends on how the future
is likely to be.  I am more likely to succeed in drying the laundry if
there is no rain.  Third, how the future is likely to be can depend on
how some person is likely to act.  I am more likely to succeed in
drying the laundry if the children are unlikely to be playing with the
hose at the same time.  Fourth, the relevant person may be the agent
himself.  I am more likely to succeed in drying the laundry if I am
unlikely to be at the same time watering the garden.  Finally, the
fact that an agent intends to X can make it more likely that
the agent will X in the future.  The fact that I intend to
water the garden can make it more likely that I will be watering the
garden.  Thus, the fact that an agent intends to X can make it
more likely that the agent will not succeed in an intention
to Y, and so that the agent has less reason to intend
to Y.  Given that one’s intending to X can affect one’s
reason to Y and vice versa, the questions, “What reason
do I have to intend to
Y?  What reason do I have to intend to X?” may be
insufficiently determinate.  Better questions may instead be
“What reason do I have (to intend to X and to intend
to Y)?  What reason do I have (to intend to X and not to
intend to Y)?  What reason do I have (not to intend to X
and to intend to Y)?  What reason do I have (not to intend
to X and not to intend to Y)?”
This phenomenon, or apparent phenomenon, that the presence of one
intention can affect one’s reason to have another intention, should be
distinguished from the phenomenon, or apparent phenomenon, that the
presence of one intention and the presence or absence of another can
make it the case that one violates or satisfies a rational requirement
of instrumental coherence as such.  First, what matters for rational
requirements is what we believe about the relations between
the intentions, whereas what matters for reason would seem to be how
they are likely to affect one another, which may be
independent of what we believe.  Second, what matters for rational
requirements is intending to X as such, whereas what matters
for reason is what intending to X means for the future.  In
some cases, intending to X (e.g., intending to become King of
France in 2023), may not affect the likely future.  In other
cases, conditions other than intending to X (e.g., my
self-trust that I will X even if I don’t intend it now, or my
knowledge that I will be tortured or coerced into X-ing) may
affect the likely future in the same way.  Finally, rational
requirements are usually taken to be wide-scope, as we will see below.
That is, one never needs to have or lack any particular attitude in
order to satisfy them.  By contrast, one usually needs to have or lack
a particular attitude in order to conform to one’s reason to have a
certain pattern of intentions.  If one ought, for example, (to intend
to X and not to intend to Y), then one can comply with
this requirement of reason only by intending to X and not
intending to Y.
One might argue for Ought Pattern 1 in the following way.  Suppose 
that it is not the case that one ought not to believe that one will E 
only if one intends to M.  Then by:
one ought to believe it.  Suppose further that it is not the case
that one ought not to intend to E.  Then by:
one ought to intend to E.  Suppose further that:
Then one ought to E.  Then by:
one ought to intend to M.  In other words, either one ought
not to believe that one will E only if one intends to M,
or one ought not to intend to E, or one ought to intend
to M.
One problem is that the objections to Ought Necessity that we saw
in §2 seem to apply to Variant as well.
Another is that Practical Strictness seems untenable (Way 2012a;
Cheng-Guajardo 2014). It might be the case neither that one
ought not to intend to E, nor that one ought to intend
to E; intending to E might be merely permitted.  Suppose
I ought to take a can of beans.  I can take the can of beans on the
left, or I can take the equally good can on the right.  It is neither
the case that I ought not to intend to take the can on the left, nor
that I ought to intend to take the can on the left.
But perhaps in such cases one’s intending to take the can on
 the left provides a reason that tips the scales, thereby making it the 
case that one ought to intend the means to that end. (See Schroeder 
2009, §4.1;  For criticism of the view that intentions provide reasons 
in this way, see Broome 2001 and Brunero 2007.)  If that’s true, then 
these cases of “picking” wouldn’t pose a special problem for Ought 
Pattern 1; in all such cases, one ought to intend to M. 
One might argue for Ought Pattern 2 in the following way.  Again, 
suppose that it is not the case that one ought not to have the belief.  
Then, by Epistemic Strictness, one ought to have the belief.  For the 
time being, suppose that one does not intend to M.  Then by:
one ought to believe that one does not intend to M.  Then by:
one ought to believe that one will not E.  Then by:
one has no reason to intend to E.   In other words, so long as one 
does not intend to M, one has no reason to intend to E.  If we also 
accept:
then, so long as one does not intend to M, one has no reason to 
intend to E and reason not to intend to E.  This makes it plausible that
 there is more reason (not to intend to M and not to intend to E) than 
(not to intend to M and to intend to E).  This does not mean 
that one ought (not to intend to M and not to intend to E) all things 
considered.  For example, it might be the case that one ought (to intend
 to M and to intend to E).  But it does mean that whatever pattern of 
intention one ought to have, it is not to (not to intend to M and to 
intend to E).  There is a superior alternative.
One question, of course, is whether we should accept these
assumptions, in particular Required Self-Knowledge.
Another problem is that even if this explains Ought Pattern 2, and
so the Violation Claim, it does not explain the:
Suppose that one ought to have the means-end belief and one ought (to
 intend to E and to intend to M).  However, one avoids incoherence by 
dropping the means-end belief, not intending to E, and not intending to 
M.  Intuitively, one has satisfied some requirement.  This is what the 
Satisfaction Claim reflects.  But one hasn’t adopted the particular 
attitudes (or patterns) that one ought to adopt.  How, then, are we to 
explain the Satisfaction Claim?
A quick answer might be this.  One might suggest, first, that one
ought to be instrumentally coherent, because it is a necessary means
to, or at least a necessary condition of, having the particular
attitudes (or pattern) that one independently ought to have, or not
having the particular attitudes (or pattern) that one independently
ought not to have.  Suppose that one ought to intend to M, but
does not.  Just as (P or Q) is a necessary condition
of P, so too a necessary condition of intending to M is
(either not to intend to E, or not to believe that one
will E only if one intends now to M, or to intend
to M).  Now suppose that instead of intending to M, one
drops one’s intention to E.  While one hasn’t intended
to M, which one ought to do, one has fulfilled a necessary
means, or at least a necessary condition, of that.  Assume Ought
Necessity of §2, perhaps slightly
strengthened: that one ought to take any necessary means to, or at
least fulfill any necessary condition of, what one ought.  In that
sense, by dropping one’s intention to E, one has done something
that one ought, and so satisfied a requirement.  Analogously, if one
ought to post the letter, then, by similar reasoning, one ought
(either to post the letter or to burn it).  So, if one burns the
letter, one has done something that one ought, and so satisfied a
requirement.
Note that this response assumes that either Ought Pattern 1 or
Ought Pattern 2 is correct.  Otherwise, we have no guarantee that, in
any given case, a necessary condition of having the particular
attitudes that one ought to have, or not having the particular
attitudes that one ought not to have, is (either not to intend
to E, or not to believe that one will E only if one
intends now to M, or to intend to M).  So it inherits
all of the challenges in defending Ought Pattern 1 or Ought Pattern
2.
Another problem with this response is that it is not obvious that
Ought Necessity is true, as the Professor Procrastinate example
of §2 suggested.
A third problem is that necessary conditions of intending
to M are easy to come by.  Another necessary condition is
(either intending to M or being instrumentally
incoherent)!  Therefore, in exactly the same way, one satisfies a
requirement by remaining incoherent.  But the intuitive Satisfaction
Claim is precisely that in escaping incoherence one satisfies a
requirement of a kind which one would not satisfy by remaining
instrumentally incoherent.
The Violation and Satisfaction Claims would be explained by a
requirement of reason to avoid or escape instrumental
incoherence as such.  Just as we ought not to torture, or
ought to care for our children, we ought to be instrumentally coherent
as such.
One might instead suggest a weaker view: we have a reason to be 
instrumentally coherent as such.  But this weaker version faces a 
difficulty in explaining the “strictness” of the Violation Claim.  One 
could have a reason to X without being under any requirement to
 X, as when that reason to X is outweighed.  But, according to the 
Violation Claim, whenever one is instrumentally incoherent, one violates
 some requirement.  This “strictness” would thus remain unexplained by 
the weaker view (Broome 1999).  Of course, the weaker view—that we have a
 reason to be instrumentally coherent as such—could be true even though 
it fails to explain the Violation and Satisfaction Claims.
So, let’s work with the stronger view, according to which we ought to
 be instrumentally coherent as such.  One worry about this answer is 
“bootstrapping.”  Suppose that this requirement to be instrumentally 
coherent as such is stated in “narrow-scope” form: if one intends to E 
and believes that one will E only if one intends to M, then one is 
required to intend to M.  Now suppose that one intends to stay in power 
and believes that one will do so only if one intends to kill one’s 
rival.  If one ought to be instrumentally coherent as such, it would 
follow that one ought to intend to kill one’s rival.  But that seems 
implausible.  So, one may conclude, we cannot understand “one is 
rationally required” as implying “one ought.” 
A natural reply, however, is that there is another way to be
 instrumentally coherent: namely, to abandon the intention to stay in 
power.  Thus, a requirement of instrumental coherence as such should 
take “wide-scope.” It should say: one is required to either revise one’s
 intention to E, or revise one’s belief that one will E only if one 
intends to M, or intend to M. (See especially Broome 1999 and Wallace 
2006.  For earlier defenses of the wide-scope view, see Hill 1973 and 
Darwall 1983.)  So even if “one is rationally required” is taken to 
imply “one ought,” all that follows is that one ought to either revise 
the intention to stay in power, or revise the belief that one will do so
 only if one intends to kill one’s rival, or intend to kill one’s rival.
  It does not follow that one ought to intend to kill one’s rival.
However, there are some problems facing this approach, which we 
outline in the supplemental document 
 Problems for Wide-Scoping. 
Some of those problems concern the allegedly implausible 
consequences that emerge when we apply some of the transmission 
principles we discuss in §2 above—specifically, Ought 
Necessity, Weak Reasons Necessity, and Weak Reasons Sufficiency—to the 
relevant wide-scope ought in certain cases. Other problems concern 
whether the wide-scope formulation is adequate as a formulation of the 
rational requirement.
There are other challenges facing the view that the Violation and
Satisfaction Claims are explained by a requirement of reason to be
instrumentally coherent as such.  The proponent of this view,
presumably, should be able to say what the reason is to be
instrumentally coherent as such (see Kolodny 2005, §2). 
Keep in mind that it won’t be enough to state a reason to be disposed
 to be instrumentally coherent.  It doesn’t follow from one’s having a 
reason to have a disposition that one has a reason to manifest that 
disposition on every particular occasion.  And so pointing to a reason 
to be disposed to be coherent wouldn’t yield a reason to be 
instrumentally coherent as such.  (As we’ll see in
 §4.4,
 a similar problem confronts the Kantian constitutivist view that 
continued instrumental incoherence threatens our status as agents.  
Since our agency isn’t at risk with every instance of instrumental 
incoherence, this account won’t yield a reason to be instrumentally 
coherent on every particular occasion; it would only provide a reason to
 do so when one’s incoherence is extreme enough to threaten one’s status
 as an agent.)  Furthermore, it is not clear what reasons there are to 
be disposed to be instrumentally coherent.  It might be thought that 
being disposed to be instrumentally coherent will make one more likely 
to conform to reason over the long run.  But given that instrumental 
coherence may just as soon be gained by revising one’s attitudes against
 reason as in conformity to reason, one might doubt that this is so  
(Kolodny 2008b).
There’s a reason to be skeptical that such a reason could be 
provided.  A reason to be instrumentally coherent as such would have to 
apply at once to beliefs and intentions.  But one might think that this 
cannot be the case: that reasons for belief and reasons for intention 
are fundamentally different in kind.  Reasons for belief are 
considerations that show that the belief is likely to be true, whereas 
reasons for action are considerations that show that the action would 
realize one’s desires, or promote or respect something of value.
Some philosophers have attempted to meet this challenge.  Jonathan
Way (2012a) has developed an account which points to the costs
necessarily involved in intending to E without also intending
to M, specifically the psychological resources that would be
wasted (one’s monitoring one’s progress towards E-ing, being
disposed to take means towards E-ing, etc.).  And Michael
Bratman (2009c) has recently suggested that we have a reason to be
instrumentally coherent as such because doing so is a necessary,
constitutive component of self-governance, and we have an intrinsic
reason to govern ourselves.  In his view, just as we have a reason not
to torture, and a reason to care for our children, we have a reason to
govern ourselves.  And one’s being instrumentally incoherent on any
particular occasion would be a way of failing to govern oneself. 
A third approach to instrumental incoherence holds that one need
not violate any requirement of reason in being instrumentally
incoherent.  One version of this view
(§3.3.1) holds that instrumental coherence
is to be explained in terms of appropriate responses to
one’s beliefs about independent requirements of reason, where
these beliefs could be false.  Another version of this view
(§3.3.2) holds that instrumental incoherence
is nothing more than an indicator that one is not functioning well as
an agent, where this evaluation doesn’t entail any particular
conclusions about what one ought, or has reason, to do.
On this first approach to explaining the Violation and Satisfaction
Claims, what one does “wrong” in being instrumentally
coherent is violate one’s own judgments about one’s reasons (or fail
to be attentive enough to form such judgments in the first place), and
what one does “right” in becoming instrumentally coherent
is respond appropriately to one’s judgments about one’s reasons.
Suppose one is instrumentally incoherent.  Plausibly, one is in a 
position to know this, that one is instrumentally incoherent.  
Plausibly, one is also in a position to know Ought Pattern 2: the 
general fact that, when one is instrumentally incoherent, there is some 
specific change that one ought to make.  So, one is in a position to 
know that there is some specific change that one ought to make.  So, 
plausibly, one ought to give some thought to what this specific change 
is.  In other words,
Suppose one arrives at some such belief.  And suppose one revises
one’s attitudes in accordance with that belief.  If one becomes
instrumentally coherent in this way, then, even if one
revises one’s attitudes in the wrong way (i.e., against reason), one
still satisfies:
This would explain the Satisfaction Claim.
It might be thought that it’s not much of an improvement to explain
the requirement to be instrumentally coherent in terms of
Self-Monitoring and Krasia, since we are still appealing to a
requirement of coherence: namely, Krasia. The only difference is that
it requires us not to be instrumentally coherent, but instead
to be kratically coherent: i.e., to follow one’s judgment
about one’s reasons.  Indeed, if we thought that it were a
requirement of reason to comply with Krasia, then similar
challenges to those we discussed
in §3.2. would reappear, and so it
would not be much of an improvement.  
But, the view considered here naturally suggests a new strategy: 
presenting a Transparency Account according to which the normativity of 
instrumental coherence is merely apparent (Kolodny 2005, §5).
According to the Transparency Account of rational requirements in 
general, when we point out to people that rationality requires something
 of them, we aren’t presenting them with some requirement of reason; 
rather, we’re pointing out to them what they already think reason 
requires of them.  And, so, when we point out to someone that 
rationality requires they be instrumentally coherent with respect to 
some end, we’re pointing out to them that (on the assumption that 
Self-Monitoring is satisfied) they already think that reason requires 
some specific change in their attitudes.  Of course, the instrumentally 
incoherent agent could be mistaken in these thoughts; perhaps he thinks 
reason requires him to intend the means when reason actually requires 
that he abandon the end instead.  It is this possibility for false 
belief that restricts us to saying that the normativity of rational 
requirements is merely apparent.  
However, one might challenge whether the Satisfaction Claim is 
adequately explained by an appeal to Self-Monitoring and Krasia.  
Suppose an instrumentally incoherent agent knows that she ought to give 
up her intention to kill her boss, but instead she comes to intend to 
poison the office coffee, which she believes to be a necessary means to 
killing her boss.  She clearly violates a requirement of reason and she 
clearly violates Krasia, but it still seems that she satisfies some 
requirement in coming to intend the means to her immoral end.  The 
appeal to Self-Monitoring and Krasia can’t explain our thinking that she
 satisfies some requirement in proceeding this way.
Perhaps a violation of a requirement of instrumental coherence is
merely an indicator that an agent is not functioning well in the
exercise of her rational capacities, where this evaluation doesn’t
entail that she ought, or has reason, to be instrumentally coherent on
any particular occasion (see Raz 2005a,b).  In holding this view,
one could also say that there is value in being a properly functioning
agent, and that this value is explained by the ways in which
functioning properly as a agent tends to bring one into conformity
with what reason requires.  But, it doesn’t follow from this that
there is value in functioning properly, or that one has any reason to
function properly, in every particular occasion.  (Similar things
could be said about the value of having well-functioning perceptual
capacities.)  For instance, when one has the unalterable intention to
kill one’s boss (for more on unalterable ends, see 
 Section 1 of
the supplementary document 
  Problems for Wide Scoping), 
there is nothing valuable in one’s
functioning properly, so far as instrumental rationality goes, on that
particular occasion, and one would have no reason to do so (see Raz
2005a, especially pp. 10–13, and Bratman 1987). 
But one might worry about how well this account explains the 
Violation and Satisfaction Claims.  On this view, the requirements 
violated, or satisfied, are simply standards of proper rational 
functioning.  These standards can be used to evaluate how well particular 
agents are functioning, in the same way that standards of what makes for
 a well-functioning perceptual apparatus can be used to evaluate how 
well particular perceivers are functioning.  But, rational requirements 
also seem to call for some response.  For instance, when we 
advise others who are in violation of rational requirements, such as 
those who are instrumentally incoherent, we say that some change in 
attitude is called for.  And, when we ourselves are 
instrumentally incoherent, we feel some “normative pressure” to 
change our attitudes in some way (see Kolodny 2005, §4). It’s unclear 
how these features of rational requirements could be explained by a view
 that takes them to be merely evaluative.  
A fourth approach to explaining the Violation and Satisfaction Claims 
argues that the requirement violated, or satisfied, is, or is explained 
by, requirements on belief exclusively.  There are two 
components to this “cognitivist” approach: first, there is some thesis 
about how intention involves belief, and, second, there is some account 
of how the requirements governing those involved beliefs constitute, or 
explain, the requirement to be instrumentally coherent. 
Here are some candidates for the first component:
(Cognitivist accounts developed with Strong, or a variant of it, are 
found in Harman 1976, 1986; Velleman 1989, 2007; Setiya 2007; Broome
 2009; and Archer 2018.  Earlier defenses of Strong can be found in Hampshire and Hart 
1958 and Grice 1971.  Wallace 2006 develops a cognitivist account with 
Medium, and Binkley 1965 does so with Weak.)
Let’s begin with Strong.  Suppose I am instrumentally
incoherent—that is, I intend to E, believe I
will E only if I intend to M, but don’t intend
to M.  According to Strong, I believe
When we pair this with my instrumental belief
and apply the theoretical rational requirement
we get the result that I am required to believe
or drop either (1) or (2).  If I drop (1), I would cease to intend to
 E (according to Strong) and thereby cease to be instrumentally 
incoherent, and if I drop my instrumental belief (2), I would also cease
 to be instrumentally incoherent.
But is coming to believe (3) enough to cease to be instrumentally 
incoherent?  What if my belief is false?  There are two options for the 
cognitivist at this point.  The first would be to defend  
But we might doubt that we are infallible in our beliefs about our 
own intentions (Bratman 2009b, §4,5).  After all, it seems that we can 
be mistaken in our beliefs about other attitudes we have (see 
Schwitzgebel 2010, §4).
A second option for the cognitivist would be to say that having
 false beliefs about one’s own intentions is possible, but
 theoretically irrational.  (On this option, the cognitivist
 approach to instrumental coherence appeals to two
 theoretical requirements: Closure plus some other requirement not to
 have false beliefs about one’s own intentions.)  However, there is
 usually nothing necessarily incoherent about one’s having
 a false belief.  So, the challenge for cognitivists is to
 explain why, in this particular case, there is.  (This strategy is
 pursued by Setiya 2007, 670–671. For criticism, see Bratman
 2009a, §4 and Brunero 2009, §2.)
Additionally, one might worry that Strong is too strong.  Suppose you
 intend to go shopping on Thursday but don’t believe you intend this and
 instead believe that you intend to go shopping on Friday.  Maybe you’ve
 temporarily forgotten that you’ve recently changed your mind, deciding 
to go on Thursday instead of Friday  (Bratman 2009a, §5).  In this case,
 you might not believe you will go shopping on Thursday.  In light of 
this example, John Broome (2009, §7) suggests the following 
But this wouldn’t help the cognitivist if she aims to account for the
 application of instrumental coherence to all intentions, including 
those we don’t believe we have (Bratman 2009b, §2).  Additionally, both 
Strong and Variant of Strong seem vulnerable to counterexamples.  
Suppose I intend, and believe I intend, to carry out a difficult task.  
Knowing the difficulty involved, I could intend to carry out the task 
but remain agnostic about whether I will do so.  Here’s another 
counterexample: suppose I intend to stop by a bookstore on the way home,
 but know that once I’m riding on my bicycle, I tend to go on 
“autopilot.”  Aware of my absentminded tendencies, I might intend to 
stop by the bookstore without believing I will (Bratman 1987, 38–39; 
also discussed in Holton 2008, §2). Since such intentions make applicable
 a requirement of instrumental coherence, but don’t involve a belief in 
success, the cognitivist cannot explain why requirements of instrumental
 coherence apply to these intentions. 
Next, let us consider Medium.  Suppose again that I am instrumentally 
incoherent—that is, I intend to E, believe I will E only if I intend to 
M, but don’t intend to M.  By
I believe
Let us now suppose that the instrumental belief takes this form:
If I satisfy Closure, then I believe:
However, since I intend to E, then, by Medium, I believe:
Thus, in believing (3) and (4), I violate:
Thus, if one satisfies Closure, then one violates Belief Consistency (Wallace 2006).
One might object to Self-Knowledge, arguing that we aren’t always
aware of what we fail to intend.  One might falsely believe one
intends the means (Bratman 2009a) or one might simply fail to notice
that one hasn’t intended the means (Brunero 2005a).  One response
available to the cognitivist would be to say that such lapses in
self-awareness are possible, but are
theoretically irrational.  And so instrumental coherence
would be explained by Closure, Belief Consistency, and the requirement
to be aware of one’s absent intention in this context.  While it
wouldn’t be plausible to claim that rationality requires, in general,
awareness of what one does not intend, it might be plausible to say
that awareness of what one does not intend is rationally required in
this specific context (Wallace 2006, 118). 
One might also object that if one is going to be a cognitivist about 
practical requirements in general, one must account for both 
instrumental coherence and
But Medium, on its own, does not seem sufficient to account for 
Intention Consistency.  Such a conflict of intentions would involve the 
following beliefs:
But unlike those beliefs involved according to Strong, namely,
(5) and (6) are perfectly consistent with one another.  I could 
consistently believe it’s possible that I not go to the game tonight, and 
possible that I go to the game tonight.  So, we are still in need of an 
explanation of why I’m rationally required to not both intend not to go 
and intend to go (Bratman 2009b, §3).
One might also raise doubts about Medium. Suppose I know I haven’t
yet investigated whether the stores are closed for the holiday on
Thursday, and so I haven’t yet formed any beliefs about whether I can
go shopping then.  Couldn’t I still intend to go shopping on Thursday?
That might be irrational or careless planning on my part, but it seems
possible.  (The example might prove even more convincing if we add the
feature of Bratman’s example above: suppose, forgetting about my
change of mind, I believe I intend to go shopping on Friday, not on
Thursday.)  Perhaps doubts could even be raised, not just about
whether intending to E involves believing E is possible,
but also about whether intending to E involves not
believing E is impossible.  Richard Holton (2008), drawing
on Anscombe’s example from Intention (§52) of a man who
is certain he’ll break down under torture but is determined not to
break down, has argued that one could intend some end while believing
that end isn’t a “live possibility.” Such combinations,
Holton argues, may be irrational, but aren’t impossible. 
Next, let us consider Weak.  Suppose again that I am instrumentally 
incoherent—that is, I intend to E, believe I will E only if I intend to 
M, but don’t intend to M.  By Self-Knowledge, I believe:
When this belief is paired with the contrapositive of my
instrumental belief
Closure requires that I believe
or cease to believe (1) or (2).  But since I intend to E, it
follows, by Weak, that I do not believe (3).  Were I to comply with
Closure by forming the belief (3), I would, according to Weak, thereby
cease to intend to E.  In ceasing to believe (2), I would cease
to be instrumentally incoherent.  And in ceasing to believe (1)
(which, if Self-Knowledge is true, would mean that it is no longer the
case that I do not intend to M) I would also cease to be
instrumentally incoherent.
Some of the objections mentioned above would also apply to this 
account.  There is the objection to Self-Knowledge.  And Anscombe’s 
example, exploited by Holton, also presents a challenge to Weak, since 
the torture victim intends not to break down but believes that he will.
Additionally, one might raise questions concerning the rationality
of responding to the violation of Closure in this context.
Usually, if one discovers that one
believes P, P→Q, but does not
believe Q, the rational way to proceed depends upon one’s
assessment of the relevant reasons for belief (where these are
evidential, not pragmatic, reasons).  Let us assume, for simplicity,
that P→Q is a fixed background belief.  If one
thinks there are really strong reasons for believing P and not
strong reasons for not believing Q, then it would be irrational
for one to refuse to believe Q and instead to drop one’s belief
that P.  Now, according to this cognitivist account, when I’m
instrumentally incoherent, I believe (1) and (2) but not (3).  How
should I proceed?  If I currently do not intend to M, and if,
as Self-Knowledge holds, I’m infallibly aware of what I do not intend,
then it seems that the evidence I have for my belief that I do not
intend to M is really quite strong.  Let’s assume (2) is a
fixed background belief.  In revising in light of my assessment of the
evidence, it seems that the revision could only proceed in one
direction: by modus ponens, coming to believe I will
not E.  It would be irrational for me instead to proceed
by modus tollens, ceasing to believe that I do not intend
to M.  So, if we respond to violations of Closure in the usual
way, we are left with the counterintuitive result that there is only
one way to escape a state of instrumental incoherence: by abandoning
the end.
Finally, one might also cast doubt on the general cognitivist 
strategy being employed here, whether it appeals to Weak, Medium, or 
Strong.  Many of the same questions that we’ve raised about instrumental
 incoherence could be raised about rational requirements on belief, 
including Belief Consistency and Closure.  There are analogues of the 
Violation and Satisfaction Claims for these rational requirements that 
would need to be defended and explained.   For example, Joseph Raz 
questions whether the analogue of the Violation Claim for Belief 
Consistency is even true (see Raz 2005b, §3; Raz 2005a, §5).  If one has
 a set of beliefs that is inconsistent, then at least one of the beliefs
 in that set is false.  But, Raz argues, it does not follow that there 
is any revision in one’s beliefs that one ought to make.  (Reflection on
 logical paradoxes, like the sorities paradox, shows that having an 
inconsistent set of beliefs doesn’t imply that there is any belief in 
the set that one ought to give up.)  Although Raz objects to the 
cognitivist’s appeal to Belief Consistency in particular, similar 
questions might be raised about the cognitivist’s appeal to Closure.
Much discussion of instrumental rationality has taken place in the
context of a debate about whether instrumental rationality is the only
kind of practical rationality or, alternatively, there are other
requirements of practical rationality as well, such as requirements of
prudence and morality.  Typically, the former view is called a
“Humean” one and the latter a “Kantian” one.
In this section, we’ll consider some possible understandings of the
thesis that instrumental rationality is the only kind of practical
rationality (§4.1), and whether some
version of this thesis is given any support by an instrumental
analogue of Lewis Carroll’s famous paradox concerning modus
ponens (§4.2).  We’ll also consider
the views of Hume (§4.3) and Kant
(§4.4) on instrumental rationality.
It is sometimes claimed that instrumental rationality is the only kind of 
practical rationality.  But what exactly is being claimed?
Is the claim about rational incoherence?  Then it would seem to be 
the claim that the only kind of practical, rational incoherence is 
instrumental incoherence.  But this claim would have to contend with the
 idea that there are other kinds of practical, rational incoherence.  
For example, it seems incoherent to refuse to intend what one believes 
one ought to intend.  It also seems incoherent to intend to X and to 
intend to Y when one believes that if one Xs, one will not Y.
Alternatively, the claim might be about reason: that all
(practical) reason is, in some sense, instrumental.  On one
interpretation, the claim would say that the only true claim about
reason is some principle of instrumental transmission.  But this
would seem to imply that there are no practical reasons at all.
Unless there is some other true claim about reasons for
“ends” understood as actions, there is nothing to be
transmitted.  (For arguments that there would need to be another kind
of rationality, see Korsgaard 1997; Lavin 2004; Hubin 1999; Nozick
1993; Hampton 1998.)
A different interpretation is that all reasons are instrumental.
  In other words, the reason for any action (or intention) can be 
expressed as: the action will help to bring about some “end,” where 
“end” is understood not as an action, but instead as some valuable or 
desired state of affairs.  The Desire-Based Theory is committed to this 
claim.  But not all Value-Based Theories are.  The reason for an action,
 for example, might be that it honors or respects something of value, 
even though it does not help to bring it about.
A final interpretation is that all deliberation is of
means.  In other words, there is no place for significant
evaluative or normative reflection on the ultimate ends that one has
reason to bring about.  The Desire-Based Theory seems committed to
this claim, at least to some extent.  According to the Desire-Based
Theory, reflection on the ultimate ends that one has reason to bring
about is just reflection on the non-normative matter of what one in
fact desires, plus grasp of the Desire-Based Theory itself.  On the
other hand, Value-Based theories seem committed to rejecting this
claim, even those Value-Based Theories that accept that all reasons
are instrumental in the sense discussed in the previous paragraph.
For whether a certain state of affairs is valuable, and so an end that
one has reason to bring about, is itself the object of significant
evaluative thought.  (Note that it is a mistake to express the present
idea, that all deliberation is of means, as the idea that one cannot
be criticized for ends.  According to the Desire-Based
Theory, one can be criticized for what one intends
or acts to bring about, insofar as it is not the realization
of one’s strongest, present intrinsic desires.  And even according to
Value-Based theories, one cannot be criticized for what one
has reason to bring about.)
Notice that the Desire-Based Theory is committed to the claim that 
practical reason is exclusively instrumental, on these two last 
interpretations.  This may explain why the Desire-Based Theory is often 
simply identified with “instrumental rationality,” and why the claim 
that “the only kind of practical rationality is instrumental 
rationality” is sometimes just meant as an assertion of the Desire-Based
 Theory.
Lewis Carroll (1895) introduced a famous paradox concerning modus ponens.
  Some philosophers have argued that an instrumental analogue of this 
paradox shows there to be something special about instrumental 
rationality, and perhaps even provides support for some version of the 
thesis that instrumental rationality is the only kind of practical 
rationality.
Carroll imagined a conversation between Achilles and a Tortoise
regarding the following valid argument: 
Therefore,
The Tortoise adopts a skeptical position, asking how he can be 
logically forced into accepting (Z) when he accepts (A) and (B).  Achilles 
attempts to supply him with the missing premise:
But the Tortoise grants (C), and resumes his skepticism, asking how
he can be logically forced to accept (Z) when he accepts (A), (B), and
(C).  It soon dawns on Achilles that the mere addition of further
premises (like “If (A), (B), and (C) are true, (Z) must be
true”, and so on) won’t help resolve the Tortoise’s skepticism.
One could keep on adding such premises ad infinitum and yet
not get the Tortoise to accept (Z).
Much has been written about what lessons to draw from Carroll’s
paradox, but this much seems clear: the Tortoise refuses to accept (Z)
because he refuses to apply modus ponens to the premises he
accepts.  So, if modus ponens itself is merely
accepted by him as yet another premise, that won’t suffice to get him
to accept (Z).
Now, imagine we confront someone who holds some end E,
believes some means M is necessary for E-ing, yet
doesn’t intend to M, and, like the Tortoise, doesn’t intend
to M because he refuses to apply instrumental
rationality to the ends he has, including E.  If we suggest
that he remedy this defect by adopting yet another end (namely, the
end of doing what instrumental rationality requires), this wouldn’t
help matters.  Since his problem is that he doesn’t apply instrumental
rationality to the ends he has, he wouldn’t apply instrumental
rationality to this new end as well, and so still wouldn’t intend
to M (or drop the intention to E).  So, the mere
addition of instrumental rationality as another end would be
futile.
What should we conclude from this instrumental analogue of
Carroll’s paradox?  Railton (1997) argues that it shows that a certain
form of skepticism about rationality—specifically, one’s asking
“Why should I comply with the norms of practical
rationality?”—can be answered.  First, the asking of this
skeptical question reveals a commitment to at least instrumental
rationality, since one is here questioning whether being practically
rational would advance one’s ends.  And, second, the
instrumental analogue of Carroll’s paradox shows that we can’t think
of this commitment to instrumental rationality as merely another end
the agent accepts and could dismiss at will.  If the skeptic thinks it
is, Railton suggests that “we can answer ‘No, on pain of
regress, it cannot be just another end of yours’”
(p. 317).
However, it’s not clear why the skeptic would have to think of
instrumental rationality as just another end she has.  Couldn’t she
think of it instead as (or also as) a disposition that she manifests,
or a capacity that she exercises, with respect to the ends that she
accepts?  (If so, she would avoid the particular problem that
confronts the character in the instrumental analogue of Carroll’s
paradox, who merely accepts instrumental rationality as another end
without applying it to her ends.)  And then couldn’t she
request some philosophical explanation of why she should exercise that
capacity?  That she already has the capacity is of course no barrier
to posing such a question (Wedgwood 2005).  Indeed, as we’ve seen
in §3.3, some philosophers
have denied that we always ought, or have reason, to be
instrumentally coherent; they’ve argued that rational requirements are
only apparently normative, or are merely evaluative.
Dreier (2001) concludes that the instrumental analogue of Carroll’s
paradox shows that instrumental rationality has a special status.  In
Carroll’s original paradox, the Tortoise would be such that we
couldn’t give him reasons to believe in some proposition.  In the
normal case, I can provide you with a reason to believe Q by
getting you to believe P and to believe P→Q.  But
this simply won’t work for the Tortoise, who refuses to
apply modus ponens.  Likewise, Dreier observes, we would be
incapable of giving reasons to someone who refused to draw
“practical inferences” between ends and means.  The
acceptance of instrumental rationality is thus, he argues, a necessary
condition for being receptive to reasons at all.  And this supports
his conclusion that “the only ultimate sort of reasons are
instrumental reasons” (p.  43).  This seems to be an endorsement
of the Desire-Based Theory. 
Does the conclusion follow?  Even if a disposition to be
instrumentally rational is indispensable in the way Dreier suggests
to having a practical reason, nothing follows
about what one has practical reason to do.  Additionally,
it’s worth noting that it’s doubtful that Carroll’s original paradox
would license a restriction on the scope of theoretical
reasons analogous to the Humean restriction on the scope of practical
reasons that Dreier thinks the instrumental analogue of Carroll’s
paradox supports.  That is, it is not obvious that I have reason to
believe Q only if I am disposed come to believe it by
applying modus ponens.  Perhaps my merely believing, with
reason, both P and P→Q provides me with a reason
for believing Q.  Or perhaps the mere fact the available
evidence supports Q is enough (Jollimore 2005).
Korsgaard (2009) argues that we can draw a conclusion about
the metaethical status of instrumental rationality by
considering an instrumental analogue of Carroll’s paradox.
Specifically, she appeals to it to argue against metaethical realism
about instrumental rationality (and about other normative principles
as well).  Let’s suppose that there is a requirement of reason to be
instrumentally coherent.  A realist would claim that there is some
normative fact, according to which we ought to be instrumentally
coherent.  But a skeptic might ask, “Why ought I apply that
fact—that I ought to be instrumentally coherent—to my
actions?” The realist might answer, “Because—and
here’s another normative fact—it just is the case that you ought
to apply the fact that you ought to be instrumentally coherent to your
actions.” But one might resume one’s skepticism and ask why one
must apply that normative fact to one’s actions.  One could
keep adding normative facts ad infinitum without providing an
answer to the question, in the same way that Achilles could keep
adding premises without meeting the Tortoise’s challenge.  
A full discussion of the metaethical issues raised by this argument 
would take us too far afield  (see Parfit 2006). But one strategy of 
reply is to argue that the realist has already answered the question.  
What it is for such normative facts to be normative just is 
that they require that you act in some way.  If you’re asking of 
normative facts in general why you should act in accordance with them, 
then you don’t fully understand what normative facts are.
The thesis that instrumental rationality is the only kind of
practical rationality is often taken to be a “Humean”
thesis, though, as we’ve seen (§4.1),
there are several ways in which this thesis could be understood.  One
could take the thesis just to be an assertion of the Desire-Based
Theory.  One could also take the thesis to specify that instrumental
coherence is the only requirement of practical rationality.  However,
it is doubtful that Hume held either of these views.  
There are some passages which might seem to suggest these views.
In Book II of the Treatise (1739–40), Hume denies that
a person’s ends, however immoral or imprudent, can be unreasonable
(“contrary to reason,” to use his exact phrase) if they’re
not based on a false belief:
Here he seems to claim that one’s choosing means insufficient for 
one’s end can be deemed unreasonable, even though the end itself is not 
subject to such rational assessment. 
However, this wouldn’t support the Desire-Based Theory, since the
Desire-Based Theory allows that ends can be unreasonable when they
don’t promote the satisfaction of one’s strongest, present intrinsic
desires.  For instance, choosing one’s total ruin, when doing so runs
counter to one’s strongest, present intrinsic desires, even when doing
so isn’t based on a false belief, can be criticized as unreasonable on
the Desire-Based Theory.
Soon after this passage, Hume is careful to note that it wouldn’t
be one’s intending of means insufficient for one’s ends
that’s unreasonable, but the false belief on which this
intention is based.  For example, when I falsely believe that staying
on 95N will get me to Memphis, which is where I intend to go, and so I
intend to stay on 95N, it’s my belief that 95N will get me to Memphis
that’s unreasonable, not the intention, based on this belief, to stay
on 95N.
Why did Hume think this?  Hume holds that “reason is the
discovery of truth and falsehood” (p. 458).  Since beliefs aim
to correctly represent the world—and the beliefs that succeed in
representing the world are true, while the beliefs that fail to do so
are false—they can be assessed as reasonable or unreasonable.
But passions, as well as intentions and actions, are “original
existences.” They don’t purport to represent or
“copy” some other “existence” (p. 415).
Specifically, they don’t aim to correctly represent the world, and so
they can’t be true or false.  Hence, they can’t be assessed as
reasonable or unreasonable. 
In light of such considerations, many philosophers have argued that
Hume doesn’t endorse an instrumentalist conception of practical
reason, but instead, more radically, is a skeptic about all of
practical reason.  (See, for instance, Hampton 1995; Millgram 1995;
Korsgaard 1997.  For objections to this skeptical interpretation of
Hume, see Setiya 2004.)  On this interpretation, Hume acknowledges the
existence of requirements of theoretical reason, since
beliefs can be assessed as reasonable or unreasonable, but is
skeptical about the existence of requirements of practical
reason, including instrumental reason, since desires, intentions, and
actions can’t be assessed as reasonable or unreasonable.  (Even a
preference for “one’s own acknowledg’d lesser good”
wouldn’t be unreasonable, on his view.)  Since, on this
interpretation, Hume was skeptical about practical reason in
general, we can’t appeal to his view to establish a special place
for instrumental rationality among the requirements of practical
rationality. 
Various challenges could be raised against Hume’s rather narrow 
conception of reason.  But our primary interest here is in whether Hume 
can provide us with a plausible account of instrumental rationality.
 On Hume’s view, our intentions are subject to rational criticism when, 
and only when, they are based on false beliefs (and, again, it’s the 
belief that’s to blame, strictly speaking).  As an account of 
instrumental rationality, Hume’s view would face two serious objections.
First, it seems that one can be instrumentally irrational without
having any intentions based on false beliefs (or lacking any
intentions because of false beliefs).  John Broome provides an
example: suppose I know the hotel is on fire and that the only escape
involves my intending to go through the open window, and, though I
intend to live, I sit on the windowsill singing happily until the
flames consume me.  This is a clear case of instrumental
irrationality, despite my not having any false beliefs (Broome 1997).
Indeed, one could fail to intend the means believed necessary for
one’s ends because of rage, depression, distraction, grief, or other
causes which don’t necessarily involve any false beliefs (Korsgaard
1986).  Hume would have to conclude either that such cases are
impossible, or that they involve no instrumental irrationality.
Second, it seems that one can have intentions based on false
beliefs without being instrumentally irrational, or irrational in any
other way.  Instrumental rationality, as it’s usually understood, is a
requirement of coherence governing one’s intentions and
beliefs—a requirement that is in place regardless of
the truth of those beliefs.  The person who intends to get to
Memphis, believes that he must intend to stay on 95N to get there, and
does intend to stay on 95N, displays coherence in his attitudes,
despite having a false belief.  So, an accusation of instrumental
irrationality here would be misplaced. (Additionally, it would also be
inappropriate to accuse him of any theoretical irrationality,
if we suppose that this belief isn’t inconsistent with any other
beliefs he holds, and he also believes there’s conclusive evidence for
it, and so forth.)  Hume would have to conclude either that such cases
are impossible, or that they involve instrumental irrationality. 
An alternative to the narrow instrumentalism associated with Hume is 
found in the work of Immanuel Kant, who thought that rationality 
required us not only to be instrumentally rational, but also to obey the
 moral law.  In his Groundwork for the Metaphysics of Morals (1785),  
Kant distinguishes two kinds of imperatives:
For example, “If you intend to go to law school, take the
LSAT” would be a hypothetical imperative since it commands an
action (taking the LSAT) as a means to some end (going to law school).
If you didn’t have any ends that would be served by taking the LSAT,
the command for you to do so would be withdrawn.  Categorical
imperatives, such as “If someone is drowning nearby, offer
assistance,” differ in two ways.  First, the command to offer
assistance applies to you regardless of whether offering assistance
serves any of your (desired or intended) ends.  Second, you have a
reason to offer assistance regardless of whether doing so serves any
of your (desired or intended) ends.  (Philippa Foot has argued that
this second feature doesn’t follow from the first: a rule of
etiquette, or a club rule, may apply to you regardless of whether
compliance with it serves any of your ends, but you may nonetheless
have no reason to comply with it. See Foot 1972.) 
By “one wants” in the passage above, Kant means
“one wills”: something closer to “one intends”
than “one desires.” (After all, it wouldn’t be plausible
to suggest that one is instrumentally irrational in not intending the
necessary means to what one merely wants.  I want to own a
BMW, but I don’t intend to work the kind of job that would allow me to
buy one.  But there’s nothing incoherent about my continuing to desire
to own one.)  According to Kant:
But if Kant’s view is to provide a plausible account of
instrumental coherence, it should instead refer to the
means believed to be indispensably necessary, since there is
nothing incoherent about not willing necessary means of which you are
unaware, and something incoherent about not willing the means you
believe are necessary, even when they actually aren’t (Korsgaard
1997, 236). 
Kant’s parenthetical remark in the passage above is important.  For
Kant, when one fails to will the necessary means to one’s ends, then
reason has failed to have decisive influence.  In other words, one is
irrationally incoherent.  Less guardedly, Kant says “the
proposition (if I fully will the effect, then I will the action
required of it) is analytic” (4:417).  But it is puzzling how
this proposition could be analytic.  If it were analytic, then it
would be conceptually impossible to be instrumentally
incoherent since whenever one doesn’t will the means, then one doesn’t
will the end.  (For a defense of this conceptual impossibility, see
Finlay 2009.)  And if it’s conceptually impossible to be
instrumentally incoherent, we’d be unable to make sense of why Kant
formulates his account of instrumental incoherence in terms
of imperatives, which, on Kant’s view, are commands addressed
to a will that is capable of both following and not following the
commands (Kant 4:414; Hill 1973, 430; Korsgaard 1997, 236).  So,
perhaps we should read Kant’s claim as that if one wills the
end, rationality requires that one will the means.  (For an
alternative reading, see Lee 2018.)
Even so, there is a debate over the interpretation of Kant’s claim,
particularly about the logical scope of “requires.”
According to the wide-scope interpretation of Kant’s claim, what
reason requires is that one either will the means or
not will the end.  In contrast, according the narrow-scope
interpretation of Kant’s claim, if one wills the end, then what reason
requires is that one will the means.  The wide-scope
interpretation posits a disjunctive requirement (that one either not
will the end or will the means) that, like Kant’s categorical
imperative, applies to every rational agent, regardless of
the particular ends she wills.  But it’s hard to square the existence
of such a universally applicable requirement with some other claims
Kant makes about how hypothetical imperatives are to be distinguished
from categorical ones, and how hypothetical imperatives could be
derived from an analysis of the concept of willing an end. (See Schroeder
2005b.  For a defense of the wide-scope interpretation against Schroeder’s objections, see Rippon 2014. For a related discussion of these issues, see Schwartz
2008.)  
But the narrow-scope interpretation appears to leave Kant’s view 
vulnerable to “detachment” objections.  Suppose you will some immoral 
end but, irrationally, don’t will the immoral means you believe 
necessary to carry out this immoral end.  On the narrow-scope 
interpretation, reason would require that you will the immoral means.  
But that seems implausible.  At the very least, it would lead to 
something Kant wouldn’t accept: reason issuing contradictory commands.  
Your willing the immoral means would be required by a hypothetical 
imperative but forbidden by the categorical imperative (Hill 1973, 436).
Kant could avoid the detachment problem if he holds, as some
interpreters claim, that it is impossible to will (Wille)
immoral ends (Schroeder 2005b, §3).  If this interpretation is
right, then reason would never require one to will immoral means.  But
it would also leave Kant without an account of instrumental
incoherence, at least as we have been understanding it.  After all,
agents can display instrumental incoherence in the pursuit
of both moral and immoral ends.  To use Kant’s own examples,
the doctor who doesn’t intend the means believed necessary to making
his patient healthy is instrumentally incoherent in the same way as is
the poisoner who doesn’t intend the means believed necessary to kill
his victim (4:415).  So, this interpretation would have Kant avoiding
the detachment objection, but at the cost of no longer presenting an
account of instrumental incoherence that holds regardless of whether
the end is reasonable or good.  
Let’s now turn to Kant’s explanation of the normative authority of 
hypothetical imperatives.  While Kant presents a complicated and 
intricate argument to explain the normative authority of the categorical
 imperative, he claims that hypothetical imperatives require “no special
 discussion,” and spends comparatively little time discussing them 
(4:417).  Kant’s approach here—which might seem to play into the hands of
 instrumentalists (see §4.1 above) who, while 
skeptical of the rational authority of the categorical imperative, 
follow Kant in thinking that the authority of hypothetical imperatives 
is obvious and unproblematic—has been challenged.  Although the “ought” 
of a hypothetical imperative is contingent on an agent’s ends, that 
“ought” still needs to be explained.  Additionally, it’s not clear that a
 hypothetical “ought” is any more compatible with a naturalistic 
worldview than a categorical one.  Specifically, some of the same 
metaethical challenges that have been raised about the status of the 
categorical “ought” could be raised about normative claims in general, 
including the hypothetical “ought”  (Hampton 1998, Ch. 4; Shafer-Landau
 2006, §6).
So, what is Kant’s explanation of the normative authority of
hypothetical imperatives?  According to Korsgaard (1997), Kant’s views
changed over the course of his philosophical development.  Kant’s
early “dogmatic rationalist” view (evident in
the Groundwork) held that we should comply with these
hypothetical imperatives simply because they express what a perfectly
rational agent would do.  But the mature Kantian view—which
Korsgaard endorses—explains the normative authority of
hypothetical imperatives in terms of the commitments that are
constitutive of willing.  According to this view, what’s involved
in willing some end (as opposed to merely desiring it) is
being committed to taking the means to that end.  It’s not
that complying with this commitment is constitutive of
intention (this would render instrumental irrationality conceptually
impossible) but that having this commitment is constitutive
of intention.  So, when one is instrumentally irrational, one fails to
live up to one’s own commitments.  Korsgaard writes:
But is Korsgaard right that willing an end necessarily
involves prescribing that end to yourself?  Korsgaard argues
that to will some end, you must at least take that end to be good in
some sense, and you must also think that there is a reason for
pursuing that end (246, 250–1).  But it seems possible for one
to have some akratic end while failing to see anything even pro
tanto good about it, or any reason to pursue it (Wallace 2006,
§1).  And it’s clear that one could display instrumental
rationality or irrationality relative to these akratic ends.  So,
Korsgaard’s view seems unable to explain the authority of instrumental
rationality with respect to such ends—ends that an
agent has but doesn’t prescribe to herself.
Korsgaard offers a second Kantian explanation of the authority of 
instrumental rationality.  She argues that incessant instrumental 
irrationality threatens one’s status as an agent:
But this argument doesn’t provide a reason to conform to the
instrumental principle in every case in which the instrumental
principle is applicable.  Rather, it provides a reason to do so only
when accompanied by enough other instances of non-conformity to
threaten one’s status as an agent (Kolodny 2005, 544; Shaver 2006,
342). So, like the previous Kantian argument, and like the Hume’s
skepticism discussed in §4.3, this argument
also fails to explain why instrumental rationality applies in every
case in which it does.