For contemporary feminists, the question of who or what women are is
not easily answered. Both analytic and continental traditions find a
clear articulation of the problem in Simone de Beauvoir’s 1949
book, The Second Sex where she famously claims that
“One is not born, but rather becomes a woman” (1953, 281).
Elizabeth Spelman’s consideration of this claim (1988) can serve
as a basis for the analytic tradition’s reflections on the
question of who or what women are meant to be while Judith
Butler’s analysis (1990) can do the same for the continental
tradition. 
The claim that “One is not born, but rather becomes a
woman” signals a distinction between sex, comprising physical
and biological aspects of bodies, and gender, comprising learned
behaviors, attitudes and aspirations. While this distinction is
complex and controversial enough (see the entry on
 feminist perspectives on sex and gender)
 de Beauvoir’s claim also raises what are now termed
intersectional issues. Spelman notes that in parts of The Second
Sex de Beauvoir recognizes that if one is not born but rather
becomes a woman, it is not the same to become a white woman as it is
to become a black one, for example, and not the same to become a
bourgeois woman as it is to become a proletarian one. Indeed, de
Beauvoir bemoans the effect this difference has for women’s struggles
for freedom and equality. Women “live dispersed among the
males,” she writes, “attached through residence,
housework, economic condition, and social standing to certain men
– fathers or husbands – more firmly than they are to other
women. If they belong to the bourgeoisie, they feel solidarity with
men of that class, not with proletarian women; if they are white,
their allegiance is to white men, not to Negro women” (1953,
xix). Not only are women’s allegiances class and race bound but their
classes and races can lead to tensions and conflicts. Among other
observations De Beauvoir makes, Spelman notes, are that bourgeois
women can be hostile to their working class male and female servants;
that upper-class girls are brought up to believe in their superiority
to working class men and that during the American Civil War white
Southern women defended slavery even more fiercely than their male
counterparts. 
In other parts of The Second Sex, however, de Beauvoir
ignores the consequences of intersections of gender with class and
race, and talks about women in general. In this regard, Spelman points
to her contrast between women, on the one hand, and proletarians,
aborigines, blacks and Jews, on the other, as well as to her
ascription of women’s failure historically to reject their
subordinate social position to the advantages they gain from their
alliance with “a superior caste.” Here de Beauvoir seems
to forget that many women are proletarians, aborigines, blacks and
Jews and she writes as if all women shared the same relation to the
cast of white bourgeois men she calls the “superior
caste”(1953, xxi). Spelman also notes the contrast de Beauvoir
sets up between men defined as citizens and women depicted as wives
“shut up in the home;” the way she refers appreciatively
to August Bebel’s comparison of women and the proletariat in his
Women under Socialism; the use she makes of Hegel’s
discussion of the relationship between master and slave to describe
the relationship between men and women; and her comparison of
“Negro slavery” with female slavery (Spelman 1988, 64–5).
De Beauvoir’s work thus contains a contradiction in its thinking about
women: Sometimes it conceives of women as a homogenous group,
uniformly subordinate to men, and sometimes it conceives of women as
“dispersed,” with different relations of solidarity with,
and subordination to, different groups of men. Both conceptions have
problems. In conceiving of women as dispersed according to race and
class de Beauvoir’s work raises the question of what similarities in
experience, interest or concern might underwrite feminist struggles.
Sally Haslanger calls this the commonality problem (2000, 37). What
experiences does a black Sudanese Muslim woman displaced by ethnic
cleansing in Dafur share with the Queen of England (Mikkola 2007,
363)? What connects white middle-class women pursuing professional
careers with, say, poorer women or women of color who may take over
their domestic chores (Ehrenreich 2002)? Indeed, might interests in a
living wage by female childcare workers not oppose interests of more
privileged women in affordable day care (Collins 1998, 223)? Moreover,
in conceiving of women as a homogeneous group and contrasting them to
proletarians, aborigines, blacks and Jews de Beauvoir betrays her
identification of women in general with a certain group of women,
namely those that are not proletarian, aboriginal, black or Jewish.
Haslanger calls this the normativity problem. Talk of women as a
single group falsely generalizes the interests, characteristics and
concerns of specific women – mainly those that are middle-class,
European, white and heterosexual – and makes them the norm for
all.
Kimberlé Crenshaw (1991) draws the consequences of this false
generalization for combatting violence against African American women.
Civil rights groups often downplay statistics about domestic violence
in African American neighborhoods because they do not want to feed
stereotypes about the violence of African American men. Likewise,
feminists often downplay the statistics because they do not want
domestic violence to appear to be simply a crime against women of
color. To this extent, African American men are the norm for civil
rights advocates and white women are the norm for women’s rights
advocates. Women of color simply disappear from view.
In making this point, Crenshaw underscores concerns about exclusion
voiced by the Combahee River Collective, founded in 1974 as well as by
writers such as bell hooks (1981, 7), Aída Hurtado (1989,
849–50) and the contributors to such influential anthologies as
This Bridge Called My Back (Moraga and Anzaldua 1981) and
All the Women Are White, All the Blacks Are Men, But Some of Us
Are Brave: Black Women’s Studies (Hull, Scott and Smith 1982).
These concerns cannot be accommodated by what Chandra Mohanty calls
the “add and stir” approach (2003, 518), which tries to
counter the exclusion of many women but still takes the experiences of
white European heterosexual women as the base while mixing in the
experiences of others, say, Indonesian Nike workers, as if they were
mere seasoning. Nor can the concerns be accommodated by taking
Indonesian Nike workers as normative for non-Western women any more
than the concerns of mid-twentieth century Parisian women can be taken
as normative for Western ones (2003, 34).
Ann Garry (2011) looks to a Wittgensteinian family resemblance
analysis. We can give up on the existence of some property,
experience, or interest that all women share without giving up on
overlapping and crisscrossing characteristics that become clear within
specific social contexts. For her part, Haslanger proposes an
“ameliorative” concept of women, one that can help with
attempts to end sexist oppression. If gender cannot be defined in
terms of characteristics or concerns common to members of a particular
gender, she thinks it can nonetheless be defined “in terms of
how one is socially positioned, where this is a function of, e.g., how
one is viewed, how one is treated, and how one’s life is
structured socially, legally, and economically.” On this
account, gender categories represent hierarchical relations in which
one group maintains a subordinate relation to another and the
difference between the two groups is marked by “sexual
difference” (2000, 38). Thus:
Haslanger acknowledges that this definition excludes some we might
intuitively think of as women such as women of inordinate privilege
who are not marked for subordination by their observed or imagined
bodily features. Nevertheless, she thinks that if we tailor our
definition to the feminist purposes of overcoming subordination these
“women” are not the ones who matter (2000, 46). 
Yet Mari Mikkola (2009) claims that the confusion Haslanger’s terms
would create by excluding many commonly defined as women “is
unlikely to help in the task of challenging existing social
conditions.” For her part, Katharine Jenkins (2016) thinks the
definition excludes some trans women. Indeed, she argues it probably
includes only those trans women whose gender presentation is respected
because they are perceived as possessing bodily features associated
with a female’s role in reproduction and hence are perceived as either
cisgender or as having undergone medical interventions that have
altered some of their bodily features so that they now are understood
as the same sort of features cis women possess (400). According to
Jenkins, Haslanger’s ameliorative project can be rescued by
considering gender in terms not only of class, as Haslanger does in
talking about gender, but also as identity, as Haslanger does in
talking about race. Here gender and racial identities involve
navigating the norms associated with those identities. There are thus
two concepts that need to be the focus of an ameliorative inquiry:
being classed as a woman and having a female gender identity (415–6).
The concern with which Butler opens her 1990 and now-classic book,
Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Identity, is
the relation between construction and representation. As a political
movement, feminism supposes that it represents a set of pre-existing
subjects, namely women, who are uniformly oppressed by a uniform
patriarchy. Yet if we follow Foucault, we have to ask who these
pre-existing subjects are. More specifically, if we return to de
Beauvoir’s claim that “One is not born, but rather becomes
a women” we have to ask who or what it is that becomes a woman.
It is misleading to think of oppression in terms of structures of
power over against the subjects that precede them because subjects, as
the particular subjects they are, are first constituted through
specific authorizations “through the forms of power that
regulate, control, represent and protect them.” Hence,
“the juridical formation of language and politics that
represents women as ‘the subject’ of feminism is itself a
discursive formation and effect of a given version of representational
politics” (1990, 2). While de Beauvoir’s claim assumes a
pre-existing female sexed person who acquires the attitudes, behaviors
and aspirations of a feminine gender through socialization, Butler
maintains that it is through regimes of gender that we first conceive
of bodies as sexed. “Gender is … the discursive/cultural
means by which ‘sexed nature’ or ‘a natural
sex’ is produced and established as
‘prediscursive’” (1990, 7). This discursive
formation of both gender and sex is not only inevitably exclusionary
and not only “the mark imposed by the oppressor” (Wittig
1992, 11) but also inconsistent and incoherent both across different
historical contexts (see Riley 1988) and in relation to race, class,
sexual identities and so on. 
As Butler points out, Luce Irigaray (1985) complicates matters
further. Here Irigaray’s reference is de Beauvoir’s claim that a woman
“is defined and differentiated with reference to man and not he
with reference to her; she is the incidental, the inessential as
opposed to the essential. He is the Subject, he is the Absolute
– she is the Other” (1953, 13). De Beauvoir insists that
there is no time in history in which women were not the Other: men are
always the One and women are always the Other. Moreover, as the Other,
they live only in relation to the One and have no free human existence
or subjectivity on their own. They occupy space in a man’s world
only as relative and inessential aspects of it. Yet Irigaray explains
that if women are the Other to men they cannot be defined
independently of a definition of men. To define women as the Other of
men is to articulate their identity within a vocabulary that takes men
as its norm. But if they cannot be defined independently of men, how
are they be Other from them? If women can be articulated only within a
male-normed language, then language cannot get at their otherness at
all. They are always, instead, part of a language system expressing
the One. The “exclusion” of women, Irigaray writes,
“is internal to an order from which nothing escapes: the order
of (man’s) discourse. To the objection that this discourse is
perhaps not all there is, the response will be that it is women who
are ‘not-all’” (1985, 88). Julia Kristeva agrees.
“A woman cannot be,” she writes. “It is something
which does not even belong in the order of being” (1981, 137).
If women disappear into various nodes of intersectionality in the
analytic tradition, in the continental they cannot be thought in the
first place. 
Is there any way to rescue them? Butler is not wedded to the idea that
we need a stable conception of women. Rather, she wonders whether we
should entertain “a radical critique that seeks to free feminist
theory from the necessity of having to construct a single or abiding
ground,” and she asks whether “the construction of the
category of women as a coherent and stable subject” is “an
unwitting regulation and reification of gender relations” (1990,
5). Other feminists making use of continental sources are less sure
about this conclusion. Iris Marion Young (1994) turns to Jean-Paul
Sartre’s distinction between a series and a group. For Sartre, a
group is a collection of people who consciously undertake a common
project together where the project typically is one best taken up by
this sort of group (1994, 724). Storming the Bastille is an example.
In contrast, a series is less organized and not at all self-conscious;
here the example is people waiting for a bus. These individuals
possess a common interest in traveling along a certain route, but they
have, or need have, no direct relation to one another. This series
could become a group were individuals within it to start complaining
about the length of time they wait for the bus, and they could
undertake together some sort of collective protest. Nonetheless,
without this move toward collective action, they remain isolated from
one another and focused on the bus, which Sartre and Young call a
practico-inert reality, rather than on each other. 
Women, for Young, are a series, where one practico-inert reality is an
effect of a compulsory heterosexuality that focuses on the features of
a body connected to sexual reproduction. Other practico-inert
realities include pronouns, verbal and visual representations,
clothes, cosmetics, social spaces, and spaces associated with the
sexual division of work and other activities. In each case, these
realities describe structures or objects to which individuals relate
themselves serially, as they relate themselves to a bus. Conceiving of
women as a series thus allows for the sense in which they share
certain features but in which they can also possess striking
differences in their relation to the realities that make them part of
that series. Women are “a serial collective defined neither by
any common identity nor by a common set of attributes that all
individual in the series share” (1994, 737). 
In another attempt to rescue women, Linda Martín Alcoff (2005)
appeals to Maurice Merleau-Ponty and Hans-Georg Gadamer to anchor
women’s identity in embodiment. Bodies and bodily experiences differ
for men and women. These differences can stem from cultural practices
that promote different ways of moving, siting, standing, running,
speaking, and throwing a ball, for instance. Moreover, because of
differences in physical strength, men and women also approach the same
task differently, using different parts of their bodies to do the same
things. Finally, in distinction from men, women’s bodily experiences
include the “experience of breasts, menses, lactation and
pregnancy” (Alcoff 2005, 106). For Alcoff, these differences
lead to differences in women’s orientations or what, following
Gadamer, she calls horizons on themselves and their world. Alcoff does
not deny that these horizons vary according to the traditions and
cultures to which various women belong; nor does she deny that
horizons also vary according to intersections with other factors, such
as race and class. At the same time, she argues, “The
possibility of pregnancy, childbirth, nursing, and in many societies,
rape are parts of females’ horizons … and they exist there
because of the ways we are embodied” (2005, 176). Yet, Stephanie
Julia Kapusta (2016) questions Alcoff’s emphasis on biological
differences and pregnancy given the way in which it can marginalize
and inflict psychological, moral, or political harms on certain
individuals, including trans people. Georgia Warnke (2007) proposes a
different hermeneutic approach. Identities, she claims, are
interpretations of, or ways of understanding, who we and others are.
As such they necessarily comply with the conditions of understanding:
they are culturally and historically situated, motivated by particular
concerns and interests and inevitably partial. We can thus understand
people as women in particular contexts without requiring their
identities or commonalities to extend beyond them. Lauren Barthold
(2016) takes up both Alcoff’s and Warnke’s accounts to conceive of
women’s identity in Gadamerian terms as a dialogic one. 
In de Beauvoir’s work, both broadly analytic and broadly continental
feminist approaches find resources for raising questions about who
women are, how they might be defined and for what purposes. Both
approaches are interested in developing a definition of women that is
inclusive, sensitive to intersecting oppressions and useful to
feminist struggles. There are affinities in some of the ways theorists
in each tradition try to accomplish these goals: for example between
Garry’s appeal to family resemblances and Young’s appeal to series
that can become groups. Critics within each tradition also overlap in
questioning the exclusions proffered definitions involve. 
With regard to questions of freedom and domination, the distinction
between continental feminists in the (French) post-structuralist
tradition and those in the (German) tradition of critical theory is
perhaps more pronounced than that between the latter and those in the
analytic tradition. 
Butler (1990) begins her analysis by returning to Irigaray and
Kristeva’s criticism of de Beauvoir and arguing that their insights
into the closed nature of a gendered linguistic system raise issues
about a substance-accident metaphysics as a whole. According to this
metaphysics, both sex and gender are meant to be accidental attributes
attached to a substantial subject. One is essentially a subject and
only accidentally a male or female, masculine or feminine one. Yet, if
women can be defined only in terms of men, as the Other of men, then
sex and gender are not as much accidents as they are relations –
not attributes a subject possesses but oppositions between linguistic
terms: male versus female and masculine versus feminine. Furthermore,
if sex and gender are not attributes, perhaps we should rethink the
subject or substance to which they are meant to attach. Perhaps there
is only language which, in articulating a relation between male and
female, masculine and feminine, posits a substance on which to erect
those terms. Butler quotes Michel Haar’s commentary on Nietzsche:
In other words, language inspires us to add substantial identities to
actions because verbs need subjects. Turning from Nietzsche to J.L.
Austin, Butler conceives of women (and men) as
“performatives.” Performative speech acts for Austin are
utterances such as “the meeting is now open” or “I
now pronounce you husband and wife” in which, uttered under
appropriate circumstances, the speech act does something by saying
something. The speech act thus brings a state of affairs into
existence. Likewise, according to Butler, the language of sex and
gender, appropriately institutionalized, creates men and women.
What is meant by appropriately institutionalized? For Foucault (1978)
the most important sites of power lie in everyday social practices
such as social work, medicine and psychiatry, in scientific and social
scientific disciplines that type individuals and create categories of
identity, and in institutions such as prisons, schools and hospitals.
Such power is productive: social institutions and practices create
modern identities such as gays, “blacks,” and
manic-depressives. For Butler and others, the construction of men and
women takes a similar path, as the result of compulsory
heterosexuality. As a form of power, compulsory heterosexuality
imposes a set of norms about how and whom we should desire and
establishes a set of sanctions from this set. By doing so, it divides
human populations into two genders that are in turn supposed to be
connected to two sexes with two directions of sexual desire. Thus, one
is a man with a male body and a desire for women or one is a woman
with a female body and a desire for men. “The
heterosexualization of desire,” Butler writes, “requires
and institutes the production of discrete and asymmetrical oppositions
between ‘feminine’ and ‘masculine,’ where
these are understood as expressive attributes of ‘male’
and ‘female’” (1990, 17).
This account of identities as effects of power is obviously skeptical
of our capacities for critical agency and rational reflection to which
Marxists and other social critics have traditionally appealed for a
purchase on relations of power and subordination. If the subject, as a
woman or gay person for example, is an effect of power, the structure
of oppression is already built into the identity. How can women or gay
people be agents for the emancipation of, or equal justice for, women
or gay people if their identity is itself an effect of unequal power
relations? Indeed, if we become subjects at all only within everyday
disciplinary practices, then subjects are always already effects of
power. To emancipate ourselves from power would be to emancipate
ourselves from ourselves. How then are we to address issues of freedom
and autonomy? Butler looks to resignification. Power not only produces
but reproduces itself and this constant production and reproduction
serves as the opening for “resignification, redeployment,
subversive citation from within, and interruption and inadvertent
convergences with other [power/discourse] networks” (1995, 135).
Yet other continental feminists find this approach unsatisfying. Nancy
Fraser finds the positive connotations that Butler associates with
resignification “puzzling.” “Why,” she asks,
“is resignification good? Can’t there be bad (oppressive,
reactionary) resignifications?”(1995, 67–8). If all subjectivity
is a construction of power/discourse networks, why should we not
simply be content with the subjects that our current disciplinary
practices enforce? Or, if some resignifications are good, which ones?
How do we determine which sort we should endorse?
In general, Fraser thinks feminists too eagerly turned to
poststructuralist theories in the 1990s and that this turn has
consequences: not only does it leave women with no prospects for
change other than resignification but it also reduces gender
inequality to a matter of language and culture and neglects
socio-economic issues such as female poverty (2013). Here her
criticism is directed at what she calls Lacanianism in feminism. The
work of Lacanian feminists has some merit, she says, in that it shows
gender to be a discursive construction. Sexual identity is based on
the process of identification, language, and socialization in which
the child enters into the symbolic order, governed by the incest taboo
or what Lacan calls “the law of the Father.” Subjugation
to that law and becoming a subject are thus one and the same. Given
the law’s phallocentric tilt, women are pretty much
condemned. Nevertheless this analysis remains too historically
unspecific for Fraser. What we need from discourse theory, she
maintains, are insights into how our social identities are formed and
altered over time, how social groups form and disintegrate, how
dominant groups retain their cultural dominance and what the prospects
are for emancipatory change.
Seyla Benhabib (1995), Amy Allen (2008) and Allison Weir (2013) also
question equations between identity, law and power. Benhabib
distinguishes between a stronger and a weaker version of the claim
that identities such as women and gay people are constructions of
power (1995, 20). The stronger version insists that subjects are
entirely the effects of power, particularly of a compulsory
heterosexuality, and that as effects they can only accept their mode
of being a subject or try to subvert it from within. A weaker version
of the claim, however, would simply emphasize that infants are born
into a world of existing gendered relations, hierarchies and
distributions of power and are acculturated into this world by
parents, teachers and the like. To say that infants are born into
prevailing structures of power, however, is not to say that they are
already entirely constituted by them. Hence, Benhabib claims, there
remain capacities for reflection and accountability that are not simply
themselves effects of power. While more sympathetic to Foucault and
Butler, Allen uses Jessica Benjamin’s (1988) account of recognition to
make a similar point. There may be “no outside to power, in the
sense that there is no possible human social world from which power
has been completely eliminated.” Nevertheless, we need not deny
“moments of mutual recognition…within ongoing,
dynamically unfolding, social relationships” that can provide
for both the constitution of autonomous selves and a reference point
for social and political critique (2008, 91). Weir likewise stresses
relations of recognition, as well as of “identification, of
flourishing, of meaning, of love, of different kinds of power,
including empowerment and solidarity” (2013, 91). Again,
resistance to domination is not just a matter of resignifying within
oppressive structures. Rather it is a matter of transforming women.
Indeed, she asks “What have we been doing in our women’s studies
programs, associations of feminist philosophers and academics,
feminist movements, lesbian communities, women’s cooperative, and
culture building and other alternative communities if we haven’t been
…producing women as something other than subjected?”
(2013, 94). 
Working from an Anglo-American liberal tradition, Martha Nussbaum has
raised questions similar to those that Allen, Benhabib, Fraser and
Weir raise about a post-structuralist feminism. Indeed, she thinks the
latter is irretrievably self-involved and needs to be rejected in
favor of the kind of theoretical and practical work that can end
oppressive practices and institutions (1999a). Her own starting point
is what she calls the “capabilities approach,” an approach
that is rooted in “respect for the dignity of persons as
choosers” (2000, 71–2) and that asks what individuals within a
given society are able to do and to be – what their capabilities
or freedoms are. Following Rawls here Nussbaum focuses on the
distribution of resources and opportunities within a country or
political entity. Like Amartya Sen, she adds to Rawls’ view, first,
the question of what individuals’ needs for resources are and, second,
the question of how they are able to convert these resources into
human functionings (1999, 34). By human functionings, Nussbaum means
the realization of one or more capability – the enjoyment of
good health, for example. She is interested in both the basic
functionings, without which we would not regard a life as human or
fully human, and the less basic functionings, without which we would
not regard a human life as flourishing.
The “we” here is not meant to be ethnocentric. The claim
is, rather, that a just society provides individuals with capabilities
for human functionings where the idea of the important capabiliities
is one to which people from different traditions with different
conceptions of the good could agree as necessary to the pursuit of
their conception. This idea provides a checklist of capabilities
against which to measure forms of oppression and discrimination in
particular countries. Thus, inequalities based on gender hierarchies
as well as practices such as female genital mutilation will be
precluded and a defense of such practices as part of the cultural
tradition will not work. If cultural tradition confines women to the
house, even if widowed and without means of support, then such
practices are to be condemned as violating capabilities for even basic
functioning. Indeed, while egregious practices such as female genital
mutilation and female confinement violate capabilities for life,
nutrition and bodily integrity, all inequalities based on gender
hierarchies, in Nussbaum’s view, undermine capabilities for
self-respect and emotional development that are part of human
functioning. Ultimately, Nussbaum’s concerns are the same as Fraser’s:
that a focus on genealogy and resignification cannot do the work of
undoing the social, political and economic discrimination that women
suffer in far too many cultures and countries and that it is this
discrimination that feminism must try to combat. 
Other feminists have concerns about Nussbaum’s approach, however.
Susan Moller Okin objects to the narrative approach that Nussbaum
introduces in Women and Human Development insofar as it
relies on retelling the experiences of two poor Indian women, Vasanti
and Jayamma. Okin points out that despite the sort of cross-cultural
dialogue in which Nussbaum thinks feminists should engage (Nussbaum
2000, 7), she rarely quotes these women directly and refracts their
views through her own (Okin 2003, 295). From where, then, does
Nussbaum’s checklist of capabilities come? Okin calls her idea
of a fully human life “highly intellectualized” and
maintains that the capacities central to it “seem to derive far
more from an Aristotelian ideal than from any deep or broad
familiarity with the lives of women in the less developed world”
(203, 296). Likewise, while Alison Jagger thinks the narrative
approach may be anodyne as long as it is meant simply heuristically,
she argues that there is little evidence that Nussbaum’s list of
capabilities reflects anything like a consensus or even overlapping
consensus of “people across the world who are reasonably
well-informed and uncoerced” (2006, 313). Rather, in spite of a
long list of interlocutors, Jagger thinks Nussbaum pays insufficient
attention to questions of inclusiveness and representation. 
Feminists in both the analytic and continental traditions raise
concerns about a post-structuralist identification of the subject,
including the feminist subject, with power. If women, like gay people
and others, are the effects of discourses of power how can they also
be the agents of their own emancipation? Some feminists find this
question to be so removed from the horrific lives many women live as
to be farcical. For example, Nussbaum asks that we attend to
capacities and functionings and Fraser likewise insists that we
move away from what she sees as purely cultural concerns to
socio-economic ones. Others try to secure theoretical grounds for
agency and autonomy outside of power.
Feminism has an obvious relation to epistemology insofar as it must
justify the legitimacy of its claims and the credibility of those
making them. Miranda Fricker’s book, Epistemic Injustice:
Power and Ethics of Knowing (2007) has grounded much of the
current discussion in the analytic tradition, which has largely
focused on cataloguing and categorizing instances of epistemic
injustice. The continental tradition traces this issue back to
concerns with ideology and power/knowledge regimes that have long been
a part of emancipatory discussions.
Fricker takes up two varieties of epistemic injustice: testimonial and
hermeneutical. Her account of the former can be seen as a development
of claims Jennifer Hornsby and Rae Langton (1998) made about silencing
with reference to Catharine MacKinnon’s claim that pornography
interferes with women’s freedom of speech (1993). Freedom of
speech involves not simply the ability to make claims but, more
importantly, the ability to have illocutionary effects in which one’s
audience takes up those claims. MacKinnon focuses on the ability to
refuse sex by saying no. Under the influence of pornography one’s
audience may not recognize what one is trying to do with one’s words
and may fail to take this no as a refusal. For Fricker, structural
identity prejudices in general affect one’s credibility as a
speaker and conveyor of knowledge. Her example is the way, in the
screenplay of “The Talented Mr. Ripley,” Marge Sherwood is
unable to communicate her suspicions about Ripley to her
father-in-law, Herbert Greenleaf, because of the identity prejudices
he holds about women. Assuming that women tend to respond emotionally
instead of rationally to a situation, he downgrades her credibility
and effectively silences her. The testimonial injustice here excludes
Sherwood from the social practice of pooling information. 
Kristie Dotson (2011) distinguishes two different kinds of silencing
practices: testimonial quieting and testimonial smothering. While
testimonial quieting characterizes a failure to recognize the speaker
as a knower and thus to offer the speaker appropriate uptake, Dotson
describes testimonial smothering as a coerced truncation by speakers
of their own testimony. Speakers recognize that their audiences are
unwilling or unable to offer appropriate uptake to their testimony,
and in response, limit and shape their testimony in order to
“insure that the testimony contains only content for which
one’s audience demonstrates testimonial competence” (2011,
244). Dotson characterizes both of these silencing practices as forms
of epistemic violence, and both have dramatic effects for the
epistemic pursuits of individuals and communities alike.
With regard to hermeneutical injustice, Fricker focuses on gaps in the
collective hermeneutical resources that make it difficult for members
of particular groups, including women, to make sense out of and
articulate important areas of their experience. The available
resources are either not adequate for expressing these areas of
experience or they are misleading. Where this failure or inadequacy
affects people differentially it is unjust, Fricker argues. As an
example she points to the damage done to many women’s lives and
careers after they suffered unwanted sexual advances on the job before
sexual harassment was a hermeneutical resource available to make sense
out of their experience (2007, 152). Fricker thinks it would be a
mistake to see this gap in the collective hermeneutic resources as
merely bad timing, as might be the case if one suffered from a disease
that had not yet been diagnosed or understood. Rather, to the extent
that the gap affected women and their sexual harassers differentially
it led to an injustice. It also derived from one. Fricker argues that
the hermeneutical gap was the result of “unequal hermeneutical
participation” in which women were left out of or barred from
engaging in the formation of the relevant collective understandings
(Fricker 2007: 152). This marginalization, she argues, results from a
combination of two forms of power: identity power that downgrades a
speaker’s credibility and material power. In a social world in
which men have more power than women, men also have more say over
defining what experiences mean and the result is to render “the
collective hermeneutical resource structurally prejudiced”
(2007, 154–5).
Shelley Tremain (2017) finds a problem with Fricker’s distinction
between hermeneutical gaps due to diseases not yet diagnosed and
hermeneutical gaps that reflect hermeneutical injustice. While Fricker
wants to see the former as a case of mere bad luck, Tremain points to
the lack of hermeneutical resources many disabled people suffer
because of social, cultural and political norms that are as inadequate
and misleading as those distorting attempts to articulate the
experience of sexual harassment. As she writes, “Until the
relatively recent formation and rise of ‘the mad pride
movement’ and related social movements, the hermeneutical
resources that such disabled people required in order to collectively
understand the political character of their situation were unavailable
to them” (178). 
Other feminists add to Fricker’s account of hermeneutical injustice
just as they do to her account of testimonial injustice. Following up
on Charles Mills’ account of white ignorance (1998), Gaile Pohlhaus,
Jr. (2012), for example, conceives of the consequence of this
structural prejudice as a willful hermeneutical ignorance in which
“dominantly situated knowers…continue to misunderstand
and misinterpret the world” (2012, 716). Dotson uses this idea
of willful hermeneutical ignorance to identify a third feature of
epistemic injustice along with testimonial and hermeneutical
injustice: namely contributory injustice in which willful
hermeneutical ignorance compromises a speaker’s epistemic agency
and obstructs the capacity to contribute to a community’s
collective hermeneutical resources (2012, 31). Fricker now
distinguishes between “in-group intelligibility” within
marginalized groups and their “frustratingly failed attempts to
communicate” (2016, 167) with dominant groups. 
Fricker’s solution to epistemic injustice looks to a sort of virtuous
listening that can undo prejudiced judgments of credibility. Feminists
in the continental tradition appreciate her work but try to go beyond
dyadic instances of epistemic injustice. Allen (2017) makes three
recommendations. First, we can look at what Jose Medina “complex
histories and chains of social interactions that go beyond particular
pairs and clusters of subjects” (Medina 2013, 60). Second, we
can look at Foucault’s account of power/knowledge regimes for a robust
account of collective hermeneutical resources and the exclusions they
enforce as well of the institutional mechanisms that determine what is
and is not to count as knowledge and who is and who is not to count as
a knower. Finally, we can look at Foucault’s development of genealogy
as a form of critique that allows for the disruption of epistemic
hierarchies that may be inherited but that are nonetheless contingent.
Other feminists have sought an expanded version of deliberative theory
that can take what they see as better account of impediments to the
participation of women and other marginalized groups. Thus, Young
substitutes communicative for deliberative democracy in order to
expand the scope of considerations beyond the exchange of reasons to
include story-telling as well as argumentation on grounds close to
Fricker’s and Dotson’s concerns: namely that power relations can
stifle speech (1996, 123). Likewise Simone Chambers looks to a melding
of deliberative and diversity theory (2003, 322) while Noelle McAfee
(2008) looks beyond a Habermasian proceduralism to an integrative
model of public deliberation that respects the importance of multiple,
partial views. 
The concept of epistemic injustice has proved a fruitful one for
feminists, as for critical race theorists, disability theorists and
others.  Those in the analytic tradition have focused on mapping its
contours, nailing down the precise form of injustice it involves and
exposing forms of socially positioned ignorance in which dominant
groups continue to misapprehend the world. Those in the continental
tradition conceive of such ignorance as ideology and, like those in
the analytic tradition, understand it as a mechanism of both
distortion and silencing. They have also probed the conditions for
forms of public communication and discourse free of coercion. Moving
on from Fricker’s work, feminists in both analytic and continental
traditions remain interested in expanding the concept of epistemic
injustice beyond dyadic relations to examine is systemic reach and
consequences. 
Analytic and continental feminists share interests in avoiding
exclusion in attempts to define women, in overcoming patriarchal forms
of oppression and in securing the claims of women to know and to
participate in epistemic projects. Analytic and continental feminists
sometimes pursue these interests in different ways, sometimes in
similar ways and sometimes in conversation with one another.
Collectively they take up and further develop a rich history of
liberal, Marxist, post-structuralist, hermeneutic and linguistic
thought.