In ‘Actions, Reasons and Causes,’ Donald Davidson gave a
reductive theory of ‘intention with which’ as
‘syncategorematic’: the phrase does not refer to an event
or state of the agent, but is a way of redescribing what she is doing
in terms of a ‘primary reason,’ where this is understood
as a pro-attitude towards actions having some feature, F,
along with the belief that the original action has that feature
(Davidson 1963, pp.  5–8). It is in virtue of its relation to a
primary reason that the action counts as intentional, and this reason
gives the intention with which the action is done. Davidson thereby
unified, or took himself to have unified, intentional action and
intention-with-which.
As he came to see, however, this story neglects and cannot easily
incorporate prospective intention or intention for the future
(Davidson 1978). There are apparent cases of ‘pure
intending’ in which no steps of any kind are taken. Suppose that
I intend to write a book review but have yet to open the book. On the
face of it, such pure intending cannot be reduced to intentional
action. What is more, once we recognize the existence of pure
intending, ‘there is no reason not to allow that intention of
exactly the same kind is also present when the intended action
eventuates’ (Davidson 1978, p. 89). If what I am doing
intentionally takes time, as almost everything does, there will be
early phases in which I stand to the completion of the deed just as I
stand to future actions I intend to perform but have yet to begin.
The majority of work since Davidson’s conversion has followed
him in acknowledging the state of prospective intention as
irreducible to action, and has been led to seek unity in the forms of
intention by explaining the others—intentional action and
intention-with-which—in terms of intending as a mental state.
Recently, however, philosophers inspired by Anscombe’s
Intention have offered resistance to this move. Anscombe
denies that there is a sharp distinction between ‘I am doing
A’ and ‘I am going to do A’
offered as answers to the question ‘Why are you
doing B?’ (Anscombe 1963, pp. 39–40). Nor does she regard
intention for the future as needing further explanation once
intentional action and intention-with-which have been understood
(Anscombe 1963, pp. 90–4). Thus, Anscombe appears
to solve the problem of unity without acknowledging intention as a
mental state.
The simplest version of this approach would emphasize the
‘openness’ of the progressive, that ‘He is doing
A’ does not imply that he will succeed in
doing A, or that he has or will get very far with it. (That I
am crossing the road is consistent with being hit by a car the moment
I step off the curb.) It then identifies the fact that S
intends to do A with the fact that S is
doing A intentionally, though perhaps he has barely begun. If
I intend to visit the zoo next Thursday, I am already on the way to
doing so. Here it is striking that we sometimes employ the present
progressive in anticipation: ‘Kieran is visiting the zoo next
Thursday’ sounds perfectly fine when said today, before I have
taken any overt steps (see Falvey 2000 pp. 25–6; Thompson 2008,
pp. 140–1; Moran and Stone 2009, pp. 145–6).
A more subtle line would concede that we do not always use the
progressive quite so liberally, but insist that doing so carves nature
at its joints. According to Michael Thompson (2008, pp. 91–2,
133–46), intending to do A is not a mental state
because it is not static; instead it is a form of imperfectivity or
being in progress towards the intentional completion of an act, where
the progress may be so vestigial or ineffectual or interrupted that it
would be odd to remark, ‘He is doing A.’ (See
Thompson 2008, pp. 91–2, 133–45; Moran and
Stone 2009, pp. 146–8; Ferrero 2017.) The unity of prospective intention and
‘doing A intentionally’ is that the latter, too,
consists of being in progress, though perhaps with the implication of
some success.
Along with this unity, and the hint supplied by the use of the
progressive in anticipation, there are two main arguments for the
theory of intending as being embarked on intentional action. First, it
readily explains why intending is always intending to do
something. (For this argument, see Thompson 2008, pp. 120–3,
127–8, 130–1, drawing on Baier 1970; Moran and Stone 2009,
pp. 143, 147.)  Although we sometimes report intention as a
propositional attitude—‘I intend
that p’—such reports can always be recast as
‘intending to…’ as when I intend to bring about
that p. By contrast, it is difficult to rephrase such mundane
expressions as ‘I intend to walk home’ in propositional
terms. ‘I intend that I am (will be) walking home’
suggests indifference to getting there. ‘I intend that I (will)
have walked home’ suggests indifference to my present
agency. ‘I intend that I walk home’ can only be read as an
intention with a habitual object, describing a general practice of
getting home on foot; it is not directed at a particular action. If
intending is being on the way to intentional action, it is no surprise
that its proper object—what one is on the way to doing—is
not a mere proposition or state of affairs, but something one might do.
Second, the theory of intending as being embarked on intentional
action explains the unity of what Thompson calls
‘naïve’ and ‘sophisticated’
rationalization. (For this argument, see Thompson 2008,
pp. 97–9, 118–9, 132–4.) As well as explaining
action by intention—‘He is doing A because he
intends to do B’—we explain action by
action—‘He is doing A because he is
doing B’—intention by intention—‘He
intends to do A because he intends to
do B’—and intention by action—‘He
intends to do A because he is doing B.’ On the
face of it, moreover, ‘naïve’ explanations in terms
of what someone is doing entail ‘sophisticated’
explanations that appeal to intention. At least when we are using the
‘because’ of rationalization, ‘He is
doing A because he is doing B’ arguably
entails ‘He is doing A because he intends to
do B.’ The same point holds for what is explained:
‘He is doing A because…’ entails ‘He
intends to do A because…’ If intending is being
on the way to intentional action, these are all forms of explanation
by, and of, such progress. So, again, it is no surprise that they are
bound together in just the way that they appear to be.
If we help ourselves to the ‘because’ of
rationalization, we can further exploit the unity of its
‘naïve’ and ‘sophisticated’ forms to give
a simple theory of intention-with-which. An intention with which one is
doing A is an intentional-action-in-progress that explains one’s
doing it. We thus complete the task of unification that was set by the
threefold division of intention for the future, intention-with-which,
and intentional action, all of which are modes of, or modes of
explanation by, being embarked on intentional action.
A final virtue of this account is that it captures the element of
commitment in intention, emphasized by Michael Bratman, among others
(Bratman 1987, pp. 18–20). Intention is not merely predominant
desire.  When I decide to do something, and so intend to do it, I am
embarked upon doing it. This vindicates the Aristotelian view that
action itself is the conclusion of practical thought.
Because of its relatively recent recovery, and the prevalent
acceptance of intention as a mental state, there has been little
examination of the present alternative. But some initial observations
can be made. First, it is in fact controversial that intending to
do A is necessary for doing A intentionally, as the
present theory predicts. This raises complications best considered
later on, in sections 2 and 4. (They are briefly discussed at Thompson
2008, pp. 102–3.)
Second, and more obviously, there is room to doubt whether intending
to do A is sufficient for me to count as doing it
intentionally, even when we admit that I can be doing what I will
never successfully do. Isn’t there a distinction between taking
preparatory steps towards doing A and beginning to do it, as
in the contrast between buying flour and eggs with the intention of
baking, and turning on the oven the following week? This distinction
may be significant in ethics and the criminal law (Paul 2014). There
is also the prospect of plans that require no preparatory steps, as
for instance, to blink tomorrow at 3:00pm. Isn’t some intending
utterly pure, as Davidson thought? Once we move away from the simple
theory of intending as doing, however, and introduce the abstract
notion of imperfectivity or being in progress, it is more difficult to
say what such examples show. That the theory is false? Or just how
liminal being in progress can be?
More telling, perhaps, is the possibility of making a mistake, as when
I intend to walk home by the shortest possible route, but have taken a
wrong turn. Do I count as being embarked on walking home by the
shortest route? If not, the theory stands refuted. If so, I can be on
the way not only to doing something I will never do, because I will be
interrupted at the earliest moment, but something it is now impossible
for me to do. Can we explain how my doings are directed at that
impossible outcome except by appeal to the intention with which they
are performed?
The arguments that motivate the theory of intending as being embarked
on intentional action are in any case inconclusive. As to the second,
while it is a constraint on any theory of intention to show the unity
of ‘naïve’ and ‘sophisticated’
rationalization, insofar as they are really unified, it would take
much further argument to show that this cannot be done while thinking
of intention as a mental state (cf. Setiya 2007a,
pp. 51–2). Further demands for unity push towards that view. So,
for instance, if we hope to bring out what is common to the
explanations ‘He is doing A because he is
doing B’ and ‘He is doing A because
p’ where these entail, respectively, ‘He is doing
A because he intends to do B’ and ‘He is
doing A because he believes that p,’ we will
have to relate intention to the mental state of belief. If intention
is not itself a mental state, but a way of being in progress, such
relations are more puzzling.  They are taken up again in section
5.
As to the first, those who think of intention as a mental state could
explain why its objects are restricted to actions by saying more about
the kind of state it is. For instance, if intention is a
representation that is such as to guide and control what it
represents, its object must be as such as to be guided: it must be the
sort of thing that can be in progress and move towards completion,
something that can be done, not a mere proposition or state of
affairs.  Alternatively, the restriction could be denied (as it is by
Davis 1984, pp. 131–2; Ferrero 2013). Intending that p
is fundamental, and intending to walk home can be explained in terms
of it: I intend that I will have walked home by walking home.
Finally, whatever view we take about the basic objects of
intention—actions or propositions—it is a problem for the
theory of intending as being embarked on intentional action that these
objects can be logically complex. I intend not to be hit by a car as I
walk home. I intend to drink with dinner or have dessert, but not both. I intend to
read a book tonight if there’s nothing on the radio. In none of these
cases can we say, without contrivance, what action I am
now on the way to performing. Until it is supplied with an account of
these cases, and of the relation between intention and the mental
states with which it interacts, the theory of intending as being
embarked on intentional action remains incomplete.
If prospective intention cannot be explained in terms of intentional
action, or both in terms of being in progress, how can we preserve the
unity of our three divisions? In particular, how does intentional
action relate to prospective intention and intention-with-which? There
are two obvious thoughts. The first is that doing A
intentionally is doing it with some further intention, or doing
something with the intention of thereby doing A. The second
is that both phenomena are to be explained in terms of intention as a
mental state. Let us take these possibilities in turn.
The idea of explaining intentional action through intention-with-which
is associated with resistance to causal accounts of acting for a
reason. It begins instead with intentional
teleology—doing A in order to do B, or with
the intention of doing B—treating this as primitive and
not involving intention as efficient cause. If we assume that every
intentional action is done for a reason, and that this reason can be
cast in teleological form, we can identify doing A
intentionally with doing A in order to do something else. We
thereby unify two guises of intention. Difficulties arise, however,
from the case of idle behaviour, in which I am doing A
intentionally for no particular reason (Anscombe 1963, p. 25), and
from the possibility—or necessity—that teleological
series come to an end. I am doing A in order to do B
in order to do C … in order to do Z, which I
am doing for its own sake. Not all intentional actions are performed
with a further end. The purported unity fades. In order to solve this
problem, George Wilson (1989) and Carl Ginet (1990, Ch. 6) appeal to
intention de re. One need not intend one’s doing A
to promote some further end in order to count as doing A
intentionally. It is sufficient to intend, of something one is doing,
that it promote or constitute one’s doing
A.
This way of putting things prompts the objection that merely having
that intention is not enough. If the intention is idle or ineffective,
one will not, despite one’s wishes, count as doing A
intentionally, or as acting in order to do A (Mele 1992,
pp. 248–55).  We need to add a causal relation, after all. But
this objection misunderstands the teleological view. It is not that
the mere presence of a mental state—intending of … that
it …—constitutes acting with an intention, or acting
intentionally, but that intention-with-which is a basic form of
teleology, distinct from causation, out of which we can construct the
unity of intention.
A deeper problem for the teleological approach is how to complete this
construction with an account of prospective intention in terms of
intention-with-which. In cases of pure intending, there is no
intention with which I am doing anything yet. It is thus no accident
that Wilson (1989, pp. 222–30) is led to deny the possibility of
pure intention. When I intend to do A in the future, I am
doing something now with the intention of doing A, in that I
intend, of what I am doing, that it promote or constitute my
doing A. The action in question may be overt, but it may be
as minimal as keeping track of opportunities for doing A, or
biding my time.
Finally, the teleological theorist must account for the connection
between intentions with which one acts and psychological states of
belief and desire. Why does it follow from the fact that one intends,
of what one is doing, that it promote or constitute one’s
doing A that one wants to do A and that one
believes, of what one is doing, that it is a means to that end? These
implications make sense if intention is a species of desire that
interacts with means-end belief when one does A with the
intention of doing B. They are more difficult to explain if
intention-with-which is the basic material from which intention and
intentional action are built. (This argument is developed at greater
length in Setiya 2011, pp. 146–9.)
Pressures of this kind push us towards the second approach, now
orthodox in action theory, which aims to explain both intentional
action and intention-with-which in terms of intention as a mental
state. According to the simplest possible view, an intentional action
of doing A is the execution of a prior intention to
do A, and doing A with the intention of
doing B is intending, of one’s doing A, that it
promote or constitute one’s doing B.
There are two immediate difficulties. First, although we sometimes
form an intention prior to acting, this is not essential. I can wave
my arm intentionally without planning in advance. This fact elicits a
refinement often credited to Searle (1983, pp. 84–5): the
distinction between prospective intention and intention in action. In
the former case, one intends to do A, perhaps at some point
in the future. In the latter, one intends to be doing it
now. When S is doing A intentionally, she is doing
it in execution of an intention in action, though except in very
unusual cases she also intends to do A: to complete the
action she is in the midst of performing.
This refinement preserves the idea that doing A intentionally
requires an intention whose object is doing A. This is what
Bratman (1987, p. 112) has dubbed ‘the Simple View.’ It is
open to serious objections, the more subtle of which will be examined
in section 4. For now, it is sufficient to note that I sometimes count
as doing A intentionally when it is a merely foreseen and
unintended consequence of what I intend to do. (See Harman 1976,
pp. 151–2; Bratman 1987, pp. 123–5.) Thus if I am paid to
pump water into the cistern of a house, and I continue to do so even
when I realize that the water is poisoned, I poison the inhabitants of
the house intentionally, despite the fact that I did not intend or
desire such harm (cf. Anscombe 1963, pp. 41–2). Even here,
however, an intention is executed: I intend to pump water into the
house. In general, when it is not the execution of a directly
corresponding intention, doing A intentionally is a foreseen
or desired consequence of an action that is. Admittedly, this
condition is necessary, not sufficient, for intentional action, a
concept whose vagaries are hard to map. But the execution of intention
remains the core phenomenon from which all instances of intentional
action are derived.
Along with such matters of detail, two problems of principle can be
raised against the present approach. The first contends that it is
tacitly circular, because the content of intention always includes the
concept of intentionality (Wilson 1989, pp. 274–5; Ginet 1990,
pp.  34–5). In prospective intention, I intend not only to
do A, but to do A
intentionally, and the same point holds for the object of
intention in action. This prevents us from explaining what it is to act
intentionally in terms of intention as a mental state.
The force of this objection is unclear. While there is something wrong
with an account of what it is to φ that appeals to being or doing
φ, it is not so obviously problematic to appeal to mental states
that represent something as being or doing φ. Our task is
not to introduce the concept of intentional action to someone who
lacks that concept, but to spell out the metaphysics of
doing A intentionally. It is an open question whether
‘metaphysical definition’—saying what it is to
φ—can be permissibly circular, so long as the circularity is
contained in the scope of an attitude. Such circularity is
characteristic of ‘response-dependent’ accounts of
evaluative and other properties. (This response may fail if the
attitude in question is knowledge; see Ford 2011, §4.)
A more direct response to the challenge would deny its premise.  While
it is true that the execution of intention is intentional action, it
does not follow that the object of intention is
doing A intentionally (cf. Searle 1983, pp. 85–6.) If I
intend to be smiling and am doing so involuntarily, I am doing what I
intend, though not intentionally. Likewise, if I intend to skip
breakfast and do so because I forget about it, my intention was
fulfilled, though not by intentional action. (These claims are
consistent with the view that, when I act for reasons, those reasons
figure in my intention as a Kantian ‘maxim’. In that case,
my intention is fulfilled, in its entirety, only if I act on them and
thereby act intentionally. See Wallace 1999, pp. 60–2; Setiya
2007a, pp. 39–49; Korsgaard 2008; Schapiro 2011; and, for resistance, Sinhababu 2013,
§3. On the content of intention, more generally, see Harman 1976,
pp. 156–8; Velleman 1989, pp. 94–7; Mele 1992, Ch. 11; and
Ross, pp.  255–7, Appendix B.)
The second problem is more a question: whether ‘the relation
of being done in execution of a certain intention, or
being done intentionally, is a causal relation between act
and intention.’ (Anscombe 1983, p. 95) Anscombe denies that it
is.  When she writes of ‘practical knowledge’ as
‘the cause of what it understands’ she means formal not
efficient cause, and then only when ‘the description of the
action is of a type to be formally the description of an executed
intention.’ (See Anscombe 1963, pp. 87–8, and for
conflicting interpretations: Hursthouse 2000; Vogler 2002; Moran 2004;
Newstead 2006; Velleman 2007; Paul 2011; Ford 2015; Schwenkler 2015;
Lavin 2016; Setiya 2016a; Campbell 2018a; Campbell 2018b.) 
One source of
concern about intention as efficient cause is that intention need not
precede intentional action, while causes must precede their
effects. But causal theorists may deny that claim about the
temporality of causes, conceiving intention as the simultaneous,
sustaining cause of what one is doing (Thalberg 1984, pp.
257–8). They can also accommodate the case in which intention is
essential to, and thus not fully distinct from, the action it causes:
for things that cannot be done except intentionally, as perhaps
greeting and promising (Anscombe 1963, pp. 84–5). Even here,
intention could play an efficient-causal role in its own execution
(Setiya 2007a, pp 56–9).
A more familiar anxiety turns on ‘causal deviance’
(Davidson 1973, p. 79). If we are trying to say what it is to act
intentionally, the condition of doing A because one so
intends looks insufficient. For it says nothing about the causal path
from intention to action. If I intend to be shaking in order to signal
my confederate, and this intention makes me nervous, so that I shake,
I am shaking because I intend to do so—though not
intentionally. My intention did not cause me to shake ‘in the
right way.’ Nor is the ‘right way’ obviously a
matter of ‘proximate’ causation or the absence of causal
intermediaries, since a causal theorist may well allow for neural
intermediaries, and further intentions, in the causal path from
intention to action. There is a failure of intentional action only
when intermediaries are of the wrong kind.
Reactions to causal deviance vary widely. Some are convinced that the
problem is hopeless (Anscombe 1989, pp. 110–1; Wilson 1989,
Ch. 9; O’Brien 2007, Ch.  8); others that it can be solved by
appeal to such phenomena as causal direction and guidance, which are
found outside the province of intentional action and therefore
introduce no circularity. (See Thalberg 1984; Mele 1992, Ch. 11;
Setiya 2007a, pp. 31–2; and, for objections, Lavin 2013.) A
recent development finds a problem of causal deviance in the
manifestation of dispositions, even when they are dispositions of
inanimate objects. Suppose I attach a fragile glass to an explosive
device that detects whether it is attached to something fragile and if
it is, shatters the object when it is struck. When the glass is
struck, it will break in part because it is fragile without
manifesting its fragility: the causal connection is wrong. Because the
phenomenon deviance is in this way general, there is reason to hope we
can solve it for intentional action by appeal to resources we need
elsewhere. (See Hyman 2014 on dispositions and desires.)
It is in any case unclear how the dispute about causal deviance bears on the
project of explaining intentional action through intention as a mental
state. Would that project survive if the relation of execution and the
corresponding ‘because’ were taken as primitive? Or in a
‘disjunctive’ theory according to which intention in
action has two distinct forms: doing A intentionally and
‘mere’ intending, frustrated by the world? Like the
theory of intending as being embarked upon intentional action, the
disjunctive conception agrees with Aristotle that action is, or can
be, the conclusion of practical thought.
 

Corresponding issues have been pursued in the philosophy of
perception, where causal and disjunctive theories are often opposed
(as by Snowdon 1980–1), and in epistemology more
broadly. Instead of explaining knowledge as belief that meets further
conditions, some epistemologists treat knowledge as basic, explaining
mere belief as its defective form (McDowell 1995; Williamson
2000). The parallel view of intentional action treats mere intending
as a defective form of intentional action (O’Brien 2007;
Rödl 2007, Ch. 2; McDowell 2010, §7; Marcus 2012, Ch. 2). A
question for this view is how the state of intending can be a form of
something dynamic: the event or process of acting. To answer this
question, we need to say more about the kind of state intention
is.
If intention is a mental state in relation to which doing A
amounts to doing A intentionally, or with the further
intention of doing B, that fact would unify the modes of
intention with which we began. It would, however, tell us little about
intending itself.  Does this state involve desire? Belief about what
one is doing or what one is going to do? Evaluative judgement? Similar
questions arise for those who deny that intention is a mental state
and explain it as being on the way to intentional action. Must I want
to perform an action I am thus embarked upon?  Believe that I am
engaged in it? Hold it to be in some way good?
It is a matter of consensus in the philosophy of intention that
intending to do A entails wanting to do A, in the
motivational sense for which the ‘primitive sign of wanting
is trying to get’ (Anscombe 1963, p. 68). Doubts about
this entailment are attributed to ambiguities in ‘desire.’
When I intend to do A reluctantly, from the motive of duty, I
may deny that I want to do it, but what I lack is
‘appetite’ not ‘volition’ (Davis 1984,
pp. 135–40; Thompson 2008, pp.  103–5).
Intending is thus a ‘pro-attitude’ of some
kind—assuming, for simplicity, that intention is a mental
state. In his later work, Davidson specified this pro-attitude as
‘an all-out, unconditional judgement that the action is
desirable’ (Davidson 1978, p. 99). He made two further
refinements. First, when one is doing A intentionally,
‘at least when the action is of brief duration, nothing seems to
stand in the way of an Aristotelian identification of the action with
[all-out evaluative judgement]’ (Davidson 1978, p. 99). Second,
one counts as intending an action only if one’s beliefs are consistent
with one’s performing it; one cannot intend to do what one believes to
be impossible (Davidson 1978, pp. 100–1).
In an influential critique, Bratman objects that choice is possible
even when one knows that neither option is more desirable than the
other; one can decide between options that are equivalent or on a par
(Bratman 1985, §V). If unconditional judgement presents its
object as more desirable than any alternative, Davidson’s theory
wrongly prohibits such choice. If the judgement is merely that a given
action is no less desirable than others, it permits me to
intend A and intend B, even if I know that
they are incompatible. Against this, Bratman claims that it is
irrational to intend A and intend B if one cannot
rationally intend A-and-B, as when doing both is
inconsistent with one’s beliefs.
A related objection is that we can fail to act, or intend, in
accordance with our evaluations. In a typical case of akrasia,
I conclude that I ought to quit, but decide to continue smoking
instead. Davidson (1970) replied to this by distinguishing ‘all
things considered’ from ‘unconditional’ evaluative
judgement. In ‘conditional’ or ‘prima facie’
judgement one takes some body of considerations, r, to support
A over B. All things considered judgement is the
special case of this in which r includes all the
considerations one holds relevant.  There is no inconsistency in
judging that the sum of these particular considerations
favours A over B while judging that B is
better than A, perhaps in light of other considerations one
has not specifically considered. Since it is the latter judgement that
constitutes intention, one can act intentionally against the
former. This is how Davidson makes sense of my continuing to
smoke.
Few have been convinced by Davidson’s account. (A recent critic is
McDowell 2010.) Can’t we act—intentionally and without
self-contradiction—against an unconditional evaluative
judgement? Or fail to intend in accordance with one? Davidson himself
concedes that ‘A is better than B, all things
considered’ entails ‘A is better
than B’ if ‘all things considered’ means
‘all truths, moral and otherwise’ (Davidson 1970,
p. 40). He may intend this to be trivial, counting that fact
that A is better than B among the relevant
truths. But it is both plausible and non-trivial to claim
that A is better than B, in the relevant sense, if
and only if the balance of reasons favours A over B,
where the reasons are distinct from that evaluative fact. Since it is
possible to grasp this connection, to hold that the balance of reasons
favours quitting, and still not intend to quit, Davidson’s theory must
be false. (A consequence of this fact is the need to distinguish
weakness as akrasia from weakness as failure of will; see
Holton 2009, Ch. 4.)
If we hope to defend an evaluative theory of intention, despite this
possibility, we will have to equate intending with judgement of some
other evaluative proposition, not entailed by claims about the balance
of reasons (as in Rödl 2007, Ch. 2), distinguish kinds of
judgement or ways of representing an action as to be done, one of
which constitutes intending, the other of which we act against
in akrasia (as in Tenenbaum 2007, Ch. 7), or otherwise weaken
the relationship between intention and the good (as in Shah
2008). Whichever way we go, we will need to motivate the evaluative
theory. What is it about the role of intention in intentional action,
or in practical reasoning, that requires it to take an evaluative
shape? What is missing from theories of intention on which it does
not?
Having criticized Davidson’s theory, Bratman offers a diagnosis
of his mistake that appeals to the functional role of intention as a
mental state. According to Bratman (1985, §VI), Davidson neglects
the place of prospective intentions in cross-temporal and
inter-personal coordination, and as inputs to further practical
thought. There is room for doubt about this verdict, since all-out
evaluative judgement may well appear as a premise of practical
syllogism (‘I ought to do A; doing B is a
means to that; so I ought to do B’) and since it may
sustain ‘diachronic autonomy,’ at least to some extent,
just through the working of memory (a point emphasized by Ferrero
2006). But Bratman is right to indicate a gap in Davidson’s
story, which he has done more than anyone to fill.
For Bratman (1987), intention is a distinctive practical attitude
marked by its pivotal role in planning for the future. Intention
involves desire, but even predominant desire is insufficient for
intention, since it need not involve a commitment to act: intentions
are ‘conduct-controlling pro-attitudes, ones which we are
disposed to retain without reconsideration, and which play a
significant role as inputs to [means-end] reasoning’ (Bratman
1987, p. 20). The plans for action contained in our intentions are
typically partial and must be filled out in accordance with changing
circumstances as the future comes.
Among the advantages of being able to commit ourselves to action in
advance, albeit defeasibly, are: (i) the capacity to make rational
decisions in circumstances that leave no time to deliberate, or lend
themselves to deliberative distortion; (ii) the capacity to engage in
complex, temporally extended projects that require coordination with
our future selves; and (iii) the capacity for similar coordination with
others.
Bratman (1987, Ch. 3) argues that these advantages are best secured if
our intentions are consistent with one another and with our beliefs,
and if they conform to principles of means-end coherence—for
instance, that when we intend E and believe that
intending M is necessary to achieve E, we also
intend M. There is, he claims, a ‘pragmatic
rationale’ for such requirements, ‘one grounded in [their]
long-run contribution to getting what we (rationally) want’
(Bratman 1987, p. 35).
Responses to Bratman’s theory have focused largely on the nature
of these alleged requirements. Bratman (1987, §2.5) argues that
intentions do not provide inputs to practical reasoning by providing
additional reasons. This conception is, on the one hand, too weak,
since it treats the fact that I have settled on doing A as
just one consideration among many in favour of doing it, whereas
means-end coherence is a strict or peremptory demand. And it is, on
the other hand, too strong, since it permits a form of illicit
bootstrapping in which an irrational decision can generate a reason
that tips the balance in favour of acting on it. (Do intentions ever
provide reasons? Many deny this; see, for instance, Broome 2001;
Brunero 2007; Cullity 2008; Kolodny 2011. But Bratman’s argument
leaves room for such reasons, so long as the actions they support
would be rational without them. For versions of this point, see Chang
2009; Ferrero 2010; Smith 2016.)
Bratman’s pragmatic theory gives intentions a substantive role
in practical thought without treating them as reasons. But it faces
problems of its own. In structure, Bratman’s theory is akin to
the variety of rule-utilitarianism on which we have utilitarian
grounds for adopting a practice of punishment or promising that
sometimes goes against considerations of utility. This structure
prompts a serious dilemma. If reasons for adopting a practice or
pattern of reasoning transmit to the actions or inferences that fall
under it, as Rawls (1955) once argued, the problems of bootstrapping
and peremptoriness return. All we have is a theory of why
intentions provide reasons. But if reasons do not transmit in this
way, the picture appears to be one of ‘rational
irrationality’: having reason to adopt or sustain an irrational
pattern of reasoning, on the ground that the results of doing so are
mostly for the best. Neither option is appealing.
In his 1987 book, Bratman in effect pursued the second path, hoping to
soften its peculiarity by distinguishing ‘internal’ and
‘external’ perspectives on rationality and deliberation
(Bratman 1987, §3.5). More recently, he has argued that the
benefits of consistency and coherence are more than pragmatic, since
they allow for a form of self-governance that is of non-instrumental
value (Bratman 2009b), and that they are closely tied to the
functional role of intentions as plans (Bratman 2009c,
§§VIII–IX). He also adopts John Broome’s (2004)
idea that the relevant norms take ‘wide scope.’ For
instance, it is irrational to [intend E, believe that
intending M is necessary to achieve E, and not
intend M]. It does not follow from this that, if one
intends E, one is under rational pressure to intend the
necessary means, since one can just as well avoid the forbidden
combination of attitudes by giving up one’s intention for the
end. By the same token, there is no need to admit that intentions
provide reasons for acting. We thus avoid both horns of the dilemma
sketched above. How far this strategy succeeds is a matter of ongoing
dispute (Setiya 2007b; Bratman 2009b; Brunero 2010; Way 2010). There
is also a question how far Bratman’s functional explanation of
means-end rationality commits him to a wider form of rationalism or
‘constitutivism’ about practical reason (Setiya 2014;
Bratman 2018).
A further objection to the demands for consistency and coherence in
intention turns on an implication that Bratman (1987, Ch. 8) himself
draws out.  According to the Simple View, doing A
intentionally involves an intention whose object is A. As
Bratman argues, however, it is sometimes rational to attempt
both A and B, hoping to achieve one or the other,
when I know that I cannot do both. If I succeed in doing A, I
will have done so intentionally, and thus, on the Simple View, I must
have intended to do A. Considerations of symmetry imply that
I also intended to do B. But then my intentions are not
jointly consistent with my beliefs. Bratman concludes that the Simple
View is false, since it would be irrational to have such
intentions. Instead, I intend to try doing A and to try
doing B, knowing that I can make both attempts, though both
cannot succeed. Bratman admits that, when I try to do A, I
take the relevant means ‘with the intention’ of doing it.
But he finds this phrase ambiguous. On one reading, it ascribes the
intention to do A, but in the present case it does
not. Instead, I merely ‘endeavour’ to do A, where
this is a matter of ‘guiding desire’ (Bratman 1987,
Ch. 9).
The main objection to this view, pressed forcefully by Hugh McCann
(1991), is that it generates an unhappy proliferation of
intention-like states, and that, by finding ambiguity in
‘intention with which,’ it fails to unify the guises of
intention. What is more, there are natural alternatives. One equates
intention with guiding desire, defends the Simple View, and finds the
requirement of consistency defeasible. There is rational pressure to
conform to it, in general, but this pressure can be outweighed, as
when it makes sense to intend both A and B, despite
their manifest inconsistency, hoping to achieve just one. Another
alternative appeals to partial intention, by analogy with partial
belief (see Holton 2009; Goldstein 2016; Shpall 2016; Archer 2017;
Muñoz 2018). There is also room for a more radical view, on
which the reasons for being consistent in one’s intentions, or
conforming to means-end coherence, reduce to the reasons for acting in
one way or another: Bratman’s alleged requirements are a
‘myth.’ (See Raz 2005; Kolodny 2008; and for a qualified
view that speaks to the persistence of intention, Tenenbaum 2014;
Tenenbaum 2018).
A final objection to Bratman’s theory is more general, and would apply
as well to the theory of intention as guiding desire. The question is
whether such accounts reveal the unity of intentional action,
intention for the future, and intention-with-which.  McCann’s
objection concerned the latter. The more basic objection is about the
role of intention in intentional action. Bratman (1987, Ch. 8) does
not ignore this connection: he proposes necessary and sufficient
conditions for doing A intentionally that rely on the state
of intending, though not always the intention of doing A
itself. But it is open to question how deep the envisaged unity
goes. Why must there be intention in intentional action, if intentions
are plans? (See Velleman 2007, §3.)
 

A partial answer cites the need for direction and guidance in doing
anything that takes time or requires the selection of means. But it is
not clear that such guidance requires intention (see Bratman 1987,
pp. 126–7 on spontaneous action). Nor would this forge a general
connection between the state of intending and the phenomenon of acting
for reasons or the application of Anscombe’s (1963, p. 9) question
‘Why?’ If S is doing A on the ground
that
p, she is doing it intentionally. Bratman’s conditions do not
explain why intention must be involved in the antecedent of this
conditional. Why must reasons attach to what I am doing by way of
plans or guiding desires? One response is to admit that they may not:
there can be intentional action without intention (see Bratman 2000,
pp. 51–2). But if we hope to unify intention with intentional
action, we cannot accept this. Intention must figure in the correct
account of acting for a reason, and thus intentionally. In order to
avoid disunity, the theory of intentions as plans (or as guiding
desires) needs such an account.
Acknowledging these problems, some philosophers turn back to Davidson
and the project of reducing intention to desire and means-end belief
(see, especially, Ridge 1998; Sinhababu 2013; and, for discussion,
Mulder 2018). But others see a promise of unity in the
idea—influentially proposed by Elizabeth Anscombe (1963,
pp. 11–15) and Stuart Hampshire (1959, pp. 95, 102)—that
when S is doing A intentionally, S knows
that she is doing A. What is more, acting for a reason, in a
sense that contrasts with mere purposive behavior (of the sort
characteristic of other animals), essentially involves such knowledge:
in acting for a reason, I know an explanation of what I am doing that
cites that reason, and therefore know that I am doing it. That is why,
for Anscombe, the question ‘Why?’ is ‘given
application’ by the agent. Intentional action turns on knowing
the answer to that question.
This picture raises many difficulties, and needs considerable
refinement and defence. (For variations, see Velleman 1989; Velleman
2000; Setiya 2007a, Part One; Rödl 2007, Ch. 2; Setiya 2016b.)
Some will resist the claim that acting for a reason is acting with
self-knowledge—though it is important to stress that the
knowledge attributed here need not involve conscious belief. There is
also disagreement about the kind of explanation involved in giving the
reasons for which one acts (Wilson 1989, Ch. 7; Ginet 1990, Ch. 6;
Dancy 2000; Davis 2005; Alvarez 2010; Setiya 2011). But if the picture
is basically right, it suggests that the unity of intention can be
found in knowledge or belief about action.  Assuming that knowledge
entails belief, the basic thought is that intention in action involves
the belief that one is doing A. Doing something for a reason
involves a belief about one’s reason for doing it that
constitutes intention in action. And prospective intention, or
intention for the future, involves a belief about what one is going to
do and why. The idea that intention involves belief is what unifies
intentional action, prospective intention, and
intention-with-which. (On an alternative view, which may be
Anscombe’s, intention contrasts with belief: they correspond to
radically different kinds of knowledge. See the treatment of mistakes
below.)
The claim that intention entails belief—most commonly, that if
one intends to do A, one believes that one is going to
do it—is widespread among those who draw no
particular inspiration from Anscombe. (See Audi 1973; Harman 1976;
Davis 1984; Ross 2009.) As Grice (1971, pp. 264–6) observed,
there is peculiarity of some sort in asserting ‘I intend to
do A, but I might not do it,’ a peculiarity readily
explained if intention is a species of belief. It is equally striking
that the ordinary expression of intention for the future is ‘I
am going to do A’ (Anscombe 1963, p. 1), which looks like the
assertoric expression of belief. The same point holds for intention in
action: ‘What are you up
 to?’; ‘I am
doing A.’ Although such evidence is suggestive,
however, it might be explained in other ways. (See Davidson 1978,
pp. 91, 100; for criticism, Pears 1985; and for more recent
discussion, Levy 2018.)
So far, we have only the fragment of a theory, an alleged condition of
intending, not an adequate account of what intention is. Here there
are several possibilities. On the simplest proposal, to intend an
action is to believe that one will perform it and to have an
appropriate guiding desire (Audi 1973, p. 395). But a mere conjunction
seems insufficient: the desire and belief could be utterly unrelated
(Davis 1984, pp. 141–2). This prompts the suggestion that,
when S intends to do A, his belief rests on his
desire: to intend an action is to believe that one will perform it on
the ground that one wants to do so (Davis 1984, p. 147; see also Grice
1971, pp. 278–9). The principal defect of this account is that
it makes the belief component of intention epiphenomenal. This belief
merely registers one’s activity: the motivational work is done by a
prior desire. (Something similar is true on more subtle theories that
divorce the motivational role of intention from belief; as, for
instance, Ross 2009, pp. 250–1.)  If the claim that intention
involves belief is to capture the essence of the will, not a
superficial fact about the word ‘intend,’ the belief must
be implicated in the functions of intending and the explanation of
action.  (For objections of this kind, see Bratman 1987,
pp. 19–20 and Mele 1992, Ch. 8 on ‘intention*’; on
the role of beliefs in planning for the future, see Velleman 1989,
Ch. 8; Velleman 2007.)
There is variation even among those accounts that give a motivational
role to belief. On Velleman’s early view, intentions are
‘self-fulfilling expectations that are motivated by a desire for
their fulfillment and that represent themselves as such’
(Velleman 1989, p. 109). Such expectations interact with a general
desire for self-knowledge to motivate action by which they are
confirmed. More recently, Velleman has replaced the desire for
self-knowledge with a sub-personal aim or disposition (Velleman 2000:
19–21). Either way, his view threatens to generate what Bratman (1991,
pp. 261–2) calls ‘the problem of promiscuity’: in
attributing a general desire for self-knowledge that motivates us to
conform to our own expectations, it predicts that we will be just as
strongly motivated by beliefs that do not constitute intentions, like
the belief that I am going to trip over the step, or mispronounce a
word.
A different proposal, due to Harman (1976, p. 168) is that intentions
are ‘conclusion[s] of practical reasoning’ (see also Ross
2009, pp. 270–2). But it seems possible to intend an action
spontaneously, for no particular reason. In later work, Harman looks
downstream of intention, rather than upstream: an intention is a
belief about what one is doing or what one is going to do that has the
power to guide and motivate action through practical thought (Harman
1986, pp. 375–6; Setiya 2007a, pp. 48–53). This claim
interacts with the question about ‘disjunctive’ theories
left unanswered at the end of section 2. If intention involves belief,
those who treat knowledge as basic, with mere belief its defective
form, will take a similar view of ‘knowledge in intention’
(Rödl 2007; Ch. 2; McDowell 2010, §7; Marcus 2012,
Ch. 2). In the good case, one’s intention in action involves
knowledge of what one is doing: it entails, so cannot cause or
motivate, one’s action. In the bad case, one merely intends to
act. If not its causal role, however, what distinguishes knowledge in
intention from knowledge of other kinds?
Finally, there is Anscombe’s own view, on which there is a
normative contrast between intention and ordinary belief. If one fails
to act as one intends, and not through a mistaken belief about the
means or possibilities for action, ‘the mistake is not one of
judgment but of performance’ (Anscombe 1963, pp. 56–7).
Intention sets a standard of success for what does. (For discussions
of this point, see Frost 2014; Setiya 2016a; Campbell 2018a; Campbell
2018b.) What is more, there is ‘a difference of form between
reasoning leading to action and reasoning for the truth of a
conclusion’ (Anscombe 1963, p. 60). Intention is justified by
the former, not the latter: by practical not theoretical reasoning
(Anscombe 1963, pp. 57–62).
In this respect, Anscombe’s doctrine differs most sharply from
Velleman’s. As well as thinking of intention as a kind of belief,
Velleman holds that ‘practical reasoning is a kind of theoretical
reasoning’ (Velleman 1989, p. 15; see also Ross 2009). In a
review of Velleman’s book, Bratman (1991, pp. 250–1) dubbed the
conjunction of these claims ‘cognitivism about practical
reason.’ It prompts what Davidson (1978, p. 95) called ‘the
strongest argument against identifying [intention] with
[belief],’ that ‘reasons for intending to do something are
in general quite different from reasons for believing one will do
it.’ Though Velleman (1989, pp. 122–5) defends that
identification, one need not do so in order to accept the theory of
intention as belief or the idea of ‘practical
knowledge’ as ‘knowledge in intention.’
A more modest ‘cognitivism’ would hold that intention
entails belief, that practical reasoning does not reduce to
theoretical, but that some requirements that govern intention are best
understood as requirements of theoretical reason. It is often regarded
as a virtue of such cognitivism that it explains why there should be
an indefeasible requirement of consistency among intentions and
beliefs (Ross 2009, pp. 244–7). It has also been argued that the
requirement of means-end coherence follows from requirements of
theoretical reason on the beliefs that figure in our intentions
(Harman 1976, p. 153; Wallace 2001; Setiya 2007b; Ross 2009,
pp. 261–5). If I intend to do E and thus believe that I
will do it, and I believe that doing M is a necessary means
to doing
E, but do not intend or believe that I am going to
do M, I fail to believe a practically salient logical
consequence of what I believe.  The principal challenge for a
cognitivist account of means-end coherence is to explain why one must
avoid such theoretical failures by forming the relevant intention, not
just the corresponding belief (Bratman 2009a). But once again, one
need not defend cognitivism, even in its less ambitious form, in
conceiving intention as a kind of belief.
There are two main arguments against this conception. The first turns
on apparent cases of intention without belief. According to Davidson,
‘[a] man may be making ten carbon copies as he writes, and this
may be intentional; yet he may not know that he is; all he knows is
that he is trying’ (Davidson 1971, p. 50; see also Davidson
1978, pp.  91–4). Or imagine I am recovering from paralysis, and
movement slowly returns to my hand. At a certain point, I am not sure
that I can clench my fist. As it happens, I can. But if I try to do so
behind my back, under anesthesia, I may not believe that I am
clenching my fist, even though—on the face of it—I am
doing so intentionally, and that is just what I intend (Setiya 2008, pp. 390–1). Something
similar crops up in planning for the future. I intend to mail the
bills on the way to work, but I know that I am forgetful, and don’t
believe that I will do it (see Bratman 1987, pp. 37–8).
Such examples can be dealt with in various ways. One strategy insists
that, when I do not believe that I am clenching my fist, or that I
will mail the bills, I do not intend the corresponding actions, I
merely intend to try (Harman 1986, pp. 364–5; Velleman
1989, pp. 115–6). But do I really act as I intended if I try and
fail? (See Pears 1985, p. 86; McCann 1991, p. 212.) And when I know
that I am forgetful, do I even believe that I will try to mail the
bills? A more radical theory points to the simplifying assumption,
often made in epistemology, that belief
is binary and does not come by degree. On that assumption, it may be
harmless to claim that intention involves belief. But the truth is
bound to be more complex: that in forming an intention one becomes
more confident than one would otherwise be (Setiya 2008,
pp. 391–2); or that the will is a capacity to know what one is
doing, or what one is going to do, whose exercise may be impeded,
yielding mere belief or partial belief instead of knowledge (Pears
1985, pp. 78–81; Setiya 2009, pp. 129–31; Setiya 2012, pp. 300–303).
A final response casts doubt on the examples. When we recall the
‘openness’ of the progressive, we can insist that
Davidson’s carbon-copier knows that he is making ten copies,
even if he is not sure the copies are going through first time (see
Thompson 2011). It is not a condition of being embarked on intentional
action that one will in fact succeed. The same might be said when I am
clenching my first, if what I know is merely that I am in progress
towards doing so, in some liminal way. (This points back to the theory
of intending as doing, discussed in section 1.) This strategy
struggles with prospective intention and the belief that I am going to
act. But its advocates may insist that the content of prospective
intention is also imperfective (Thompson 2008, pp. 142–5). We
have practical knowledge only of what is in progress, not what has
happened, or what will.
The second objection is epistemic. If forming an intention is, among
other things, coming to believe that one is doing A, or that
one is going to do A, what entitles us to form such beliefs?
Not, or not ordinarily, that we have sufficient evidence of their
truth. Forming an intention is not predicting the future on the basis
of what one takes to be, or what ought to be, adequate grounds. That
is why Anscombe calls practical knowledge ‘knowledge without
observation,’ meaning to exclude not only observation in the
narrow sense but knowledge by inference (Anscombe 1963, p. 50). And it
is why Velleman (1989) writes about ‘spontaneous’
knowledge of action. Even though he hopes to reduce practical to
theoretical reasoning, and holds that intention involves belief, he
denies that intentions are formed on the basis of sufficient prior
evidence. Anscombe and Velleman concede that knowledge in intention
often rests in part on observation; the claim is that it goes beyond
what observation, or inference from prior evidence, can support. (For
differing views of the role of perception in practical knowledge, see
Pickard 2004; Gibbons 2010; Schwenkler 2011; Ford 2016.)
The postulation of beliefs formed without sufficient prior evidence is
sometimes taken as a fatal flaw. In a memorable formulation, Grice
(1971, p. 268) wrote that it makes decision ‘a case of licensed
wishful thinking.’ According to Grice, we are not epistemically
permitted to form beliefs about what we are doing, or what we are
going to do, without sufficient prior evidence. Instead, we know what
we are doing, or what we are going to do, by inference from the
condition of our will, along with premises about our own abilities
(Grice 1971, pp. 275–9; Paul 2009). The condition of the will
cannot itself involve belief.
Reactions to this problem vary widely. Those who restrict the content
of intention to what is in progress and emphasize how little is
involved in being embarked on intentional action may suggest that the
beliefs in question verify themselves. It is sufficient for
doing A intentionally, in the relevant sense, that one
intends to do it. As we saw in section 1, however, there are reasons
to doubt this sufficiency. And the view seems to deflate the interest
of practical knowledge. Anscombe warns against the ‘false avenue
of escape’ on which ‘I really “do” in the
intentional sense whatever I think I am doing’ (Anscombe 1963,
p. 52), and seems to allow for practical knowledge of what I will
actually do (Moran 2004: 146; Setiya 2016a).
Other views account for knowledge in intention in reliabilist terms:
where one’s intention to do A reliably issues in
doing A, it may amount to knowledge of what one is doing, or
what one is going to do (Newstead 2006, §2; Velleman 2007,
§5). Non-reliabilists may dismiss the need for prior evidence,
holding that we are entitled to form a belief if we know that it will
be true, and that we will have sufficient evidence for its truth, once
formed; this condition can be met when we form an intention to act
(Harman 1976, p. 164, n. 8; Velleman 1989, pp.  56–64). So long
as I know what I intend, and that my intention will be effective, I
have sufficient evidence for what I am doing, or what am I going to
do, even though this evidence did not precede the forming of my
intention.
Critics may object to the necessity of these conditions. According to
Berislav Marušić (2015), I can form the ‘practical
belief’ that I will do A without knowing that my
intention will be effective, so long as I know that its execution is
up to me. A more common objection is that the conditions are not
sufficient. They assimilate intention to faith, as when I form the
belief that I can leap a great chasm even though I have no evidence of
my ability to do so, knowing that the belief itself will ensure
success. It is not clear that such acts of faith are possible, that
they are epistemically rational, or that they provide a plausible
model for intention (Langton 2004; Setiya 2008, §III). On an
alternative view, there is a general demand for prior evidence in
forming beliefs, but our intentions are sometimes exempt from it, as
perhaps when we know how to perform the relevant acts (Setiya 2008;
Setiya 2009; Setiya 2012). It is know-how that explains why the
execution of our intentions, and thus the truth of the beliefs that
they involve, can be credited to us.
Anscombe’s position on the matter is elusive, and may have to do
with her normative claims about intention and belief. Is practical
knowledge exempt from ordinary requirements of evidence because there
is a mistake of performance, not of judgement, when its object is
false? (See Anscombe 1963, pp. 4–5, 56–7; Campbell 2018a.)
Would it then amount to knowledge of what is not the case? Anscombe
may seem to suggest as much (Anscombe 1963, p. 82), but it is unclear
whether she accepts or merely entertains this prospect.
Implicit these debates is a question about the scope of
groundless (non-perceptual, non-inferential) self-knowledge. A blanket
objection to beliefs formed without sufficient prior evidence cannot
be sustained: I often know what I believe without having come to know
on the basis of perception or inference. Is groundless knowledge of
this kind restricted to our mental states? Or can it extend to what we
are doing and what we are going to do? Compare externalism about
content: at least typically, believing that p has
implications for the constitution of the world outside one’s skin; but
it remains accessible to self-knowledge (Burge 1988). Why should that
not be true of intentional action? On any reading, part of the aim of
Anscombe’s Intention was to break the Cartesian prejudice
against self-knowledge of what is happening in the world. If she
failed in that endeavour, she at least prescribed a task for future
work: to say whether it is indeed a prejudice or a decisive obstacle
to the possibility of practical knowledge and the theory that
intention involves belief.