We have only a few scant clues of his biography, and we cannot be
sure of their veracity, especially in the issue of the date of his
death. We know that he lived the first half of his life in Egypt,
before moving to Karouan, Tunisia between the years of 905–907.
Most biographers agree that he lived to the age of 100, though they
disagree on the years of birth and death. Sacid
al-Andalusi (mid-11th century), in his work Kitab
Tabakat al-Umam, indicates that he died in 932 (R. Blachere 1935,
p. 157). However, one of Israeli’s pupils, Ibn al-Jazzar
died in 1009 at an approximate age of 80. If Israeli had died in
932, Ibn al-Jazzar would have been only five years old at his death,
thus this date is unlikely. Abraham Ibn Hasday, a translator of
Israeli’s works from Arabic into Hebrew, provides the date of his
passing as 942. But Altmann and Stern (Isaac Israeli, p.
xx) have pointed out that Ibn Hasday likely made a transcription error
in his quotation of Sacid al-Andalusi. Another student
of Israeli, Dunash Ibn Tamim, wrote a commentary on the Jewish mystical
work Sefer Yetzirah in 956, and indicated therein that Israeli
was no longer alive, though not mentioning the year of his death.
The Arab chroniclers of physicians indicate that Isaac Israeli
served as a doctor to Ubayd Allah al-Mahdi, the founder of the Fatimid
Dynasty of North Africa, who reigned from 910–934. In his
capacity as physician, Israeli wrote several medical treatises which
were widely regarded in the Islamic world, and highly valued in
Christian scholastic circles as well. These works include the
Book of Fevers, the Book of Foodstuffs and Drugs, and
the Book of Urine. Later Islamic historians relate
accounts that the first and third Fatimid rulers died from not
following the sound advice of Isaac Israeli, though the absence of
these anecdotes in the earlier chronicles, combined with their literary
trope-like character, render the tales suspect. Nonetheless,
these narratives do indicate the great respect accorded to Isaac
Israeli.
Although the chronicler Ibn Abi Usaybi’a, as well as titles of
some of Israeli’s work in manuscripts, assign Israeli the
patronymic term Abu Yacqub (“father of Jacob”),
the biographers state that he never married or fathered children, and
attribute to him the statement that his books will cause his name to be
remembered far better than children would. The
assignment of patronymics to persons who did not marry and beget
offspring is not altogether rare—thus we also see the patronymic
“Abu Ayub” applied to the childless poet and philosopher
Solomon Ibn Gabirol. As some of Israeli’s treatises have
survived over a millennium and remain the occasional subject of
scholarly research, his prediction is correct.
Regrettably, in his surviving treatises, Israeli does not discuss
his philosophical studies. We do know that by Isaac
Israeli’s lifetime, several Greek books of philosophy translated
into Arabic as well as original Arabic philosophical works were
available, though perhaps some of these treatises, mostly produced in
Baghdad and its environs, had not yet journeyed westward to North
Africa. Much of Aristotle’s corpus had been translated in
the previous century, as had Porphyry’s Isagoge, often
studied as an introduction to Aristotle’s works. Further,
an Arabic partial paraphrase of Plotinus’ Enneads
circulated under the pseudepigraphic title The Theology of
Aristotle in two recensions, the shorter of which is called the
Vulgate Theology of Aristotle (due to its larger number of
manuscripts) while the other recension is called the Longer
Theology of Aristotle. There are both significant
parallels and significant variances between Israeli’s writings
and the Longer Theology of Aristotle. Thus, the
influences of Aristotle and Plotinus on Israeli’s philosophy are
strong, and he likely read translations of their works as well as
commentaries on them.
S.M. Stern argues for the existence of a lost pseudepigraphic Arabic
treatise which influenced the longer recension of The Theology of
Aristotle and Isaac Israeli, and was quoted without proper
attribution by both. Further, he argues that this same treatise
is identical to a philosophical excursus which was appended to the
literary tale The Tale of the Prince and the Ascetic (Hebrew:
Sefer ben ha-melech veha-nazir) when Abraham Ibn Hasday
translated the text from Arabic (Bilawhar wa-Yudasaf) into
Hebrew in the thirteenth century. Although one may be
tempted to conjecture that the Neoplatonist appendix is an original
work by Ibn Hasday which largely paraphrases Israeli—a hypothesis
strengthened by the fact that Ibn Hasday had translated Israeli’s
Book of the Elements—Stern disproves this
possibility by demonstrating that Israeli’s Book of
Substances is largely a commentary on the metaphysics of Ibn
Hasday’s treatise, and Israeli’s Book on Spirit and the
Soul is an attempt to reconcile Ibn Hasday’s treatise with
scriptural proof texts. Hence, according to Altmann and Stern,
Israeli was strongly influenced by this treatise they call “Ibn
Hasday’s Neoplatonist.” Further, we know that Israeli
did not author this treatise, for when he quoted it, he cited
“the philosopher,” thereby indicating that he thought he
was quoting Aristotle.
More recently, Fritz Zimmerman has argued that Stern’s hypothesis of
an otherwise unattested “Neoplatonist” as source for Israeli is
superfluous.  Israeli’s source may have been the Longer Theology of
Aristotle, while Ibn Hasday’s source may simply have been Israeli,
either synthesizing the view’s in Israeli’s extant treatises, or
paraphrasing a lost treatise of Israeli’s.  In the absence of further
documentary evidence, neither Stern’s nor Zimmerman’s theory can be
definitively ruled out.
Isaac Israeli’s passages on intellection, interpreted by Stern
as a misreading of al-Kindi, actually mirrors a passage in John of
Damascus’ (c. 676–c. 749) De Fide Orthodoxa, which was
translated into Arabic in the tenth century (Wolfson, 1961:
279–280). While it is within the realm of possibility that
Israeli read this translation, it is also possible that both authors
are citing a previous source which is no longer extant.
A clear and strong influence of the Arab philosopher al-Kindi (d.
873) is evident in the work of Isaac Israeli. Like the former, he
wrote a book of definitions, many of which are strongly similar to
definitions in al-Kindi’s Fi Hudud al-ashya’
wa-rusumiha. Scholars Altmann and Stern illustrate the extensive
similarities between the two books in their commentary on
Israeli’s Book of Definitions in their study Isaac
Israeli: A Neoplatonic Philosopher of the Early Tenth
Century. Further, Israeli uses much of
al-Kindi’s terminology for both astronomical and terrestrial
objects. Nonetheless, it would be wrong to call the book a
paraphrase of al-Kindi, as there are numerous divergences as
well.
Though we see overlap with The Theology of Aristotle and
al-Kindi, we do not have any evidence that Israeli read the works of
his younger contemporary al-Farabi (ca. 870–ca. 950), nor do we see
the influence of his younger coreligionist philosopher Saadya Gaon
(882–942 C.E.).
The four kinds of inquiry, introduced by Aristotle in his
Posterior Analytics, and subsequently modified by Neoplatonist
commentators, were such a universal and fundamental component of the
cultural episteme, that elaboration of the four inquiries
often formed part of the introduction to philosophical and medical
treatises. Aristotle lists the four questions thusly:
“(1) whether the connexion of an attribute with a thing is a
fact, (2) what is the reason of the connexion, (3) whether a thing
exists, (4) what is the nature of the thing.” (Posterior
Analytics ii.1, G.R.G. Mure translation)
Following the practice of thinkers of his age, at the very beginning
of his Book of Definitions and also at the beginning of his
Book on Fevers, Isaac Israeli introduces the Aristotelian
distinction of the four kinds of inquiry, in a slightly modified
form:
“(1) The first is existence: when one inquires whether
so-and-so exists; (2) the second is quiddity: when one inquires what
so-and-so is; (3) the third is quality: when one inquires how so-and-so
is; (4) the fourth is ‘quarity’: when one inquires why
so-and-so is.” (Altmann and Stern, Isaac Israeli, pp.
10–11)
Israeli’s description mirrors the list of al-Jahiz (d. ca.
869) in the Book of Indications and Considerations (Arabic:
Kitab al-Dala’il wa’l-cItibar) as well
as cAli ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari (fl. 9th
century), in his medical text Firdaws al-Hikmah fi
al-Tibb. His list varies slightly from that of al-Kindi, who
in his treatise on metaphysics Al-Falsafah al-cula
defines the third inquiry as which, rather than
how.
Just as medieval thinkers adopted Aristotle’s four inquiries,
so too did they adopt his distinction of four types of causes
(material, formal, efficient, and final) elaborated in
Aristotle’s Metaphysics v.2 and other
places. Although Israeli adopts the schema, he notes that
within each of the four categories a cause can be either spiritual or
corporeal. While a “spiritual material cause” might
sound oxymoronic to our ears, in his Book of Definitions
Israeli provides an example:
Just as spiritual material causes are the material substratum for
genera, spiritual formal causes are substantial forms of genera.
These genera “cause” those objects which partake of them to
be as they are. Israeli’s example of a spiritual efficient
cause is paradoxical:
The prevalent medieval conception of the sphere of the cosmos is
that it is not a vacuum, but rather, crystalline and composed of a
fifth element superior to the four elements of our terrestrial
world. Hence, it would appear that the efficient spiritual cause
could also be an efficient material cause. However, this
difficulty is resolved if what Israeli meant here was an intelligence
or soul governing the sphere. Although Israeli does not in any of
his surviving writings and fragments mention a soul of the spheres, his
pupil Dunash Ibn Tamim affirms it in his commentary on Sefer
Yetzirah.
Israeli adopts the Aristotelian doctrine of the four elements which
compose all material objects: earth, air, fire and water. These
elements are generated by the motion of the heavenly sphere, and they
inhere in a material substratum—though Israeli does not elucidate
its nature. Although Israeli does not explicitly state that the
elements are made up of form and matter, Altmann and Stern (Isaac
Israeli, p. 183) present a strong case for his acceptance of this
idea. In his Mantua Text, also known as the Chapter
on the Elements, he describes the generative order of the
elements. The motion of the sphere of the world generated heat,
and thus is fire brought into existence. As fire cooled, it
became air, which, moving away from fire, cooled and moistened into
water, and as water moved from air it cooled and dried and generated
earth (Altmann and Stern, Isaac Israeli, pp. 120–121).
Similar to most other Neoplatonists, Israeli accepted the
Aristotelian definition of a substance as a something of which
something is said or predicated—and not something which is said
of something else. Within a substance, matter is the substratum
for the form which determines its being as substance. Further
matter can be either particular or general and universal, and if
particular “it is the substratum for a special form which
constitutes the essence of a particular species…”
(Isaac Israeli, p. 86)
Although explication of the nature of God is absent in the surviving
fragments of Israeli’s philosophical corpus, it is apparent that
Israeli, like the Muslim philosopher al-Kindi before him, combined the
Neoplatonist notion of God as the source of emanation of all things,
with the idea common to the monotheistic religions, of a willful
Creator who created the world in time. In blending these two
conceptions, these philosophers rejected the Aristotelian conception of
the eternity of the world, as well as the idea of eternal emanation of
some of the Greek Neoplatonists. Israeli’s use of the
Arabic term, al-Bari, “the Creator” reflects the
religious sensitivities of his age—and is not simply a
translation of Plotinus’ “The One”.
In Plotinus’ Enneads, the founding text of
Neoplatonist philosophy, The One contains a will which is not
separate from itself (Enneads, vi 8.21), and precedes the
emanation of Nous (The Intellect/Intelligence) a secondary
entity from which all lower beings emanate. In Arabic paraphrases
of Plotinus, the Will or Word of God is a secondary
hypostasis which creates Intellect (cAql).
This model is also seen in later Jewish Neoplatonist philosophers
Solomon Ibn Gabirol and Judah Halevi. However, Isaac Israeli,
like Plotinus, does not treat the will of God as a separate hypostasis
or secondary being.
One prominent feature in most variants of Neoplatonist thought is
Negative Theology, the idea that one cannot predicate anything of
God. The problems which this approach intended to avoid were two
undesired implications arising from predication of a quality of
God—namely, that if we attribute a particular quality to God,
this quality exists co-extensively with God, and must hence be
co-eternal; secondly, it introduces multiplicity to God. The
Neoplatonists, in the main, wished to conceive of God as a simple and
radical unity, preceding all multiplicity in the world, and as such,
must precede the existence of qualities. Hence the only two
allowable predications of God are God’s Unity and God’s
Existence. In none of the surviving materials do we find Israeli
expressing Negative Theology explicitly. Israeli’s pupil
Dunash Ibn Tamim promotes negative theology in his commentary on the
mystical work Sefer Yetzirah, which lead scholars Altmann and
Stern (Isaac Israeli, pp. 157–8) to conclude that we can
safely assume that Israeli held this opinion as well.
Whereas for Plotinus, the second being in the emanative chain is
Nous (Intellect), Israeli concurs with the model in “Ibn
Hasday’s Neoplatonist”, that First Matter and First Form
are the first and only “creations” of the
Creator—that is, produced by an act of Will—and
precede the Intellect. First Matter and First Form conjoin to
form the First Intellect. After God creates First Matter and First
Form, God’s active role in creation ceases and all subsequent
beings emanate in a chain of hypostases from Intellect, downward to the
three kinds of soul, and culminating in the material and corporeal
Sphere/Nature. Further, Israeli adds a second Intellect which is
a distinct hypostasis from First Intellect. First Intellect
contains the totality of forms and knows itself intuitively with
perfect unchanging knowledge. Second Intellect exists within the
domain of Soul, and knows the actualization of particular things via
temporal knowledge.
Soul is the next realm in the emanative sequence, and Israeli here
replicates Aristotle’s threefold division. This universal
soul is made up of the higher Rational Soul, the Animal Soul and the
Vegetative/Nutritive Soul and from these emanates the superlunary
sphere of heaven—the point where the material world emerges from
Soul. Whereas most other Neoplatonists use the term
“Nature” for the corporeal world, Israeli uses the term
“the sphere.” The motions of the superlunary sphere
of heaven, made up of a fifth unchanging element, govern the
combinations and recombinations of the four elements in the material
world below the moon—hence they govern the processes of
generation and corruption. Israeli’s student Dunash Ibn
Tamim calls this fourth soul the soul of the sphere.
In Neoplatonist philosophy the metaphor of light emitted from its
source illustrates the process of emanation. The light spreads
out from its source, but does not diminish its source. Similarly,
the generation of emanated entities and hypostases in no way diminishes
the source of each emanation. Israeli accounts for the increasing
corporeality and particularity and imperfection of each emanated
hypostasis by adding the idea of shadow or shade to emanation.
Each emanated hypostasis has a lighter region closer to the source of
its emanation, but it also contains regions of shade or shadow in areas
further from their source. It is in these shaded regions that the
emanation of the next sequential entity begins. Further, each
emanated hypostasis receives light from its source but also shadow,
which grows denser as the ontological distance from the source of
emanation increases.
As is standard within the intellectual milieu dominated by
Aristotelian physics, Israeli opined that the generation and passing
away of terrestrial objects was the result of recombination of elements
and their attendant properties (heat, coldness, wetness and dryness), a
process which is governed by the movement of the cosmic sphere.
Later thinkers would, via astrology, attribute certain roles in this
process to the “intelligences” governing individual
celestial objects and their relative positions. The heavens,
which are not composed of the four elements and hence not affected by
their contrary qualities, are not subject to generation and
degeneration. (Isaac Israeli [Book of Definitions],
p. 48)
In a few instances in his Book of Definitions, Israeli
diverges from models given by his forerunner al-Kindi. Although Israeli
posits a first intellect and a second intellect,
Israeli describes three hypostases of intellect. First
intellect, the entity which emerges from the conjunction of first
matter and first form, contains all subsequent forms, which emanate
from the first intellect and determine the specificality of
all substances and knows all things eternally. The secondary
hypostasis of intellect is actually in the rational soul, and is
potential intellect before it passes into the actual intellect of the
first intellect. The “second intellect” (actually the
third hypostasis of intellect) is a faculty of the rational soul, which
via sense perception and imagination (the “internal
senses”) conveys information to the higher hypostasis in the
rational soul. The second intellect of the rational soul unites
with the objects of its intellection in a spiritual, non-corporeal
sense and similarly, upon conveyance of the intellection to the higher
intellect of the rational soul, the higher hypostasis of intellect
within the rational soul also spiritually unites with the objects of
its intellection. (Altmann and Stern, Isaac Israeli, pp.
36–7) Since Israeli here diverges from al-Kindi, Stern accuses
Israeli of a clumsy misreading of the latter. (Isaac Israeli,
p. 39) However, since Israeli’s description of internal
senses largely mirrors the description in John of Damascus’
De Fide Orthodoxa, (Book II, Chapter 20) it is likely that
Israeli derived his overall schema of intellection from another
source. While Stern rejected the connection between the text of
John of Damascus and Israeli (Isaac Israeli, p. 59), Harry Wolfson
rejoined that De Fida Orthodoxa was available in Arabic
translation in the tenth century (Wolfson, 1961, p. 279).
Further, it is possible that Israeli was drew his conception from
another lost source common to himself and John of Damascus, or from a
lost Arabic commentator on the latter.
Isaac Israeli did not believe in the ensoulment of souls in
bodies. The three souls, despite their role in the governance of
the body, and the role of bodily sense perception in conveying
information to the rational soul, remained outside the body. In
his Book on Spirit and Soul, Israeli utilizes scriptural proof
texts to argue that the rational soul is what entitles mankind to
reward or punishment after death. But he writes tersely and
vaguely on the subject of reward and punishment and does not explicitly
clarify the relationship between the generic rational soul and rational
souls of individuals. Presumably, we all have separate rational
souls, otherwise the idea of reward and punishment of rational souls
makes no sense. He notes that the perfect actions of man pass
beyond the corporeal sphere while those actions to satisfy bodily
appetites do not. Further, he affirms that the soul of the
righteous will endure in the upper realm with the intellect.
Although he has sidestepped the traditional Rabbinic Jewish conception
of bodily resurrection of the righteous by stating that the world to
come is the upper non-physical world, he does not spell out whether
this dwelling entails reintegration of one’s rational soul with
the intellect, or a separate yet proximate existence.
Israeli, like the physician Qusta Ibn Luqa (ca. 835–912), argued
that in addition to its connection with souls, a living being has a
vital spirit, which unlike souls, is contained within the body and dies
with the body, and he employs scripture (Psalms 78: 39) to argue this
point. Altmann and Stern show that Israeli’s text very
closely parallels Ibn Luqa’s, hence either derived it directly
from the former, or they both are quoting the same prior source.
(Isaac Israeli, p. 50)
In addition to an emanative/generative order, a prominent feature of
Neoplatonist philosophy is the idea that through withdrawal from bodily
desires, and perfection of the intellect, one’s rational soul can
attain unity with the higher world. The early
Neoplatonists—those outside of the “revealed”
monotheistic traditions of Islam, Judaism and
Christianity—suggest that it is possible for the rational soul to
achieve unity with The One/God. However, the Neoplatonists who
were members of established monotheist religions do not think that
one’s rational soul is capable of so high an ascent up the
emanative chain, and advocation of such belief might have lead to
prosecution for blasphemy or heresy. Nonetheless, Neoplatonists
of religious traditions did think that the rational soul’s union
with the realm of intellect was possible. Neoplatonists from
Proclus onwards describe unification as a three-part process, which
Altmann and Stern characterize as
Purification—Illumination—Union. For Israeli, the
Purification stage involves three activities: an ascetic rejection of
bodily desires and pleasures, and the dominance of the two lower souls;
a worship of God combined with ethical behavior towards one’s
fellow men; and the study of philosophy to develop one’s rational
soul. In the second stage, the soul is illuminated by
truth. In the third stage, one’s rational soul becomes
spiritual and divine, though not achieving full unity with the
Creator.
According to Israeli, a human being can act in a number of ways when
faced with a specific situation. The reason for this
ability is the capacity of discernment, and more specifically of
cogitation and consideration. Due to these capacities people are able
to acquire theoretical and practical knowledge and to differentiate between good and evil. Because animals do not
possess intellectual capacities, they are limited to acting in a
definite way in particular situations. However, the ability of humans to act in different ways is a
consequence of humans’ position between pure intellect and
beast. People use their cogitation and consideration to attain a
higher level of knowledge. However, as long as humans use those
capacities their knowledge will remain imperfect and they will
continue to hesitate and be uncertain. When they are united with intellect they
no longer are  uncertain and act in the best possible way in
all situations without any tension in their soul. According to
Israeli, the certainty of truth cancels all kinds of bad temptations.
One may interpret Israeli here as saying that if a man has an imperfect knowledge that it is bad to eat
unhealthy candies, his knowledge and his temptation for these candies
are in struggle in his soul. His capacities of consideration and
cogitation (אלפכר) have to decide between this imperfect knowledge and
the temptation. Once this person attains perfect knowledge, he or she
no longer wishes to eat the candies. S. Sadik argues that Israeli’s remarks constitute a Socratic negation of akrasia (Sadik 2013).
All of the following works, except the Book on the
Elements, have been translated by Alexander Altmann and S. M.
Stern in their monograph Isaac Israeli: A Neoplatonic Philosopher
of the Early Tenth Century. In the 1950s and 1960s these two
scholars have also published transcriptions of the fragments and
manuscripts of these works in a number of journals. In addition
to publishing and translating known works of Isaac Israeli, Altmann and
Stern firmly established the hypothesis suggested by Gershom Scholem
that Isaac Israeli authored a work previously erroneously attributed to
Aristotle: The Chapter on the Elements (Mantua Text).
Further, in their extensive analyses of Israeli’s texts (in which
they often compare Israeli’s text to parallel passages in
al-Kindi and other authors), they established the surprising antiquity
of the Neoplatonic treatise which Abraham Ibn Hasday (d. 1240) appended
to his Hebrew translation of The Prince and the Ascetic.
This work, which they dubbed “Ibn Hasday’s
Neoplatonist” actually predated and influenced both Isaac Israeli
and the Longer Recension of the Theology of Aristotle, and
Stern’s article on “Ibn Hasday’s Neoplatonist”
is an important component of any thorough study of the philosophy of
Isaac Israeli.
Originally written in Arabic, this work is extant in two Latin
(Liber de Definicionibus/Definitionibus) and two Hebrew
translations (Sefer ha-Gvulim), but only a fragment of the
original Arabic (Kitab al-Hudud) survived. That
this book was widely read by Christian scholastics is evidenced by
Thomas Aquinas’ and Albertus Magnus’ misattribution of
Avicenna’s definition of truth to Isaac’s Book of
Definitions (see Altmann & Stern, Isaac Israeli, p.
59). This book is a collection of 57 definitions, the bulk of
which are paraphrases and quotes (often without attribution) of various
passages of al-Kindi. In some instances, he cites “the
philosopher” who would be understood to mean Aristotle, but he is
actually paraphrasing al-Kindi, who oftentimes purports to elucidate
what Aristotle had written on a particular subject.
Occasionally, his definitions derive from other possible sources such
as Qusta ibn Luqa (a physician, mathematician, scientist and
translator, lived 835–912 C.E.), Ammonius Hermiae of Alexandria (Fifth
Century C.E.) and John Philoponus (490–ca. 570 C.E.). A few ideas
expressed in this work are not attested in any other known
sources. Yet, because of the book’s close adherence to
al-Kindi, Stern hypothesizes that these deviations are often either
quotation of definitions of al-Kindi which have been lost, or are
misreadings of al-Kindi. One of the colophons at the end noted
that the work is a “collection,” perhaps indicating that
the material was not original, nor intended to be read as such.
In another manuscript the colophon asserts that Isaac Israeli had
written it, yet this same colophon contains spurious
information—that Israeli was from Spain and that he had fathered
children whom he hoped would study it (Altmann & Stern, Isaac
Israeli, p. 78), hence its claim that the treatise is an entirely
original work of Israeli’s must not be regarded as
authoritative.
Both Latin versions were published by J.T. Muckle, “Issac
Israeli, Liber de Definicionibus” in Archives
d’histoire doctrinale et litteraire du moyen age,
1937–8. The longer version was translated by Gerard of Cremona
(1114–1187), and appears in manuscripts (Paris B.N. 14,700; Paris B.N.
6443; Vatican Lat. 2186) as well as a printed edition Omnia opera
Ysaac, from Lyons in 1515. M. Alonso speculated that the
shorter version (MS Munich Lat. 8001) is a translation by Domingo
Gundissalinus and predated the longer version (Alonso, 1947, pp. 295,
325) (See “Traducciones del arcediano Domingo Gundisalvo”
in Al-Andalus, 1947, pp. 295, 325). Altmann and Stern
challenge this hypothesis, arguing that the shorter version is an
epitome of the longer version, improving the translation at points
(Isaac Israeli, p. 5).
Nissim ben Solomon translated one of the Hebrew versions, and it can
be found in its entirety in H. Hirschfeld, Festschrift zum 80.
Geburtstag M. Steinschneiders, pp. 131–42. J.L. Teicher was
of the opinion that the Hebrew version was translated from the Latin
version (See “The Latin-Hebrew school of translators in Spain in
the twelfth century,” in Homanaje a Millas-Vallicrosa,
v.ii, pp. 416–22). Julius Guttman and Stern think that his
primary source was the Arabic version (Stern and Altmann, Isaac
Israeli, p. 6). The second Hebrew translation, whose
translator is unknown, was published by Altmann in Journal of
Semitic Studies, 1957, pp. 232–42.
The surviving Arabic fragment is written in Hebrew characters, but
there are indications that the original text was written in Arabic
script. The Arabic fragment can be found in the Cambridge
Taylor-Schechter collection, document TS. 8 Ka.62 and has
been published twice—by H. Hirschfeld in “The Arabic
portion of the Cairo Genizah at Cambridge,” Jewish Quarterly
Review xv (1902), pp. 689–93 and by Altmann in Journal of Semitic
Studies, 1957, pp. 232–42. This work is accessible in
English translation with commentary in Altmann and Stern’s
Isaac Israeli, 9–78.
The Book of Substances (Arabic: Kitab al-Jawahir)
is extant only in fragments of Judeo-Arabic (that is, Arabic written in
Hebrew letters) in the Firkovitch Collection in St. Petersburg and in
the British Museum. Stern established that both manuscripts were
separately transliterated from an original text in Arabic
characters—which is deducible from transcription errors arising
from Arabic rather than Hebrew orthographic similarities, and that the
transcription and transliteration errors in the two manuscripts do not
match (Stern, “The Fragments of ‘The Book of
Substances’”, pp.16–17). Stern pieced together the fragments,
adding some missing materials from a passage in “Ibn
Hasday’s Neoplatonist” and published them in the
Journal of Jewish Studies, vii (1956), 13–29. The extant
fragments largely paraphrase and add commentary to passages from the
pseudo-Aristotelian “Ibn Hasday’s
Neoplatonist.” Due to the close textual proximities between
the two texts, Stern conjectured that in places where Israeli is
quoting “the philosopher” he is likely quoting a lost
passage of the Neoplatonist. These parallels allowed Stern to
arrange the discontinuous fragments into an order mirroring its source
treatise. Altmann and Stern subsequently published a translation of the
fragments in Isaac Israeli, pp. 81–105.
J.L. Teicher argues that Isaac Israeli is not the author of this
work (Teicher, 1956 p. 424). However, since
Israeli’s pupil Dunash Ibn Tamim quotes passages of it in his
commentary on the mystical work Sefer Yetzirah,
Teicher’s view is likely erroneous.
Two Hebrew translations (Sefer ha-Ruah v’ha-Nefesh)
and a fragment of the Arabic original remain of this work.
Altmann and Stern provide a critical English translation based on the
Hebrew manuscripts (Munich Steinschneider’s Cat. no. 307, fols.
47ff; Cambridge Addler 1858 fols. 113v ff.) and A. Borisov’s
publication of the Arabic fragment in Isaac Israeli, pp.
108–117.
This treatise, unlike the Book of Definitions and Book
of Substances is a distinctly Jewish work of philosophy, as it
combines doctrines of soul drawn from Ibn Hasday’s Neoplatonist
with Jewish scriptural proof texts, supporting a Neoplatonist
conception of soul as distinct from mortal spirit, combined with the
Rabbinic Jewish belief in reward and punishment of souls.
A single Hebrew translation (Shacar ha-Yesodot
le-Aristo) is extant in manuscript Mantua 28c, folios
16r–18r. This unsigned work was initially regarded as an
anonymous commentary on Aristotle. Altmann, developing a hypothesis
first proposed by Gershom Scholem, argues that this text is the work of
Isaac Israeli. Also called the Mantua Text, it is
available in English translation by Altmann in two
publications—Journal of Jewish Studies, vii (1956) pp.
31–57 and in Altmann and Stern’s Isaac Israeli, pp.
119–32.
Like most of his other philosophical works, Israeli’s Arabic
original (Kitab al-Ustuqussat) is lost, and we are left with a
Latin translation and two Hebrew versions. Gerard of Cremona’s
Latin translation of this book was published in the work Omnia
opera Ysaac, Lyons: 1515. One Hebrew version (Leiden, Warner MS
No. 13) was rendered by Abraham ibn Hasday for David Qimhi. The
other translation (Munich MS No. 43) is more eloquent, and likely an
improvement on the earlier translation, leading Salomon Fried to
conjecture that the famous Medieval translator Moses ibn Tibbon
(flourished mid-13th century, Provence) prepared it (Fried,
1884, pp. 75–83).
In 956, Dunash Ibn Tamim, a pupil of Isaac Israeli, wrote an
extensive commentary on the short recension of Sefer Yetzirah,
a mystical work of cosmogony which attributes great importance to the
letters of the Hebrew alphabet and their combinations in determining
the structure of the universe. In this work he cites Israeli so
extensively that in the nineteenth century, a few scholars
misidentified the commentary as Israeli’s.
Isaac Israeli’s medical treatises were studied for several
centuries both in the original Arabic and in Latin
translation. In the eleventh century, Constantine
Africanus, a professor at the prestigious Salerno school of medicine,
translated some of Israeli’s works into Latin. Many medieval
Arabic biographical chronicles of physicians list him and his
works.
Israeli’s philosophical works exercised a considerable
influence on Christian and Jewish thinkers, and a lesser degree of
influence among Muslim intellectuals. In the twelfth century,
following a major phase of the Christian reconquest of Spain, a group
of scholars in Toledo transmitted many Arabic works of science and
philosophy into Latin. One of the translators who migrated to
this cultural center, Gerard of Cremona, rendered Israeli’s
Book of Definitions and Book on the Elements into
Latin. Israeli’s work was quoted and paraphrased by a
number of Christian thinkers including Gundissalinus, Albertus Magnus,
Thomas Aquinas, Vincent de Beauvais, Bonaventura, Roger Bacon and
Nicholas of Cusa (See Altmann and Stern, Isaac Israeli, pp.
xiii–xiv; Julius Guttmann, Die Scholastik des 13.
Jahrhunderts in irhen Beziehungen zum Judentum und zur judische
Literatur, pp. 55–60, 129–30,150 and 172; as well as Guttmann,
Das Verhaltniss des Thomas von Aquino zum Judentum und zur
judischen Literatur, pp. 55–60).
Isaac Israeli corresponded with Saadya ben Joseph al-Fayyumi
(882–942) prior to the latter’s departure from Egypt. Saadya
later became the head (Gaon) of the Talmudic Academy of Sura and one of
the most influential figures in the medieval Judaism. Saadya Gaon was
known for his Jewish legal rulings, his arrangement of the Jewish
prayer book (Siddur), his translation of the Hebrew Bible into Arabic,
his liturgical poetry and his philosophical work The Book of
Beliefs and Opinions (Arabic: Kitab al-‘Amanat
wal-‘Itikadat, Hebrew: Sefer emunot
ve-decot). Altmann and Stern suggest
that it is possible that Saadya Gaon’s concept of rational
commandments was influenced by Israeli’s concept of
“intellectual precepts” from his Book of
Definitions. (Isaac Israeli, p. 217) However, it is
also possible that Saadya Gaon’s conception may have been a
product of the vibrant and somewhat ecumenical intellectual culture of
Baghdad, in which a group of theologians known as the Muta‘zilites
reconciled logic and science with Islamic theology, arguing for the
rationality of God and His actions.
The great Jewish poet and Neoplatonist Solomon Ibn Gabirol (known in
Latin as Avicebron and Avicebrol) likely read Isaac Israeli’s
works as well as the widely-circulated encyclopedic Epistles of the
Brethren of Purity (Arabic: Rasa’il Ikhwan
as-Safa’). Solomon Ibn Gabirol was at times close to
the latter in his models of emanation. He was also highly
innovative—hence the influence of Isaac Israeli is difficult to
gauge. Nonetheless, Israeli’s Book on Spirit and
Soul was likely the only philosophical text which combined
Neoplatonist cosmology and psychology with Biblical proof texts—a
task which Ibn Gabirol accomplished so masterfully in his liturgical
poem Keter Malkhut. It is probable that Ibn
Gabirol’s idea of spiritual matter was influenced by Israeli.
Another of the Golden Age Hebrew poets of Spain, Moses Ibn Ezra
(c. 1060–1139) quotes Isaac Israeli without attribution in his
treatise The Book of the Garden, explaining the meaning of Metaphor
and Literal Expression (Originally in Judeo-Arabic: Kitab
al-Hadiqa fi Macna ‘l-Majaz
wa’l-Haqiqa). Stern explores this matter in his
article “Isaac Israeli and Moses ibn Ezra.” The poet and
philosopher Joseph Ibn Tzaddiq of Cordoba (d. 1149) authored a work
The Microcosm (the Judeo-Arabic original is lost, but the work
survived in Hebrew translation as Ha-colam
ha-Qatan) containing many ideas indebted to Israeli.
Parallels between the two thinkers are illuminated in Altmann and
Stern’s Isaac Israeli (pp. 30, 44, 73–74,
117).
Isaac Israeli’s philosophical influence on Muslim authors is
slight at best. The only known quotation of Israeli’s
philosophy in a Muslim work occurs in Ghayat al-Hakim, a book
on magic, produced in eleventh-century Spain, translated into Latin and
widely circulated in the West under the title Picatrix.
Although there are passages which correspond directly to
Israeli’s writings, the author does not cite him by name.
As Neoplatonist philosophy waned, in addition to the Galenic medical
tradition of which Israeli was a part, the appreciable influence of
Isaac Israeli diminished as well.