Medically trained as a psychiatrist, Lacan’s first texts
started appearing in the late 1920s (during the course of his
psychiatric studies), with his publishing activity really taking off in
the subsequent decade. The 1930s see several early Lacanian
milestones: the publication, in 1932, of his doctoral thesis in
psychiatry, De la psychose paranoïaque dans ses rapports avec
la personnalité (On Paranoid Psychosis in its Relations
with the Personality); collaborations with the Surrealist and
Dadaist artistic movements in whose midsts he circulated as a familiar
fellow traveler; entry into analytic training, including a
didactic analysis with Rudolph Lowenstein; attendance at
Alexandre Kojève’s renowned seminars on G.W.F.
Hegel’s Phenomenology of Spirit; the first
presentation of the now-famous theory of the “mirror stage”
at the International Psychoanalytic Association (IPA) conference at
Marienbad in 1936 (a presentation truncated by Freud’s friend and
biographer, then-IPA President Ernest Jones); and, the
appearance, in the Encyclopédie française in
1938, of a substantial essay on a sizable swathe of analytic topics
entitled Les complexes familiaux dans la formation de
l’individu: Essai d’analyse d’une fonction en
psychologie (“The Family Complexes in the Formation of the
Individual: Attempt at an Analysis of a Function in
Psychology”). This crucial period of Lacan’s development, as
the immediately preceding already indicates, was marked by the
collision of interests and influences related to psychoanalysis,
psychiatry, philosophy, art, and literature, among other areas.
More specifically, the robustly interdisciplinary combination that came
together for Lacan at this time of Freudian analysis, Hegelian
dialectics, Kojèvian pedagogy, and different experiences of
“madness” from numerous perspectives indelibly colors and
permanently inflects the entire rest of Lacan’s intellectual
itinerary.
Unsurprisingly, the Second World War was, for Lacan (and, of course,
for history generally), a period of disruption and upheaval. His
psychoanalytic activities were interrupted, including his training
analysis (Lowenstein and Lacan did not concur about whether this
analysis was well and truly completed, with Lacan deciding it was over
and, somewhat controversially, never returning to Lowenstein’s
couch). The War provided Lacan with an exposure to military psychiatry
in both France and England, with his five-week visit to the latter
acquainting him with aspects of the British psychoanalytic world
(features of this visit are recounted in “British Psychiatry and
the War” [1947]). A handful of important texts were composed
during and after the War, all of which eventually got reprinted in
Lacan’s magnum opus, Écrits (1966):
“Logical Time and the Assertion of Anticipated Certainty: A New
Sophism” (1945); “Presentation on Psychical
Causality” (1946); “Aggressiveness in
Psychoanalysis” (1948); and “The Mirror Stage as Formative
of the I Function as Revealed in Psychoanalytic
Experience” (delivered in 1949 at the IPA conference in
Zurich—whereas the 1936 version from Marienbad is lost, this
version is the surviving one made canonical through its inclusion
in Écrits).
The next decade was pivotal in Lacan’s trajectory, the time
when he fully came into his own as a leading analytic thinker of great
originality and immense import. A veritable explosion of Lacanian
material was unleashed during this period, including seven annual
seminars and many of the most celebrated essays subsequently collected
in the nine-hundred-page Écrits (a number of these were
hyper-condensed distillations of the results of the annual
seminars). At the end of the 1940s and beginning of the 1950s,
Lacan became initiated into and conversant with the structuralism of
Ferdinand de Saussure and his inheritors such as Claude
Lévi-Strauss and Roman Jakobson.
Lévi-Strauss’s 1949 book The Elementary Structures of
Kinship helped launch the French structuralist movement that
flourished during the 1950s and 1960s, an orientation that challenged
the theoretical primacy of existentialism in France.
Lévi-Strauss “structuralized” anthropology, as
Roland Barthes did for literary-cultural studies and Louis Althusser
for Marxism. Up through the end of the 1950s—in 1959–1960,
a fundamental reorienting shift arguably occurred in Lacan’s
thinking—Lacan fairly can be portrayed as likewise
structuralizing Freudian psychoanalysis. He did so under the
banner of a “return to Freud” according to which, as his
most famous dictum has it, “the unconscious is structured like a
language” (l’inconscient est structuré comme un
langage). Lacan portrayed himself as the lone defender of a
Freudian orthodoxy in danger of being eclipsed by its alleged
abandonment and betrayal in the post-Freudian analytic universe,
particularly Anglo-American ego psychology as consolidated by the
troika of Heinz Hartmann, Ernst Kris, and Lacan’s former analyst
Lowenstein. Lacan adamantly maintained that a Saussurian-assisted
recovery of the overriding significance of language for analysis both
clinical and metapsychological is the key to faithfully carrying
forward Freud’s revolutionary approach to psychical
subjectivity. All of this was announced in detail in the lengthy
founding manifesto of Lacanianism, the 1953 écrit
“The Function and Field of Speech and Language in
Psychoanalysis” (often referred to as the “Rome
Discourse” because of where it was delivered). This
manifesto coincided with Lacan’s participation in an exodus from
his former analytic institute, the Société Parisienne de
Psychanalyse (SPP), and the founding of a new institute, the
Société Française de Psychanalyse (SFP). The
SPP’s move to a medicalized model of analytic training (as per
the scientistic psychiatric paradigm that was dominant in the
institutes of the English-speaking world) was one of the main
precipitators of the departure of the breakaway faction that founded
the SFP.
Also in 1953, Lacan conducted his first annual seminar addressing
Freud’s Papers on Technique (1953–1954). Lacan
continued giving these right up until shortly before his death, with
le Séminaire running continuously for twenty-seven
years. As was the case with Kojève, Lacan exerted
his influence primarily through his oral teachings. The first
decade of le Séminaire (1953–1963) was taught at the
Hôpital Sainte-Anne and had an audience consisting mostly of
psychoanalysts. For reasons I will explain shortly, Lacan, in
1964, moved his seminar first to the École Normale
Supérieure (1964–1969) and then to the Faculty of Law across
from the Panthéon (1969–1980). From 1964 onwards,
Lacan’s audience startlingly increased in both sheer numbers and
breadth of backgrounds, with artists and academics from various
disciplines across academia joining the more clinically-minded
attendees. Le Séminaire became a nodal Parisian
intellectual institution, a kind of hub attracting some of the
brightest stars of the post-War French cultural firmament. For
instance, such philosophers as Jean Hyppolite, Michel Foucault, Gilles
Deleuze, Luce Irigaray, and Julia Kristeva spent time in Lacan’s
audience. In his seminars, Lacan deftly maneuvered within and
between a multitude of theoretical currents, putting psychoanalysis
into conversation with the history of philosophy, phenomenology,
existentialism, structuralism, post-structuralism, feminism, and, as
already indicated, just about every discipline represented in the
university. All of the major French philosophers of the
generation that came of age in the 1960s and 1970s engaged with
Freudian analysis in one way or another, and all of them did so in
fashions varyingly informed by Lacan’s teachings.
The 1960s were a highly productive and equally tumultuous era in
Lacan’s history. In his seventh seminar on The Ethics
of Psychoanalysis (1959–1960), Lacan took a sort of turn fateful
for the direction of his later trajectory, initiating an interrogation
of the ways in which language was privileged by his 1950s “return
to Freud.” The immediately prior years tirelessly
emphasized the essential role of the register of the Symbolic, namely,
the pride of place of analytically modified versions of Saussurian
signifiers in the structures and dynamics of the unconscious and
speaking subjectivity (in the 1930s and 1940s, the phenomenal-visual
register of the Imaginary was to the fore thanks to the focus on the
mirror stage). At the end of the 1950s, with the rise of the Real
as the register of a new focus of Lacan’s thinking—I will
say more about Lacan’s tripartite register theory subsequently
(see 2.1 below)—things and phenomena escaping, resisting, or
thwarting the signifying powers of the socio-linguistic symbolic order
became ever more central in Lacanian theory. These things and
phenomena include Otherness, drives, jouissance, and objet
petit a, among other Lacanian concepts
 (see 2.3,
 2.4.2, and
2.4.3 below).
 This 1959–1960 seminar defensibly can be depicted
as a prescient post-structuralist text avant la lettre.
An earthquake in Lacan’s professional and personal histories hit him
in 1963. For ten years (1953–1963), the SFP, following its
creation after the defections from the SPP, was being scrutinized at
length by the IPA as a training institute applying for IPA
membership. To cut a long story short, the IPA ended up offering the
SFP an ultimatum: It could be admitted only if Lacan was struck from
its list of training analysts. Lacan’s non-standard
“variable-length sessions,” deviating from the
fixed-length session rules of IPA orthodoxy, was the main reason for
the IPA’s withholding of its recognition from him. The SFP accepted
this condition, stripping Lacan of his standing within it. In the
aftermath of what he understandably experienced as a deeply wounding
betrayal, he abandoned his original plans for a 1963–1964
seminar on The Names-of-the-Father (only its opening session
of November 20, 1963 was given), relocated his teaching from the
Hôpital Sainte-Anne to the École Normale
Supérieure, and conducted his deservedly renowned eleventh
seminar of 1964, The Four Fundamental Concepts of
Psychoanalysis (with Lacan identifying these four concepts as the
unconscious, repetition, the transference, and the drive). This
seminar’s opening session involved Lacan discussing his SFP-brokered
“excommunication” from the IPA, with him comparing himself
to Baruch Spinoza and the latter’s expulsion from the Jewish community
for being a heretic. However traumatic this blow, it seemed to prompt
Lacan to come even more into his own, to forge a distinctly Lacanian
battery of ideas and terms—and this by contrast with the more
familiar Freudian language and apparatus of the first decade of le
Séminaire (1953–1963).  Although not without many
precedents in his prior work, a Lacanianism distinct from Freudianism
began to emerge clearly into view in the mid-1960s. In the shadow of
his rejection by the IPA and departure from the SFP, Lacan founded his
own analytic organization, the École freudienne de Paris. This
new institutional framework (and freedom) provided him with a setting
in which to experiment with novel approaches to analytic teaching and
training.
In 1966, Lacan’s hulking tome Écrits was
published by Éditions du Seuil. Prior to this, Lacan had
published only a single book, his thesis in psychiatry (1932).
The nine-hundred-page Écrits gathered together many of
Lacan’s most important articles and essays into a single volume,
covering a thirty-year stretch from 1936 to 1966. These
“writings” provide very daunting and demanding paths of
entry into Lacanian thinking (the annual seminars are comparatively
more reader-friendly and transparent). Although the
Écrits bear no small portion of responsibility for
Lacan’s reputation as a “difficult” (if not
deliberately obscurantist) thinker, this book became a bestseller upon
its initial release in France. Its success elevated Lacan into
his fame as the French Freud in the eyes of France’s reading
public. During this time, Lacan’s audience for le
Séminaire continued to swell, with his influence growing to
cover ever-wider circles of Paris-centered intellectual and cultural
life.
Throughout his career, Lacan exhibited a serious interest in various
branches of mathematical and formal disciplines. This goes as far
back as the 1940s, with the recourse to game theory in “Logical
Time and the Assertion of Anticipated Certainty.” The turn
to structuralism at the end of the 1940s and beginning of the 1950s
reinforced these formalistic tendencies, with Lacan, in the 1950s,
already drawing upon not only game theory, Lévi-Straussian
anthropology, and Jakobsonian phonology, but also the history of
mathematics and topology. Throughout the 1950s and 1960s, more
and more diagrams, graphs, and symbolizations appeared peppered
throughout Lacan’s lectures and writings, testifying to a
steadily intensifying trend toward formalization. By the late
1960s and, especially, the 1970s, discussions of logic, topology, and
knot theory were prominent (sometimes even dominant) features of
Lacanian discourse. In relation to Lacan, the 1970s could be
characterized as the decade of the “matheme,” Lacan’s
neologism for a unit of formalization (qua a
mathematical-style symbolization) distilling and fixing the core
significance of a specific Lacanian analytic concept-term. Lacan
hoped thereby to avoid being misinterpreted in the ways that
Freud’s deceptively accessible employments of natural language
allegedly allowed most non-Lacanian post-Freudians to perpetrate.
Additionally, topology, as a science of surfaces, provided Lacan with
resources for his regular assaults on the crude, popular images of
psychoanalysis as a “depth psychology,” with these images
relying upon the simplistic two- and three-dimensional Euclidean spaces
of spontaneous picture thinking. Topological figures and
constructions undermining the intuitions of this picture thinking
assisted Lacan in recasting the unconscious as an ensemble of
contortions, curvings, folding, inflections, twists, and turns immanent
and internal to a single plane of minded subjectivity accessible to
rigorous, rational (psycho)analysis.
In addition to the pursuit of formalization via mathemes, the seminars
of the final decade of Lacan’s teachings also were preoccupied with
reflections on his register theory, especially the register of the
Real, and sexual difference (reflections often intertwined with each
other). The program of formalization ostensibly enabled Lacan to
reveal with exactitude the precise limits of the sayable and the
representable, thereby touching upon the Real through showing what is
not pinned down fully and adequately within the coordinates of the
accessible, familiar “reality” co-constituted through the
other two registers of the Imaginary and the Symbolic
(see 2.1 below). Various aspects and facets of
things sexual came to be associated by the later Lacan with the
enigmatic evasiveness of the Real, including sexual difference. In one
of his most famous seminars, the twentieth (Encore,
1972–1973), he theorized sexual difference as
“sexuation,” depicting the non-biological, denaturalized
subject-positions of masculinity and femininity in terms of formal
logic. Therein, he purported to uncover an inherent, ineliminable
structural discrepancy/gap separating the sexes, an inescapable
condemnation of sexed subjects to being essentially, necessarily
out-of-sync with each other (and even with themselves as split
subjects). Lacan summarized this with an infamous one-liner:
“Il n’y a pas de rapport sexuel” (There is no
sexual relationship). This declaration scandalized many at the
time. Moreover, the twentieth seminar in particular as well as
connected portions of Lacan’s corpus from this same period served as
powerful catalysts for crucial developments in French feminist
thinking during the 1970s.
In 1980, near the end of his life, Lacan saw fit to disband his
school, the École freudienne. This decision was
controversial and triggered factional infighting amongst his
followers. Lacan died in 1981. His son-in-law and editor of
le Séminaire, Jacques-Alain Miller—when he was a
student of Althusser’s at the ENS, Miller met Lacan for the first
time in 1964 as an attendee of Lacan’s eleventh
seminar—founded the École de la Cause freudienne as a
successor to the École freudienne on the heels of the
latter’s “dissolution.” Miller has since
retained publishing control over Lacan’s texts, editing the Champ
freudien book series in which official “established”
versions of the annual seminars and other Lacanian writings appear.
The theory of the three registers of the Imaginary, the Symbolic,
and the Real forms the skeletal framework for the various concepts and
phases of most of Lacan’s intellectual itinerary. His
characterizations of each of the three registers, as well as of their
relations with each other, undergo multiple revisions and shifts over
the many years of his labors. As will become increasingly evident
in what follows, the majority of Lacanian concepts are defined in
connection with all three registers. By the 1970s, with his
meditations on the topological figure of the Borromean knot—this
knotting of three rings, pictured on the coat of arms of the Borromeo
family, is arranged such that if one ring is broken, all three are set
free in disconnection—Lacan emphasizes the mutual dependence of
the registers on one another. Hence, loosely speaking, the
Imaginary, the Symbolic, and the Real can be thought of as the three
fundamental dimensions of psychical subjectivity à la
Lacan. Furthermore, scholars sometimes segment Lacan’s
evolution into three main periods, with each period being distinguished
by the priority of one of the registers: the early Lacan of the
Imaginary (1930s and 1940s), the middle Lacan of the Symbolic (1950s),
and the late Lacan of the Real (1960s and 1970s). However, such a
neat and clean periodization should be taken with several grains of
salt, since intricate continuities and discontinuities not conforming
to this early-middle-late schema are to be found across the entire
lengthy span of Lacan’s teachings.
Lacan tends to associate (albeit not exclusively) the Imaginary with
the restricted spheres of consciousness and self-awareness. It is
the register with the closest links to what people experience as
non-psychoanalytic quotidian reality. Who and what one
“imagines” other persons to be, what one thereby
“imagines” they mean when communicatively interacting, who
and what one “imagines” oneself to be, including from the
imagined perspectives of others—all of the preceding is
encompassed under the heading of this register. Such a
description indicates the ways in which the Imaginary points to core
analytic ideas like transference, fantasy, and the ego. In
particular, the Imaginary is central to Lacan’s account(s) of
ego-formation (as per the mirror
 stage—see 2.2 below).
As Lacan integrates his early work of the 1930s and 1940s with his
structuralism-informed theories of the 1950s, he comes to emphasize the
dependence of the Imaginary on the Symbolic. This dependency
means that more sensory-perceptual phenomena (images and experiences of
one’s body, affects as consciously lived emotions, envisionings
of the thoughts and feelings of others, etc.) are shaped, steered, and
(over)determined by socio-linguistic structures and dynamics.
With the growing importance of the Real in the 1960s and the Borromean
knots of the 1970s, it becomes clear that Lacan conceives of the
Imaginary as bound up with both of the other two registers
(incidentally, the Imaginary and the Symbolic, when taken together as
mutually integrated, constitute the field of “reality,”
itself contrasted with the Real). In fact, it could be maintained
that the Imaginary invariably involves category mistakes. More
specifically, it is the register in which the other two registers are
mistaken for each other: What is Real is misrecognized as
Symbolic (for example, as in particular sorts of obsessional-neurotic
and paranoid-psychotic symptoms, certain meaningless contingent
occurrences at the level of the material world of non-human objects are
viewed as though they were meaningful signs full of deep significance
to be deciphered and interpreted) and what is Symbolic is misrecognized
as Real (for example, as in psychosomatic-type “conversion
symptoms,” unconscious mental conflicts encoded in language and
ideas are suffered as bodily afflictions and ailments).
With his choice of the word “imaginary,” Lacan indeed
intends to designate that which is fictional, simulated, virtual, and
the like. However, the phenomena of the Imaginary are necessary
illusions (to put it in Kantian locution) or real abstractions (to put
it in Marxian parlance). This signals two points. First, as
one of Lacan’s three basic, essential registers, the Imaginary is
an intrinsic, unavoidable dimension of the existences of speaking
psychical subjects; just as an analysis cannot (and should not
try to) rid the analysand of his/her unconscious, so too is it neither
possible nor desirable to liquidate the illusions of this
register. Second, the fictional abstractions of the Imaginary,
far from being merely “unreal” as ineffective,
inconsequential epiphenomena, are integral to and have very concrete
effects upon actual, factual human realities.
The Lacanian Symbolic initially is theorized on the basis of
resources provided by structuralism. Tied to natural languages as
characterized by Saussure and specific post-Saussurians, this register
also refers to the customs, institutions, laws, mores, norms,
practices, rituals, rules, traditions, and so on of cultures and
societies (with these things being entwined in various ways with
language). Lacan’s phrase “symbolic order,”
which encompasses all of the preceding, can be understood as roughly
equivalent to what Hegel designates as “objective
spirit.” This non-natural universe is an elaborate set of
inter-subjective and trans-subjective contexts into which individual
human beings are thrown at birth (along the lines of Heideggerian
Geworfenheit), a pre-existing order preparing places for them
in advance and influencing the vicissitudes of their ensuing lives.
According to Lacan, one of the (if not the) most significant and
indispensable conditions of possibility for singular subjectivity is
the collective symbolic order (sometimes named “the big
Other,” a phrase to be unpacked further
shortly—see 2.3 below). Individual
subjects are what they are in and through the mediation of the
socio-linguistic arrangements and constellations of the register of
the Symbolic. Especially during the period of the “return to
Freud,” the analytic unconscious (qua “structured
like a language”) is depicted as kinetic networks of interlinked
signifiers (i.e., “signifying chains”). Rendered thusly,
the unconscious, being of a Symbolic (anti-)nature in and of itself,
is to be interpretively engaged with via the Symbolic medium of
speech, namely, the very substance of the being-in-itself of the
speaking subject (parlêtre) of the
unconscious. Furthermore, the Lacanian unconscious is structured like
“un langage” and not “une
langue.” Although both French words translate into English
as “language,” the former (langage) refers to
logics and structures of syntax and semantics not necessarily specific
to particular natural languages, whereas the latter (langue),
which also could be translated into English as “tongue,”
does refer to the notion of a natural language. Hence, Lacan is not
saying that the unconscious is structured like French, German,
English, Spanish, or any other particular natural language.
Although the register of the Symbolic comes to the fore only with
Lacan’s structuralist phase of the 1950s, it arguably is not
without its precursors in his earlier texts. Already in 1938, the
idea of the “complex” in the encyclopedia article on
“The Family Complexes” anticipates how Lacan recasts the
Freudian Oedipus complex via Lévi-Straussian structural
anthropology. Similarly, the prisoners’ dilemma scenario
narrated in 1945’s “Logical Time and the Assertion of
Anticipated Certainty” illustrates how a formal, game-theoretic
apparatus governs the lived experiences of subjects inserted into
it. Moreover, the 1949 écrit on “The Mirror
Stage” hints at the enabling background presence of a
socio-symbolic milieu (incarnated first and foremost by parental
caregivers) as the trigger prompting the child’s identification
with mirrored images of him/her-self (as I will discuss subsequently
here, this hint is expanded and embellished upon by Lacan in 1960s-era
revisions of the mirror stage—see 2.2 below).
Despite the rise to prominence of the register of the Real beginning
around 1959–1960, the Symbolic continues to play pivotal roles in
Lacan’s teachings right up until the start of the 1980s.
For instance, in Seminar XVII (1969–1970) and the
contemporaneous interview “Radiophonie,” Lacan
forges his theory of the “four discourses” (those of the
“master”, “university,” “hysteric,”
and “analyst”) to reflect the interlinked permutations of
multiple kinds of “social links” configuring the relations
between speaking subjects. More generally, the later Lacan
remains reliant on the notion of the Real sides of the Symbolic, these
being signifiers in their meaningless, nonsensical materiality as
visible marks and audible sounds (i.e., “letters” in
Lacan’s technical sense)—and this by contrast with the
Imaginary sides of the Symbolic, in which signifiers are paired with
signifieds to form meaningful, significant signs (à la
Saussure’s classic explanation of successful communication via
natural language). Such senseless signifiers and their
enchainings amount to a late Lacanian rendition of Freudian primary
processes as the thinking distinctive of unconscious mindedness.
When Lacan mentions “structure,” a word to which he has
frequent recourse, he usually is thinking of his register of the
Symbolic. Between the periods of his “return to
Freud” and later teachings, Lacan reconsiders and alters what is
conceptualized under the heading of the “like a language”
(comme un langage) part of his fundamental claim that,
“the unconscious is structured like a language.”
However, from the 1950s until his death, his specific rendition of
Freud’s discovery consistently holds to the thesis that,
“the unconscious is structured.” That is to say, the
unconscious, as bound up with that which is Symbolic, is an intricate,
labyrinthine web of ideational representations interconnected in
multiple sophisticated manners. Contrary to the crudeness of
commonplace vulgar picturings of Freudian analysis as an irrationalist,
neo-romantic psychology of the unruly natural depths, the unconscious
is not the id, namely, an anarchic seething cauldron of unthinking
animalistic instincts (i.e., something unstructured).
The register of the Real is tricky to encapsulate and evades being
pinned down through succinct definitions. Lacan’s numerous
and shifting pronouncements apropos the Real are themselves partly
responsible for this absence of straightforwardness. But, rather
than being just a barrier to grasping the Real, this absence is itself
revelatory of this register. To be more precise, as that which is
foreign to Imaginary-Symbolic reality—this reality is the realm
containing conscious apprehension, communicable significance, and the
like—the Real is intrinsically elusive, resisting by nature
capture in the comprehensibly meaningful formulations of concatenations
of Imaginary-Symbolic signs. It is, as Lacan stresses again and
again, an “impossibility” vis-à-vis
reality.
Lacan’s earliest employments of the term “Real”
use it to refer to material being(s) an sich, namely,
to physical existents handled as roughly equivalent to Kant’s
things-in-themselves. The Real hence would be whatever is beyond,
behind, or beneath phenomenal appearances accessible to the direct
experiences of first-person awareness. This characterization of
the Real persists into the first versions of Lacan’s mature
register theory as initially elaborated throughout the 1950s.
During this decade of the “return to Freud,” the Real also
gets connected to Lacan’s contemporaneously emerging conceptions
of psychosis and Otherness (the latter to be addressed soon—see
2.3 below). Additionally, in the 1950s, 
Lacan tends to speak of
the Real as an absolute fullness, a pure plenum devoid of the
negativities of absences, antagonisms, gaps, lacks, splits, etc.
Portrayed thusly, the Symbolic is primarily responsible for injecting
such negativities into the Real. For instance, only though the
powers of language can material being in itself be said to be
“missing” things, since, on its own, this dimension of
being always is simply whatever it is in its dumb, idiotic presence as
never more and never less than sheer, indifferent plenitude.
As I noted above, the seventh seminar of 1959–1960 marks a shift
away from the privileging of the Symbolic over the course of the 1950s
and toward prioritizing the Real. The Real prior to Seminar
VII tends to be depicted in non-dialectical and/or quasi-Kantian
terms. Although Kant is one of the main explicit foci during this
academic year, Lacan’s sustained reformulation of the Real in
this seminar introduces quasi-Hegelian dialectical features into it,
thereby nuancing and complicating his ideas about this register.
The new Real involves convergences of opposites as a register of
volatile oscillations and unstable reversals between excesses and
lacks, surpluses and deficits, flooding presences and draining
absences. In the seventh seminar, Lacan puts forward the figure
of the mother as the key analytic referent justifying this rendition of
the Real (a figure he relates to another figure, that of “the
Lady” in the courtly love tradition). In the beginning of
the psychical-libidinal subject’s ontogentic life history, the
maternal caretaker is, at one and the same time, both overwhelmingly,
stiflingly present or near and, in her strange, impenetrable alterity,
also frustratingly, uncontrollably absent or inaccessible; there
is either too much or too little of her, never the right balanced
amount. With the passage of time and the temporal transformations
of the libidinal economy, the mother, as this archaic Real Other,
becomes the forever unattainable “Sovereign Good,” the
fixed vanishing point, of all desiring (what Lacan calls, in dialogue
with the history of philosophy as well as Freud, “das
Ding” [la Chose, the Thing]).
Throughout the 1960s and up through the end of Lacan’s
teachings, the Real takes on an ever increasing number of aspects and
connotations. It becomes both a transcendence troubling and
thwarting Imaginary-Symbolic reality and its language from without as
well as an immanence perturbing and subverting reality/language from
within. It comes to be associated with libidinal negativities
(objet petit a, jouissance, and sexual difference,
all to be discussed later—see 2.3, 
2.4.2, and 2.4.3 below),
material meaninglessness both linguistic (see 2.1.2 above) and
non-linguistic, contingent traumatic events, unbearable bodily
intensities, anxiety, and death.
As regards the unconscious as the principle concern of
psychoanalysis, the later Lacan combines his earlier emphasis on
socio-linguistic formations (à la “the
unconscious is structured like a language”) with a subsequent
stress on forces and factors internal but irreducible to these
formations. After the 1950s, Real dimensions are added to the
unconscious, with its Symbolic dimensions being made to orbit around
black holes of unsymbolizability impossible to represent via the
signifier-like ideational representations (Freud’s
Vorstellungen) of the language-like sides of the
unconscious. Nonetheless, the rise of the Real in Lacan’s
teachings does not amount to him converting to any sort of analytic
recapitulation of mysticisms or negative theologies. Instead, for
Lacan, analysis both theoretical and clinical permits delineating and
tracking the Real with conceptual precision, if only as an exercise in
pinpointing the exact limits of the Imaginary, the Symbolic, and their
overlappings.
The account of the mirror stage is perhaps Lacan’s most famous
theoretical contribution (maybe even more famous than the well-known
thesis apropos the unconscious as “structured like a
language”). Initially developed in the 1930s, this account
involves a number of interrelated ingredients. Lacan offers the
narrative of this stage as an explanation specifically for the genesis
and functions of the Freudian psychical agency of the ego
(Ich, moi). One of the psychoanalytic and
philosophical upshots of the mirror stage, a crucial one in
Lacan’s eyes, is that the ego is an object rather than a
subject. In other words, the ego, despite conscious senses to the
contrary, is not a locus of autonomous agency, the seat of a free, true
“I” determining its own fate. This portrait of the
ego-as-object is at the heart of Lacan’s lifelong critical
polemics against Anglo-American ego psychology, with the ego
psychologists seeking to strengthen their patients’ egos by
appealing to supposed autonomous and “conflict-free” sides
of these psychical agencies. Against this, Lacan views the ego as
thoroughly compromised and inherently neurotic to its very core, as a
passionate defense of a constitutive ignorance of the unconscious.
To stay at this more general metapsychological level for a little
while longer, Lacan eventually forges, partly on the basis of the
mirror stage, a distinction between the ego (moi) and the
subject (sujet, a word freighted with philosophical
baggage—Lacan knowingly adds this word and its philosophical
vocabulary to analytic discourse, although Freud did not speak of
“the subject” and was wary of philosophy).
Appearances notwithstanding, the ego is, when all is said and done, an
inert, fixed bundle of objectified coordinates, a libidinally invested
and reified entity. By contrast with the ego and the illusory
sense of fictional selfhood it supports, the psychoanalytic subject of
Lacanianism is an unconscious kinetic negativity defying capture by and
within ego-level identificatory constructs. The Lacanian
enunciating subject of the unconscious speaks through the ego while
remaining irreducibly distinct from it.
Returning to a tighter focus on the mirror stage proper, Lacan,
relying on empirical data from the late-nineteenth and early-twentieth
centuries, posits that very young children, between the ages of six and
eighteen months, quickly acquire the ability to identify their own
images in reflective surfaces. At this time, infants are lacking
in most physical and mental abilities possessed by older human
beings. Prior to Lacan, Freud already highlights how a
biologically dictated prematurational helplessness
(Hilflosigkeit) naturally predestines the human being to the
predominance of social nurture over material nature due to the
protracted period of total reliance on other persons for one’s
life-or-death vital requirements. Following Freud here, Lacan
fleshes out this helplessness into which birth throws neonates,
describing in detail the anatomical, physiological, cognitive,
emotional, and motivational facets of this natural condition of
post-birth prematurity.
This initial state of helpless “motor impotence and nursling
dependence” entails the infant experiencing a swirl of negative
affects: anxiety, distress, frustration, and so on. To the
young child, motivated by these negative affects, a crucial component
of the enthralling lure exerted by the fascinating image of his/her
body is this image’s promise that he/she can overcome his/her
Hilflosigkeit and be a unified, pulled-together whole, an
integrated, coordinated totality like the bigger, more mature others
he/she sees around him/her-self (however, according to Lacan,
individuals spend their entire lives, beginning thusly, chasing in vain
after an unattainable state of harmony and mastery first falsely
promised by the mirror). This imago-Gestalt of virtual
wholeness, identified with by the infant in a jubilant moment of
“Aha!,” lays down the imagistic nucleus of the thereafter
ontogenetically accreting ego as a series of self-objectifications in
images and, soon after with the event of language acquisition, words
too.
For Lacan, identification with the imago-Gestalt of the
moi entails alienation—and this for additional reasons
over and above those given in the preceding paragraphs. Already
in the 1949 écrit on the mirror stage, mention is made
of “some prop, human or artificial” supporting the infant
as he/she gazes into the mirror and looks at him/her-self. In
1949, Lacan seems to think of this prop more as artificial than human,
referring to the “trotte-bébé”
(walker) leaned on by the child. But, in subsequent revisitations
of the mirror stage during the 1960s, Lacan dramatically highlights the
supporting role of fellow human beings instead. In so doing, he
argues that the infant is encouraged to identify with the mirror image
as “me” by verbal and gestural prompts issuing from the
bigger other(s) holding him/her up in front of the reflective surface
(for example, the utterance “That’s you there!”
accompanied by pointing and grinning). This later shift of
emphasis has two crucial consequences. First, the Imaginary
register of the mirror does not precede the Symbolic register of
language and sociality in a linear chronology of developmental stages
(as the earlier text of “The Mirror Stage” might be at risk
of suggesting); if anything, socio-linguistic variables (for
instance, the words and body language of parents) are the causal
triggers of the child’s investment in select sensory-perceptual
experiences (such as the body image in the mirror). Second, this
means that the imagistic nucleus of the ego is suffused from the get-go
with the destinal “discourse of the Other”—in this
case, fateful significations (in Lacanese, “unary traits”)
coming from caregivers’ narratives articulated simultaneously
along with their encouragements to the child to recognize him/her-self
in the mirror (“What a handsome boy!,” “What a
beautiful girl!,” “You’re going to grow up to be big
and strong, just like your daddy,” etc.).
As a result of all of the above, Lacan considers the recognition
that happens in the mirror stage to amount to
“misrecognition” (méconnaissance).
This likewise holds throughout life for all ensuing experiences of
“recognizing” oneself as being a particular kind of
“I,” namely, taking qua imagining oneself to be a
certain sort of ego-level self (apropos Freudian-Lacanian
psychoanalysis, it always pays to remember William Wordsworth’s
line, “The child is the father of the man”). The ego
is not only a congealed, heteronomous object rather than fluid,
autonomous subject, but also, in its very origins, a repository for the
projected desires and fantasies of larger others; the
child’s image is a receptacle for his/her parents’ dreams
and wishes, with his/her body image being always-already overwritten by
signifiers flowing from the libidinal economies of other speaking
beings. Hence, recognizing the ego as “me,” as
embodying and representing an authentic, private, unique selfhood that
is most genuinely my own, is tantamount to misrecognizing that, at
root, the ego ultimately is an alienating foreign introject through
which I am seduced and subjected by others’ conscious and
unconscious wants and machinations. To borrow one of
Lacan’s many neologisms, the ego ultimately is something
“extimate” (i.e., intimately exterior, an internal
externality) insofar as it crystallizes “the desire of the
Other” (qua others’ conscious and unconscious
wants and machinations). Or, as the Lacan of the eleventh seminar
would put it, there is something in the me more than the me itself to
the extent that this moi essentially is a coagulation of
inter-subjective and trans-subjective alien influences.
Finally, Lacan’s utilization of the idea of the mirror is not
exclusively literal. Although he often talks of mirrors as shiny
reflective surfaces, he does not limit mirroring to being a visible
physical phenomenon alone. Most importantly, other persons’
speech, gestures, postures, moods, facial expressions, and so on
frequently can be said to “mirror” back to one an
“image” of oneself, namely, a conveyed sense of how one
“appears” from other perspectives.
Throughout his teachings, Lacan regularly utilizes the terms
“other” (with a lower-case o) and “Other” (with
a capital O). Given an understanding of Lacan’s register
theory and the mirror stage (see 2.1 and
 2.2 above), these terms can be
clarified with relative ease and brevity. The lower-case-o other
designates the Imaginary ego and its accompanying alter-egos. By
speaking of the ego itself as an “other,” Lacan further
underscores its alien and alienating status as spelled out in the
immediately preceding sub-section here (see 2.2 above).
Additionally, when relating to others as alter-egos, one does so on the
basis of what one “imagines” about them (often imagining
them to be “like me,” to share a set of
lowest-common-denominator thoughts, feelings, and inclinations making
them comprehensible to me). These transference-style imaginings
are fictions taming and domesticating the mysterious, unsettling
foreignness of one’s conspecifics, thereby rendering social life
tolerable and navigable.
The capital-O Other refers to two additional types of otherness
corresponding to the registers of the Symbolic and the Real. The
first type of Other is Lacan’s “big Other”
qua symbolic order, namely, the overarching “objective
spirit” of trans-individual socio-linguistic structures
configuring the fields of inter-subjective interactions.
Relatedly, the Symbolic big Other also can refer to (often
fantasmatic/fictional) ideas of anonymous authoritative power and/or
knowledge (whether that of God, Nature, History, Society, State, Party,
Science, or the analyst as the “subject supposed to know”
[sujet supposé savoir] as per Lacan’s distinctive
account of analytic transference). But, as already becomes
evident in Lacan’s first few annual seminars of the early 1950s,
there also is a Real dimension to Otherness. This particular
incarnation of the Real, about which Lacan goes into greatest detail
when addressing both love and psychosis, is the provocative, perturbing
enigma of the Other as an unknowable “x,” an unfathomable
abyss of withdrawn-yet-proximate alterity (in his 1895 Project for
a Scientific Psychology, to which Lacan refers repeatedly, Freud
depicts this alterity in the guise of the Nebenmensch als Ding
[Neighbor-as-Thing]).
For Lacan, the Freudian Oedipus complex stages the drama of the
child’s laborious struggles to situate him/her-self
vis-à-vis all three register-theoretic dimensions of
Otherness. Thanks particularly to what he takes from his
engagements with structuralism, Lacan, throughout his career, is
careful to avoid a pseudo-Freudian reification of the bourgeois nuclear
family, with a mother and father biologically sexed female and male
respectively. The maternal and paternal Oedipal personas are
psychical-subjective positions, namely, socio-cultural (i.e.,
non-natural, non-biological) roles that potentially can be played by
any number of possible persons of various sexes/genders.
That noted, in the Lacanian version of the Oedipus complex, the
maternal figure initially features for the infant as a Real Other
(i.e., the Nebenmensch als Ding)—more specifically, as
an obscure omnipotent presence who is the source of all-important love
(more will be said about Lacan’s concept of love—see 
2.4.1
below). But, because of the combination of her obscurity and
importance, the mother qua Real Other also is a source of
deeply unsettling anxiety for the very young child. She seemingly
threatens her offspring with being alternately too smothering or too
withdrawn, too much or not enough. In his/her anxiousness about
controlling the ultimately uncontrollable presence (and absence) of
this mysterious and indispensable maternal Other, the child confronts
the question, “What does the (m)Other want?” The
infant’s gradual formation of an ego as per the temporally
elongated processes delineated in Lacan’s account of the mirror
stage (see 2.2 above) is, in part, a 
response to this riddle (albeit in
a broader sense, with the child constructing an ego-level identity
informed by the perceived wants of Others in addition to the mother,
such as the father).
In relation to the immediately preceding, Lacan’s Oedipal
father is an Other with both Symbolic and Real faces. On the
Symbolic side, the paternal figure represents the answer to the
question, “What does the maternal Other want?” In
Lacan’s terminology, the child’s alighting upon the
paternal third party in the family romance of the Oedipal social
triangle as the solution to the puzzle of the maternal figure’s
enigmatic intentionality amounts to “the desire of the
mother,” as an unknown, being replaced by “the paternal
metaphor.” Directly connected to this, Lacan (re)defines
the phallus (which is not the penis) as the structural function of
whatever “x” the child hypothesizes the paternal figure
possesses making him the focus of the maternal figure’s desire,
that is, the possession enabling the father to domesticate and control
the mother’s otherwise unpredictable desire. Also at the
level of the Symbolic, the paternal function involves bringing to bear
within the child’s familial sphere the disciplinary and
prohibitory features of the family’s enveloping symbolic order as
their socio-linguistic milieu (this entails such impositions as
weaning, toilet training, exogamy, and “castration” in the
Freudian-Lacanian sense—see 2.4.1 below). As for Real
Otherness here, this would be the version of the paternal figure
mythically portrayed by Freud in Totem and Taboo (1913),
namely, the tyrannical, enjoying-without-restraints “primal
father” (Urvater) of the savage fraternal horde, the
exception to the otherwise universal law of (symbolic)
castration. This Real Urvater arguably is a
fantasy-construct generated in and by the Oedipus complex, with the
child imagining an obscene, dark, jouissance-saturated
underbelly behind the Symbolic façade of paternal authority and
its rules.
The child’s identifications with maternal and paternal Others
are distributed across Real and Symbolic dimensions. However,
different subjects-in-formation distribute their identifications
differently. Freud, in his reconsiderations of earlier renditions
of the Oedipus complex, came to highlight an asymmetry between Oedipal
dynamics for young boys and girls, repudiating the idea of girls
undergoing an “Electra complex” as the symmetrical
counterpart to the Oedipus complex. Skipping over a lot of
details and cutting a long story short, the later Lacan, when taking up
the topic of sexual difference, preserves this Freudian emphasis on
asymmetry. In this vein, Lacan introduces the idea of sexuation
as the Real of sexual difference, namely, as an impenetrable, opaque
facticity of this difference continually prompting and yet perpetually
resisting being adequately translated into the terms of Imaginary and
Symbolic realities. As neither biologically given sex nor
socially constructed gender, the Real of sexuation is what is
responsible for the absence of an exhaustively representable,
symbolizable natural and/or cultural relationship between sexuated
positions (as per Lacan’s statement, “Il n’y a
pas de rapport sexuel”). The structural-psychical
positions of masculinity and femininity embody constitutively
out-of-synch and inherently incommensurable subjective stances,
incompatible (yet interacting) arrangements of distinct sorts of
libidinal economies.
Freud’s metapsychology of the libidinal economy, of the
underlying motivational mechanisms of psychical life, is grounded on
his theory of drive (Trieb, and not Instinkt, despite
many English mistranslations of Trieb as
“instinct”). Lacan elaborates upon and extends this
Freudian theoretical framework. In the process, he reworks some
of Freud’s concepts and adds other concepts of his own.
Need, demand, and desire form a conceptual-terminological triad in
Lacanian theory. Needs are biologically innate vital requirements
for the human being as a living organism. Humans are born saddled
with such imperatives from the very start, although, as per Freudian
Hilflosigkeit, they are powerless on their own to satisfy
these bodily dictates for a protracted initial period lasting well into
childhood (see 2.2 above).
The combination of being prematurationally helpless but having
unavoidable needs means that, over the course of physical and mental
development, the infant must come to articulate its needs to bigger
others. These others (as three-dimensional O/others along the
lines of Lacan’s register theory—see 2.3 above) are
addressed as those capable of assisting in the meeting and quelling of
needs. Of course, crying, screaming, gesticulating, and the like
are early expressions of needs, being the fashions in which infants
prior to acquiring language per se alert the older individuals around
them of their requirements. Even at this early stage, the infant
is forced to rely on his/her thus-addressed significant others to
interpret the “meaning” of his/her cries, screams, and
gesticulations (“Ah, you’re hungry,” “Uh oh,
that means you’re tired,” “So, it’s time to
change your diaper,” etc.). Through these spontaneous
interpretations, others, whether knowingly or not, participate with the
pre-verbal child in shaping links between needs and the socially
mediated significance of the expressions of needs. These others
thereby lend the child’s noises and movements the significance of
being “demands,” with this amounting to a kind of
assistance provided over and above the assistance of meeting bare needs
themselves. Now, this is not to say that there are no natural
correlations whatsoever between needs and their pre-verbal expressions
hardwired into babies’ behavioral repertoires. But,
arguably, infants are not immediately and automatically
self-consciously aware of these correlations as such, with
caretakers’ responses being key aids in helping the child become
explicitly cognizant of need-expression couplings.
As the infant continues maturing, soon acquiring language, the
influences of others and Others (especially inter-subjective others as
conveyors of the signs and signifiers of the big Other qua
trans-subjective symbolic order—see 2.1.2
 and 2.3 above)
increasingly exert themselves on the forming of associative connections
between needs and demands. For example, as part of socialization
and education, parents typically begin to introduce the discipline of
insisting that the child articulate his/her requirements and urges in
specific manners (“Say ‘please’ and ‘thank
you,’” “Ask nicely,” “In this household,
we do not yell when we’re hungry,” and so on). The
child learns that he/she must accept, internalize, and speak “the
discourse of the Other” (in this instance, the parents) in order
to get his/her needs recognized, acknowledged, and addressed in a
satisfactory fashion. In short, he/she must make demands couched
in terms and conventions imposed by O/others’ socio-symbolic
regimes. Lacan maintains that natural bodily needs hence, via the
inter- and trans-subjective dynamics of demand, are
“overwritten” by the signifiers of an ultimately Symbolic
Otherness, an overwriting through which the bases of the libidinal
economy are denaturalized and subjected to socio-cultural forces and
factors. Much of this beds down in the young, nascent
subject’s psyche, thereafter exerting (often in unconscious ways)
decisive effects on this person’s libidinal economy throughout
his/her life.
In his 1958 écrit “The Signification of the
Phallus,” Lacan provides a succinct formula for defining
“desire” in relation to both need and demand. He
stipulates that desire is what remains after need is subtracted from
demand. What, exactly, does this equation mean? Through
being translated into demands, needs come to be saddled with surpluses
of more-than-biological significances; vital requirements take on
the excess baggage of meanings over and above the level of brute,
simple organic survival. Largely by virtue of what O/others add
to the child’s experiences of needs through superimposing
interpretations of these needs as socio-symbolic demands, the meeting
of the child’s needs in response to his/her demands makes these
needs into, first and foremost, litmus tests of where he/she stands in
relation to these thus-addressed significant O/others. Being
given specific items of food by a parent in response to a demand
expressing hunger can indicate to the child not only that the parent
understands that a need to eat has to be met, but also, and more
importantly, that he/she is loved by the parent, that he/she enjoys a
privileged position in relation to the parent’s attention and
priorities. Lacan therefore asserts that each and every demand
is, at bottom, a demand for love. Returning to the equation
“demand – need = desire,” what is desired when a
demand is addressed to another is not so much the meeting of the
thus-expressed need, but, in addition to this, the very love of
another.
Parents of children are all too familiar with seemingly endless
series of demands from the little ones (“I want a
sandwich,” “OK, here’s a sandwich”…
“I want a lollipop,” “OK, here’s a
lollipop”… “I want a new toy,” “OK,
here’s a new toy”… and on and on until an exhausted
parental “No” is pronounced and wearily defended against
vigorous protests). Adults, whether parents or not, also are
aware of a similar desiring restlessness in themselves, an inability to
acquire an object or attain a success that would be “IT”
(with-a-capital-I-and-T), the final be-all-and-end-all telos
of wanting and wishing satisfying them for good forever after.
Similarly, an adult in a romantic relationship never is content with
being told that he/she is loved by the beloved only once; he/she
insists upon repetitions ad infinitum of the affirmation by
the significant other that, “I love you” (as if no
affirmation is ever quite enough). With both children and adults,
margins of dissatisfaction, perpetually resurfacing itches that never
can be scratched just right, are to be explained, according to Lacan,
through a clarification of the essence of the “love”
demanded in all demands in excessive addition to the gratification of
corresponding needs. What is being requested is an impossibility
impossible on the basis of the register-theoretic version of
O/otherness à la Lacanianism (see 2.1 
and 2.3
above): the non-objectifiable negativity of the kinetic, slippery
heart of Real Otherness (i.e., the always-on-the-move affection, focus,
etc. of the Real Other’s desiring core both conscious and
unconscious) being objectified as the positivity of a static, stable
thing (i.e., a special object able to be gift-wrapped and handed over
as part of the response to demand). Employing once again the
example of hunger, while the O/other can respond to demands for food
with the provision of nourishing substances answering to the need for
nourishment, he/she is constitutively incapable of turning the nucleus
of his/her desiring being (i.e., the non-object of his/her
“love”) into one tangible object among others to be
bestowed along with food and the like. As will be discussed here
shortly (see 2.4.3 below), conscious 
and unconscious fantasies are
aroused on the sides of desiring demanders—and, everyone is a
desiring demander—by the necessary, inevitable dissatisfactions
accompanying desires. These fantasies cover over the
impossibility of bringing desires to satisfying ends. They do so
by constructing scenarios in which there is a yet-to-be-(re)obtained
object that really is “IT.” Moreover, in these
fantasmatic scenarios, answers to questions of Real Others’
inscrutable desires (“What does the Other want, and want
specifically of me?”) are staged.
As should be evident by now, the intervention of the signifiers of
the symbolic order (i.e., the discourses of big Others) is integral to
the genesis of the need-demand-desire triad. Through the
intrusion of these signifiers cutting into both the body and mind of
the young child, a proto-subjective being of need, passing through the
demands of discipline (in both sense of the genitive), is transformed
into a subject of desire. Such a subject is
“barred”—Lacan’s matheme for the barred subject
of desire is $—alienated from its natural needs and derailed onto
the tracks of non-natural desires doomed never to reach enjoyable
destinations. In connection with his revisions of the Oedipus
complex (see 2.3 above), Lacan turns Freudian castration into
“symbolic castration.” The latter, rather than being
a real or imagined scene in which a specific threat to bodily integrity
is issued, designates the dual somatic and psychical discombobulating
effects upon the premature human animal caused by insertion into and
subjection to surrounding socio-symbolic contexts, of being made to
depend on the foreignness of signifiers and everything they bring with
them.
In Freud’s drive theory, sublimation amounts to a drive
finding a means to secure satisfaction (Befriedigung) in the
face of “aim-inhibition” (i.e., a blockage of its prior
path to an earlier aimed-at drive-object). But, as Lacan
observes, Freud also oddly defines the aim (Ziel) of any and
every drive as satisfaction. Therefore, how can a drive achieve
satisfaction if its aim (defined as the achievement of satisfaction) is
inhibited? Lacan’s response to this apparent Freudian
contradiction is to put forward a distinction between the aim and
“goal” of the drive as a metapsychological entity:
While the aim of a drive can be and inevitably is inhibited, its (true)
goal always is reached—and this because its goal is nothing other
than enjoying the ceaseless movement of repetitively rotating around
whatever blockages land on its path.
According to a certain widely accepted reading appealing to the
immediately above (promoted by Slavoj Žižek and the Slovenian
School of Lacanian theory), Lacan distinguishes between desire and
drive. As seen (see 2.4.1 above), an essential characteristic of
desire is its restlessness, its ongoing agitated searching and futile
striving. No object it gets its hands on is ever quite
“IT.” Whereas desire is stuck with its dissatisfied
drifting from object to object and ever onward (in a structured
movement akin to the “spurious/bad infinite” as per Hegel),
drive derives a perverse enjoyment from this desire-fuelled libidinal
circling around the vanishing point of the
impossible-qua-unattainable. There where desire is
frustrated, drive is gratified. Drive gains its satisfaction
through vampirically feeding off of the dissatisfaction of desire.
Like the register of the Real with which it is most closely
associated, jouissance, a notion that comes to the fore at the
end of the 1950s, is difficult to encapsulate in succinct defining
formulas. By the end of Lacan’s itinerary at the start of
the 1980s, this term had taken on a plethora of significations,
dividing and sub-dividing into a wide array of distinct-but-related
concepts. In English-language Lacanian scholarship,
jouissance almost always is left untranslated, since its
English equivalent, “enjoyment,” fails to capture the
specifically sexual connotations of the original French word.
The best way to begin getting a sense of what Lacan means by
jouissance is through reference to the Lacanian distinction
between drive and desire (see 2.4.2 above) in conjunction with select
stipulations by Freud regarding the infamous death drive
(Todestrieb) of Freud’s later dual drive theory (first
laid out in Beyond the Pleasure Principle (1920)).
Like Freud’s Todestrieb, Lacan’s
jouissance is “beyond the pleasure principle”
(this being another reason why the English “enjoyment,” as
synonymous with pleasure, is an inappropriate translation). The
post-1920 Freud muses that all drives might be said to be death drives,
meaning that each and every drive perhaps works, at least in certain
respects at certain times, contrary to the pursuit of the pleasurable
as balance, gratification, homeostasis, satisfaction, and so on.
Along these same lines, the Lacanian drive extracts
“enjoyment” from the thwartings and failures of
desire; whereas the latter is oriented by the tantalizingly
elusive telos of pleasure qua satisfaction, the
former generates its jouissance-beyond-pleasure precisely
through the inhibiting of desire itself. The many possible
sadistic and masochistic implications of this side of the libidinal
economy are not difficult to imagine.
One of several clinical phenomena pushing Freud into dethroning the
pleasure principle in 1920 as the formerly hegemonic ruler of the
psyche in its entirety is “repetition compulsion”
(Wiederholungszwang)—specifically, the psyche’s
perplexing, spontaneous compulsive repeating of that which is painful
and/or traumatic (examples of this include post-traumatic disorders,
so-called “negative therapeutic reaction,” and the
recurrent types of self-defeats unconsciously arranged by neurotics for
themselves). One of the theoretical functions of the death drive
is to account for whatever disregards or disrupts the reign of the
pleasure principle as a fundamental “law” of mental
life. In Lacan’s conceptual apparatus, jouissance
sometimes likewise refers to an overriding force/tendency compelling
repetitions of experiences or events upsetting the calm, delicate
equilibrium of psychical subjectivity’s Imaginary-Symbolic
reality (hence the association of jouissance with the
Real).
In the process of the neonate as a biological being acquiring both
an ego and a speaking subjectivity—this involves the living
organism being submitted to the mediating matrices of
Imaginary-Symbolic realities—the human creature supposedly loses,
through symbolic castration (see 2.4.1 above), 
access to an immediate,
undiluted jouissance in its raw, unmitigated intensities
(whether this is an actual, factual occurrence in linear, chronological
ontogeny or an après-coup, retrospective fantasy is a
complicated issue in Lacanian theory). The jouissance
presumably lost to the speaking subject returns only in the guises of
what might be labeled “limit experiences,” namely,
encounters with that which is annihilating, inassimilable,
overwhelming, traumatic, or unbearable. Similarly,
jouissance, in this vein, is related to transgressive
violations, the breaching of boundaries and breaking of barriers.
It is difficult, if not impossible, for the parlêtre to
accommodate, tolerate, and digest. The speaking being is forced
to cohabitate uneasily with its always problematic
jouissance.
In line with Freud’s discussions of fantasizing in psychical
life, Lacan treats fantasies, particularly those functioning at the
level of fundamental formations of the unconscious, as schematizations
(in a quasi-Kantian respect) of desiring subjectivity. Put
differently, the wants and wishes of a particular subject are shaped
and governed by a peculiar skeletal template, an idiosyncratic and
paradigmatic Ur-scene, in which this desiring subject is
positioned in a specific manner vis-à-vis a specific
object of its desire. This fundamental template/scene is an
unconscious formation operating as a transcendental condition of
possibility for the subject’s libidinal economy in all its
crucial, symptomatic manifestations. Lacan’s matheme for
the fantasy is $ ◊ a. The $ stands for the
subject of desire brought into being by the barring/splitting
consequences of Others’ mediating influences (see
 2.3 and 2.4.1
above).
The a stands for objet petit a, that is, object
a as the “object-cause of desire.” Lacan
employs this latter phrase for object a because this
“object” is a spectral, virtual construct of what would
qualify as “IT” for the desiring subject (see 2.4.1 above),
with this libidinal-transcendental schema of desire’s object
(i.e., a) “causing” select given empirical objects
in a person’s libidinal-amorous history and experience to be
desired as stand-ins for “IT.” However, these
substitutes are always and necessarily inadequate and unsatisfactory
due to an insurmountable, ineliminable gap between the
more-than-empirical fantasmatic objet a originating in the
subject’s unconscious past and the empirical objects present and
future incarnating it. These latter objects are situated in
Imaginary-Symbolic reality, condemned partially and imperfectly to
embody an interminably receding and elusive surplus (i.e., the
impossible-qua-Real dimension of object a).
To refer back one last time to the matheme of fantasy ($ ◊
a), the diamond-shaped “lozenge”
(poinçon) ◊ can be read as a condensation of
four symbols: one, ∧ (the logical symbol for conjunction
[“and”]); two, ∨ (the logical symbol for
disjunction [“or”]); three, > (the
mathematical symbol for “greater than”); and, four,
< (the mathematical symbol for “less than”).
As per Lacan’s matheme, the subject’s desires are scripted
and orchestrated by an unconscious fundamental fantasy in which the
desiring subject ($) is positioned in relation to its corresponding
object-cause of desire (a). Hence, ∧, ∨,
>, and < represent, in a deliberately loose and open
fashion, possible variants of this positioning of $
vis-à-vis a. Singular subjects flesh out
conjunction, disjunction, being “greater than,” and being
“less than” in their own styles, namely, as their unique
fantasies of merger or symbiosis (conjunction), scorn or refusal
(disjunction), mastery or domination (“greater than”),
slavery or submission (“less than”), and any number of
other possible particularizations of these four basic categories of
rapport.
In some of Lacan’s earlier presentations of the mirror stage,
the a serves as an abbreviation for autre
(other). More precisely, in this context, a refers
primarily to the little-o-other as the Imaginary ego (see
 2.2 and 2.3
above). The ego is an “other,” a not-me misrecognized
as “me,” insofar as it is brought into existence through a
combination of an object external to the (proto-)subject (i.e., the
imago-Gestalt of the body image) and the interests of Symbolic
and Real Others investing this object through words and behaviors.
Within the framework of the mirror stage, a (usually as
a’) also designates alter-egos as the Imaginary partners with
which the ego itself is inextricably intertwined, invariably defining
itself through reference to these partners.
Furthermore, there indeed is a thread of continuity between the
a of the mirror stage and object a: Both ego
(as a) and fantasy (with its a) unconsciously are the
subject’s fateful answers to the questions, “What does the
Other want?” and “How must I position myself with respect
to the desire of the Other?” (see 2.3 above). Lacan’s
a, like the rest of his mathemes, is deliberately handled as
akin to an algebraic variable. It is a placeholder for any number
of particular types of determinants: what an Other desires, what
I must be so as to be the object of an Other’s desire, what would
at last lay to rest my restless strivings and yearnings, what would do
so for a significant Other to whom I remain attached, etc. But,
in all cases, a reflects Lacan’s
Hegelian-Kojèvian slogan having it that, “man’s
desire is the desire of the Other.”