Jan Łukasiewicz’s life was that of a career academic and scholar,
seriously disrupted by the upheavals of war in the twentieth century.
Born and educated in Polish Austria, he flourished in Poland’s Second
Republic, endured the hardships of war, fled ahead of the Red Army to
Germany, and found a final haven in the Republic of Ireland.
Jan Leopold Łukasiewicz was born on 21 December 1878 in
 Lwów[1],
 historically a Polish city, at that time the capital of Austrian
Galicia. Łukasiewicz’s father Paweł was a captain in the
Austrian military, his mother Leopoldine, née Holtzer, was
daughter of an Austrian civil servant. Jan was their only child. The
family spoke Polish. Łukasiewicz attended school (classical
Gimnazjum or grammar school, emphasizing classical languages)
from 1890, completing in 1897 and beginning the study of law at the
University of Lwów. Under Austrian rule the university
permitted instruction in Polish. In 1898 he switched to mathematics,
studying under Józef Puzyna, and philosophy, studying under
Kazimierz Twardowski, who had been appointed Extraordinary (Associate)
Professor there in 1895, and also Wojciech Dzieduszycki. In 1902
Łukasiewicz was awarded his doctorate in philosophy under
Twardowski with a dissertation “On induction as the inverse of
deduction”. Having achieved only top marks in all examinations
between his school leaving examinations and his dissertation, he was
awarded the doctorate sub auspiciis Imperatoris, a rare
distinction, and he received a diamond ring from Emperor Franz
Josef.
From 1902 he was employed as a private teacher and as a clerk in the
university library. In 1904 he obtained a scholarship from the
Galician autonomous government and went to study in Berlin then in
Louvain. In 1906 he obtained his Habilitation with a piece on
“Analysis and construction of the concept of cause”. As a
Privatdozent in Philosophy, he was able to give lectures at
the university, becoming the first of Twardowski’s students to join
him in doing so. His first course of lectures, delivered in Autumn
1906, was on the algebra of logic, as formulated by Couturat. In 1908
and 1909 he obtained a stipendium which enabled him to visit Graz,
where he made acquaintance with Alexius Meinong and his school. In
1911 he was appointed Extraordinary Professor, and continued to teach
in Lwów until the outbreak of war in 1914. During this time his
students included Kazimierz Ajdukiewicz and Tadeusz Kotarbiński,
who would later become famous philosophers in their own right. He also
in 1912 got to know Stanisław Leśniewski, who had however
come to Lwów after studying abroad and cannot be counted as his
pupil.
In 1915 the fortunes of war put Germany in control of Warsaw, and they
decided to re-open the university, which had not been allowed to
function as a Polish-speaking university under Russian rule.
Łukasiewicz became professor of philosophy there. In 1916 he was
dean of the Faculty of Arts, and in 1917 prorector of the university.
In 1918 he left the university, being appointed Head of the Department
of Higher Schools in the new Polish Ministry of Education, and after
Poland obtained full independence he became Minister of Education in
Paderewski’s Cabinet, serving from January to December 1919. From 1920
until 1939 he was, as was Leśniewski, a Professor in the Faculty
of Natural Sciences at the University of Warsaw. In 1922/23 and again
in 1931/32 he served as rector of the university. In 1929 he married
Regina Barwińska.
The interwar period was most fruitful for Łukasiewicz. He was a
leading figure, with Leśniewski and Tarski, in what became known
as the Warsaw School of Logic. He made a friend of the only German
professor of mathematical logic, Heinrich Scholz, and was awarded an
honorary doctorate by the latter’s University of Münster in 1938.
Other honors awarded him in this period were Grand Commander of the
Order of Polonia Restituta (1923), Grand Commander of the Hungarian
Order of Merit, a monetary award from the City of Warsaw (1935) and
memberships of the Polish Academy of Arts and Sciences in
Kraków, and the Polish Scientific Societies in Lwów and
Warsaw.
Students whom he supervised through their doctoral dissertations were:
Mordechaj Wajsberg, Zygmunt Kobrzyński, Stanisław
Jaśkowski, Bolesław Sobociński, and Jerzy
Słupecki.
At the outbreak of war in September 1939 the Łukasiewiczes’ home
was bombed by the Luftwaffe: all his books, papers and correspondence
were destroyed, except for one volume of his bound offprints. The
Łukasiewiczes lived in provisional accommodation for academics.
The German occupiers closed the university and Łukasiewicz found
employment for a meagre salary in the Warsaw city archives. Additional
financial support came from Scholz. Łukasiewicz taught in the
underground university. From late 1943, fearing the imminent arrival
and occupation of Poland by the Red Army, and under suspicion by some
colleagues of being pro-German and anti-Jewish, Łukasiewicz
expressed the wish to Scholz that he and his wife should leave Poland.
As a first step to their going to Switzerland, Scholz managed to
obtain permission for the Łukasiewiczes to travel to
Münster. They left Warsaw on 17 July 1944, just two weeks before
the outbreak of the Warsaw Rising. Following the 20 July 1944 bomb
plot against Hitler there was no hope of them obtaining permission to
leave for Switzerland. They stayed in Münster, enduring allied
bombing, until January 1945, when they were offered accommodation by
Jürgen von Kempski at his farm in Hembsen (Kreis Höxter,
Westphalia), where they were liberated by American troops on 4
April.
From the summer of 1945 Łukasiewicz taught logic at a Polish
secondary school set up at a former Polish POW camp in Dössel. In
October 1945 they were allowed to travel to Brussels. There
Łukasiewicz again taught logic at a provisional Polish Scientific
Institute. Being unwilling to return to a Poland under communist
control, Łukasiewicz looked for a post elsewhere. In February
1946 he received an offer to go to Ireland. On 4 March 1946 the
Łukasiewiczes arrived in Dublin, where they were received by the
Foreign Secretary and the Taoiseach Eamon de Valera. In autumn 1946
Łukasiewicz was appointed Professor of Mathematical Logic at the
Royal Irish Academy (RIA), where he gave lectures at first once and
then twice a week.
In his final years in Ireland Łukasiewicz resumed contacts with
colleagues abroad, particularly Scholz, with whom he was in constant
correspondence. He attended conferences in Britain, France and
Belgium, sent papers to Poland before being expelled (with 15 other
exiled Poles) from the Polish Academy in Kraków, lectured on
mathematical logic at Queen’s University Belfast and on Aristotle’s
syllogistic at University College Dublin. His health deteriorated and
he had several heart attacks: by 1953 he was no longer able to lecture
at the Academy. In 1955 he received an honorary doctorate from Trinity
College Dublin. On 13 February 1956 after an operation to remove
gallstones he suffered a third major coronary thrombosis and died in
hospital. He was buried in Mount Jerome Cemetery in Dublin, “far
from dear Lwów and Poland”, as his gravestone reads.
Regina deposited most of his scientific papers and correspondence with
the RIA. In 1963 the Academy transferred their holdings to the library
of the University of Manchester, where they remain, uncatalogued. The
choice of Manchester was due to the presence there as a lecturer of
Czesław Lejewski, who had studied with Łukasiewicz in Warsaw
and twice been examined by the latter for doctoral theses, once in
1939, when war intervened, a second time in London in 1954. Lejewski
had seen the second edition of Łukasiewicz’s book on Aristotle’s
syllogistic through the press: it appeared posthumously in 1957.
Łukasiewicz was one of Twardowski’s first students in
Lwów, and was influenced in his attitudes and methods by his
teacher. Twardowski was born and studied in Vienna, where he became a
disciple of Franz Brentano, and was imbued with the latter’s
passionate advocacy of philosophy as a rigorous discipline, to be
investigated with the same care and attention to detail as any
empirical science, and to be communicated with utmost transparency. In
1895 Twardowski was appointed Professor Extraordinary in Lwów.
He found Polish philosophical life dormant and third-rate, and set
about vitalising the subject and building its Polish institutions, at
the cost of his own academic output. Like Brentano, he believed that a
sound descriptive psychology was methodologically basic for
philosophy, and like Brentano he advocated modest reforms in formal
logic. Łukasiewicz, under the influence of Husserl, Russell and
Frege, rejected any foundational role for psychology, and inspired in
particular by the latter two, he carried the reform of logic far
beyond anything Twardowski envisaged. He read Russell’s The
Principles of Mathematics in 1904 and it influenced him
considerably. The general attitude that philosophy could and should
aspire to be scientifically exact was one that stayed with
Łukasiewicz, though his estimation of the state of the subject
tended to become more pessimistic than optimistic, and he advocated
fundamentally reforming philosophy along logical lines.
Another respect in which Łukasiewicz continued the tradition of
the Brentano School was in his respect for the history of philosophy,
particularly that of Aristotle and the British empiricists. (He and
Twardowski translated Hume’s first Enquiry into Polish.)
Twardowski, who knew Bolzano’s work well, pointed out similarities
between concepts in Bolzano’s and Łukasiewicz’s theories of
probability. The respect for history also lay behind
Łukasiewicz’s groundbreaking studies in the history of logic,
notably his accounts of Stoic propositional logic and Aristotle’s
syllogistic.
Łukasiewicz emulated and indeed surpassed Twardowski in his
attention to clarity of expression. Qualified experts agree that
Łukasiewicz’s scientific prose, in whichever of the three
languages in which he wrote, is of unmatched clarity and beauty.
In the years before World War I, Łukasiewicz worked predominantly
on matters to do with the methodology of science. His doctorate,
published in 1903 as “On induction as the inverse of
deduction”, investigated the relationship between the two forms
of reasoning, in the light of work by Jevons, Sigwart and Erdmann.
Inductive reasoning, proceeding from singular empirical statements,
attempts on his early view to reach a general conclusion to which a
certain probability can be ascribed. But he soon shifted to the view
that it is impossible to ascribe a determinate probability to a
general statement on the basis of induction. Rather the method of the
empirical sciences is to creatively hazard the thought that a certain
generalization is true, deduce singular conclusions from this, and
then see whether these are true. If one conclusion is not, then the
general statement is refuted. This, an early formulation of the
hypothetico-deductive method of science, anticipates the ideas of
Popper by more than two decades, though expressed less forcefully.
Łukasiewicz also anticipated Popper by stressing what he called
“creative elements in science”, against the idea that the
scientist’s task is to reproduce or replicate the facts.
In 1906 Łukasiewicz published a substantial piece,
“Analysis and construction of the concept of cause”, which
gained him his Habilitation in Lwów. It is
significant both for its carefully argued method and for presaging
themes that were to occupy him later. Taking concepts platonistically
as abstract objects, Łukasiewicz rejects
 psychological, subjective and regularity accounts of causality
and accepts that cause and effect are linked by necessity, which he
identifies with logical necessity: “a causal relation is a
necessary relation, and the relative feature […] due to which
we call some object a cause, is the feature ‘entailing or
bringing-about with necessity’.” The piece’s motto is
Arceo psychologiam, “Reject psychology”, marking
a clear break with Twardowski and Brentano, while the logical analysis
is aimed at extracting the logical features of the notion of cause. It
is a clear example of what later came to be called ‘analytic
philosophy’, and shows Łukasiewicz bringing logical concepts to
bear on scientifically central concepts, as he was later to do with
his logical analysis of determinism.
An interest in probability lay behind one of Łukasiewicz’s two
monographs published before the war, namely Logical Foundations of
Probability Theory, which was written and published not in Polish
but in German. In 1908 and 1909 Łukasiewicz visited Graz where
both Alexius Meinong and Ernst Mally were also working on probability
theory at this time, so it is likely that the book was written in
German because their language of discussion was German, and also in
order to ensure a wider audience. Łukasiewicz’s theory makes
constructive use of ideas plucked from elsewhere: from Frege he took
the idea of a truth-value, from Whitehead and Russell the idea of an
indefinite proposition, and from Bolzano the idea of the ratio of true
values to all values for a proposition. Consider the classical urn
example, where an urn contains m black balls and n
white balls. Let the indefinite proposition ‘\(x\)
is a black ball in this urn’ be such that the
variable ‘\(x\)’ may take as value any
expression naming a ball in the urn: the variable is then said to
range over the individual balls, and different expressions
naming the same ball to have the same value. (Note that
Łukasiewicz indeed uses the terminology, later associated with
Quine, of a variable taking values, here expressions, and ranging over
objects designated by said expressions.) An indefinite proposition is
said to be true if it yields a true proposition (Łukasiewicz says
‘judgement’ for a definite proposition) for all values of
its variables, it is false if it yields a false judgement for all
values, and is neither true nor false if it yields true judgements for
some values and false judgements for others. The ratio true values/all
values is then called by Łukasiewicz the truth-value of
the indefinite proposition. For true indefinites it is 1, for false
indefinites it is 0, and for others it is a rational number between 0
and 1 (rational because only finite domains are considered). In our
urn case the truth-value of the indefinite proposition
‘x is a black ball in this urn’ is
\(\frac{m}{m+n}\).
On this basis Łukasiewicz develops a calculus of truth-values in
which he can deal with logically complex propositions, conditional
probability, probabilistic independence, and derive Bayes’ Theorem.
The calculus of truth-values is used as a logical theory of
probability, assisting us in our dealings with definite reality:
Łukasiewicz denies that there can be a theory either of objective
or of subjective probability as such. Two ideas from this short but
remarkable work are worth emphasizing because they resonate with later
ones of Łukasiewicz. Firstly, there is the idea of a proposition
(in this case an indefinite proposition) being neither true nor false;
secondly, and connected with this, of such a proposition having a
numerical truth-value properly between 0 (false) and 1 (true).
Łukasiewicz’s theory deserves to be better known: it continues
and extends earlier ideas of Bolzano, his probability corresponding to
the latter’s degree of validity of a proposition (with respect to
variable components). Its chief drawback is that it is formulated for
finite domains only.
Of all the works Łukasiewicz published before World War I, one
most clearly anticipated his later concerns. This was the 1910
monograph On the Principle of Contradiction in Aristotle. It
marked a crucial turning point in the development of the
Lwów-Warsaw school. For Łukasiewicz it represented the
first sustained questioning of the assumptions of traditional
Aristotelian logic.
Łukasiewicz introduces the project of his monograph, a critical
investigation of the legitimacy of the Principle of Contradiction (PC)
as variously formulated by Aristotle, in the context of its critique
by Hegel and the opportunity to re-examine the PC in the light of the
development of mathematical logic from Boole to Russell.
Łukasiewicz’s sources for the post-Hegelian discussion of the
‘logical question’ are Ueberweg, Trendelenburg and
Sigwart. A more local background was probably Twardowski’s account of
the absolute and timeless nature of truth.
Łukasiewicz distinguishes three different, non-equivalent
versions of PC in Aristotle: an ontological version, a logical
version, and a psychological version, as follows:
Ontological (OPC): No object may at the same time possess and
not possess the same property.
Logical (LPC): Contradictory statements are not
simultaneously true.
Psychological (PPC): No one can simultaneously believe
contradictory things.
Łukasiewicz criticises Aristotle for on the one hand claiming PC
cannot be proved, and on the other hand attempting an indirect or
pragmatic “proof”. In partial agreement with the tradition
according to which PC is not the cornerstone or basic principle of
logic, Łukasiewicz claims that its status is less secure than
some other logical propositions, and that its function is principally
to serve as a pragmatic norm. Nevertheless, in an Appendix to the book
he gives a formal derivation of one version of PC from other
assumptions. This shows that PC is as it were just one logical theorem
among others, a statement that would raise few eyebrows today but was
fairly radical in its day. Among the assumptions used in the
derivation is a version of the Principle of Bivalence, that every
proposition is either true or false and none is both, so the
derivation of PC is not after all such a surprise.
Łukasiewicz described himself later as attempting in the
monograph to devise a “non-Aristotelian logic” but admits
that he did not succeed, principally because at this stage he was not
prepared to reject the principle of bivalence. It may well be
Meinong’s influence at work when Łukasiewicz comes to give his
natural-language renderings of the symbolism of Couturat’s algebra of
logic in the Appendix. There is little or no trace of the
propositional logic that Łukasiewicz was to make very much his
own: the renderings are clumsily object-theoretic: the constant
‘0’ for example, which might be naturally construed as a
constant false proposition (and is so in later Łukasiewicz) is
rendered as “the object that does not exist”. This is one
reason why Łukasiewicz’s formal work in the Appendix to the 1910
work appears relatively archaic. While the variable letters like \(a,
b\) etc. “signify affirmative statements” and their
negations \(a', b'\) etc. “signify negative statements”,
and in practice do work like propositional variables and their
negations in modern propositional logic, Łukasiewicz’s renderings
of them are curiously hybrid: ‘\(a\)’ is
rendered as ‘\(X\) contains \(a\)’
and ‘\(a'\)’ as ‘\(X\)
contains no \(a\)’, while
‘1’ signifies ‘\(X\) is an
object’ and ‘0’ signifies ‘\(X\)
is not an object’. This is all very confused,
and by no means a classical sentential logic in intent, even if it
works like one in practice.
While not in itself a success, the book shows Łukasiewicz on the
threshold of his later logical breakthroughs. It was read in 1911 by
the young Leśniewski, who sought against Łukasiewicz to
prove OPC, and who first introduced himself in 1912 on
Łukasiewicz’s doorstep with the words, “I am
Leśniewski, and I have come to show you the proofs of an article
I have written against you.” The book also contains a brief
discussion of Russell’s Paradox, and it was reading this that inspired
Leśniewski to become a logician, intent on providing a
paradox-free logical foundation for mathematics. The book promoted
further discussion in Lwów: Kotarbiński wrote in defense
of Aristotle’s idea, discussed by Łukasiewicz, that a statement
about future contingent events may lack a truth-value before the event
and only gain one afterwards, while Leśniewski wrote in
opposition to this and brought Kotarbiński round to his own view
(which agreed with earlier views of Twardowski and later ones of
Tarski) that truth is timeless, or as Leśniewski expressed it,
both eternal and sempiternal. Łukasiewicz was soon to side with
the earlier Kotarbiński, and in so doing to make his most famous
discovery, that of many-valued logic.
Łukasiewicz came across propositional logic, which he originally
followed Whitehead and Russell in calling ‘theory of
deduction’, in their work and also in that of Frege. In 1921
Łukasiewicz published a ground-clearing article,
“Two-Valued Logic”, in which he brought together results
in the algebra of logic governing the two truth-values true and false,
which, like Frege, Łukasiewicz construed as what sentences or
propositions denoted, but for which, unlike Frege, he
introduced constant propositional symbols ‘1’ and
‘0’. He intended it as the first part of a monograph on
three-valued logic, which however was never completed, probably
because Łukasiewicz became dissatisfied with the rather hybrid
approach which was already being outdated by his rapid development.
The article is notable for several innovations. Using a symbolism
derived from those of Couturat and Peirce, it introduces the idea of
axiomatic rejection alongside that of axiomatic assertion, which
latter was of course familiar from Frege, Whitehead and Russell. The
constants ‘0’ and ‘1’ also occur in asserted
and rejected formulas, in effect setting up an object-language version
of truth-tables. To show this we use Łukasiewicz’s later
parenthesis-free notation (see the supplementary document
 (Łukasiewicz’s Parenthesis-Free or Polish Notation)
 and his symbols ‘\(\vdash\)’ for assertion and
‘\(\dashv\)’ for rejection, to be read respectively as
“I assert” and “I reject”. The first
principles of logic are simply \({\vdash}1\) and \({\dashv}0\) but to
indicate the tabulation for implication the following principles must
be adhered to: \({\vdash}C00, {\vdash}C01, {\dashv}C10, {\vdash}C11\).
When Łukasiewicz employed propositional variables, he quantified
them in the manner of Peirce, using ‘\(\Pi\)’ for the
universal and ‘\(\Sigma\)’ for the particular
quantifier.
Łukasiewicz and his students made the study of propositional
calculi very much their own: the results obtained between 1920 and
1930 were published in a 1930 joint paper of Łukasiewicz and
Tarski, “Untersuchungen über den
Aussagenkalkül”. Work proceeded on both classical
(bivalent) and many-valued calculi. The clearest and most complete
demonstration of how Łukasiewicz in his maturity treated
classical propositional calculus comes in his 1929 student textbook,
based on lecture notes, Elements of Mathematical Logic. The
system, following Frege, is based on implication \((C)\) and negation
\((N)\) alone, with the elegant axiom set
and three rules of inference: modus ponens, a rule of uniform
substitution of formulas for propositional variables, and a rule of
definitional replacement. On this basis, and using an extremely
compressed linear notation for proofs which is at the opposite extreme
of Frege’s space-occupying proofs, Łukasiewicz proves around 140
theorems in a mere 19 pages.
Łukasiewicz, aided and abetted by students and colleagues, not
just Tarski but also Adolf Lindenbaum, Jerzy Słupecki,
Bolesław Sobociński, Mordechaj Wajsberg and others,
investigated not only the full (functionally complete) propositional
calculus, with different sets of connectives as basic, including the
Sheffer functor D, but also partial calculi, in particular
the pure implicational calculus (based on C alone) and the
pure equivalential calculus (based on E alone). They strove
to find axioms sets satisfying a number of normative criteria: axioms
should be as few as possible, as short as possible, independent, with
as few primitives as possible. Undoubtedly there was a competitive
element to the search for ever better axiom systems, in particular in
the attempt to find single axioms for various systems, and the
exercise has been smiled upon or even belittled as a mere
“sport”, but the Polish preoccupation with improving axiom
systems was a search for logical perfection, an illustration of what
Jan Woleński has termed “logic for logic’s sake”. At
one time it was thought, not without some justification, that only
Poles could compete. When Tarski once congratulated the American
logician Emil Post on being the only non-Pole to make fundamental
contributions to propositional logic, Post replied that he had been
born in Augustów and his mother came from Białystok.
Later, Łukasiewicz was to find in the Irish mathematician Carew
Meredith a worthy non-Pole who could outdo even the Poles in the
brevity of his axioms (see Meredith 1953).
Łukasiewicz used many-valued matrices to establish the
independence of logical axioms in systems of Frege, Russell and
others. He proved the completeness of full, implicational and
equivalential calculi, and proved that the equivalential calculus
could be based on the single axiom \(EEpqErqEpr\), with substitution
and detachment for equivalence, and showed further that no shorter
axiom could be the sole axiom of the system. Tarski showed in 1925
that the pure implicational calculus could be based on a single axiom,
but a series of improvements by Wajsberg and Łukasiewicz led to
the latter’s discovering in 1936 that the formula \(CCCpqrCCrpCsp\)
could serve as single axiom and that no shorter axiom would suffice,
though the publication of this result had to wait until 1948.
Standard propositional calculus employs neither quantifiers nor
variable functors, that is, functors of one or more places taking
propositional arguments, but which unlike such constant functors as
\(N\) or \(C\) do not have a fixed
meaning. Such variable functors act like the predicates of first-order
predicate logic except for taking propositional rather than nominal
arguments. They thus add to the expressive power of the logic.
Leśniewski added both quantifiers and bound propositional and
functorial variables to propositional logic, and called the resulting
theory protothetic. Leaving prefixed universal quantifiers
tacit, it is a thesis of protothetic that
where \(\delta\) is a one-place propositional functor, out of the same
syntactic stable as negation or necessity. This thesis is an
expression of the law of extensionality for propositional expressions.
If \(p\) and \(q\) are replaced by
complex expressions \(x\) and \(y\) the
thesis can be used to enable definitions to be given in the
implicational form \(C\delta x\delta y\).
If \(\delta\) is replaced by the first part of a complex expression,
e.g., \(Cq\) or \(CCq0\), then simply adjoining a variable such as \(p\)
to give \(Cqp\), \(CCq0p\), is straightforward. But
if the “gap” where the variable is to go is not at the
end, such as \(Cpq\), or if the variable is to be inserted more than
once, as \(CCp0p\), this simple replacement procedure will not work.
Leśniewski got around the problem by introducing auxiliary
definitions which maneuvered the required variable slot into the right
position with only one occurrence. But Łukasiewicz found this
procedure unintuitive and wasteful. His preference—which in fact
echoes the practice of Frege—was to allow any context in which a
single propositional variable is free to serve as a substituend for a
functor like \(\delta\), and mark the places into which the argument
of \(\delta\) was to be slotted with an apostrophe, so in our examples
\(C \apos q\), \(CC\apos 0 \apos\). This more liberal
“substitution with apostrophe” allows definitions to be
given a satisfyingly simple implicational form. For example, in
propositional calculus based on implication and the propositional
constant 0, negation can be defined simply by \(C\delta Np\delta
Cp0\). The use of variable functors with liberal substitution enables
a number of principles of propositional logic to be given startlingly
compressed and elegant formulations, for example the principle of
bivalence in the form
which can be read as “if something is true of a false
proposition then if it true of a true proposition, it is true of any
proposition” (C00 is a true proposition). The supreme
achievements of compression using variable functors were made by
Meredith, who showed (as quoted by Łukasiewicz, referring to an
apparently unpublished paper) that the whole of classical
propositional logic with variable functors can be based on the single
axiom
More astonishingly, Meredith (1951) showed that the whole of
bivalent propositional calculus with quantifiers and variable functors
can be deduced, using substitution, detachment and quantifier rules,
from the single axiomatic formula
Łukasiewicz admiringly described this feat as “a
masterpiece of the art of deduction”.
Łukasiewicz was interested in intuitionistic logic, not least
because, like his own, it rejected the law of excluded middle. In a
late article published in 1952, he gave an elegant axiomatization with
ten axioms, using the letters \(F\), \(T\)
and \(O\) for the intuitionist
connectives of implication, conjunction and disjunction respectively,
in order to obviate clashes caused by “competition” for
the connectives, though interestingly he kept the usual negation for
both systems. He then showed how to define classical implication as
\(NTpNq\), formulated this definition using a variable functor as the
implication
and proved that in this version classical bivalent logic based on \(C\)
and \(N\) is contained in
intuitionistic logic, provided that detachment is confined to \(C\)-\(N\)
formulas only. Classical
conjunction and disjunction can be defined in the usual way as
\(NCpNq\) and \(CNpq\) respectively. By differentiating intuitionistic
from classical connectives his perspective reverses the usual one that
intuitionistic propositional calculus is poorer in theorems than
classical: in Łukasiewicz’s formulation it is the other way
around.
Łukasiewicz’s most celebrated achievement was his development of
many-valued logics. This revolutionary development came in the context
of discussing modality, in particular possibility. To modern
logicians, used to the idea of modal logic being grafted onto
classical bivalent logic, this may seem odd. But let us consider how
Łukasiewicz arrived at the idea. If \(p\) be any
proposition, let \(Lp\) notate that it is necessary that \(p\)
and \(Mp\) that it is possible that \(p\).
The two modal operators are connected by the usual
equivalence \(ENLpMNp\). Everyone accepts the implications \(CLpp\)
and \(CpMp\). Łukasiewicz supposes one accepts also the converse
implications \(CpLp\) and \(CMpp\), as one would from a deterministic
point of view. That gives the equivalences \(EpLp\) and \(EpMp\),
which effectively collapse modal distinctions. Now add in the idea
that possibility is two-sided: if something is possible, then so is
its negation: \(EMpMNp\). From these it immediately follows that
\(EpNp\), and this is paradoxical in two-valued logic. The way out, as
Łukasiewicz portrays it, is to uncollapse the modal distinctions,
not by rejecting any of the principles above but by finding a case
where \(EpNp\) is true. We entertain the idea of the
proposition \(Mp\) being true when \(p\) is neither
true nor false. In addition to the truth-values true
(1) and false (0), allow then a third value,
possible, which we write
‘\(\tfrac{1}{2}\)’, so that when \(p\) is
neither true nor false, it is possible, and so is its negation \(Np\),
for if \(Np\) were true, \(p\) would be false, and vice
versa. If \(Epq\) is true when \(p\) and \(q\)
have the same truth-value, then when \(p\)
is possible (we write ‘\(\tval{p}\)’ for
the truth-value of \(p\), so \(\tval{p}=\tfrac{1}{2}\))
we have
This is, with minor changes, the way in which Łukasiewicz
introduces the third value in his first published paper on the
subject, which bears the title “On the Concept of
Possibility”. This short paper is based on a talk given on 5
June 1920 in Lwów. Two weeks later a second talk in the same
place was more transparently titled “On Three-Valued
Logic”. In this, Łukasiewicz sets out principles governing
implication and equivalence involving the third value. These in effect
determine the
 truth-tables[2]
 for these connectives:
Together with the assumed definitions of negation, conjunction and
disjunction as, respectively
this yields truth-tables for these connectives as
Łukasiewicz proudly declares “that three-valued logic has,
above all, theoretical significance as the first attempt to create a
non-Aristotelian logic” (PL, 18; SW, 88). What
its practical significance is, he thinks awaits to be seen, and for
this we need “to compare with experience the consequences of the
indeterministic view which is the metaphysical basis of the new
logic” (ibid.).
This final remark reveals the motivation of Łukasiewicz’s drive
to replace the old bivalent logic with the new trivalent one. It was
in order to defend indeterminism and freedom. In fact the idea had
come to fruition some three years earlier. Having been appointed to an
administrative position in the Ministry of Education in 1918, and
being about to leave academic life for an indefinite period,
Łukasiewicz delivered a “farewell lecture” to the
University of Warsaw on 17 March, in which he announced dramatically,
“I have declared a spiritual war upon all coercion that
restricts man’s free creative activity.” The logical form of
this coercion, in Łukasiewicz’s view, was Aristotelian logic,
which restricted propositions to true or false. His own weapon in this
war was three-valued logic. Recalling his 1910 monograph, he notes
that:
Because Łukasiewicz was involved in government until the end of
1919, it took until 1920 for his discoveries of 1917 to be revealed to
a wider academic public. Łukasiewicz returned to the subject of
determinism for his inaugural lecture as Rector of the University of
Warsaw on 16 October 1922. That lecture, delivered without notes but
later written down, was reworked, though not in essentials, up until
1946. It was published only posthumously in 1961 as “On
Determinism”. Distinguishing logical from causal determinism,
Łukasiewicz claims that if a prediction of a future contingent
event such as an action is true at the time the prediction is made,
the event must occur, so the only way to rescue the agent’s freedom of
action is to deny that the prediction is true, and assign it instead
the third truth-value of possibility.
Here is not the place to go into the problems with Łukasiewicz’s
argumentation. Suffice it to say that the principle EpLp need
not be accepted by determinists, and that other logicians who have
considered adding a third value to logic, such as (unbeknown to
Łukasiewicz) William of Ockham, concluded that there was no
reason to reject bivalence while upholding freedom. This is without
even considering compatibilist views.
Once the spell of bivalence was broken, a natural next step was to
consider logic with more than three values. In 1922 Łukasiewicz
indicated how to give truth-tables for the standard connectives in
systems with finitely or infinitely many truth values, according to
the following principles, where the truth-values are numbers in the
interval [0,1]:
In proposing logics with infinitely many values, Łukasiewicz was
thus the inventor of what was much later (43 years later, to be exact)
to be called ‘fuzzy logic’. Commenting on these systems in
1930, Łukasiewicz wrote
We will discuss this philosophical attitude below.
Once the truth-tabular or matrix approach to many-valued logics was
established, it was natural to consider their axiomatization.
Łukasiewicz’s students assisted in this. In 1931 Wajsberg
axiomatized the three-valued system Ł\(_3\)
by the theses
Wajsberg also proved a conjecture of Łukasiewicz that the
denumerably infinite-valued system Ł\(_{\aleph_0}\)
can be axiomatized by
None of these systems is functionally complete: there are connectives
not definable on the basis of C and N alone. Among
those that are definable is possibility M: as early as 1921
Tarski showed that it could be defined as CNpp. In 1936
Słupecki showed that by adding a functor \(T\)
specifiable as \(\tval{Tp} = \tfrac{1}{2}\) for all values of
p, all connectives can be defined in Ł3. To
axiomatize these functionally complete system the formulas
have to be added to Wajsberg’s axioms.
Adolf Lindenbaum showed that Ł\(_n\) is
contained in Ł\(_m\) \((n \lt m)\) if and
only if \(n - 1\) is a divisor of \(m - 1\), so if neither divides the
other their respective tautologies properly overlap but neither set is
contained in the other. Tautologies of the infinite-valued system
Ł\(_{\aleph_0}\) are contained in those
of all the finite-valued systems.
From 1917, Łukasiewicz had been happy with the three-valued logic
as formulating adequate notions of modality, with the noted preference
for the infinite-valued system as optimally precise. At some time,
probably around 1951–52, when he was working on Aristotle’s
modal logic, Łukasiewicz changed his mind. There are a number of
reasons behind the change of mind but the easiest to identify is
Łukasiewicz’s concern that in Ł\(_3\)
there are theorems of the form
\(L\alpha\), for example \(LCpp\). Why should this be a concern, given
that most “standard” modal logics recognize the principle
that if \(\alpha\) is a theorem, so is \(L\alpha\)? Łukasiewicz
gives two examples to justify the worry. If \({=}ab\) is the
proposition that \(a\) is identical with \(b\),
then basing identity on the two axioms of
self-identity and extensionality
then instantiating \(L{=}a\apos\) for \(\phi\) gives
and if we accept \(L{=}aa\) we are forced to conclude that \(L{=}ab\),
which Łukasiewicz thinks is false (SW 392, AS
171), citing Quine’s (1953) example (now outdated because the number
has changed) that while it’s true that 9 = the number of planets, this
is not necessarily true, although necessarily 9 = 9. Dually, we
have
that is, if \(MN{=}ab\) then \(N{=}ab\). But suppose a is
replaced by “the number thrown on this throw of this die”
and b by “the number thrown on the next throw of this
die” the antecedent can be true and the consequent false.
In the wake of much subsequent discussion of such examples by Quine,
Kripke and others, these examples are hardly convincing, but there is
another more general reason why Łukasiewicz rejects necessities
as theorems:
Since \(LCpp\) is a theorem of all the systems of many-valued logic to
date, Łukasiewicz needed to come up with something new. This he
did in his 1953 paper “A System of Modal Logic”.
Łukasiewicz begins the paper by laying out the conditions that a
modal logic needs to satisfy. These include axiomatic rejections as
well as assertions, as follows:
To obtain a system of modal logic respecting extensionality for
propositional functors, Łukasiewicz takes Meredith’s axiom for
\(C\)-\(N\)-\(\delta\) propositional
calculus
and adds one more axiomatic assertion and two axiomatic rejections
together with rules of substitution and detachment for both assertion
and rejection, to obtain his logic. The principles for assertion are
as usual, while those for rejection are:
\(\dashv\) Substitution: Any formula which has a rejected substitution
instance is rejected.
\(\dashv\) Detachment: If \(Cab\) is asserted and \(b\)
is rejected then \(a\) is rejected.
From these he can derive all the desired principles and
extensionality.
This is the logic Ł. Unlike standard modal logics, it has a
finite characteristic matrix, as follows, where like Łukasiewicz
we now replace ‘\(M\)’ by a new symbol
‘\(\Delta\)’, with 1 as the designated (true) value and 4
the antidesignated (false) value:
The matrix was proved characteristic by Smiley in 1961. Functors of
necessity (\(\Gamma\)) and conjunction are definable in the standard
way. More intriguingly, Łukasiewicz notes that there is another
possibility operator \(\nabla\) with the truth-table also given
below:
Taken in isolation, this is indistinguishable from \(\Delta\), but the
two operators together interact differently, for while \(\dashv
\Delta\Delta p\) and \(\dashv \nabla\nabla p\), both \(\vdash
\Delta\nabla p\) and \(\vdash \nabla\Delta p\). Łukasiewicz
compares them to twins which are indistinguishable separately but
distinguishable together. Similar twins are the necessity operator
\(\Gamma\) and its counterpart (with values 3434), and indeed the two
intermediate truth-values 2 and 3.
The logic is very unlike Łukasiewicz’s earlier multivalent
systems and also very unlike other modal systems. It is unlike his own
systems in that it is an extension of classical bivalent logic and
includes all bivalent tautologies. This is less surprising when we
note that the four-valued matrices for the standard connectives are
simply the Cartesian product of the standard bivalent matrices with
themselves. It is the modal operators that make the difference.
Several features make this very unlike standard modal systems. One is
the complete lack of any truths, let alone theorems, of the form
\(\Gamma a\), in line with Łukasiewicz’s rejection of truths of
“higher dignity”. Other odd theorems are:
\(\vdash CK{\Delta}p{\Delta}q{\Delta}Kpq\)

all possible propositions are compossible
\(\vdash CEpqC{\Delta}p{\Delta}q\)

materially equivalent propositions are both possible if one is
\(\vdash C{\Delta}pC{\Delta}Np{\Delta}q\)

if a proposition and its negation are both possible, anything is
Łukasiewicz was aware of many of these odd consequences, but
continued to uphold his system. Despite a number of attempts to make
sense of the system, it has generally been concluded that because of
these oddities it is not really a system of modal logic. If there is
one dominant reason for this it is Łukasiewicz’s adherence to the
principle of extensionality (truth-functionality) even for modal
operators, which forced his account of modality to go multivalent in
the first place.
Łukasiewicz’s third signal achievement, along with his
investigations of many-valued and propositional logics, is his work in
the history of logic. Indeed he can reasonably be considered the
father of the modern way of doing the history of logic, which is
pursued, to quote the subtitle of his book on Aristotle’s syllogistic,
“from the standpoint of modern formal logic.” We saw that
his early book on the principle of contradiction in Aristotle was
relatively unsuccessful in its own terms, though it demonstrated his
ability to go to the heart of the ancient Greek texts.
A decisive event in Łukasiewicz’s development as an historian of
logic was his discovery of ancient Stoic logic. It seems he was
examining a dissertation on the Stoics and to prepare for it he read
original texts. He thereupon discovered that Stoic logic, contrary to
the then standard opinion, voiced by Prantl, Zeller and others, was
not a bowdlerized and defective Aristotelian syllogistic, but an early
propositional logic, so that for example the first Stoic
indemonstrable, “if the first, then the second; but the first,
therefore the second” is simply modus ponens or detachment for
the conditional ‘if’, and the variables, represented not
by letters but by ordinal numerals, are propositional variables, not
term variables. He first voiced this view, which is now of course
standard, at a meeting in Lwów in 1923. A more systematic
treatment of 1934, “On the History of the Logic of
Propositions”, is a delightful vignette taking in the broad
sweep from the Stoics, ancient disputes about the meaning of the
conditional, Petrus Hispanus and Ockham on the De Morgan laws, the
medieval theory of consequences, and culminating with Frege and modern
propositional calculi. Modern appreciation of the achievements of
Stoic logic dates from Łukasiewicz’s clarification and his
unstinting praise of the Stoics, especially Chrysippus.
Łukasiewicz appreciated that Prantl did not have the benefit of
knowing post-Fregean logic, and despite Prantl’s erroneous dismissal
of the “stupidity” of much Stoic logic did at least
provide helpful sources. Nevertheless, Łukasiewicz’s judgement on
past historians of logic is scathing:
In Łukasiewicz’s logic textbook of 1929, after treating
propositional calculus he does not go on, as one would nowadays, to
expound predicate logic, but gives a brief formal account of
Aristotle’s categorical (non-modal) syllogistic, presupposing twelve
theorems of propositional calculus. This foreshadowed his 1951 book,
Aristotle’s Syllogistic, by 22 years. This book, which
revolutionized the study of Aristotle’s logic, had a long and
interrupted genesis. A talk on the subject given at Kraków in
1939 was published in Polish only in 1946. In 1939 Łukasiewicz
prepared a Polish monograph, but the partial proofs and manuscript
were destroyed in the bombing of Warsaw. In 1949 he was invited to
lecture on Aristotle’s syllogistic at University College Dublin, and
those lectures formed the basis of the book, completed in 1950 and
published the following year, his first in English. The first edition
dealt only with categorical syllogistic. For the second edition,
completed in 1955, less than a year before his death, Łukasiewicz
added three chapters on the modal syllogistic, employing the modal
logic Ł that he had developed in the meantime. The second edition
was proof-read and indexed by Lejewski, and appeared in 1957.
Łukasiewicz’s understanding of Aristotle’s syllogistic is based
on two specific interpretative principles and a general attitude. The
first principle is that Aristotle’s syllogisms are not, as had
traditionally been supposed, inference schemata, of the form
‘p, q, therefore r’, but
conditional propositions of the form ‘if p and
q, then r’. This leads directly into
the second principle, which is that there is behind the syllogistic
treatment of term logic a deeper logic, that of propositions, and in
particular a logic of opposition, ‘and’ and
‘if’, as well as (in modal syllogistic)
‘necessarily’ and ‘possibly’. Łukasiewicz
takes this propositional basis to be occasionally invoked by
Aristotle, for instance in the treatment of indirect proofs, but for
the most part left as tacit, and he therefore regards it as legitimate
to criticise Aristotle (unlike the Stoics) for not explicitly
formulating the underlying propositional logic. Łukasiewicz’s
trenchant and controversial views sparked a controversy over how to
interpret the syllogistic. While the principles did win an early
adherent in Patzig (1968), subsequent criticisms by Corcoran (1972,
1974) and, independently, Smiley (1974) established clearly that
syllogisms are not propositions but inferences, and that Aristotle had
no need of a prior logic of propositions. That view is now universal
among scholars of Aristotle’s logic. In retrospect, it appears that
Łukasiewicz was keen to wish onto Aristotle his own (Fregean)
view of logic as a system of theorems based on a propositional
logic.
The general attitude, present throughout Łukasiewicz’s treatment,
is that Aristotle’s work is of sufficient precision and stature to
warrant and withstand exposition using the most rigorous modern
logical methods and concepts. In other words, the development of
modern logic, while it may highlight lacunae and deficits of
Aristotle’s logic, in fact brings out its merits, innovations and
genius more clearly than previous traditional or philological studies.
Łukasiewicz’s attitude has prevailed and is now pervasive among
those studying Aristotle’s logic, whether or not they agree with his
specific interpretative principles.
After an exposition of the basics of Aristotle’s treatment of
syllogistic, in which he criticises earlier commentators and notes
that Aristotle originated the method of rejected forms in order to
show not just which are the valid syllogisms but also to prove the
invalid forms to be such, Łukasiewicz presents his formalization
of categorical syllogistic, based on the following logical
expressions
Taking \(A\) and \(I\) as primitive and
defining \(E = NI\) and \(O = NA\), the axioms, added to propositional
calculus, are
together with modus ponens and a substitution rule for term variables.
This in fact was the system that Łukasiewicz had put forward in
his 1929 textbook. As the second axiom indicates, Łukasiewicz is
here following Aristotle in assuming that all terms denote. Rejected
forms can be added: Łukasiewicz gives from the second figure
which together with detachment and substitution for rejection deliver
all Aristotle’s 232 rejected moods. Łukasiewicz’s verdict on
Aristotle’s categorical syllogistic is, that despite its narrowness,
it is “a system the exactness of which surpasses even the
exactness of a mathematical theory, and this is its everlasting
merit.” (AS, 131)
The modal syllogistic on the other hand is little studied, according
to Łukasiewicz, both because it falls well below the standards of
perfection of the categorical, and for lack of a “universally
acceptable system of modal logic”, which Łukasiewicz takes
himself, with Ł, now to have provided. Łukasiewicz’s own
treatment falls short of being definitive, though it provides material
for later studies, and we shall not pursue it here. Interestingly, in
Aristotle’s attempts in Book I, Chapter 15 of the Prior
Analytics, to establish the theses
Łukasiewicz sees an Aristotelian endorsement for the idea of a
principle of extensionality for modal operators as well as for
categorical ones.
In his early philosophy, the most significant and influential position
adopted by Łukasiewicz is his anti-psychologism in logic. This
was influenced by Frege, Husserl and Russell. It manifested itself
terminologically in Łukasiewicz’s replacement of the traditional
term sąd (judgement), used by Twardowski, by the term
zdanie (sentence). This change of perspective and terminology
was adopted by subsequent Polish logicians en masse. After
1920, Łukasiewicz is very sparing in his statements regarding
philosophy and philosophical problems. His abiding commitment to
indeterminism we have noted. His main comments and indeed ire are
reserved for those who criticise the place of mathematical logic (or
logistic, as it was then known) in philosophy and thought in general.
He noted certain convergences in method and style between the
Lwów–Warsaw School and the Vienna Circle, but criticised
the latter for their conventionalism and rejection of all metaphysics
and for their attempt to turn substantive problems into linguistic
ones. Despite its abstractness, logic is no more detached from reality
than any other science, and it is constrained to conform to aspects of
the world. It was his conviction that determinism was false that drove
his rejection of bivalent logic. While maintaining the metaphysical
neutrality of logic, he admitted later in the 1930s that whereas he
had earlier been a nominalist, he was now a platonist. The source of
this conviction is stated at the end of his 1937 polemic “In
defence of logistic”:
Rarely has the motivation for platonism been so eloquently stated.
In the philosophy of logic, one of Łukasiewicz’s most deep-seated
convictions, one that he shared with the other logicians of the Warsaw
School, was that logic has to be extensional, that it is the study of
the calculi not of linguistic meanings or psychological judgements but
of the truth-values, whether just the classical two or more besides.
His view is that sentences denote truth-values, and that logic is the
science of such logical values, not of sentences (which is grammar) or
of judgements (which is psychology), or of contents expressed by
propositions, or of objects in general (ontology). He does not justify
this position, but simply accepts and assumes it. As we saw, it has
far-reaching consequences for his treatment of modal logic, forcing it
to be many-valued.
In addition to the general attitude to scientific philosophizing that
he derived from Twardowski, there is one identifiable source of some
other of Łukasiewicz’s philosophical stances regarding logic, or
if not a source, at least a point of convergent convictions. One is
the rejection of a “supertruth” above ordinary truth. This
comes out especially clearly in the modal logic Ł. The other is
his liking for degrees of possibility intermediate between truth (1)
and falsity (0), by contrast with the non-quantitative third case of
possibility (or in Ł twin third cases). An exactly similar
distinction between two kinds of possibility,
“unincreasable”, without degrees, and
“increasable”, with infinite degrees, can be found in
Meinong’s massive 1915 treatise Über Möglichkeit und
Wahrscheinlichkeit. Like Łukasiewicz, Meinong does not
accord propositions a dignity of necessity higher than truth, and
despite having the most ample ontology known to philosophy, Meinong’s
object theory lacks objects described as necessary: he never mentions
God, and ideal objects such as numbers are taken by him to subsist,
not to exist or subsist necessarily. It is perhaps not incidental that
on returning to Lwów after his visit to Graz, Łukasiewicz
spoke in 1910 about the law of excluded middle, concluding that like
the principle of contradiction it is not fundamental, and has
practical rather than logical significance. He conjectured that it
failed for general objects like the triangle in general, which is
neither equilateral nor not equilateral. Meinong accepted such
objects, which he called “incomplete”, and had in fact
adopted the idea from Łukasiewicz’s teacher Twardowski.
Łukasiewicz also regarded the application of the principle to
real objects as “connected with the universal determinism of
phenomena, not only present and past ones but also future ones. Were
someone to deny that all future phenomena are today already
predetermined in all respects, he would probably not be able to accept
the principle in question.” The seeds of three-valued logic were
already germinating in 1910, after the visit to Graz.
Meinong employed the many values of increasable possibility to give an
account of probability. While Łukasiewicz’s procedure in his 1913
monograph was based on a different idea, he continued to be pulled
towards the idea that infinite-valued logic might be able to shed
light on probability. At the very latest by 1935, with the publication
of a short article on probability and many-valued logic by Tarski, he
knew that the most straightforward approach, that of identifying
probabilities with truth-values between 0 and 1, would not work. The
reason is that because of probabilistic dependence, probability is not
extensional: if \(p\) is the proposition that it will
rain in Dublin tomorrow and \(Np\) is its negation, the probability of
the contradictory conjunction \(KpNp\) is 0, but if \(p\)
has degree of truth \(\tfrac{1}{2}\), so does \(Np\),
and so \(\tval{KpNp} = \tfrac{1}{2}\) in both Ł\(_3\)
and Ł\(_{\aleph_0}\).
Despite this, as late as 1955
Łukasiewicz could still muse,
Łukasiewicz once declared somewhat immodestly that the discovery
of many-valued logics was comparable to that of non-Euclidean
geometries (SW 176). Whatever their significance,
Łukasiewicz’s hopes for such logics have not been realized in the
way he anticipated. The semantics and pure mathematics of multivalued
logics have flourished, leading to the development of MV-algebras in
use for the algebraic semantics of Łukasiewicz’s logics.
Infinite-valued or fuzzy logic has its own mathematics, and prominent
among its developers is the Czech mathematical logician Petr
Hájek, whose work is influenced by that of Łukasiewicz.
Fuzzy logic is found in many practical applications, where it is used
to deal with vagueness, inexactness, or lack of knowledge, whether
these are the same or different. But Łukasiewicz’s championing of
multivalence in the analysis of modality has been almost universally
rejected, and the logic of modality has inexorably followed other
paths, mostly bivalent, non-extensional ones. His final logic Ł
has resisted consensual interpretation, and is regarded as at best an
oddity and at worst a dead end.
The outstanding work that Łukasiewicz and his students
accomplished in the logic and metalogic of propositional calculus, the
Polish speciality of ever-shorter axioms and so on, now belongs to the
bygone heroic age of logistic. Its results have indeed only been
bettered occasionally by automated theorem-provers. On the other hand
the emphasis on logical semantics, Łukasiewicz’s abundant use of
truth-values notwithstanding, has shifted interest away from axiomatic
virtuosity.
In the history of logic, Łukasiewicz’s pioneering studies opened
up a new and more fruitful interaction between the past and the
present, and the rediscovery and new appreciation of figures from
logic’s past “in the light of modern formal logic” has
continued to this day, though not all of Łukasiewicz’s own views
on how to approach Aristotle or the Stoics have stood the test of
time. His work also helped to inspire those historians of logic from
the Catholic tradition in Kraków, most notably Jan Salamucha
and Józef Bocheński, who applied modern methods to the
investigation of logical problems and arguments from the history of
philosophy.
During the heyday of the Warsaw School, 1920–1939,
Łukasiewicz played a key role in educating the next generation of
logical researchers and inspiring them with methods, results and
problems. Even ideas he tossed off as exercises have changed logic,
for example a 1929 suggestion to formalize the informal procedure of
proof from assumptions led to Stanisław Jaśkowski’s 1934
system of natural deduction, in essentials the way logic is mainly
taught to students today. The war irrevocably interrupted their work.
Several of Łukasiewicz’s best students were Jewish, and were
killed in Nazi death camps. In his exile from Poland after 1944,
Łukasiewicz had scant opportunity to continue this pedagogical
work, holding a research position in a non-teaching institution in a
country with no logical tradition. His interactions with
contemporaries were much more sparse, and those chiefly through
correspondence. The one notable logician who interacted with
Łukasiewicz at this time and whose work intersects with his in
both interests (time, modality, many-valuedness) and attitudes (the
importance of logic for philosophy) is Arthur Prior, who was the only
major logician to adopt Polish notation, and who also expended more
effort than anyone in the attempt to find a plausible interpretation
for the system Ł. It is also fair to say that of the major
figures among the Warsaw logicians, Łukasiewicz has received the
least attention from commentators and historians. There are relatively
fewer monographs and papers on Łukasiewicz than on other major
figures of the Lwów–Warsaw School.
Despite such disappointments, Łukasiewicz’s achievements and
inventions ensure him a permanent and honorable place in the history
of mathematical and philosophical logic. Łukasiewicz was justly
proud of the prominence achieved by Polish logicians between the wars,
and fully deserves his commemoration by one of Adam Myjak’s four
statues of prominent Lwów–Warsaw School members at the
entrance to Warsaw University Library.