Addams’ philosophical work is deeply connected to her
extraordinary life. As witnessed by the many biographical
accounts of Addams compared to the relatively few comprehensive
considerations of her philosophy, her personal exploits often overshadow her
intellectual contributions. Nevertheless, as an American
pragmatist, Addams valorized experience making it appropriate to
recount, at least briefly, her life story.
Laura Jane Addams was born in Cedarville, Illinois on September 6,
1860. She grew up in the shadow of the Civil War and during a time
when Darwin’s Origin of the Species achieved widespread
influence. Her childhood reflected the material advantage of being the
daughter of a politician and successful mill owner, John Addams. When
Jane was two years old, her mother, Mary, died giving birth to her ninth
child. Subsequently, the precocious Addams doted upon her father and
in return benefited emotionally and intellectually from his
attention. Although John Addams was no advocate of feminism, he did
desire higher education for his daughter and sent her to the
all-women’s institution, Rockford Seminary (renamed later,
Rockford College) in Rockford, Illinois. Addams became part of a
generation of women that were among the first in their family to
attend college. At Rockford, she experienced the empowerment of living
in a women-centered environment and she blossomed as an intellectual
and as a social leader.  Her classmates and teachers acknowledged this
leadership.  Ultimately, Addams spearheaded an effort to bring
baccalaureate degrees to the school, and, after serving as class
valedictorian, received the first one.
Like those of many women of her time, Addams’ prospects after college
were limited. She made a failed attempt at medical school and then
slipped into a nearly decade-long malaise over the direction of her life. The
energy and spirit of her undergraduate college experience did not translate into any
clear career path, given that she had rejected both marriage and the
religious life. Addams’ malaise was somewhat analogous to the
unidentified illness that her later acquaintance, Charlotte Perkins
Gilman (as described in The Yellow Wallpaper) suffered. As a
member of the privileged class, her soul searching included a trek to
Europe, which Addams made twice during this period. On the second trip
she visited Toynbee Hall, a pioneering Christian settlement house in London,
which was to inspire her in a direction that propelled her toward
international prominence (TYH 53).
Toynbee Hall was a community of young men committed to helping the
poor of London by living among them. After visiting Toynbee Hall,
Addams was rejuvenated by the idea of a scheme to replicate the
settlement in the United States. She enlisted a college friend, Ellen
Gates Starr in the plan. However, to identify their vague idea as a
“plan” is a bit of hyperbole. There was very little by way
of specific directions for what the settlement would be other than a
good neighbor to oppressed peoples. A suitable location in a
devastatingly poor Chicago immigrant neighborhood was found and on
September 18, 1889, Hull House opened its doors. Working amidst one of
the greatest influxes of immigrants the United States has ever known,
Hull House quickly became an incubator for new social programs.
Without any formal ideological or political constraints, the
settlement workers responded to the needs of the neighborhood by
starting project after project.  The list of projects started at Hull
House is astounding, including the first little theatre and juvenile
court in the United States and the first playground, gymnasium, public
swimming pool and public kitchen in Chicago.  The work of Hull House
residents would result in numerous labor union organizations, a labor
museum, tenement codes, factory laws, child labor laws, adult
education courses, cultural exchange groups, and the collection of
neighborhood demographic data.  Hull House was truly a dynamo of
progressive initiatives, all of which Addams oversaw.  
The reputation of the settlement rapidly grew and women, mostly
college educated, from all over the country, came to live and work at
Hull House. Although Hull House was co-educational, it was clearly a
woman-identified space. There were male residents at Hull House, some
of whom later became prominent leaders, however the policies,
projects, decision-making, and methodologies of the Hull House
community were gynocentric—foregrounding women’s experience,
analysis, and concerns. Furthermore, although a few of the residents
were married, most were single and some were in committed
relationships with other women. Given the drastic shifts in sexual
mores in the twentienth century, the contemporary understanding of
what it means to be lesbian cannot straightforwardly be mapped onto
the late and post Victorian eras, but it can be argued that Hull House
was lesbian-friendly space. Addams set the tone for this
identification with her own long-term intimate relationships with women, first
with Starr and then Mary Rozet Smith (Brown, 2004).
From the outset of its operation, Addams theorized about the nature
and function of Hull House. The language she used reflected her
philosophical approach. For example, in one published essay, Addams
describes the application and reorganization of knowledge as the
fundamental problem of modern life and then claims that settlements
are like applied universities: “The ideal and developed
settlement would attempt to test the value of human knowledge by
action, and realization, quite as the complete and ideal university
would concern itself with the discovery of knowledge in all
branches” (FSS 187). This kind of reflective analysis and wider
thematization of her work and the work of the social settlement was a
hallmark of Addams’ writing.  Because of her insightful
reflections on the Hull House community, Addams became a popular
author and sought-after public speaker. Eventually, she extended her
cosmopolitan analysis to issues of race, education, and world
peace. For Addams, local experiences were always a springboard for
political theorizing.
Addams became one of the most respected and recognized
individuals in the nation. She played a key role in numerous
progressive campaigns. Addams was a founding figure in the National
Association for the Advancement of Colored People, the American Civil
Liberties Union, and the Women’s International League for Peace and
Freedom. Her popularity was such that when Theodore Roosevelt sought
the presidential nomination of the Progressive Party in 1912, he asked
Jane Addams to second the nomination, the first time a woman had
participated in such an act. There was a gendered dimension to this
popularity however. Addams had challenged the borders of the public
and private spheres through her work at Hull House, but her forays
into masculine domains were masked by the “social
housekeeping” characterization of the settlement activism. After
World War I broke out in Europe, her outspoken pacifism and refusal to
endorse the war or the U.S. entry into it, was more gender role
transgression than the public could tolerate from a woman. Addams’
popularity fell and she became the victim of vicious gender-specific
criticism.  Biographer Allen Davis reports that one writer indicated that what
Addams needed to disabuse her of her pacifism was “a strong,
forceful husband who would lift the burden of fate from her shoulders
and get her intensely interested in fancy work and other things dear
to the heart of women who have homes and plenty of time on their
hands” (240). A reporter for the Los Angeles Times
quipped, 
Her new role as social outcast and critic gave an opportunity for the
public philosopher in Addams to reflect on the nature of citizenship
and patriotism in her many books and articles—some of which had
difficulty getting into print because she was perceived as being
anti-American. Although she had written on peace early in her public
career (NIP), from 1914 through the end of her life, Addams’
publications became decidedly more focused on issues of peace and war,
including two books exclusively dedicated to the topic (WH, PBT) and
several books with sections devoted to the nature and politics of war
(LRW, STY, MFJ).  Although initially criticized, Addams’ pacifist
tenacity was ultimately recognized with the Nobel Peace Price (1931). In the last
years of her life, she spent less time at Hull House and more time
working for world peace and an end to racism. Addams died of cancer on
May 21, 1935, leaving a tremendous intellectual legacy that has yet to
be fully explored.
Addams was well read and could claim numerous and varied
influences. However, Addams was no one’s protégé. Addams
picked and chose intellectual resources that resonated with her notion
of sympathetic knowledge in the process of bringing about social progress. A few
significant influences are recounted here. Addams read Thomas
Carlyle’s (1795–1881) work while she was attending Rockford
Seminary. Carlyle’s social morality held a particular appeal to
Addams. He believed that the universe was ultimately good and moral
and led by a divine will that worked through society’s heroes and
leaders.  Carlyle wrote biographies of social saviors that came in the
form of poets, kings, prophets, and intellectuals, mixing in
commentary that explicated his moral philosophy. However, Carlyle’s
heroes reflect the evolution of society, as different contexts require
different leadership. These heroes are able to recognize the social
dynamics at work and use them for the benefit of others.  Carlyle’s
heroes evolved over time. For Carlyle, a duty extends to all to
find themselves or realize their place in the world and what their
work on behalf of society should be. Because of his emphasis on
powerful individuals, Carlyle was not particularly fond of
democracy. Although Addams shed Carlyle’s notion of individualistic
heroism and his disdain for democracy, she retained the
valorization of moral action throughout her career.  Furthermore,
Carlyle’s morality was grounded in social relations: to be moral is to
be in right relation with God and others. A precursor to Addams’
notion of sympathetic knowledge can be found in Carlyle’s relational
ethics.
Addams was also influenced by John Ruskin (1819–1900) who
theorized that art and culture reflected the moral health of
society. Although Ruskin maintained a certain elitism in his view that
great people produced great art, he also saw such great cultural works
as a manifestation of the well-being of society as a whole. The plight
of the oppressed was tied to a sense of the aesthetic. Certainly,
Addams’ valorization of art and culture as exhibited in the
appearance and activities of Hull House resonates with Ruskin’s
aesthetics. For Addams, “Social Life and art have always seemed
to go best at Hull House” (STY 354).  Addams viewed art and
cultural activities as reinforcing essential human bonds (DSE
29). Ruskin also influenced Arnold Toynbee and other future settlement
workers by identifying the problems in large industrial cities and
calling for reforms foreshadowing the safety nets typical of later
welfare states. Ruskin valued labor as a noble means of
self-actualization. This became a crucial concept for Addams as she
sought meaningful labor for those in the Hull House neighborhood. For
example, Addams expresses sympathy for laborers who skipped work or
came in late for work because “all human interest has been
extracted from it” (SYC 129). Although Addams valued
Ruskin’s moral imagination, concept of labor, and ideas about
transforming the city through infusing culture, she rejected his
romanticization of the preindustrial past. With a strong belief in
social progress, Addams did not desire a return to a previous era. For
Addams, society should grow and adapt to its conditions even in regard
to moral philosophy.
Leo Tolstoy (1828–1910) was another type of hero to Addams.
Unlike Carlyle, Tolstoy did not valorize individuals standing out from
the crowd as exemplary moral paragons who wield socially ordained
positions of power. He valued solidarity with the common
laborer. Addams’ wide intellectual curiosity made such extremes
in influences possible. Addams read Tolstoy’s works from the time that
she graduated from college until the last years of her life and she
often praised his writing in articles and book reviews. Tolstoy’s
emphasis on working for and with the oppressed, while simultaneously
writing novels and essays that influenced a wider audience, resonated
with Addams’ work and writings. However, Tolstoy
was a moral idealist. He left everything behind to take up the plow
and work as a common farm laborer. Addams was moved by Tolstoy’s
account and—typical of her self-critical, thoughtful
approach--she questioned her leadership role in the social settlement,
but only for a short time. 
Motivated by Tolstoy’s troubling moral challenge to work in solidarity
with the common laborer, Addams sought him out while she was on
vacation (and recovering from typhoid) in Europe in 1896. The meeting
made a lasting impression on Addams (TYH 191–195).  Tolstoy came in
from working the fields to be introduced to Addams and her partner
Mary Rozet Smith. The meeting began with Tolstoy questioning Addams’
fashion choice because the sleeves of her arms, consistent with the
style of the time, had “enough stuff on one arm to make a frock
for the girl” (TYH 192). Tolstoy was concerned that the
trappings of material wealth alienated Addams from those she was
working with. This criticism continued when Tolstoy learned that part
of Hull House’s funding came from Addams’ estate that included a
working farm: “So you are an absentee landlord? Do you think you
will help the people more by adding yourself to the crowded city than
you would by tilling your own soil?” (TYH 192) Addams was
humbled by the remarks and on her return to Hull House was determined
to take up more direct labor by working in the new Hull House
bakery. However, reality demonstrated how Tolstoy’s idealism was
incompatible with her work in social settlements: “The half
dozen people invariably waiting to see me after breakfast, the piles
of letters to be opened and answered, the demand of actual and
pressing human wants—were these all to be pushed aside and asked
to wait while I saved my soul by two hours’ work at baking
bread?” (TYH 197) Theoretically, the shared experience of
common labor would break down class
distinctions. Addams had experienced such camaraderie at Hull House,
and she never stopped appreciating Tolstoy’s social
criticism. However, she saw the value of intelligent
leadership. Someone had to organize the clubs, arrange for
philanthropic support, and chair the meetings.  To a certain extent,
Addams found Tolstoy’s labor demand to be self-indulgent: if she
engaged in the labor of the poor exclusively, she might alleviate her
upper class guilt but she would no longer be working holistically
toward changing the structure of society.  Addams’ own philosophy of
civic activism valued engagement through ongoing presence and
listening. Indeed, Hull House had a very flat and responsive organization
structure. Nevertheless, Tolstoy’s absolutist moral demands failed to
take into account context—a hallmark of Addams’ approach.
Addams also found Tolstoy’s pacifism inspiring. She admired the
manner in which Tolstoy sympathized with revolutionaries in the 1870s
but did not compromise his moral convictions because of these
sympathies. Tolstoy offered a doctrine of non-resistance that sought
to substitute moral energy for physical force. Addams once again did
not accept Tolstoy’s pacifist ideas uncritically. For example, she
questioned the clarity of the categories (moral energy versus physical
force) that Tolstoy created in his doctrine of non-resistance (TYH
195). Addams also questioned whether Tolstoy reduced social issues too
simplistically, albeit eloquently.  Despite her less than congenial
meeting with him, Addams cited Tolstoy as a positive moral
example throughout her life. However, like all of her influences,
Tolstoy’s philosophy could not be accepted uncritically. Addams had to
adapt and infuse her own insight to make it work for the society of
which she was a part. 
As previously mentioned, Toynbee Hall was the inspiration for
Hull House and Canon Barnett (1844–1913), who served as
“warden” of the settlement for over twenty years, was the
inspirational force. Prior to his service at Toynbee Hall, Barnett
worked as Vicar of St. Judes, Whitechapel where he instituted a number
of improvements to the slums surrounding the Church, including building
educational and recreational programs. It was St. Judes that students
from Oxford would visit, working to help improve conditions for
residents of the surrounding community, all the while engaging in
discussions about how to institute social reforms.  One of those
students was Andrew Toynbee.
Barnett describes a threefold rationale for the development and growth
of settlements: First, a general distrust that government-sponsored
institutions could care for the poor. In particular, government and
private philanthropy appeared to be failing the masses. The second
reason Barnett gives for the rise of settlements is the need for
information. Barnett believed there was widespread curiosity regarding
oppression that he could satisfy with documented observations
regarding the circumstances of the poor. Finally, Barnett notes a
groundswell of fellowship not driven by traditional “Charities
and Missions” but by a fundamental humanitarianism. Settlements
provided an outlet for these fellow feelings. 
Addams was familiar with Barnett’s writings and referred to them on
many occasions. For example, when Addams wrote “The Function of
the Social Settlement,” Barnett’s philosophy played a prominent
role. She agrees with him that settlements should not be missions
because if they become too ideological, they will fail to be
responsive to their neighbors (FSS 344–345). However, despite
acknowledging that the term “settlement” was borrowed from
London, she finds subtle differences between the philosophies of
Toynbee Hall and Hull House: “The American Settlement, perhaps
has not so much a sense of duty of the privileged toward the
unprivileged of the ‘haves’ to the ‘have
nots,’ to borrow Canon Barnett’s phrase, as a desire to equalize
through social effort those results which superior opportunity may
have given the possessor” (FSS 322–323). Addams is very
sensitive about a sense of superiority in settlement work. She always
eschewed the notion that she was a charitable “lady
bountiful.” She wanted to learn about others so that she could
develop the proper sympathies and strategies for
assisting—sympathetic knowledge. For Addams, Hull House always
combined epistemological concerns with moral ones. 
When Addams’ philosophy is considered, if at all, it is usually
associated with the work of John Dewey (1859–1952). This
association is appropriate given their friendship and mutual
interests; however her intellectual deference to Dewey is often
overstated.  Dewey is considered one of the greatest American
philosophers and his name, along with William James, Charles Sanders
Peirce, and Josiah Royce form the traditional list of founding fathers
of what is labeled American Pragmatism. His work appealed to Addams
because they shared many of the same commitments including the value
of a robust democracy as well as the importance of education that
engaged the student’s experience. Addams and Dewey were intellectual
soul mates from the moment they met in 1892. Dewey visited Hull House
shortly after it opened and before he moved to Chicago to teach at the
University of Chicago. Following the meeting, Dewey expressed to
Addams an appreciation for Hull House’s work and he would become a
frequent visitor. There was much intellectual cross-fertilization
between Hull House and the University of Chicago and vice
versa.  Historian Rosalind Rosenberg describes Addams as a de
facto adjunct professor at the University of Chicago. Mary Jo
Deegan documents that over the course of a decade Addams taught a
number of college courses through the Extension Division of the
University of Chicago. In addition, she refused offers to join the
undergraduate and graduate faculty (Deegan, 1988). Furthermore, Dewey
assigned Addams’ books in his courses. Addams and Dewey worked
together personally and politically. When Hull House incorporated,
Dewey became one of the board members. He often lectured to the Plato
Club, Hull House’s philosophy group.  Dewey would dedicate his book
Liberalism and Social Action to Addams. Dewey named one of
his daughters in her honor and Addams wrote the eulogy for Dewey’s son
Gordon (EBP).
Although Dewey and Addams would gain celebrity status in their lifetime,
their fame and legacies are characterized much differently. Dewey was
the great intellectual—a thinker—and Addams was the
activist—a doer. As contemporaries, they represent classic
archetypes of gender: the male as mind generating theory and the woman
as body experiencing and caring. However, there is much evidence that
such a characterization is inaccurate. Both John Dewey and his
daughter, Jane, credit Jane Addams with developing many of his
important ideas including his view on education, democracy, and
ultimately philosophy itself (Schlipp, 1951). Despite the lack of
attribution in Dewey’s written work, many scholars document
Addams’ significant influence (Davis, 1973; Deegan, 1988;
Farrell, 1967; Lasch, 1965; Linn, 2000; Seigfried, 1996)
Overshadowed by Addams’ relationship with the celebrity philosopher,
Dewey, was her strong tie to George Herbert Mead (1863–1931) who is
considered the father of “symbolic interactionism,” an
approach to social inquiry that emphasizes how symbols create meaning
in society. Mead’s work on development through play and education
influenced Addams but, as with Dewey, the influence was mutual. Addams
maintained a long-term close personal relationship with Mead and his
wife, Helen Castle Mead. They often dined together and visited one
another’s family. Like Addams’, Mead’s intellectual legacy is
not altogether settled. His works have been recognized as significant
by sociologists but many philosophers have overlooked him.
Mead and Addams worked on a number of projects together including
pro-labor speeches, peace advocacy and the Progressive Party.  When
Addams was publicly attacked for not supporting the U.S. entry into
World War I, Mead defended her even through he did not agree with her
position.  Like Dewey, Mead was a frequent lecturer at
Hull House. Also, like Dewey, Mead could not help but be impressed
with Addams’ intellect. In 1916, Mead advocated awarding Addams an
honorary doctorate from the University of Chicago. The faculty
supported the award but the administration overturned the decision
(eventually making the award in 1931).
Addams also maintained a friendship with William James (1842–1910),
whose work she cites on many occasions. James was a pragmatist whose
vision of urban improvement would have been shared by Addams.  James
and Addams both valued experience and among the
“professional” pragmatists his style of writing is closest
to Addams’ in terms of its readability and use of tangible
examples.
Addams clearly influenced and was influenced by the Chicago
School. Although she was often frustrated with the abstract trajectory
of the university, Addams embraced reflective analysis.  Through her
Hull House experience Addams took many opportunities to theorize about
the interchange between theory and practice. For a time, American
philosophy, sociology, and social work existed in a symbiotic
harmony—each not clearly differentiated from the other but
benefiting from the interchange. Unfortunately, since the early
20th century when Mead, Dewey, and Addams were together in
Chicago, the intellectual genealogy of American philosophy, sociology
and social work has more drastically diverged to a point where
crossover is less likely and perhaps less welcome. Lost in the
compartmentalization of these disciplines is how Jane Addams played a
role in each.
In addition to the Romantics (Carlyle and Ruskin), the social
visionaries (Barnett and Tolstoy), and the pragmatists (Dewey and
Mead) Addams was influenced by the great collection of feminist minds
who came to work at the social settlement. Hull House has been
described in many different ways, reflecting the complexity and
multiplicity of its functions.  Perhaps an overlooked descriptor is as
a pragmatist feminist “think tank.” Although the
“Metaphysical Club” has taken on something of a mythical
status among some in American philosophical circles (Menand, 2001),
the intellectual, social, and political impact of the Hull House
residents dwarfs that of the Cambridge intellectuals. Hull House
residents dined, slept, did domestic chores, and engaged in social
activism together. They also discussed and debated ethics, political
theory, feminism, and culture while immersed in their tasks and
stimulated by the many speakers and visitors to Hull House. The
prolonged contact, shared gender oppression, and common mission made
for a unique intellectual collective that not only fostered action but
also theory. 
Ostensibly, Hull House was the first co-educational settlement. Addams
recognized the need for male residents so that men in the neighborhood
could better relate to Hull House endeavors. However, it was quite
clear to visitors and residents that Hull House was a woman’s
space. Hull House boasted some of the great minds and agents of change
of the era. Alice Hamilton (1869–1970), a physician who trained
in Germany and the U.S. and who is credited with founding the field of
industrial medicine, lived at Hull House for 22 years. She went on to
teach at Harvard where she became a nationally recognized social
reformer and peace activist. Julia Lathrop (1858–1932) was a
Vassar graduate who, in 1912, after residing at Hull House for 22
years, became the first woman to head a federal agency, the Children’s
Bureau, which, in terms of conduct, she modeled after
Hull House. Rachel Yarros (1869–1946), a twenty-year resident at
Hull House, was also a physician who taught at the University of
Illinois. The university created a position for Yarros in recognition
of her tremendous contribution to social hygiene and sex
education. Author and feminist theorist, Charlotte Perkins Gilman
(1860–1935), was a resident for a short period of time. Gilman
thought highly of Addams but had no stomach for settlement existence
amongst the oppressed. However, Gilman’s groundbreaking work on gender
and economics likely influenced Addams. Sophonisba Breckinridge
(1866–1948) graduated from Wellesley and went on to obtain both
a Ph.D. in political science and a J.D. from the University of
Chicago. Her greatest contribution was in the area of social work
education. Edith Abbott (1876–1957) and her sister Grace Abbott
(1878–1939) joined Hull-House about the time as Breckinridge
(1907). Edith Abbott would obtain a Ph.D. in Political Economy from
the University of Chicago while Grace Abbott earned a Ph.D. from Grand
Island College in Nebraska. Edith would have an academic career at the
University of Chicago prior to her appointment as Chief of the
Children’s Bureau after Julia Lathrop’s departure. Mary Kenney
(1864–1943) became an important labor organizer for Samuel
Gompers’ American Federation of Labor and influenced Addams’
sensitivity to the plight of organized labor, something that all
progressives did not share. These are only a few of the more
well-known residents but numerous feminists used their Hull House
experience as a springboard to careers in social reform or
professions of various sorts.
Although Hull House was replete with extraordinary minds, no one was
likely to be as intellectually challenging to Addams as Florence
Kelley (1859–1932). A Cornell graduate, Kelley translated
Friedrich Engels’ The Condition of the Working Class in
England and Karl Marx’ Free Trade into
English. She was an active member of the Socialist Labor Party until the
leadership, threatened by Kelley’s forceful style,
expelled her.  A single mother with three children, Kelley found a home at
Hull House where she opened an employment center and
began conducting research on sweatshops for the Illinois Bureau of
Labor Statistics. Kelley would later go on to become the general
secretary of the new Consumer’s League, an organization dedicated to
using consumer pressure to ensure that safe and high quality goods
were manufactured. Kelley was one of the most distinguished social
reformers of the early 20th Century.
At Hull House, Kelley altered the dynamics of the resident
community. She brought a sense of class-consciousness along with a
great strength of conviction. After Kelley’s arrival (and Mary Kenny’s
coming a year prior) Hull House became more deeply involved in
supporting the labor movement, which was heretofore dominated by
men. Kelley also learned from Addams, who she admired throughout her
life. Perhaps the legacy of the many accomplishments of the Hull-House
residents suffered because of the fame of their leader, but given the
opportunity, each expressed their admiration and gratitude to Addams
for making Hull House the hotbed of ideas and action that it
was. Addams was the most visible leader of a remarkable group
of educated activists whose mutual respect allowed intellectual growth
to flourish.
Finally a few other influences are worthy of mention. Although she was
not personally religious, Addams’ Christian roots left their
mark. Addams was quite well versed in the Christian bible and had
attended a number of religious courses during her time at Rockford
Seminary. Addams used religious language on occasion to help get her
message out to Christian constituencies. Addams was also well
acquainted with Greek philosophy and made references to Socrates,
Plato, and Aristotle in her work. Addams was attracted to the ability
of Greek philosophers to move between personal and social concerns
rather than compartmentalizing their philosophical analysis. Some have
suggested that Addams was influenced by August Comte (1798–1857)
and the positivists. Comte, who coined the term
“sociology,” believed sciences need their own logic drawn
from experience rather than the a priori universal
rationalism of Descartes. Addams would have been attracted to his
ideas about social progress and his development of a religion of
humanity. Finally, Addams also read a great deal of literature, which
influenced her ideas concerning culture and which sometimes seeps into
her analysis, as it does when she uses Shakespeare’s King
Lear to understand labor-management relations.  Athough she did not
believe that reading was a substitute for direct experience, she did
suggest more than once that reading great works of fiction was a means
of developing a sympathetic understanding.
Although Addams had a wide variety of influences, as we have seen, she
was not a derivative thinker as many commentators suggest. She drew
upon a number of great theorists to develop her ideas about social
morality but never dogmatically followed in anyone’s footsteps. All
the while, she influenced many others as she made her unique
contributions to American and feminist philosophy.
Feminist philosophers have attended to the impact of context on theory
more than mainstream philosophers. Although there are lively debates
within feminist philosophical circles regarding the nature of
objectivity, many including Dorothy Smith, Nancy Hartsock, Hilary
Rose, Alison Jaggar, and Sandra Harding have developed the notion that
knowledge is indeed situated. In particular, feminist standpoint
theorists valorize the perspectives and theories derived from
oppressed positions in society such as from women’s
experience. Harding describes a feminist standpoint as something to be
achieved rather than as a passive perspective. All women have lived
experience in a woman’s body and therefore have a woman’s perspective
but a feminist standpoint requires an effort at stepping back to gain
a holistic picture of power struggles. Through the understanding of
the perspectival aspect of knowledge claims, standpoint epistemology
can create libratory knowledge that can be leveraged to subvert
oppressive systems. One of the challenges of standpoint theory is how
to give voice to multiple positions without falling back on
hierarchies that favor certain standpoints over others.
Jane Addams demonstrates an appreciation for the spirit of standpoint
theory through her work and writing at Hull-House.  Despite the
privileged social position she was born into, her settlement avocation
immersed her in disempowered communities.  Addams poetically describes
her moral mandate to meet, know, and understand others: “We know
at last, that we can only discover truth by a rational and democratic
interest in life, and to give truth complete social expression is the
endeavor upon which we are entering. Thus the identification with the
common lot that is the essential idea of Democracy becomes the source
and expression of social ethics. It is though we thirsted at the great
wells of human experience, because we know that a daintier or less
potent draught would not carry us to the end of the journey, going
forward as we must in the heat and jostle of the crowd” (DSE
9). One might object that although these are admirable sentiments,
they are still spoken as an outsider. What constitutes an outsider?
Addams lived the better part of a half-century in the diverse
immigrant neighborhood of Hull House in Chicago. She didn’t go
home to the suburbs or return with her data to a university
office. She lived and worked amongst the crime, civic corruption,
prostitution, sweatshops, and other ills of the community. When they
first started Hull House, Addams and Starr were involved
outsiders—an oddity that neighbors looked upon
suspiciously. However, time, proximity, and an earnest desire to learn
and help won the trust and respect of the neighborhood. The outsiders
became insiders. When Addams wrote or spoke about single women
laborers, child laborers, prostitutes, or first and second generation
immigrants, she employed first-hand knowledge gained from her own
social interactions. Addams leveraged her Hull House experiences to
give voice to standpoints marginalized in society. Simultaneously, she
worked to give the oppressed their own voice through college extension
courses, English language courses, and social clubs that fostered
political and social debate. Addams was self-conscious about speaking
for others: “I never addressed a Chicago audience on the subject
of the Settlement and its vicinity without inviting a neighbor to go
with me, that I might curb my hasty generalization by the
consciousness that I had an auditor who knew the conditions more
intimately than I could hope to do” (TYH 80). Addams did not try
to arrive at universal moral truths but recognized that the standpoint
of Hull House neighbors mattered. 
In an 1896 article in The American Journal of Sociology,
“A Belated Industry,” Addams addresses the plight of women
in domestic labor. These were the most powerless of laborers:
predominantly women, many of them immigrants with limited English
language skills and in a job that afforded little legal protection or
organizing possibilities. Addams begins the article with a footnote
claiming that her knowledge of domestic laborers comes from her
experience with the Woman’s Labor Bureau, one of the many Hull House
projects. Addams goes on to address the powerlessness of domestic work
particularly as it entails isolation and a highly inequitable power
relationship: “The household employé[sic] has no regular
opportunity for meeting other workers of her trade, and of attaining
with them the dignity of corporate body” (ABI 538). Addams
identifies the gendered dimension of this oppressive work: “men
would … resent the situation and consider it quite impossible
if it implied the giving up of their family and social ties, and
living under the roof of the household requiring their services”
(ABI 540). Addams extrapolates her experience of these workers to
imaginatively inhabit a standpoint and give them voice. She explicitly
claims as much, “An attempt is made to present this industry
[domestic labor] from the point of view of those women who are working
in households for wages” (ABI 536). Addams repeatedly gave
recognition to the experiences of oppressed peoples that she came to
know in an effort to have their concerns acknowledged in the social
democracy she was trying to foster.
Addams believed recognizing alternative standpoints was
important in promoting social progress through sympathetic
understanding. Accordingly, if a voice is given to individuals
inhabiting marginalized positions in society, it fosters the
possibility of better understanding between people as well as actions
that can lead to improving their lot. Addams engaged in the tricky
balance of honoring standpoints while simultaneously seeking
connections and continuities to build upon. This is exemplified in
Addams’ books on young people, Youth and
the City Streets, and elderly women, The Long Road of Woman’s
Memory. The latter work is a treatise on memory, which is based
on the memories of first generation immigrant women. Rather than
grounding her theory upon the experiences of famous women theorists or
writers—and Addams knew most of the prominent women of her
day—Addams based her analysis on the women who were her
neighbors at Hull House. Addams not only grounded her philosophical
work in experience, but in the experiences of those on the margins of
society. Addams puts experience before theory. She did not begin by
positing a theory about these women. Instead, she retold a number of
stories she had heard from them and then drew out conclusions about
the function of memory. For Addams, theory follows experience. Addams
was in the minority among her peers in philosophy or feminism to
believe that working class immigrant women not only should be given a
voice but also had something important to contribute to the community
of ideas.
An example of Addams’ application of feminist standpoint theory
(or at least a forerunner of it) can be seen in the “Devil
Baby” which recounts what transpired after three Italian women
came to Hull House to see a possessed infant. One can form a whimsical
image from Addams’ account, “No amount of
denial convinced them that he was not there, for they knew exactly
what he was like with his cloven hoofs, his pointed ears and
diminutive tail; the Devil Baby had, moreover, been able to speak as
soon as he was born and was shockingly profane” (LRW 7–8). This
would be an amusing anecdote if it stopped there, but Addams described
a six-week period of time when Hull House was inundated with stories
about the alleged Devil Baby. Visitors even offered Hull House
residents money to see the creature despite adamant responses that
there was no such baby.  Multiple versions of how the Devil Baby came
to be arose in the neighborhood and eventually the hysteria made the
newspapers. One version of the story claimed that the Devil Baby was
the offspring of an atheist and a devoted Italian girl. When the
husband tore a holy picture from the wall claiming that he would
rather have a devil in the house, his wish was granted in the form of
his coming child (LRW 8). Although a fascinating social phenomenon,
the Devil Baby story is of little obvious philosophical importance and
it would be easy to dismiss those who perpetuated the story as
simpletons caught up in hysteria. Not for Jane Addams. She applied a
familiar approach by refusing to pass judgment, listening carefully,
and developing a sympathetic understanding. Addams actively worked to
grasp their subject position.
Although Addams dismissed the “gawkers” who came to see the
Devil Baby as a sensationalist seeking mob, she wanted to understand
the older women who had perpetuated the myth: “Whenever I heard
the high eager voices of old women, I was irresistibly interested and
left anything I might be doing in order to listen to them” (LRW
9). What she found were women who were serious and highly animated
about the Devil Baby. They used the appearance of the Devil Baby and
the excitement it created as an opportunity to discuss important and
troubling matters of their life. Addams, who never sought simple
answers to complex issues, found a convergence of class, race, and
gender dynamics fueling the Devil Baby phenomenon.  These immigrant
women were in very unfamiliar surroundings and had to adjust to
foreign ideas and practices. They had been alienated by their children
who adapted to the new country more easily, keeping the old ways at
arm’s length. Many of these women also had been victims of domestic
abuse long before such acts had a distinct label. One woman tells
Addams, “My face has this queer twist for now nearly sixty
years; I was ten when it got that way, the night after I saw my father
do my mother to death with his knife” (LRW 11). For these
forgotten and beaten women the Devil Baby represented a connection to
a past that made more sense to them: one that had clear moral
imperatives. Another woman tells Addams, “You might say it’s a
disgrace to have your son beat you up for the sake of a bit of money
you’ve earned by scrubbing—your own man is
different—but I haven’t the heart to blame the boy for
doing what he’s seen all his life, his father forever went wild when
the drink was in him and struck me to the very day of his death. The
ugliness was born in the boy as the marks of the Devil was born in the
poor child up-stairs” (LRW 11). Addams’ recounting of tale after
tale of violence provides a depressing view of immigrant women’s lives
at the turn of the century. For women who had lived such a hard life,
the Devil Baby provided a momentary opportunity for
resistance. Husbands and children would listen to them and temporarily
forsake beating them for fear of divine retribution as evinced by the
Devil Baby. Addams describes memory as serving to “make life
palatable and at rare moments even beautiful” (LRW 28). Although
this is a specific explanatory analysis, it demonstrates how Addams sought
connections among the personal stories: “When these
reminiscences, based upon the diverse experiences of my people unknown
to each other, point to one inevitable conclusion, they accumulate
into a social protest …” (LRW 29). Addams proceeds to view
the Devil Baby in light of the women’s movement and the fight against
oppression. Given the position of the old women, the Devil Baby was
the vehicle of resistance and an opportunity for Addams to interject
feminist analysis.
If “radical” is defined as challenging existing structures
of power, Jane Addams was the least elitist and the most radical of
the American philosophers of her era. Addams consistently took and
eloquently supported inclusive positions that sought the benefit of
society. While pragmatists typically advocated for social progress,
Addams radicalized the extent of that social progress. Rather than
defining progress by the achievements of the best and the brightest,
Addams advocates the betterment of all in what she calls
“lateral progress.” For Addams, lateral progress meant
that social advancement could not be declared through the
breakthroughs or peak performances of a few, but could only
authentically be found in social gains held in common.  Addams employs
metaphor to explain the concept:
  The man who insists upon consent, who moves with the people, is
bound to consult the feasible right as well as the absolute right. He
is often obliged to attain only Mr. Lincoln’s “best
possible,” and often have the sickening sense of compromising
with his best convictions. He has to move along with those whom he
rules toward a goal that neither he nor they see very clearly till
they come to it. He has to discover what people really want, and then
“provide the channels in which the growing moral force of their
lives shall flow.” What he does attain, however, is not the
result of his individual striving, as a solitary mountain climber
beyond the sight of the valley multitude, but it is underpinned and
upheld by the sentiments and aspirations of many others. Progress has
been slower perpendicularly, but incomparably greater because
lateral.  
He has not taught his contemporaries to climb mountains, but he has
persuaded the villagers to move up a few feet higher (AML 175).
Whether one refers to them as “robber barons” or
“captains of industry,” the rise of commerce in the United
States was defined by the winners of the game: those who amassed
wealth. The wealthy enjoyed tremendous progress in healthcare,
education, and material well-being. Addams was not satisfied with
narrow social development and redefined progress according to the
common person’s experience. This redefinition continues to elude us
today as class disparity in the United States continues to
grow. Ironically, Addams is often chastised for expounding middle
class values, which was her point of reference as she started Hull
House, but Addams’ experiences pushed her to more fully understand and
appreciate the immigrant poor in the neighborhood.
Addams applied the idea of lateral progress to numerous issues. When
she discusses the role of labor unions, she argues that in their
attempt to improve conditions for all workers, unions are fulfilling a
vital function that society has abrogated. Addams, who had a track
record of supporting labor, makes it clear that she does not view
collective bargaining as an end in itself. Addams views unions as
trailblazers who obtain working conditions that eventually benefit
everyone in society: “trade unions are trying to do for
themselves what the government should secure for all its citizens;
has, in fact, secured in many cases” (FSS 456). Addams is not
interested in improving the lot of one group of workers over
another. “Any sense of division and suspicion is fatal in a
democratic form of government, for although each side may seem to
secure most for itself, when consulting only its own interests, the
final test must be the good of the community as a whole” (FSS
461). For Addams, unions are important in as much as they improve
working conditions, raise wages, reduce hours and eliminate child
labor for all Americans—lateral progress.
Although the first chapter of Addams’ Democracy and Social
Ethics is ostensibly a critique of charity workers and their
preconceived notions of the needs of the destitute, it also reveals
Addams’ disposition toward the poor and the oppressed. She decries the
historical position of blaming the victim: “Formerly, when it
was believed that poverty was synonymous with vice and laziness, and
that the prosperous man was the righteous man, charity was
administered harshly with a good conscience; for the charitable agent
really blamed the individual for his poverty, and the very fact of his
own superior prosperity gave him a certain consciousness of superior
morality” (DSE 11–12). Such a judgment serves to separate the
wealthy from the poor.  Accordingly, the rich can make progress
intellectually, materially, technologically, etc., while the poor are
thought to be left behind largely due to their own actions. Addams
argues that the poor are often victims of circumstance and that it is
the responsibility of society to first understand those who are
marginalized and then develop means for their participation in lateral
progress.
Charity, although a good, is not lateral progress. A temporary
transfer in wealth, while noble, does not constitute real progress in
alleviating economic disparity. Addams never viewed herself as a
charity worker nor did she characterize the work of Hull House as
charity: “I am always sorry to have Hull House regarded as
philanthropy” (ONS 45). What Addams sought was a lateral
progress that could be brought about by the collective will and
manifested through social institutions. She believes there would be no
need for settlements if “society had been reconstructed to the
point of offering equal opportunity for all” (ONS 27). Addams is
not advocating a laissez-faire capitalism version of equal
opportunity that is abstract and rights based. Free market economics
influences modern understandings of democracy as merely assuring the
adequate opportunity to participate. Addams’ approach to equal
opportunity is set in a context of active democracy where citizens and
social organizations look out for one another because they all have a
stake in lateral progress or what today might be termed democratic
socialism.
Addams’ radical pragmatism ultimately had a feminist dimension as she
continually gave voice to women’s experience, addressed women’s
issues, and saw a vibrant social democracy as only possible if there
was full participation by both men and women.  When it came to issues
such as women’s suffrage, Addams manifests a feminist
pragmatism. “If women had no votes with which to select the men
upon whom her social reform had become dependent some cherished
project might be so modified by uninformed legislatures during the
process of legal enactment, that the law, as finally passed, injured
the very people it was meant to protect. Women had discovered that the
unrepresented are always liable to be given what they do not want by
legislators who merely wish to placate them” (STY 89–90). Note
that Addams does not argue the application of abstract human rights
but she instead makes a functional claim about the role of voting in
proper democratic representation. It is not that Addams opposes rights
but she will continually opt for pragmatist arguments on feminist
issues. Her male pragmatist colleagues were sympathetic to feminist
positions but did not make the claims as forcefully or consistently as
Addams (Seigfried, 1996).
Addams’ notion of lateral progress exemplifies again how she has
been misrepresented as merely a reformer. Radical discourse, a la Marx,
has been associated with the call for extreme changes in social
institutions and systems. Although such changes may be arguably
desirable, they entail upheaval that will disrupt social relationships
at great potential personal cost. Addams sought substantial social progress
through mutual agreement and tapping into communal intelligence.  Her
radical vision refused to give up on the individuals in society and
their caring relationships. Mixing theoretical notions of social
change with concrete experiences of community organizing, Addams was a
caring radical.  Addams was indeed interested in ameliorating social
problems, but that does not preclude a broadly construed radical edge
to her social philosophy.
An analysis of Addams’ moral philosophy suggests at least three
claims about her relationship to feminist care ethics avant la lettre. One,
Addams’ approach to the important social issues of her day
reflected the relationality and contextualization that are important
to what is called care ethics today.  Two, although Addams employed
caring in response to the needs of others, she contributes an active,
even assertive, dimension to care ethics not commonly found in
feminist theory. Third, Addams advocates what might be called
“socializing care”: systemically instantiating the habits
and practices of care in social institutions.
Although care is a simple and widely invoked word, many feminist
theorists have invested it with a particular meaning as it applies to
ethics.  The original motivation for developing care ethics was an
acknowledgement that traditional forms of morality, in particular
principle-based and consequence-based ethics, did not adequately
address the richness of the human condition. These approaches are said
to bracket-out emotions, relationships, temporal considerations,
reciprocity, and creativity to focus on immediate adjudication of
moral conflicts. Accordingly, the use of rules or consequences can
become a reductionist and formulaic response resulting in shortsighted
responses to complex and systemic issues. For care ethicists, while
principles are not totally ignored, they are tempered by a concern for
interpersonal connection. Principles and consequences have an
important place in moral deliberation but care theorists seek a more
robust and complex sense of morality that cannot ignore the context
and people involved. For example, the claim that people who
spray-paint graffiti on a building ought to be punished because they
have damaged someone else’s property (rule/principle violation) will
likely receive widespread assent. Care ethicists do not necessarily
deny such an assertion but they want to know more. The person doing
the spray-painting is a human being whose motivations and
circumstances may reveal other variables not sufficiently addressed by
the mere recognition of rule violations. There may be systemic issues
involving social opportunities or discrimination or lack of voice that
have contributed to this behavior. Care ethicists shift the moral
focus from abstract individuals and their actions to concrete,
situated people with feelings, friends, and dreams—persons who
can be cared about. Care ethics demands effort, experience, knowledge,
imagination and empathy to effectively understand the totality of the
moral context. The result is not exoneration of personal
responsibility but a richer understanding of the human condition where
we are all actors and acted upon.
Addams consistently moves beyond formulaic moral accounts of
principles or consequences to apply a kind of care ethics to her experiences in
the Hull House neighborhood. Proximity is once again crucial as she
has direct experience of individuals which better provides the
resources for a caring response. However, as a philosopher, Addams
extrapolates her experiences to theorize about others of similar
circumstances. For example, in The Spirit of Youth and the City
Streets Addams addresses juvenile delinquency. She recounts
charges against young men who were brought before the Juvenile Court
in Chicago (which Hull House had helped establish). These charges were
categorized by type such as stealing, which included the pilfering of
pigeons, blankets, and a bicycle. Another category was disorderly
conduct which included picking up coal from railroad tracks, throwing
stones at railroad employees, and breaking down a fence. There was
also vagrancy, which included loafing, sleeping on the streets all
night, and wandering (SYC 56–57). Addams does not deny the seriousness
of some of these infractions but she does not rush to judgment,
instead choosing to investigate the context further.  She talks to the
young men and asks them about their motivations.  She identifies a
listlessness, a desire for adventure not quieted by what the city has
to offer: “their very demand for excitement is a protest against
the dullness of life, to which we ourselves instinctively
respond” (SYC 71). Addams views the city as built around the
possibility of factory production but ignoring the needs of future
workers. She finds in the “juvenile delinquents” many
young people who simply seek adventure and excitement because their
lives have little of it. Had Addams merely abstracted youth as a
category of individuals who seem to be prone to break the law, she
could have easily found principles to place a negative judgment on
them. However, Addams saw them as humans, many of whom she witnessed
grow up in the neighborhood and she cared for them beyond the
alienating label of “troubled youth.”
More than merely prefiguring care ethics, Addams infuses a high standard of
social responsibility into this moral approach. Addams advocates a
duty of social awareness and engagement thus creating the potential
for care. Many care ethicists are wary of the notion of duty, as it
has been traditionally formulated. Moral duties have historically
entailed claims regarding actions that a person is required to offer
on behalf of another. Because the “other” is an abstract
other and the requirements are universalized (I must act in such a way
in all cases) duties toward others have tended toward moral minimums
of obligation. For example, if someone’s life is in peril and minimal
effort is required to prevent it, such as an infant drowning in 3
inches of bath water, a moral obligation to act is present. Although
such cases get widespread agreement, it becomes more difficult to
ascertain what obligation one has to distant others with unclear
expectations of success. For example, many Americans have disposable
income that could save the life of someone in a poverty stricken
country on a distant continent; do they have a moral obligation to
give them money and to what extent?  Addams constructs the duty to
care differently. Hers is an epistemological demand. Addams claims
that good citizens actively pursue knowledge of others—not just
facts but a deeper understanding—for the possibility of caring
and acting on their behalf: “if we grow contemptuous of our
fellows, and consciously limit our intercourse to certain kinds of
people whom we have previously decided to respect, we not only
tremendously circumscribe our range of life, but limit our scope of
ethics” (DSE 8). For Addams, care ethics must be actively
pursued not passively fostered. Addams’ language is more
assertive than much current care ethics discourse. 
Finally, Addams extends care ethics to the public realm. She is not
content to compartmentalize personal and social morality.  Caring is
what she desires for democracy and its various institutions. Addams
views the residents of social settlements, for example, as having
“an opportunity of seeing institutions from the recipient’s
standpoint” because they are not distant institutions but
neighbors. She finds this perspective significant and believes that it
should ultimately “find expression in institutional
management” (OVS 39). Furthermore, she differentiates the
epistemological project of the settlement from the university in
language that acknowledges a caring element: “The settlement
stands for application as opposed to research; for emotion as opposed
to abstraction, for universal interest as opposed to
specialization” (FSS 189). While social settlements epitomize a
democratic endeavor for Addams, she applies the same caring values to
other institutions. The creation of the juvenile courts in Chicago
represented an example of caring because it mandated contextualized
regard for the context of young people. The creation of adult
education that addressed tangible and contemporary issues also
demonstrated a caring regard for the needs of Hull-House
neighbors. Perhaps most of all, the comportment of the Hull-House
residents manifested care ethics in their willingness to listen, learn
and respond. Addams viewed socializing care as participating in a rich
ideal of democracy.