 Before proceeding
to a consideration of Japanese Pure Land Buddhist thought, it may be
useful to note two intertwined difficulties that it presents for modern
Western readers in particular: an extensive scriptural and commentarial
tradition, and apparent resemblances to familiar forms of Christian
thought.
 The Pure Land
teachings are often regarded as popularized, devotional extensions of a
more philosophically demanding contemplative tradition based on a core
doctrine of emptiness or voidness. In fact, the concepts of multitudes
of celestial buddhas and their buddha-fields throughout the cosmos are
already in evidence in the earliest strata of extant texts produced by
the Mahayana movement, and sutras expounding distant buddha-fields,
such as that of Akṣobhya Buddha in the east, are among the first
to be translated into Chinese already in the second century CE, with
sutras teaching Amida Buddha soon to follow. Thus, sutras teaching
methods of achieving liberation from samsaric existence through
attaining birth in buddha-fields in other regions of the
cosmos—particularly Amida Buddha’s Pure Land—were
among the earliest Buddhist scriptures transmitted to China. Further,
the teaching of birth into Amida’s buddha-field became the focus
of a continuous commentarial tradition that began among such major
Indian Mahayana thinkers as Nāgārjuna (c. 150–250) and
Vasubandhu (c. 320–400) in India, was transmitted to China as early as
the third century CE, and is maintained today in Japan. Thus, it may be
said that Pure Land concepts and ideas emerged directly out of
elemental strains of Mahayana Buddhist thought at an early stage and
underwent continual development in East Asia.
 The Pure Land path
based on Amida is expounded in the Larger and Smaller
Sutras of the Adornments of [the Buddha-field Named]
Bliss (Sukhāvatīvyūha-sūtra),
which trace their origins back to northwestern India in about the first
century CE, the period of the redaction of the
Prajñāpāramitā in 8000 Lines,
Garland, Lotus, Vimalakīrti, and other
major Mahayana sutras. These two sutras, along with the later Sutra
of Contemplation on the Buddha of Immeasurable Life (Jp.
Kanmuryōjukyō), form the foundation for the East
Asian Pure Land tradition.
 The Larger Sutra
is the only extant sutra that relates the narrative of how the
bodhisattva Dharma-Storehouse (Dharmākara) established and
fulfilled vows to become Amida (“immeasurable [light and
life]”), the buddha of compassion who leads all beings to
enlightenment by enabling them to be born into his buddha-field. It was
first translated into Chinese in the third century and was reputedly
retranslated eleven more times over the following seven hundred years,
attesting to its enduring importance in Chinese Buddhist tradition. The
Pure Land tradition developed for over a thousand years in China,
accumulating an extensive body of scriptural and commentarial writings,
before undergoing the radical reinterpretation in Japan that Suzuki
refers to.
 Thus, the Pure Land
Buddhist heritage in Japan stands today upon the selective use of a
continuous textual tradition stretching back nearly two millennia.
Terms from the Chinese of the sutras in their various renditions and
evolving commentaries on the Pure Land path became the standard medium
of Pure Land Buddhist discourse in Japan, so that a full grasp of the
Japanese tradition requires familiarity with these terms, their
relationship to the broader Buddhist tradition, and the historical
changes in their understandings and emphases in the course of their
long development in various cultural spheres and sectarian settings.
Japanese Buddhists have been, throughout their history, fully aware of
their geographical position at the easternmost reach of the spread of
Buddhism in Asia and of their indebtedness to the transmission of
Buddhist tradition across the various ethnic locales and political
boundaries of the Asian continent.
 A further
difficulty in grasping Japanese Pure Land thought involves the pitfalls
of a comparative approach in relation to Western religious traditions.
When, for his own polemical purposes, Karl Barth (1886–1968) surveyed
the religious traditions of the world in search of doctrinal parallels
to Christianity, he concluded that it was the Japanese Pure Land
tradition that provided
 “the most exact, comprehensive, and plausible ‘pagan’ parallel to
 Christianity” (Barth 1961, 1,2: 342).
He expresses some shock at the depth
and specificity of resemblance, commenting that the Pure Land thought
of Hōnen (1133–1212) and Shinran (1173–1263) in particular
parallels not so much Roman or Greek Catholicism but rather of
all things the Christianity of the Reformation, and therefore
confronts Christianity with the question of its truth precisely in its
 form as a consistent religion of grace. (Barth 1961, 1,2: 342; for a discussion on
Barth’s comparative comments, see Hirota 2000a, especially pp. 35–38)
Barth insightfully discusses specific doctrinal
analogues in a long note in Church Dogmatics, and these
parallels have indeed tended to form the foundations for the
understanding of Japanese Pure Land Buddhism in much of Western
scholarly literature. Unfortunately, to the extent that Pure Land
Buddhism has seemed to resemble Protestant Christianity, it has also
been assumed to be divorced from “genuine” or
“original” Mahayana Buddhist thought and practices and
devoid of any intellectual interest. Any comparative considerations of
Japanese Pure Land Buddhist thought, therefore, require caution, even
in the face of seemingly evident resemblance.
 As mentioned
before, the Pure Land Buddhist teachings have taken on a highly
distinctive shape in Japan, generating new determinations of the central canonical texts and
multiple strands of scholastic and commentarial tradition. It is in
relation to these latter developments that we can best speak of a
specifically “Japanese Pure Land Buddhist philosophy,” for
the creative construals of a practicable Buddhist path to transformed
awareness involved, in the forces for their evolution and in the
articulation of their implications, deliberation on such matters as the
nature of human existence, self and other, language, reality, and
truth. Further, the disparate streams of Japanese Pure Land thought
stand as distinctive understandings, often employing their own
characteristic terminology, of an already highly evolved Buddhist
tradition, and a grasp of them often requires a recognition of the
tensions between received tradition and reinterpretation that they
manifest.
 In order to treat Pure Land Buddhist tradition while keeping within
the parameters of “Japan” and “philosophy,”
this entry will divide the discussion into three sections. In the
first, there is a brief sketch of several broad trajectories of
thought that stem from central Mahayana concerns and that shape the
Pure Land outlook, coming to hold particular significance in the
Japanese Pure Land tradition. The second section identifies the
central issues involved in Hōnen’s seminal reformulation of the
Pure Land path. The third section will then treat several fundamental
philosophical issues in Japanese Pure Land thought, focusing upon Pure
Land thought as one distinctive stream of a path to religious
awakening within the Mahayana traditions of praxis, and further upon
the major developments that occurred specifically in Japan. The point
will not be to suggest that medieval Japanese thinkers speak directly
to Western philosophical issues, but rather to investigate how their
thinking might be understood to take up topics commonly considered
philosophical in Western intellectual tradition and to illuminate
perspectives relevant to current intellectual concerns.
 Two fundamental
elements of early Mahayana practice contributed significantly to the
development of the Pure Land path. First, the animating force that
initially gave rise to the Mahayana movement as a whole—the
critical reflection on obdurate self-attachment that attended even
religious endeavor—was pursued to a culmination in Pure Land
aspiration. Second, the Mahayana movement’s formulation of
genuine practice as the career of the bodhisattva-practitioner provided
the principal framework and symbols for the articulation of Pure Land
practice. In particular, the stage in the bodhisattva’s progress
of nonretrogression from perfect enlightenment, which was regarded as
holding decisive significance, served to shape the Pure Land path by
becoming its goal.
 Mahayana tradition
appears to have arisen when, around the beginning of the common era,
groups of Buddhists emerged who, reflecting on their own experience in
practice, assumed a critical stance toward the immediately preceding
tradition. They viewed the existing institutions as having declined,
during five centuries of transmission since the time of the Buddha,
into monastic formalism and scholasticism, sectarian disputation, and
an erroneous notion of the nature of the wisdom that was the aim of
Buddhist practice. They declared that the established view of training,
directed to merely personal emancipation from painful existence, was
narrow and finally inadequate, and that in their aspiration to attain
the actual realization Śākyamuni had transmitted, they had
sought and discovered a method by which genuine attainment was
possible. They called this new path the “great vehicle”
(Mahayana), because it holds as its goal the attainment of authentic
enlightenment by all beings, and asserted that it was superior to the
existing institutions, which they labeled the “lesser
vehicle” (Hinayana).
 According to
Mahayanists, the Hinayana sages withdrew from ordinary life in society
and performed practices and disciplines, seeking their own extinction
of passions and emancipation from samsaric existence by realizing the
nonsubstantiality of their own person—the fact that the ego-self
is no more than a delusional construct. Mahayana Buddhists asserted
that such praxis did not free practitioners from a final residue of
self-attachment manifested in the desertion of the beings of samsara in
favor of personal liberation and in an attachment to the goal of
nirvana itself. Instead, the Mahayanists taught the thorough
relinquishment of all attachments through the realization or
“seeing” of the nonsubstantiality or emptiness that
pervades not only the self, but all things and all persons. Such seeing
is established by eradicating the discriminative thinking arising from
the perspective of the reified, delusional self. One thus transcends
even the dichotomies of self and other, blind passions and
enlightenment, and samsara and nirvana, and realizes nondiscriminative
wisdom that “sees suchness” or things just as they are.
Here, practice to attain enlightenment oneself and to liberate all
beings is understood to be one.
 The rigorous
scrutiny of even religious praxis for vestiges of self-attachment and
discriminative thinking, which informed the origins of the Mahayana
movement, also provided impetus for its development as the Pure Land
path.
The path of realization based on the Mahayana conception of genuine
wisdom was elaborated as the career of the bodhisattva. As described in
Mahayana sutras, it begins with the profound awakening of the mind
aspiring for enlightenment (bodhicitta), the determination to
become a buddha whatever hardships one may encounter over the course of
many lifetimes of endeavor. This unshakable resolution is declared in
the presence of a buddha in formal vows, and typically, the bodhisattva
receives from the buddha a prophesy foretelling eventual fulfillment of
those vows. A standard element of such individual vows is the
establishment, through their vast accumulation of merit through praxis,
of a buddha land or field of influence (buddhakṣetra),
which is understood as giving concrete manifestation both to the
splendor of their attainment and to their activity to bring beings to
enlightenment.
The bodhisattva then embarks upon the practices and disciplines, to
be continued through countless lifetimes, that will finally result in
fulfillment. It is said that vast aeons—“three great
innumerable kalpas”—are required for the completion of a
bodhisattva’s practices (the inconceivable stretches of time may
be understood as expressing the depths of a being’s evil karma to
be eradicated and the preciousness of enlightenment). The process of
practice has been formulated in a scheme of ten stages, in which the
most crucial is the stage of nonretrogression, the first (or in some
formats, the seventh). While prior to reaching this stage, they will
fall back into samsaric existence if they discontinue their practice,
once they have attained nonretrogression through stilling their
discriminative thought and seeing suchness, they will never regress but
steadily advance in their practice to supreme awakening.
Although Pure Land Buddhism is sometimes understood to teach a
paradisial afterlife, in fact it developed as a method for achieving
nonretrogression, one that provided an alternative to the arduous
endeavor through numerous lifetimes required for reaching this stage in
the earlier formulations of the bodhisattva path. As practitioners
found themselves without enlightened guidance in a world increasingly
distant from the benign influence of a buddha’s presence, the
obstacles to successful practice loomed ever larger and practitioners
came to seek a practicable way to advance. The possibility of entrance
into an environment that would support one’s efforts in
bodhisattva practices emerged, and on the basis of the Pure Land
sutras, the concepts of the bodhisattva path were recast to render a
new understanding of the nature of practice.
There are several aspects of the bodhisattva’s career of
particular note when approaching Pure Land Buddhist thought. First, an
essential element of the bodhisattva path is the transference to other
beings of the merit that accrues from performance of praxis. All
Buddhists have accepted that, by the principle of karmic causation,
good acts hold the power to counteract the effects of evil deeds and
lead to better conditions in the next birth. In the earlier Buddhism,
it was generally assumed that only one’s own thoughts and acts
could exert their influence on one’s future conditions, although
the evidence of inscriptions suggests that sharing merit with
one’s parents or teacher was also recognized. In the Mahayana
tradition, however, bodhisattvas perform good acts and practices for
long aeons and thus accumulate vast stores of merit, but their practice
is invariably undertaken with the liberation of all beings foremost in
their minds. Thus, their merit is always freely and selflessly given to
beings in samsaric existence. This concept of giving or transferring
merit (Jp. ekō) is a direct expression of the nature of
bodhisattvas, for they undertake their practice in nondichotomous
wisdom.
 Even in the early
Buddhist tradition, Sakyamuni’s attainment of awakening was not
regarded as an utterly unique event or even the first occurrence of
buddhahood. Nevertheless, the appearance of a buddha, who bears the
epochal role of bringing liberation to beings through teaching, was
regarded as a momentous event in the history of the world. The early
tradition had taught instead the ideal of the arhat, who would enter
into nirvana upon death, having completely eradicated blind passions
and attained emancipation from further rebirth within the world of
samsaric existence.
The Mahayana tradition, however, recognized the attainment of
buddhahood itself—not merely deliverance from afflicting passions
and samsaric existence—as the genuine goal of religious practice
and proclaimed it, along with the engagement with beings in samsara
that it implied, as the supreme fulfillment for all sentient beings
since the beginningless past. It is natural, therefore, that Mahayana
Buddhists recognize the present existence of vast numbers of celestial
buddhas and bodhisattvas who had already reached attainment.
Further, it was assumed in Indian Buddhism that two buddhas could
not appear in a single epoch of a world system, any more than two
“universal monarchs” (cakravartin) could rule
simultaneously. Thus, the existence of innumerable buddhas implied that
there are myriads of purified buddha-fields over which they preside,
for it may be expected that, through aeons of history in numberless
worlds, countless beings will have attained supreme awakening by
following the bodhisattva path, and these beings all work for the
liberation of others in their own spheres of realization. Mahayana
writings often refer to the concept of the “great
chiliocosm,” which is made up of one billion universes. In the
Mahayana cosmology, there are great chiliocosms countless as the sands
of the Ganges throughout the ten quarters, and most are buddha-fields,
or parts of buddha-fields, in which a buddha teaches dharma for the
benefit of its inhabitants. Our own universe—called the Sahā
world, or “world in which pain must be endured”—is
the buddha-field of Sakyamuni, the sphere in which he appeared in order
to save the beings within it. Thus, the entire cosmos is a panoply of
countless buddha-fields in which the drama of the salvation of all
beings is carried out, with buddhas and bodhisattvas radiating the
light of wisdom-compassion for all living things.
A third aspect of notable relevance to the Pure Land tradition is
the transcendence of the dichotomy of monastic and lay in Mahayana
thought. Monastic life had developed as the practical norm for Buddhist
life in the early tradition, for the end was personal emancipation from
samsaric existence. Practice was construed as observance of the
monastic code and meditative practices, and withdrawal from ordinary
lay life was itself seen as a crucial step in breaking the bonds of
samsaric existence. Mahayanists, however, sought to realize a fully
nondichotomous wisdom; hence, while in actual practice they continued
to recognize the efficacy of monastic life as a means to the goal,
renunciation of lay life was not in itself an intrinsic or requisite
aspect of emancipation. They therefore reformulated the central
elements of the path—traditionally given as the “three
learnings” of precepts, meditation, and wisdom—as the six
paramitas—giving, moral action, patience, effort, meditation, and
wisdom. In this enumeration of virtues, we find selfless giving
understood not simply as alms-giving or “charity,” but as
the total, compassionate activity of bodhisattvas for whom meritorious
action leading to enlightenment and the giving of their own merit to
others are interfused. Other paramitas also emphasize the resolution to
fulfill the bodhisattva vows for the enlightenment of all beings.
Moreover, precepts or morality was not necessarily construed as the
rigid monastic rule governing sequestered life apart from normal
society, but as a more general code of proper action observable in
varying degrees in lay life also. Thus, true practice and attainment
transcends the dualism of monk and lay, and the arena of the
bodhisattva’s practice is precisely the realm of samsara in which
unenlightened beings wander. This insight rooted in Mahayana thought
from its beginnings underlies the evolution of Pure Land Buddhism in
Japan in particular, which during the period of its most dynamic
development evinces precisely the shift of the center of praxis from
assumptions of monastic efficacy to an emphasis on everyday life as the
domain of in which genuine practice is manifested.
 Since our
fundamental concern is with characteristically Japanese developments of
Pure Land thought, I will focus in particular on the stream of
Hōnen. It was Hōnen who achieved perhaps the radical
doctrinal innovation of his seminal period in Japanese Buddhist history
by establishing the practice of vocal nembutsu as an independent,
self-sufficient path of Buddhist praxis. Despite widespread esteem for
his priestly and scholarly attainments and the purity of his religious
aspirations, Hōnen himself, in his penetrating self-reflection,
expressed a profound awareness of his incapacity to fulfill any
Buddhist practice and thereby advance himself toward enlightenment. He
therefore searched throughout Buddhist tradition for an accessible
path, and at length found the exposition of the nembutsu.
 Nembutsu practices
in early Buddhist tradition centered on mindfulness exercises conducted
in veneration of Sakyamuni Buddha, and included elements of bodily
worship and the reverent repetition of the name of the Buddha. Later,
it developed into a core practice of monastics involving ritual
prostrations with the body, contemplation on the features of
enlightened beings and vocal recitation of their names, conducted with
long lists of Buddhas and bodhisattvas. Such nembutsu practice was and
remains a basic practice in the Tendai monastery of Enryaku-ji on Mount
Hiei, where Hōnen originally trained and lived. In addition, the
Chinese Tientai practice of “constant walking samadhi”
(jōgyō zammai), in which a monk circumambulates a
large statue of Amida, intoning the nembutsu and meditating on Amida
Buddha and features of the Pure Land continuously for ninety days, had
been transmitted to Mount Hiei during the Heian period, and the group
practice of “constant nembutsu” (fudan nembutsu)
in which the nembutsu was chanted continuously for a set number of
days—three or seven—interspersed with the chanting of sutra
passages and hymns at the “six hours” of the day, was
frequently conducted. Although deeply familiar with such comprehensive
modes of practice embracing physical, mental, and verbal discipline,
and although widely revered for his own contemplative and scholarly
attainments, Hōnen taught that simply uttering the Name of Amida
Buddha, “Namu-amida-butsu,” entrusting oneself to his vow
to save all beings, results in birth into Amida’s buddha-field of
enlightened activity. No intellectual command of Buddhist teachings,
accumulation of merit, moral rectitude, or any act of practice other
than the vocal nembutsu is necessary.
 The Pure Land
Buddhist path based on the working of Amida’s Vow is therefore an
effective means toward emancipation from birth-and-death and attainment
of Buddhahood—for Hōnen, the only viable way for people at
present—and it can be practiced independently of any other
Buddhist teaching or method of praxis. While traditionally the nembutsu
practice involved mental concentration and the accumulation of numerous
recitations, Hōnen taught that in the Pure Land path only the
simple saying of “Namu-amida-butsu” with complete trust was
involved. There was no specified manner of utterance, no necessity for
any accompanying ritual or meditative endeavor, and no stipulation of
the length of the period of practice or number of repetitions.
 The question, of
course, is why mere vocalization of Amida’s Name should hold the
power to bring about birth into a buddha-field and eventual
enlightenment, which in our present condition are virtually impossible
to accomplish, even through the achievement of extensive learning, deep
meditative states, heroic discipline, and compassionate action. Without
an adequate demonstration that vocal nembutsu held such power, Pure
Land praxis would remain an supplementary discipline within the
existing schools of Buddhist tradition, one supportive practice to be
performed in combination with a range of other methods.
 Hōnen
promulgated his teaching by adopting an innovative perspective on the
nature of the practices taught in Buddhist tradition. He reasoned that,
although the utterance of the Buddha’s name had long been
transmitted in various Buddhist schools as one among countless
different kinds of practice useful for attainment of enlightenment, the
vocal nembutsu designated in Amida’s vow as the act leading to
birth into the Pure Land was qualitatively distinct from every one of
the thousands of other techniques found in the Buddhist teachings.
While the physical act of voicing the Name of Amida in itself might be
identical, in other forms of Buddhism it was performed in conjunction
with various other practices, including the awakening of the aspiration
for enlightenment (bodhicitta) and the selfless transference
of merits, and like other practices, its fulfillment as praxis
genuinely leading toward Buddhahood turned on the practitioner’s
own purity of motive and powers of concentration and discipline.
 The nembutsu taught
in Amida’s vow, however, as the simple voicing of
“Namu-amida-butsu” accessible to all beings regardless of
their moral qualities or spiritual capacities, was specifically
selected by Amida Buddha as the means by which he could bring to
fruition his compassionate vow to liberate all living things from
samsaric existence. In other words, Amida, through his vow and the
salvific virtue of his own already completed performance of endless
aeons of bodhisattva practices, established the saying of the Name as
the medium by which his own compassionate working actively reaches each
being. Thus, the nembutsu has been prepared for beings as effective
practice—already fulfilled by Amida as the act resulting
in birth in the Pure Land. This salvific activity is particularly
appropriate in the present age, when the accomplishment of praxis as
ordinarily understood in Buddhist tradition has receded beyond the
reach of beings. Anticipating this situation, Amida’s vow teaches
that one should relinquish the illusions and attachments focused on the
self and its capacities and set aside the extensive body of traditional
methods of praxis as no longer effective, since they require a purity
of performance no longer achievable. The Pure Land tradition
characterizes such practices as “self-power” and advocates
instead a turn to the saying the nembutsu as the act that embodies
“Other Power,” Amida Buddha’s wisdom-compassion
functioning in the world.
 Two aspects of
Hōnen historical role relate directly to our concerns here with
philosophical aspects of interpreting and articulating his religious
awareness: the means by which Hōnen effected his ground-breaking
contribution to Buddhist tradition, and Hōnen’s legacy as
inherited by his disciples. Regarding the first, Hōnen is
recognized as the first and perhaps most revolutionary
“founder” of a native Japanese Buddhist tradition. Based on
his principle of “the nembutsu selected in Amida’s primal
vow” (senjaku hongan nembutsu) as the practice embodying
the Buddha’s Other Power, he established the Pure Land school
(Jōdoshū) as an authentic Buddhist path, effective in itself
and independent from the traditionally recognized schools that had been
transmitted to Japan from the Asian continent over the preceding
centuries. Hōnen set about to accomplish this in his major
writing, Collection on the Nembutsu Selected in the Primal Vow
(Senchaku hongan nembutsu-shū), composed in
kanbun (Chinese) and addressed to an audience versed in
Buddhist erudition and its methods of discourse. Here, Hōnen
systematically raises the traditional issues involved in recognizing
the Pure Land teaching as a legitimate school of Buddhism, such as the
identification of foundational sutras, the delineation of the
historical lineage of masters by which the Pure Land path has been
transmitted down to the present, and its doctrinal orthodoxy,
demonstrated with reference to the sutras and the commentarial
tradition. In his work, Hōnen argues logically and cogently on the
basis of scriptural evidence, including extended citations from the
recognized Chinese canon.
 Hōnen allowed
his work to be copied only by disciples during his lifetime, but it was
published shortly after his death. It immediately garnered vehement
censure and counter-argument from scholar-monks of traditional schools,
attesting to the impact Hōnen’s nembutsu teaching was
already having in Japanese society, but also to the recognition of the
forms of scholastic discourse and rational argument into which his
thought had been cast. From the accounts of his followers and records
of his spoken words and letters, it appears that Hōnen was an
immensely charismatic figure, communicating his teaching to both the
ordained and lay and persuasively responding to the questions of his
many listeners from all walks of life. Nevertheless, the major
formulation of his religious thought followed customary models,
dictated by his formidable role in Buddhist history.
 As we have seen,
Hōnen asserted that the nembutsu as imparted to beings in
Amida’s vow differs profoundly from all other practices handed
down in Buddhist tradition. Persons might, therefore, perform the
utterance of the Buddha’s name as another means of healing the
mind and gaining merit, in continuous recitation or as an element of
ritual worship or contemplative practice, or they might say the name as
the act prescribed in Amida’s vow, entrusting themselves wholly
to the working of the Buddha’s compassion and abandoning any
notion of their own goodness or effort as contributing to realization.
The former manifests self-power, the latter Other Power. Hōnen
taught that it is only the latter that remains operative now for us.
However, a serious difficulty in understanding this teaching arose
among Hōnen’s following, one Hōnen struggled to deal
with but was unable to resolve doctrinally.
 Disciples found
that the nembutsu of Amida’s vow as proclaimed by Hōnen in
fact involves two elements, both of which are essential: on the one
hand, the actual saying of Amida’s Name,
“Namu-amida-butsu,” and on the other, the wholehearted
entrusting of oneself to Amida’s vow, which, as we have seen, is
precisely what qualitatively distinguishes vocal nembutsu from all
other methods of practice and makes one’s performance of it the
practice selected for beings and already fulfilled by Amida. For
Hōnen, these two elements of practice and faith—utterance of
the nembutsu and the entrusting of oneself to Amida’s
vow—were mutually and unproblematically interfused, but many who
sought to follow his teaching found that in actual engagement, the path
appeared to be defined by emphasis on one element or the other. The
question became for many followers: which is central in the life lived
in genuine accord with Amida’s vow, practice or faith? In other
words, concretely, how should persons of the nembutsu carry on their
lives?
 Those who
emphasized practice tended to assume that since the nembutsu was
devised and provided out of Amida’s wisdom-compassion, those who
entrust themselves to the Buddha’s vow will spontaneously, out of
joy and gratitude, seek to live in mindfulness of Amida and to recite
the name as often as possible throughout the remainder of their lives.
This view, however, sometimes shaded into ethical and eschatological
concerns. Some assumed that practitioners of the nembutsu should seek
to live lives appropriate for birth into Amida’s buddha-field,
lives of diligent recitation and moral rectitude; those who failed to
display such dedication were viewed as negligent in their practice.
Further, many adopted older views rooted in the Contemplation
Sutra, in which nembutsu recitation was seen pragmatically, as a
means of cancelling the karmic effects of one’s past evil. This
latter belief gave decisive weight to the nembutsu uttered at the
moment of death, when the nullification of one’s final
defilements of karmic evil made birth in the Pure Land possible.
 By contrast, those
who emphasized trust tended toward a more relaxed view of nembutsu
recitation and other forms of religious observance or moral rigor,
insisting instead on a total trust in Amida’s compassion. The
Pure Land sutras speak of ten or even a single utterance as adequate,
and Hōnen affirms this teaching, since the name as prepared for
beings by Amida holds the resultant virtues of his inconceivably long
and perfect practice. When one takes refuge in the vow and utters the
nembutsu, one’s salvation is promised by Amida and one should
have no misgivings. At an extreme, however, insistence on leaving all
to Amida’s salvific activity led to forms of antinomianism, in
which even moral restraint was viewed as the impulse to deny the fact
of one’s cravings and affirm one’s own goodness. In more
benign forms, emphasis on trust led to a denigration of continued
utterance as evidence of doubt of the vow’s power and as a
residue of attachment to one’s own action in bringing about
attainment.
 Hōnen sought
to maintain a tenuous balance between these two, mutually disparaging
positions of emphasis on praxis and emphasis on faith:
If, because it is taught [in the Larger Sutra] that birth is
attained with but one or ten utterances, you say the nembutsu
heedlessly, then faith is hindering practice. If, because it is taught
[in Shandao’s commentaries] that you should say the Name
“without abandoning it from moment to moment,” you believe
one or ten utterances to be indecisive, then practice is hindering
faith. As your faith, accept that birth is attained with a single
utterance; as your practice, endeavor in the nembutsu throughout
life. (recorded in “Zenshō-bō ni shimesu
on-kotoba,” in Kyōdō 1987, p. 464 and in Hirota 1989,
pp. 12–13)
Historically, however, we find that while Hōnen was able to
transmit his insights through his own compelling presence, after his
death, his disciples developed their individual interpretations of his
nembutsu teaching in diverse directions, with some tending toward
emphasis on nembutsu practice and other toward trust in the vow. The
master, in short, failed to achieve a clear doctrinal resolution of
this issue of religious life. In other words, he was unable to give a
persuasive account of the nexus between sentient being and Other Power,
and appears finally to affirm anew the efficacy of human action, as
either recitation of the name of Amida or entrusting of oneself to
Amida’s vow, or as a combination of both.
 The question of the
relationship between a person’s act of nembutsu and Amida
Buddha’s Other Power—or between trust in Amida’s vow,
which infuses each human act of nembutsu with Other Power, and the
practice of the nembutsu, which has been devised and made efficacious
for beings by the Buddha—raises profound questions concerning the
sources and significance of human subjectivity and agency. Above all,
the emergence of such issues within the context of a thoroughgoing
application of the general Mahayana critique of self-attachment in
religious praxis gave rise to the most innovative philosophical
reflection in the Japanese Pure Land tradition. Thus, it is among
disciples of Hōnen who tended toward the pole of emphasis on trust
or on the adequacy of a single utterance an engagement with issues that
have a distinct resonance with intellectual concerns today. This is
because such disciples found it necessary to take up questions of
one’s self-awareness in the relationship between being and Buddha
in the immediate present and to delineate a groundwork for
deconstructing commonsense subject-object dualisms applied to this
relationship without recourse to abstract conceptions of mystical
transcendence.
 At the same time,
all of Hōnen’s disciples found it necessary to formulate
responses to the relentless criticisms of the traditional schools,
which led periodically to state suppression of the nembutsu teaching,
and some resorted to adjustment of various positions Hōnen’s
logic led him to. For example, one of the leading disciples,
Shōkō (1162–1238), founder of the dominant Chinzei branch of
the Jōdo school, abandoned Hōnen’s view that only the
nembutsu could lead to birth in the Pure Land and recognized the
efficacy of the traditional practices. Others, however, such as
Shinran, Shōkū (1177–1247), and Ippen (1239–1289), pursued
the development of Hōnen’s radical teaching, each in his own
distinctive way, and it is among such figures that we find the more
philosophical strains of thinking.
 Let us turn here to
several basic issues in Pure Land Buddhist thought that (1) emerged
from problems of practical engagement but were given characteristic
treatment specifically in Japan, and (2) may be considered to have
received philosophical attention in the sense that, regarding them,
Japanese Pure Land Buddhists were forced, by intra-sectarian debate, to
seek a degree of intellectual self-understanding distinct both from
scholastic Buddhist discourse and from the kind of realization achieved
through religious engagement.
 In addition, for
convenience, I will discuss these issues under the headings of
metaphysics, anthropology, hermeneutics, and ethics. It should be borne
in mind, however, that these Western categories, while helpful in
establishing a starting point and pursuing the comparative concerns
implied in a “philosophical” approach to Buddhist thought,
suggest conceptual contours that must in fact be continually breached
in seeking to accommodate the fundamentally pragmatic orientation of
the Japanese Pure Land tradition and its roots in Mahayana Buddhist
thought. In fact, the four headings are best understood as slightly
differing perspectives on essentially the same central problem: the
apprehension of what is true and real from within a stance of radical
conditionedness. What enables such apprehension? What is its
significance for human existence? How does it come about? And what
implications does it hold for the conduct of life?
 The principal
metaphysical question occasioned by Japanese Pure Land Buddhism arises
most naturally concerning the meaning of a being’s birth in the
Pure Land and the ontological status of Amida Buddha. Although Western
researchers have often been confident in imposing substantialist
assumptions on Pure Land thought, asserting, for example, that
Hōnen and his followers thought of the Pure Land as a geographical
place, and although many Pure Land Buddhists assume that past thinkers
regarded the Dharmakara-Amida narrative as historical in a modern
sense, in fact the dominant traditional motif in treating questions of
the reality of Amida and the Pure Land reflects, not such notions as
substance, identity, autonomy, and permanence, but an interactive,
dynamic movement across provisional dichotomies of formless reality and
form, enlightened wisdom and ignorance, transtemporality and time,
buddha and sentient being. This thinking characterized by the
discriminative perception of the world of beings rooted in the
nondiscriminative apprehension of reality may be seen in relation to
the question of the real existence of beings born in the Pure Land in
the following passage from the sixth century Chinese Pure Land thinker
Tanluan (476–542):
The “birth” to which Bodhisattva Vasubandhu aspires
refers to being born through causal conditions. Hence it is
provisionally termed “birth.” This does not mean that there
are real beings or that being born and dying is real, as ordinary
people imagine.
We see that from very early in the East Asian tradition, as well
known in Japan, Pure Land thinkers applied the Mahayana logic of the
nonduality and interpenetration of discriminative and nondiscriminative
realms to Pure Land concepts.
Regarding the nature of Amida Buddha, perhaps the most natural
approach for the modern mind is to focus on the relationship between
Amida and Sakyamuni. While Amida, Buddha of infinite light and eternal
life, may be regarded as the “celestial” personification of
perfect wisdom-compassion, and the narrative of his attainment in the
inconceivable past as “mythic,” Gotama, known by his
honorific title Sakyamuni Buddha, is recognized as a historical figure,
a mendicant wanderer and religious teacher of India in the fifth
century BCE. It is common to say, therefore, that Sakyamuni belongs to
the realm of historical fact and actual existence, while Amida is
fictive. This view is supported by the modern understanding of the
relationship between the two buddhas. Sakyamuni, having become the
“awakened one” through meditative practices, taught his
realization to others, and among the teachings attributed to him is the
story of Amida Buddha. Although historical evidence now suggests that
the teaching of Amida gradually emerged around the beginning of the
common era—five centuries after Sakyamuni’s
death—even if it appeared later in the tradition stemming from
Sakyamuni, the fundamental question of the relationship between Amida
and the person(s) who first taught him remains unchanged. Amida Buddha
has never appeared directly as a historical personage, and there are no
teachings or words that can be attributed to him. Thus, it is common to
view the story of Amida as a narrative fashioned by Sakyamuni (or a
later figure) to express the content of his own religious insight.
Since his awakening could not be conveyed directly, he resorted to the
use of parables and myths, and the story of Amida is considered such a
“skillful means” (hōben) or mythic device for
teaching. In this view, Amida is a fiction whose origins lie in the
experience of Sakyamuni. Further, it is often assumed that while
unlettered Pure Land adherents may have clung to the notion of Amida
and his vows as real, taking them as objects of faith, more
sophisticated Buddhists such as those of the Tendai, Shingon, and Zen
schools recognized all along that Amida is merely a skillful
“metaphor” or “symbol” for the historical
realization of Sakyamuni.
In fact, there is basic continuity in the perspective on Amida among
the Mahayana schools, and it stands diametrically opposed to modernist
assumptions. For Mahayana Buddhists, reality resides not fundamentally
with the historical existence of Sakyamuni as such, but rather with
that for which he is recognized as buddha, or that which is the
motive-force for his appearance in the world, his attainment of
buddhahood, and his teaching of dharma. Reality assumes form in order
to emerge into the consciousness of sentient beings and thereby guide
beings beyond the attachments and compulsions of their discriminative,
reifying, conceptual grasp of their own existence and the things of the
world around them.
This circular dynamic moving between formless reality and the world
of forms may be seen with regard to the relationship between Sakaymuni
and Amida in Hōnen’s exposition. He states:
Concerning the central purport [of the Larger Sutra]:
Sakyamuni discarded the supreme Pure Land and appeared in this defiled
world; this was to expound the teaching of the Pure land and, by
encouraging sentient beings, to bring them to birth in the Pure Land.
Amida Tathagata discarded this defiled world and emerged in the Pure
Land; this was to guide sentient beings of this defiled world and bring
them to birth in the Pure Land. This is none other than the fundamental
intent with which all buddhas go out to the Pure Land and emerge in the
defiled
 world. (Muryōjukyō shaku in Kyōdō 1987, p. 67)
In Hōnen’s view, Sakyamuni and Amida function as paired
aspects of a movement of compassionate activity in teaching and
guiding, out of true reality into the defiled world, and out from the
defiled world into “the supreme Pure Land” that is the
abode of all buddhas. We see here that Hōnen transforms the
framework of historical sequence by beginning with Sakyamuni, even
though Amida’s attainment of buddhahood occurred aeons prior to
Sakyamuni’s appearance. Without Sakyamuni, Amida would remain
unknown to beings in this world and his work of leading all to his
buddha-field would go unapprehended; without Amida, Sakyamuni would
have no effective means of liberating beings and his teaching mission
would be futile. In place of a linear chronology, we have a motif of
movement between the timeless and mundane time, by which the
temporality of karmic causation and discriminative thinking is
broken.
 Shinran develops
the reciprocity between Amida and Sakyamuni seen in Hōnen into an
asymmetric relationship, and by thus giving priority to Amida, moves
even further from a modern orientation that would emphasize the
historical reality of Sakyamuni. For Shinran, it is the motive-force of
wisdom-compassion that underlies the historical existence of
Sakyamuni—that in fact made him buddha—and this
wisdom-compassion is itself the life of Amida Buddha. Hence,
Sakyamuni’s historical existence may be understood as a
manifestation of Amida, perhaps one among countless others.
This understanding may be seen in Shinran’s demonstration that
the Larger Sutra, among all the sutras, expresses the true
teaching for which Sakyamuni appeared in the world. Shinran focuses on
the pattern in the sutras by which, prior to expounding dharma, the
Buddha enters a profound samadhi and delves to the nondiscriminative
wisdom that transcends words and concepts. On emerging from the
samadhi, he reemerges into the realm of words and responds to questions
from his disciples. While his words are those of ordinary human
discourse, they give expression to the samadhi he attained. Thus, the
source of Sakyamuni’s teaching is the samadhi he entered, the
transcendent reality or wisdom itself.
At the beginning of the Larger Sutra, Sakyamuni’s
disciple Ānanda observes, from the splendor and serenity apparent
in the Buddha’s countenance, that the Buddha has entered the
samadhi of great tranquility (Jp. daijakujō, in the Tang
translation titled Sutra of the Tathagata of Immeasurable
Life) and requests him to explain its significance. Sakyamuni
proceeds to deliver the teaching of Amida Buddha. In other words,
Sakyamuni has attained the reality that is the essential quality of all
Buddhas—in a commentary on the Larger Sutra it is called
the “place where all Buddhas abide”—and on this basis
he reveals the story of Amida, for Amida is the primordial Buddha who
embodies the essence of all Buddhas. From the perspective of this
sutra, were it not for Amida, whose Buddhahood lies at the heart of the
samadhi of great tranquility, Sakyamuni himself would not be Buddha. At
the same time, were it not for Sakyamuni, the teaching of Amida would
not be disclosed to the world.
Thus, the relationship between Amida and Sakyamuni is not that
between two distinct figures, or between the religious symbol taught
and the teacher. Rather, it is viewed in a broader framework of
Amida’s characteristic as standing both in formless reality and
the world of forms, in the eternal and in history. Sakyamuni is not
separate from Amida, and in teaching dharma he manifests the activity
or movement towards beings that is Amida’s essential quality.
 It may be said that
while meditative traditions in Buddhism tend to emphasize the
elimination of delusional thinking and the apprehension of formless
reality free of the imposition of egocentric discrimination, the Pure
Land tradition is attentive to the compassionate working of reality to
awaken beings incapable of eradicating conceptual thought. It does so
by manifesting itself in forms and approaching beings. Late in life,
Shinran adopted the term jinen, “naturalness” or
“being made to become so of itself,” for the spontaneous
working of reality in the liberative process by which beings of
afflicting passions reach enlightenment. In this process, the Mahayana
assertion that “samsara is none other than nirvana” or
“afflicting passions are none other than awakening” is
affirmed, so that the end of the Pure Land path lies in this world, in
the compassionate working for the liberation of all beings.
 In relation to
beings of the world, Pure Land thinkers such as Shōkū and
Shinran asserted that the real, as itself nondiscriminative and
nondualistic wisdom or suchness, pervades all things. Since beings
cannot attain such wisdom, reality as such cannot be grasped.
Nevertheless, through that which is real that permeates their
existence, all beings, including “grasses, trees, and the land
itself,” hold the potential for awakening. Such terms as
“emptiness” and “dependent origination” are
sometimes understood in metaphysical terms, but in the context of
Mahayana Buddhist tradition, they are not concepts by which to grasp
reality, but above all elements of practice, expressing the realization
of the person who enters into profound samadhi by cutting off
discriminative thought and eradicating afflicting passions. Because the
Pure Land path is not based on such praxis, the use of such terms is
unnecessary.
 For Hōnen and
his followers, the characterization of “deep mind” (one of
“three minds” or attitudes prescribed in the
Contemplation Sutra) by the Chinese master Shandao (613–681)
provides a classic expression of the understanding of human existence
in the Pure Land path:
“Deep mind” is the deeply entrusting mind. There are two
aspects. One is to believe deeply and decidedly that you are a foolish
being of karmic evil caught in birth-and-death, ever sinking and ever
wandering in transmigration from innumerable kalpas in the past, with
never a condition that would lead to emancipation. The second is to
believe deeply and decidedly that Amida Buddha’s Forty-eight Vows grasp
sentient beings, and that allowing yourself to be carried by the power
of the Vow without any doubt or apprehension, you will
attain
 birth. (Commentary on the Contemplation Sutra, quoted in Shinran CWS I: 85.)
Second [of the three minds] is deep mind, which is true and real
shinjin. One truly knows oneself to be a foolish being full of blind
passions, with scant roots of good, transmigrating in the three realms
and unable to emerge from this burning house. And further, one truly
knows now, without so much as a single thought of doubt, that Amida’s
universal Primal Vow decisively enables all to attain birth, including
those who say the Name even down to ten times, or even but
hear
 it. (Hymns of birth in the Pure Land, quoted in Shinran CWS I: 92)
Three points may be noted here. First, the self-awareness of the
practitioner indicated by Shan-tao is that of a human being wholly
incapable of fulfilling Buddhist practices. This is expressed in
eschatological terms of endless entrapment in samsaric existence: one
is burdened by the karmic consequences of evil acts of past lives
extending from the immeasurable past; one continues to act from the
desires and hatreds arising from ignorant self-attachment in the
present; bereft as one is of any genuine goodness, one’s future
can only be further painful existence in endless transmigration.
 The second point is
that this self-awareness coexists with the realization that all beings
are enabled to attain birth in the Pure Land through Amida’s Vow.
In other words, the self-reflection implied in deep mind is, in its
opposite aspect, at the same time deep trust in the salvific power of
Amida. The third point is that while human being and Buddha stand thus
as thoroughgoing opposites—the being filled with afflicting
passions and lacking any goodness that might lead toward enlightenment,
on the one hand, and the Buddha freely exerting the power of
wisdom-compassion, on the other—deep mind arises as a unitary
awareness out of the interaction of being and Buddha. Self-reflection
and trust arise simultaneously. Without the approach of Amida, not only
trust, but also genuine self-awareness is unattainable.
 Hōnen, who was
renown in his period as a Tendai monk of extensive learning and
exemplary practice, gives direct expression to the two aspects of
“deep mind”:
Although Buddhism is vast, in essence it is composed of no more than
the three learnings [of precepts, meditation, and wisdom.] … But
as for precepts, I myself do not keep a single one. In meditation, I
have not attained even one. In wisdom, I have not attained the right
wisdom of cutting off discriminative thinking and realizing the
fruit… . [Nevertheless,] without distinguishing between wise and
foolish, the upholding of precepts and the breaking of them, Amida
Buddha comes to welcome
 us. (Recorded in Tetsu senchaku hongan nembutsu shū, Jōdoshū
zensho 7: 95–96)
It is in such self-awareness that we see the force behind
Hōnen’s radical reorientation of the understanding of
praxis. Hōnen saw clearly that unless a wholly new perspective
were established regarding the categorization and evaluation of the
myriad practices taught in Buddhist tradition, the genuine meaning of
the Pure Land path as he had come to understand it would remain
obscure, and vocal nembutsu would continue to be viewed by all people
as merely an expedient practice for inferior practitioners. He
therefore raised the issue of the subjectivity of the practitioner, and
insisted that commonsense hierarchies rooted in presuppositions of
one’s own fundamental perspicuity and autonomous capacity to
judge had to be abandoned. To accomplish this shift, Hōnen relied
on the thoroughgoing application of his innovative concept of
“selection from among alternatives” (senchaku),
which refers most centrally to Amida’s own selection, for beings,
of vocal nembutsu as the single, universally accessible practice that
results in birth into the Pure Land. Beings’ taking up of the
Pure Land path is thus founded upon Amida’s selection and
fulfillment of the nembutsu for all beings equally. We see, therefore,
that the dual awareness of “deep mind” is at the core of
Hōnen’s path.
 Hōnen’s
methodical logic led to positions easily vilified by scholar-monks of
the traditional schools. One example is his enumeration of “the
awakening of aspiration for enlightenment” (hotsu
bodaishin) among the traditional “practices” to be set
aside by nembutsu practitioners. This
“bodhi-mind”—the profound aspiration for
enlightenment for oneself and all beings—had been taught to be
the crucial starting point for the Mahayana bodhisattva, and other
Japanese Pure Land masters such as Genshin had affirmed it to be the
core of genuine desire for the Pure Land. Although Hōnen’s
position is somewhat ambiguous, in Senchakushū his
steadfast logic leads understandably to a rejection of the notion that
any attitude or attainment beyond trust and utterance is necessary for
the person of nembutsu.
 Hōnen’s
religious anthropology is perhaps the hallmark of his tradition, but
his closest disciples sought to balance his rejection of self-power
with the delineation of the working of Other Power in the practitioner.
One of the harshest criticisms of Hōnen from the traditional
schools came from Myōe (1173–1232), of the Kegon school. Myōe
argued that awakening the bodhi-mind was not to be viewed as a specific
practice within the path, but as the core of all authentic Mahayana
praxis, which must be infused with the nondiscriminative wisdom that is
also compassion. Thus, Hōnen’s rejection of bodhi-mind was a
departure from the fundamental truths of Mahayana Buddhism itself.
 On a superficial
level, the answer to Myōe was not difficult for Hōnen’s
followers. Disciples such as Shinran and Shōkū affirmed the
role of the bodhi-mind in the Pure Land path by identifying it with
trust in Amida’s vow on the part of practitioners. Shinran, for
example, distinguishes various types of bodhi-mind and identifies that
of the true Pure Land path with his conception of shinjin.
Shōkū similarly identifies the taking of refuge in the vow
with bodhi-mind. Myōe’s criticism, however, points to the
underlying issue of the stark dualism of the unenlightened being and
the enlightened Buddha in Hōnen’s teaching. If there is no
cause in beings leading to attainment, how can even trust in
Amida’s vow arise in them? If they have the ability to give rise
to trust, can they not perform other practices also?
 Hōnen’s
disciples again elaborate diverse conceptions of trust in Amida’s
vow, but at bottom there are two elements. That which is real
(suchness, thusness, nondual reality, buddha-nature, etc.) pervades all
beings; nevertheless, beings can come to awareness of it only in
relation to Amida Buddha, which is manifested in trust in the vow. The
question of the nature of the relation leads to the problem of
hermeneutics.
 Issues of
hermeneutics are central to the Japanese Pure Land tradition because of
the discontinuity it asserts between the ordinary awareness of beings
and the enlightened wisdom-compassion of the Buddha, which is the
source and ultimate content of the teaching. This is not, of course, a
problem limited to the Pure Land tradition, but is taken up in Buddhist
tradition from the time of Sakyamuni’s earliest preaching.
Nevertheless, the communication of the intent of the teaching raises
special difficulties in Hōnen’s Pure Land thought because of
the thoroughly negative assessment of human capacities of comprehension
undistorted by self-attachment. Authentic grasp of the teaching
therefore requires both (1) the working of Buddhas—Amida,
Sakyamuni, and the buddhas of the cosmos—to bridge the gap
between beings’ ignorance and dharma and to bring beings to
apprehension of the vow, and (2) a shift or transformation of awareness
in beings.
 The narrative
settings of the Pure Land teachings in the sutras were regarded as
particularly significant in this regard. The Contemplation
Sutra was especially important in Hōnen’s
interpretation of Amida’s vow, and narratives in that sutra were
understood to reveal both Sakyamuni’s intent in expounding the
Pure Land teaching and the proper stance for understanding it.
According to the sutra, the circumstances for Sakyamuni’s
teaching of Amida and his Pure Land relate to the story of Prince
Ajātaśatru, who, prompted by the Buddha’s jealous
cousin Devadatta, usurps the throne by murdering his father and
imprisoning his mother Vaidehi. From her cell, Vaidehi beseeches the
Buddha to teach her a way to be born in a world free of such treachery
and turmoil. This leads to Sakyamuni’s exposition of
Amida’s Pure Land.
 In East Asian Pure
Land tradition, this royal “tragedy of the capital of
Rājagṛha,” where Sakyamuni often resided and preached,
was understood to indicate that the Pure Land teaching was intended for
ordinary, unenlightened beings in anguished circumstances, rather than
for a capable spiritual elite. Shinran emphasizes the distance between
this world and the realm of enlightenment by asserting that at the
point in history when conditions were ripe for teaching and reception
of the Pure Land path, the entire drama of regicide and betrayal was
played out by incarnated bodhisattvas precisely to allow for the
introduction of the Pure Land teaching. It is, therefore, the condition
of self-reflection and repentance that allows for the reception of the
Pure Land teaching. As we have seen, for the Pure Land tradition that
Hōnen adopted from China, this motif is reiterated in the sutra
narrative of the lowest grade of nembutsu practitioner, who has
committed evil throughout his life but encounters the teaching through
a good friend on his deathbed and simply utters Amida’s name ten
times.
 In terms of
reception, some among Hōnen’s disciples further emphasized
the action of Amida and Sakyamuni in guiding and actively bringing
beings to trust in the vow. While the Chinzei branch of
Hōnen’s Pure Land school sought to temper the master’s
sweeping rejection of other practices by recognizing the possibility of
attaining birth through the various meditative and nonmeditative
practices set forth in the Contemplation Sutra,
Shōkū and his Seizan branch taught that the intent of the
sutra is precisely to lead people to awareness that birth is possible
only through the nembutsu. In the latter view, the various
contemplative exercises and the disciplines and study taught by the
sutra are meant to reveal the wisdom-compassion of the vow, which
grasps all beings without discrimination, whatever their capacity.
Since in the sutra beings attain birth regardless of their particular
level or kind of practice, it is not that those practices are being
prescribed; rather, the sutra intends to show that the actual cause of
birth lies not in any such practices, but solely in Amida’s vow.
In other words, the sutra teachings are not to be taken literally, but
as means to awaken beings so that they entrust themselves to the
vow.
 In Shinran, the
activity of the vow is more direct, for he asserts that shinjin in
beings is itself the mind of Amida and that Amida gives his mind to
beings. Thus, for example, Shinran interprets the nembutsu to be not
the invocation of the Buddha by beings but rather the Buddha’s
call to beings in order to awaken them. Shōkū makes a similar
claim, asserting that when a person takes refuge in Amida’s vow,
then the Buddha, who is the embodiment of perfect practice performed
out of the desire to save all beings, enters and becomes one with the
person’s aspiration. This oneness manifests itself as the
nembutsu. We see in such thinkers that genuine engagement with the
teaching is not primarily intellectual understanding or simple assent,
but a transformative encounter in which the dualism of the
person’s samsaric existence and Amida’s wisdom-compassion
is transcendent.
 The disciples of
Hōnen who pursued the teaching that birth in the Pure Land became
settled with a single utterance in trust explored the reasons this
should be so and also its consequences for ongoing life in the present.
As we have seen, Hōnen taught that the vocal nembutsu was
qualitatively distinct from all other practices, being effective as
practice because it has been fulfilled by Amida and given to beings.
Precisely how it was given remained an issue. For disciples like
Shōkō, the nembutsu was determined by Amida but retained its
quality as practice in that it was to be repeated by a person
throughout life, even though a single utterance was taught to be
sufficient. Thinkers like Shinran and Shōkū, however, both
understood the utterance of nembutsu to be fulfilled practice because
it arises from the oneness of being and Buddha expressed as shinjin or
taking refuge. Further, because of this oneness, a person’s
attainment of birth in the Pure Land is completely settled in the
immediate present.
 The effects of the
oneness are manifested not only in the occurrence of birth in the Pure
Land at death, but also in various ways in present life.
Shōkū speaks of a variety of benefits received in the present
by the person of the nembutsu, including the elimination of the effects
of past evil acts, extension of life, avoidance of various calamities,
protection of buddhas, seeing of Amida, and so on. One should not
pursue such benefits for their own sake, but they naturally come about
for the person of the nembutsu whose birth in the Pure Land is settled.
Thus, to express the condition of the nembutsu practitioner,
Shōkū even distinguishes two types of Pure Land
“birth,” “immediate birth” (sokuben
ōjō) while remaining burdened with afflicting passions
in present life and birth into the Pure Land at the time of death
(tōtoku ōjō).
Shōkū’s thinking about ethical life reflects the same
elements seen in relation to benefits in this life: the person
continues to act out of ignorance and self-attachment, but conduct
manifesting oneness with Amida Buddha may also emerge spontaneously. He
speaks, for example, of the elimination of the effects of past evil
acts through repentance (zange metsuzai). He distinguishes,
however, between two kinds or stages of repentance, that which is
deliberately undertaken at particular times through ones own powers of
self-reflection and contrition, but which is difficult to achieve
(gyōmon no zange), and that which arises spontaneously
and immediately as the working of the vow (kanmon no zange).
As seen here, ethical behavior is not prescribed and undertaken as
another form of praxis, but Other Power may function of itself in the
life of the nembutsu practitioner to suppress evil and manifest
compassion action.
 Such thinking may
also be seen in Shinran, who includes, in his list of ten benefits
obtained by the nembutsu practitioner in the present, “constantly
enacting great compassion.” In letters, he states: 
Those
who feel that their own birth is completely settled should, mindful of
the Buddha’s benevolence, hold the nembutsu in their hearts and
say it to respond in gratitude to that benevolence, with the wish,
“May there be peace in the world, and may the Buddha’s
teaching spread!”. (Shinran CWS I: 560) 
In the face of the
persecution of the nembutsu by local authorities, he advises his
disciples: 
The people who are trying to obstruct the nembutsu
are the manor lords, bailiffs, and landowners in the local areas
… . practicers of the nembutsu should act with compassion for
those who commit such obstruction, feel pity for them, and earnestly
say the nembutsu, thereby helping those who seek to hinder them.
(Shinran CWS I: 563–564) 
For Shinran, the working of Other Power is precisely
the falling away of one’s own calculative thinking, seeking
religious or worldly advantage through one’s own capacities.
Thus, where self-power has been “overturned,” acts
spontaneously possessed of compassion arise unprescribed and
undeliberated.
 For both
Shōkū and Shinran, the life of the nembutsu practitioner is
informed by a transformed temporality. This is especially clear in
Shinran, who adopts the distinction of two dimensions or phases of
Amida’s activity—that for beings’ birth in the Pure
Land (ōsō ekō) and that for their immediate
return from the Pure Land to this world in order to work for the
liberation of all beings (gensō ekō). The ethical
ideal of genuinely compassionate action—action that leads others
to liberation from ignorance—exists in the present for the
nembutsu practitioner as a goal one looks forward to in the future,
beyond all falsification by self-attachments. It is the teleological
fulfillment of human existence that unfolds only by Other Power. At the
same time, that goal, as the content of birth in the Pure Land that is
already settled in the present, pervades present existence, interfused
with the karmic burden of the samsaric past. What is authentically
known of such a self by the nembutsu practitioner, according to both
Shōkū and Shinran, is the repentance that is also
Amida’s wisdom-compassion.
The term modernity commonly indicates the cultural principles
stemming from the European Enlightenment that became dominant globally
in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, including such
ideals as reason, empirical science, individualism, freedom, and so
on. Japan’s encounter with modernity represents a particularly
clear and well-defined case, for up until the mid-nineteenth century,
Japan had an official policy of isolation, restricting all
international contact. Political stability, including religious
institutions, had continued without significant threat or conflict for
nearly two and a half centuries, during which a relatively peaceful,
prosperous, and culturally active citizenry flourished. After being
forcibly opened to foreign commerce in 1853, Japanese leaders emerged
who were fearful of the efforts by Western powers to exert control
over the country through utilizing internal conflict. They sought
fundamental political change without large-scale civil warfare and
successfully effected a shift in power from the shogunate nominally to
the emperor in 1868. Further, they entered upon a deliberate program
of importing and adopting Western learning, technology, and
sociopolitical institutions. Christianity was perceived as woven into
the fabric of modern civilization and as providing the moral
foundation for Western advances. Hence, some Japanese believed the
successful assimilation of Western technology and social institution
would require the adoption of Christianity.
 During the four decades from
the opening of Japan to about the time of the World’s Parliament
of Religions in Chicago in 1893, Buddhist institutions were forced into
a largely defensive posture in the face of programs for radical social
change and the influx of Christian missionizing. Buddhist reform
movements were beginning to arise, but on the whole it was a period for
regrouping, apologetics, and new organizational rather than
intellectual development. The observations and criticisms by Christian
missionaries regarding Japanese Buddhism during this period reveal the
challenges to which Buddhists sought to respond. An example is a
lecture delivered by M. L. Gordon (1844-1900), a Congregational
missionary and teacher, to the “General Conference of the
Protestant Missionaries of Japan” in Osaka in 1883. To more than
one hundred missionaries, Gordon, a scholar of Japanese Buddhism and
author of tracts in both Japanese and English, discussed “the
religious influence of Buddhism as an obstacle to the reception of the
Gospel in Japan” (Gordon 1883). He notes that in the modernizing
Japan of his time, “there are many among the educated classes who
not only have no sympathy with Buddhism but violently hate it.”
Still, he believed Buddhism remained the primary impediment to
missionizing. Moreover, he identified Pure Land Buddhism,
specifically the Shin Buddhism (Jōdo Shinshū) in the
tradition of Shinran’s thought, as “the most popular and
flourishing” of Buddhist schools. Gordon’s critique of
Japanese Buddhism, and of Shin Buddhism in particular, highlights
issues that Buddhist thinkers have continued to grapple with in the
modern era up to today: reasoned understanding in the face of modern
knowledge, existential engagement, and social action.
 Gordon’s attack on Pure
Land Buddhism begins with the assertion that it “is not the
Buddhism which Gotama taught” and, going even further, that
“the Buddhism taught by the Shin sect of Japan is in some
respects exactly opposed to the teaching of Shakya” (Gordon 1882,
p. 108). Utilizing contemporaneous European scholarship in Sanskrit and
Pali, Gordon lists contradictions between “Buddhism as Gotama
taught it” and “the so-called Mahayana” teachings,
which “are perversions rather than denials of the truth, and
hence are all the more dangerous.” The problem Gordon encounters
is partly a rift with Western rationality—what he calls the
ability “for the Buddhist mind to look a logical contradiction
squarely in the face without recognizing it.” Even more important
to him, however, are how the perceived deviations in the Pure Land
tradition that have transformed “original Buddhism” into a
religion in the mode of Christianity.
 Gordon adduces “the three
great biblical doctrines” that for him evince
Christianity’s superiority over Japanese Buddhism: “God,
Sin, and Salvation.” These touch on the philosophical issues of
ontology, anthropology, and ethics that we have considered, and
adumbrate the topics Japanese Buddhists would take up and continue to
tackle into the twentieth century. Gordon begins by remarking on
“the difficulty of bringing the Buddhist to an adequate
conception of God.” Here, the concept of God as creator is
pivotal for Gordon, in part because it identifies in God a unique
transcendence not present in the conceptions of Buddhas. As Japanese
Buddhists pointed out in their first encounters with Christianity, the
notion of divine incarnation fits easily into a broad Japanese Buddhist
paradigm of the emergence of form from formless reality. In
Gordon’s words, “The doctrine of the Incarnation may be
referred to … as having been greatly degraded by Buddhism.
Incarnations are frequent.” Further, related to emergence or
manifestation is the ontological ambiguity of nonduality. Hence Gordon
finds, perhaps with some frustration, that “if we were to ask the
priest who preaches this [Pure Land] doctrine … whether Amida
really exists or not, he would perhaps after some squirming admit that
either view of the case is perfectly admissible.”
 For Gordon, God as creator
serves as the linchpin for the other two key doctrines, sin and
salvation. In lacking a conception of creator, Buddhism
“recognizes no supreme and intelligent Ruler and Judge of the
universe.” This leads to “only a very inadequate idea of
sin,” one that trivializes it and in fact promotes
“immorality.” A further consequence is that salvation in
Buddhism is “salvation from the misery of the present world
rather than salvation from sin.” Pure Land Buddhism, in other
words, denigrates the significance of present life and looks only to
the promise of deliverance in the future.
 Christianity’s challenge
to Japanese Buddhists involved what Gordon expressed as “power
over the hearts and lives of men,” which had not necessarily been
sought by the Japanese temple priests whose chief duty was to the
calendar of memorial ceremonies. In his autobiographical account of his
ministry, Gordon speaks of his converts’ testimony about the
depth of their experiences. He states: “A powerful impression of
[sin] as a personal burden is not common. One old lady testified that
she had hardly thought of herself as a sinner, until she began to hear
this ‘new way.’ … Christianity alone brings true
repentance” (Gordon 1893, pp. 213-214).
 Gordon further states,
“Christianity makes loving service to mankind more prominent than
other religions.” The missionaries’ challenge to articulate
both a personal and a corporate, social ethic roused the Buddhists to
establish schools, hospitals, and various kinds of chaplaincies.
The Japanese Buddhist response to modernity from the beginning of the
twentieth century tended to be dominated by two interrelated trends:
the attempt to reinterpret the nature of the Buddhist and Christian
traditions and the relationship between them, and the attempt to
modernize Buddhist teachings by adopting modes of understanding
religious life discerned in Western thought and Christian conceptual
motifs.
 Until the latter half of the
nineteenth century, there were no terms in Japanese corresponding to
the abstract categories of “philosophy” and
“religion.” Nevertheless, the study of Western philosophy
began to be diligently pursued, even before the Meiji restoration, as
an important body of Western learning crucial for modern Japan, an
accompaniment to the natural sciences. The accepted term corresponding
to “religion,” shūkyō宗教,
came into use as the standard equivalent for the Western concept from
the 1860’s, when it was required for the translation of
diplomatic documents exchanged with Western nations. In terms of actual
content, therefore, it was at first closely associated with
Christianity.
 For Buddhists, philosophy and
religion became a means not only to position Buddhism in relation to
Christianity, but also to distance it from Christianity to its own
advantage, particularly in relation to modern scientific knowledge. The
central figure here was Inoue Enryō (1858-1919), who was born into
the family of a Pure Land temple priest of the Shin Buddhist tradition
and was active throughout his life as an educator and public
intellectual.
 Inoue’s strategy was to
view Buddhism as a religion in the mode of a philosophy. He employed
both categories in characterizing the aims and approach of Buddhism,
seeking to demonstrate its superiority to Christianity. On the one
hand, Buddhism shares the core concern of all religion, which is
“the world of the absolute” (zettai sekai):
“Religion teaches the way for our relative mind to enter into the
absolute world. In Buddhism, this is namely the overturning of
delusional thought and the awakening of enlightenment. Delusional
thought indicates the finite, while enlightenment signifies the
infinite (Meishin to Shūkyō [Superstition and
Religion], 1916, quoted in Josephson 2012, p. 159). On the other hand,
when the superstitious practices that have attached themselves to
Buddhist life are stripped away, its fundamental mode of thought,
rooted in reason and causality, is seen to resemble scientific and
philosophical thought. In this, it is distinct from Christianity, which
Inoue believes is grounded in revelation and divine creation. To
counter the notion of creationism that Gordon proposed as the
foundation of genuine religion, Japanese Buddhists drew on the Western
science of evolution as the razor that would shear superstition from a
more properly “philosophical” version of religion.
 Inoue draws on concepts and
frameworks that were current in the West in the field of
“comparative religion” or the “scientific study of
religion.” Max Müller, whose thinking informed the spirit of
the World’s Parliament of Religions in which a number of Japanese
Buddhists participated, speaks of a human faith in the infinite or
absolute within the historical world, and of the “struggle to
conceive the inconceivable” (Introduction to the Science of
Religions, 1870, quoted in Ketelaar 1990, p. 146). This language
was seen to resonate with the Buddhist tradition, providing it with
broad categories by which Japanese Buddhists were able to situate their
traditions in modern, philosophically recognizable frameworks.
 The aforementioned M. L. Gordon
had claimed that an experiential conversion—“a deep
personal loathing of sin” or awareness of “a certain and
present forgiveness of sin”—is the hallmark of the
genuinely religious. That conversion experience, he maintained, lends
Christianity a power lacking in Japanese Buddhism, which he saw as
moribund and widely discredited in modern times. Admittedly, the
Christian concepts of sin and forgiveness are absent from Pure Land
Buddhism. Yet, some Buddhist thinkers felt challenged to develop the
practical dimension of the Pure Land tradition, even while adopting
Inoue’s philosophical terminology. They accepted the Christian
critique, acknowledging the Christian strength as indispensable for, in
Gordon’s expression, “a living religion.”
 The representative Japanese
Buddhist figure here is the Pure Land priest Kiyozawa Manshi
(1863-1903), a younger associate of Inoue who had also studied Western
philosophy at Tokyo Imperial University. Despite his early death,
Kiyozawa’s efforts to democratize and modernize the Shin Buddhist
temple institution deeply influenced succeeding thinkers of the Higashi
Honganji tradition. Like Inoue, he speaks of the finite and infinite
(or absolute) as mediated by reason in philosophy and by faith in
religion. Kiyozawa is distinctive, though, in his decidedly practical
orientation, exploring the encounter with the absolute in religious
life. In his late twenties, he undertook an ascetic discipline of daily
life and diet that ended after several years when he contracted
tuberculosis. In the last five years of his life, he was strongly
attracted to the introspective spiritual cultivation of equanimity and
indifference to contingencies that he found in the early scriptures of
Buddhism and especially in the Stoic philosopher Epictetus.
 Although Kiyozawa makes little
mention of Christianity in his writings beyond, for example,
reflections on the doctrines of creation or monotheism from a
comparative philosophical perspective, we find in his journal in 1898,
amid passages from Epictetus and other classical texts, references to
biblical passages in standard English notation. In relation to the
notion “God is in man,” which he considers “an old
doctrine” found in classical Western authors, Kiyozawa gives
references to five Bible passages, including: “Do you not know
that your bodies are temples of the Holy Spirit, who is in you, whom
you have received from God?” (I Cor. 6:19); “Guard the good
deposit that was entrusted to you—guard it with the help of the
Holy Spirit who lives in us” (2 Tim. 1:4); “No one has ever
seen God; but if we love one another, God lives in us … He has
given us of his Spirit” (I John 3:12–13).
 The references suggest a close
familiarity with the Bible, probably from his youth. Although Kiyozawa
makes no reference to Christianity itself in this context, in his
pursuit of immediate experience, in his probing self-examination, and
in his works for institutional and educational reform, he appears
almost to embody a Buddhist response to Gordon’s accusation that
Buddhism lacks the power to influence daily life and ethical social
action. Toward the end of his life, Kiyozawa created a Buddhist
movement for the quest of “spiritual living”
(seishin-shugi), which he defines in terms of the personal
encounter with the absolute.
 In Kiyozawa’s disciple
Soga Ryōjin (1875-1971), also a Shin Buddhist priest, we find the
same interest in articulating the personal immediacy of religious
teachings. Instead of seeking, like his teacher, to build on the
legitimacy of philosophy and science, carving out a place for Buddhism
beyond the limitations of a rational philosophical analysis of life
experience, Soga stood within Shin Buddhist teachings and sought to
show their vital significance. He did so by drawing on broader Mahayana
Buddhist concepts, comparing them at times with Christian modes of
thought.
 In an article for fellow
missionaries explaining Amida Buddha and the Pure Land, Gordon quotes
Rhys Davids in characterizing them as “hypothetical beings, the
creations of a sickly scholasticism, hollow abstractions without life
or reality” (“The Legend of Amida”). In the 1880s,
Christian missionaries undoubtedly felt confident that to expose Pure
Land teachings as “tales” unknown to Gotama would lead to
the dismantling of “the most powerful sect in Japan.” Pure
Land Buddhists were keenly aware of such criticism, and it may have
prompted Soga and others to ponder Christian ideas in exploring the
existential, religious meaning of Pure Land teachings. While temple
institutions had pursued the study of Christian theology for polemical
purposes, it appears that by the turn of the twentieth century, some
Buddhist philosophers had gained a new confidence of their own,
allowing themselves to be stimulated by Christian theological
ideas.
In one of his seminal essays, “Savior on Earth,” Soga
begins:
This essay was published in 1913 in the magazine begun by Kiyozawa,
Seishinkai (The World of Spiritual Living), fifteen years
after Kiyozawa’s journal references to the Bible quoted above.
Although Soga is spoken of as “arguably the most innovative
thinker in modern Shin Buddhist history” by sectarian scholars,
and although he employs the traditional Shin term “directed [by
Amida]” (ekō) in speaking of the source of his
“revelation,” it is highly likely that Soga had been
testing how Christian ideas might help in developing Shin teachings.
The term “savior” (kyūshu) in Soga’s
title is widely used for Christ, and in comparative remarks in the
essay, Soga asserts that the unique incarnation as Jesus limits
God’s salvific power to Jesus personally, while Dharmakara is
born in each person and becomes “the true subjectivity of the
self in the desire for salvation.”
 Soga not only counters
criticisms that Amida is merely mythical and that Pure Land Buddhism
lacks historical foundations, but also strongly affirms in doctrinal
terms the immediacy of personal religious experience in Shin. Christian
concepts related to kenosis, incarnation in historical time, and
trinity may have stimulated Soga’s rethinking of the relationship
between the practitioner and Amida. There is also the matter of the
temporal dimension in this relationship. Previously the Japanese Pure
Land tradition had articulated the Mahayana logic of the nonduality of
the temporal and the uncreated (or transtemporal). That said, the
Christian critique and Augustinian concepts of time and eternity may
also have inspired Soga’s interpretation of the vast time spans
in the narrative of Dharmakara’s vows and practice. As Soga
explains:
The philosopher Nishitani Keiji (1900-1990) also articulates
Shinran’s treatment of time in terms of the nondiscrimination or
simultaneity of the temporal and the timeless or eternal (Nishitani
1978).
Christianity challenged Japanese Buddhists by teaching a personal
religiosity and a stringent individual moral responsibility. Kiyozawa
offers a prominent example of the attempt to engage those
issues. Regarding the narrative of the origin of Amida Buddha and the
Pure Land, which Gordon and other Christian missionaries regarded as
obvious fictions created late in the Buddhist tradition, Soga may have
found resources for resolution in the very Christian sources behind
the criticisms. The Japanese Mahayana tradition had already developed
it own concepts of the compassionate emergence out of emptiness or
formless reality as well as the nonduality of the karmically
conditioned and unconditioned. Those ideas provided an openness to and
point of entry into certain areas of Christian and Western
philosophical thought. During the twentieth century, philosophers such
as Nishida Kitarō, Tanabe Hajime, Nishitani Keiji, Takeuchi
Yoshinori, and Abe Masao have drawn on both the Christian and Japanese
Buddhist traditions, particularly Pure Land and Zen, in engaging
modern philosophical issues.