Two preliminary observations about the Japanese cultural tradition are
relevant to the arts. First, classical Japanese philosophy understands
reality as constant change, or (to use a Buddhist expression)
impermanence. The world of flux that presents itself to our
senses is the only reality: there is no conception of some stable
“Platonic” realm above or behind it. The arts in Japan
have traditionally reflected this fundamental
impermanence—sometimes lamenting but more often celebrating
it. The idea of mujō (impermanence) is perhaps most
forcefully expressed in the writings and sayings of the
thirteenth-century Zen master Dōgen, who is arguably Japan’s
profoundest philosopher, but there is a fine expression of it by a
later Buddhist priest, Yoshida Kenkō, whose Essays in
Idleness (Tsurezuregusa, 1332) sparkles with aesthetic
insights:
In the Japanese Buddhist tradition, awareness of the fundamental
condition of existence is no cause for nihilistic despair, but rather
a call to vital activity in the present moment and to gratitude for
another moment’s being granted to us.
The second observation is that the arts in Japan have tended to be
closely connected with Confucian practices of self-cultivation, as
evidenced in the fact that they are often referred to as “ways
[of living]”: chadō, the way of tea (tea
ceremony), shōdō, the way of writing (calligraphy),
and so forth. And since the scholar official in China was expected to
be skilled in the “Six Arts”—ceremonial ritual,
music, calligraphy, mathematics, archery, and
charioteering—culture and the arts tend to be more closely
connected with intellect and the life of the mind than in the western
traditions.
To this day it is not unusual in Japan for the scholar to be a fine
calligrapher and an accomplished poet in addition to possessing the
pertinent intellectual abilities.
The meaning of the phrase mono no aware is complex and has
changed over time, but it basically refers to a “pathos”
(aware) of “things” (mono), deriving
from their transience. In the classic anthology of Japanese poetry
from the eighth century, Manyōshū, the
feeling of aware is typically triggered by the plaintive
calls of birds or other animals. It also plays a major role in the
world’s first novel, Murasaki Shikibu’s Genji monogatari (The
Tale of Genji), from the early eleventh century. The somewhat later
Heike monogatari (The Tale of the Heike Clan) begins with
these famous lines, which clearly show impermanence as the basis for
the feeling of mono no aware:
And here is Kenkō on the link between impermanence and beauty:
“If man were never to fade away like the dews of Adashino, never
to vanish like the smoke over Toribeyama, how things would lose their
power to move us! The most precious thing in life is its
uncertainty” (Keene, 7). The acceptance and celebration of
impermanence goes beyond all morbidity, and enables full enjoyment of
life:
Insofar as we don’t rejoice in life we fail to appreciate the
pathos of the things with which we share our lives. For most of us,
some of these things, impermanent as they are, will outlast
us—and especially if they have been loved they will become sad
things: “It is sad to think that a man’s familiar possessions,
indifferent to his death, should remain long after he is gone”
(Keene, 30).
The well known literary theorist Motoori Norinaga brought the idea
of mono no aware to the forefront of literary theory with a
study of The Tale of Genji that showed this phenomenon to be
its central theme.  He argues for a broader understanding of it as
concerning a profound sensitivity to the emotional and affective
dimensions of existence in general. The greatness of Lady Murasaki’s
achievement consists in her ability to portray characters with a
profound sense of mono no aware in her writing, such that the
reader is able to empathize with them in this feeling.
The films of Ozu Yasujirō, who is often thought to be the most
“Japanese” of Japanese film directors, are a series of
exercises in conveying mono no aware. Stanley Cavell’s
observation that “film returns to us and extends our first
fascination with objects, with their inner and fixed lives”
applies consummately to Ozu, who often expresses feelings through
presenting the faces of things rather than of actors. A vase standing
in the corner of a tatami-matted room where a father and daughter are
asleep; two fathers contemplating the rocks in a “dry
landscape” garden, their postures echoing the shapes of the
stone; a mirror reflecting the absence of the daughter who has just
left home after getting married—all images that express the
pathos of things as powerfully as the expression on the greatest
actor’s face.
The most frequently cited example of mono no aware in
contemporary Japan is the traditional love of cherry blossoms, as
manifested by the huge crowds of people that go out every year to view
(and picnic under) the cherry trees. The blossoms of the Japanese
cherry trees are intrinsically no more beautiful than those of, say,
the pear or the apple tree: they are more highly valued because of
their transience, since they usually begin to fall within a week of
their first appearing. It is precisely the evanescence of their beauty
that evokes the wistful feeling of mono no aware in the
viewer.
In aforementioned Essays in Idleness Kenkō asks, “Are we to
look at cherry blossoms only in full bloom, at the moon only when it
is cloudless?” (Keene, 115). If for the Buddhists the basic
condition is impermanence, to privilege as consummate only certain
moments in the eternal flux may signify a refusal to accept that basic
condition. Kenkō continues: “To long for the moon while
looking on the rain, to lower the blinds and be unaware of the passing
of the spring—these are even more deeply moving. Branches about
to blossom or gardens strewn with faded flowers are worthier of our
admiration.” This is an example of the idea of wabi,
understated beauty, which was first distinguished and praised when
expressed in poetry. But it is in the art of tea, and the context of
Zen, that the notion of wabi is most fully developed.
In the Nampōroku (1690), a record of sayings by the tea
master Sen no Rikyū, we read: “In the small [tea] room, it
is desirable for every utensil to be less than adequate. There are
those who dislike a piece when it is even slightly damaged; such an
attitude shows a complete lack of comprehension” (Hirota,
226). Implements with minor imperfections are often valued more
highly, on the wabi aesthetic, than ones that are ostensibly
perfect; and broken or cracked utensils, as long as they have been
well repaired, more highly than the intact. The wabi
aesthetic does not imply asceticism but rather moderation, as this
passage from the Nampōroku demonstrates: “The meal
for a gathering in a small room should be but a single soup and two or
three dishes; sakè should also be served in
moderation. Elaborate preparation of food for the wabi
gathering is inappropriate” (Hirota, 227).
The Zencharoku (Zen Tea Record, 1828) contains a well known
section on the topic of wabi, which begins by saying that it
is simply a matter of “upholding the [Buddhist] precepts”
(Hirota, 274). The author continues:
The way of tea exemplifies
this attitude toward life in the elegant simplicity of the tea house
and the utensils, which contradicts any notion that beauty must entail
magnificence and opulence.
Wabi reaches its peak of austerity in
emptiness—which is a central and pervasive idea in Buddhism. In
an essay “In Praise of Shadows” (1933) the great novelist
Tanizaki Jun’ichirō (1886–1965) has this to say about the beauty
of the alcove (tokonoma) in the traditional Japanese
teahouse:
A simple structure, but a special and evocative one, a place of
deeply philosophical depths. A space cut out of the room, which cuts
off direct light and thereby opens up a new world: these techniques
developed distinctively in the Japanese tradition of
architecture. (See section 7, below, on cutting.)
Instead of adding something artistic to the wall one subtracts the
wall itself and sets it back into an alcove. Then let the emptiness
that’s opened up fill with a play of light and shades.
One place with a claim to be where the Japanese tea ceremony
originated is Ginkakuji, The Temple of the Silver Pavilion, in
Kyoto. Whereas the pavilion (late 15th century) is a modest monument
to the joys of sabi, the Moon-Viewing Platform and Sea of
Silver Sand beside it (from some 200 years later) are paradigms
of Wabi. These latter two constitute an unusual version of
the distinctively Japanese “dry landscape” style of garden
(see section 7, below). These strikingly abstract formations (for the
17th century!) are optimally viewed from the second floor of the
pavilion on a night of the full moon, when the sand glistens silver in
the moonlight and the stripes appear as waves on the surface of a
motionless ocean.
Larger Photographs of the Sea of Silver Sand and Moon-Viewing Platform at Ginkakuji
The term sabi occurs often in the
Manyōshū, where it has a connotation of
desolateness (sabireru means “to become
desolate”), and later on it seems to acquire the meaning of
something that has aged well, grown rusty (another word pronounced
sabi means “rust”), or has acquired a patina that
makes it beautiful.
The importance of sabi for the way of tea was affirmed by the
great fifteenth-century tea master Shukō, founder of one of the
first schools of tea ceremony. As a distinguished commentator puts it:
“The concept sabi carries not only the meaning
‘aged’—in the sense of ‘ripe with experience
and insight’ as well as ‘infused with the patina that
lends old things their beauty’—but also that of
tranquility, aloneness, deep solitude” (Hammitzsch, 46).
The feeling of sabi is also evoked in the haiku of the famous
seventeenth-century poet Matsuo Bashō, where its connection with
the word sabishi (solitary, lonely) is emphasized. The
following haiku typifies sabi(shi) in conveying an atmosphere
of solitude or loneliness that undercuts, as Japanese poetry usually
does, the distinction between subjective and objective:
Contrasting with the colorful beauty of the blossoms, the more subdued
gracefulness of the cypress—no doubt older than the person
seeing it but no less solitary—typifies the poetic mood of
sabi.
Tanizaki’s “In Praise of Shadows” frequently
celebrates sabi. By contrast with Western taste, he writes of
the Japanese sensibility: 
This is a significant existential consideration: the sheen of older
things connects us with the past in ways that shiny products of modern
technology simply cannot. And since older things tend to be made from
natural materials, to deal with them helps us to realize our closest
connections with the natural environment.
Sabi figures prominently, for Tanizaki, in the aesthetics of
the traditional Japanese toilet, which “stands apart from the
main building at the end of a corridor, in a grove fragrant with
leaves and moss.” He wrestles with the vexations that modern
technology imposes on the question of fixtures, as the traditional
ones are superseded by “white porcelain and handles of sparkling
metal” (Tanizaki, 3, 6).
It is surely fitting that one should perform those most natural
functions of urinating and defecating, returning to the earth the
waste from its bounties, in natural rather than high-tech
surroundings.
A more exalted exemplification of sabi is the exquisite
Silver Pavilion at Ginkakuji in Kyoto. Even though the tea ceremony is
said to have originated here, in a small sabi-saturated
teahouse, the exterior of the pavilion was originally going to be
covered in silver foil, in emulation of the Golden Pavilion (14th
century) at Kinkakuji. Without ever having enjoyed a coating of
silver, the Silver Pavilion is the epitome of sabi and one of
the most graceful structures ever built. The contrast with the larger,
and flashier Golden Pavilion, whose coating of gold leaf lends it a
quite different (and distinctly un-sabi) kind of beauty, is
instructive.
Larger Photographs of the Silver Pavilion at Ginkakuji and the Golden Pavilion at Kinkakuji
In 1950 a deranged Buddhist acolyte, deeply disturbed by the beauty
of the Golden Pavilion, set fire to it and burned it to the ground.
An exact replica was built on the original site in 1955. The aesthetic
qualities of the original structure are celebrated in Mishima Yukio’s
fine novel The Temple of the Golden Pavilion (1956), as well
as in Ichikawa Kon’s classic film Enjo (Conflagration,
1958). In 1987, the burgeoning Japanese economy made it possible for
the first time in the building’s history to cover the structure with
gold leaf, according to the creator’s original intention. The result
is breathtakingly spectacular—but totally un-Japanese. Old-time
residents of Kyoto famously complained that it would take a long time
for the building to acquire sufficient
sabi to be worth looking at again. At the rate the patina
seems to be progressing, probably several centuries.
In 2011, after the tsunami in Tōhoku and the explosions and
nuclear meltdown in Fukushima caused an acute energy shortage in
Japan, one of many responses was a dramatic reduction of lighting in
public places, and especially in subway stations with extensive
underground restaurant and shopping precincts. Tanizaki cites a
prescient remark from the late 1920s to the effect that “perhaps
no two countries waste more electricity than America and Japan”
(Tanizaki, 35). He would be delighted now to see Japanese cities
reducing the ubiquitous glare of neon lighting and all-night electric
illumination, in a dimming of unnecessary lights which thereby
reintroduces some of the shadows he so eloquently praises.
Yūgen may be, among generally recondite Japanese
aesthetic ideas, the most ineffable. The term is first found in
Chinese philosophical texts, where it has the meaning of
“dark,” or “mysterious.”
Kamo no Chōmei, the author of the well-known
Hōjōki (An Account of my Hut, 1212), also wrote
about poetry and considered yūgen to be a primary
concern of the poetry of his time. He offers the following as a
characerization of yūgen: “It is like an autumn
evening under a colorless expanse of silent sky. Somehow, as if for
some reason that we should be able to recall, tears well
uncontrollably.” Another characterization helpfully mentions the
importance of the imagination: “When looking at autumn mountains
through mist, the view may be indistinct yet have great
depth. Although few autumn leaves may be visible through the mist, the
view is alluring. The limitless vista created in imagination far
surpasses anything one can see more clearly” (Hume,
253–54).
This passage instantiates a general feature of East-Asian culture,
which favors allusiveness over explicitness and completeness.
Yūgen does not, as has sometimes been supposed, have to
do with some other world beyond this one, but rather with the depth of
the world we live in, as experienced with the aid of a cultivated
imagination.
The art in which the notion of yūgen has played the most
important role is the Nō drama, one of the world’s great theater
traditions, which attained its highest flourishing through the
artistry of Zeami Motokiyo (1363–1443). Zeami wrote a number of
treatises on Nō drama, in which yūgen
(“Grace”) figures as “the highest principle”
(Rimer, 92). He associates it with the highly refined culture of the
Japanese nobility, and with their speech in particular, though there
is also in Nō a “Grace of music,” a “Grace of
performance [of different roles],” and a “Grace of the
dance” (Rimer, 93). It is something rare, that is attained only
by the greatest actors in the tradition, and only after decades of
dedicated practice of the art. It is impossible to conceptualize, so
that Zeami often resorts to imagery in trying to explain it:
“Cannot the beauty of Grace be compared to the image of a swan
holding a flower in its bill, I wonder?” (Rimer, 73).
The most famous formulation comes at the beginning of Zeami’s
“Notes on the Nine Levels [of artistic attainment in
Nō],” where the highest level is referred to as “the
art of the flower[ing] of peerless charm”:
This passage alludes to the results of a pattern of rigorous
discipline that informs many “performing arts” (which
would include the tea ceremony and calligraphy as well as theater) in
Japan, as well as East-Asian martial arts.  Nō is exemplary in
this respect, since its forms of diction, gestures, gaits, and dance
movements are all highly stylized and extremely unnatural. The idea is
that one practices for years a “form” (kata) that
goes counter to the movements of the body and thus requires
tremendous discipline—to the point of a breakthrough to a
“higher naturalness” that is exhibited when the form has
been consummately incorporated. This kind of spontaneity gives the
impression, as in the case of Grace, of something
“supernatural.”
Intriguing features of Japanese aesthetics are revealed through the
artistic practices of Sesshū Tōyō and his most
celebrated work, the so-called “Splashed ink landscape” of
1495 (Haboku Sansui, literally, “Broken Ink
Landscape”). Taking the first steps towards reading his art
calls on us to recognize a distinctive feature of Japanese landscape
paintings, that is, as art objects they have a considerably expanded
aesthetic status relative to similar works as interpreted within
Western philosophical and art historical traditions.  Of course, the
painting object itself is important, but key aesthetic value also lies
in the bodily performance the work attests to. Properly estimating the
beauty of Sesshū’s “Splashed ink
landscape”—similar to how one should appreciate Japanese
calligraphy—involves more than simply making judgments regarding
the marks on paper, but also calls for an appreciation of the bodily
movements that created the work. Because Sesshū’s
spontaneous movements were cultivated according to highly disciplined
Zen Buddhist practices, interpreting his landscape art demands an
aesthetics expanded to embrace the philosophic and religious.
Sesshū Tōyō (雪舟等楊,
1420–1506) was a towering figure of the Japanese art world who helped
initiate an indigenous artistic tradition at a time when
philosophic-religious practices were going beyond their Chinese
influence, as Chan Buddhism gave rise to Zen Buddhism in
Japan. Sesshū was part of a trajectory of many centuries to
establish Japanese forms of Buddhism as an enduring feature of the
country’s religious, philosophic, and aesthetic identity. During
his life, Zen was reaching prominence as a religious discipline, as
were the related arts under Ashikaga patronage. The Muromachi Period
was the time of Zen aesthetics: not only monochrome ink painting, but
all Japanese aesthetic practices (geidō) including
calligraphy, tea ceremony, Nō drama, and dry landscape gardening
flourished as expressions of the Zen, especially Rinzai Zen, spirit of
the time. During this period, a shift was underway in the painting
world from kara-e (唐絵 “Chinese
painting”) to yamato-e
(大和絵 “Japanese
painting”). Representations of deities for devotional purposes,
and paintings of Daoist and Buddhist themes (dōshakuga)
were being supplanted as the heart of art practice as Japan saw its
first movements towards initiating an art tradition seeking purely
aesthetic ideals. Landscape painting was central to that movement.
Sesshū was a celebrated painter, poet, calligrapher, and
gardener, who mastered all of the major Chinese styles and genres, from
bird and flower paintings, to portraiture, hanging scrolls, screens,
and fans. It was his landscapes, however, particularly his famed
“Splashed Ink Landscape” for which he has been
immortalized. This painting offers insight into a central concept of
Japanese aesthetics discussed above, that is, yūgen. 
Splashed Ink Landscape by Sesshū
The mysterious grace of his most celebrated landscape painting derives
as much from the space that is left un-touched, the invisible and
absent (often referred to as the “dragon’s veins” of
a painting) as from what is painted and visible. The work appears
incomplete, still in the act of formation, and the dramatic negative
spaces created by the mists allow the various forms to dissolve and
blend into one another, but more decisively, according to the
yūgen dynamic, this negativity invites the viewer into the
painting to actively complete it. As artists employing yūgen
principles in other genres have shown, the incompleteness and
allusiveness of the artwork summons the viewer into the scene. In
Ghilardi’s words, “the onlooker must merge in the image,
completing the empty spaces, making it a lively element of nature
itself, ‘between’ visible and invisible” (Ghilardi,
2015, 99).
Sesshū does not seek to render every detail of the landscape to
achieve representational verisimilitude, to depict an object that would
be discernible for a subject. The aim is to give only a suggestion or a
trace of trees, mountains, or waters, which appear to negate themselves
as objects. Accordingly, Sesshū does not circumscribe forms but
offers the impression of poetic immediacy by breaking them down.
Extreme abbreviation and abstraction are employed such that any form,
if even discernible, is pushed as far as possible from objectivity
without disappearing completely into formlessness. As Jullien writes
regarding Chinese painters who influenced Sesshū, they paint the
“landscape in the tonality of as if, in the mode of
appearing-disappearing, at once ‘as if there were’ and
‘as if there were not.’”(Jullien, 2009. 8) The
central grouping of trees, the inn blending into their trunks, and the
tiny oarsman all appear but feel as though they are about to be lost,
maybe already transitioning into a vague memory, only a brushstroke
away from dissolving completely. A sensitive viewer does not simply
perceive a representation of this event, but can sense the sweeping and
spontaneous gestures that gave rise to the ephemerality of the scene.
To appreciate this aesthetic feature of the painting invokes Buddhist
principles Sesshū would have cultivated as a Zen monk.
Sesshū’s life and work are exemplary for Japanese
aesthetics given that his practice was not aesthetic in a restricted
sense, but also encompassed the religious and philosophical principles
of Daoist-inspired Zen Buddhism. “Splashed ink landscape”
was composed in Sesshū’s 76th year, a time when
he claimed that his eyes “were growing misty” and Daoism
was increasingly influential for his painting. As a painter-priest,
both his meditative as well as his artistic practice would have aimed
at self-negation, at achieving “non-self” as per the goal
of Zen training. As Yukio Lippit writes, “Splashed Ink Landscape
thus showcases a mode of ink painting that projects both cultivated
artistic agency and a state of subjectlessness. This condition of the
permeable subject would prove pitch-perfect for the Japanese monk
painter of the late medieval period” (Lippit 2012, 71). To
disclose how this aesthetic-religious goal was approached in painting
practice reveals the Daoist roots of Zen Buddhism. 
Painting was among the Japanese aesthetic practices referred to as
geidō 芸道. One of the sinographs shared among the compounds
for archery (kyudō 弓道), martial arts
(jūdō 柔道), calligraphy (shodō
書道), flower arranging (kadō
 華道), tea ceremony (sadō
茶道) is the sinograph dao 
(道), (dō or michi in Japanese) indicating the
philosophic-religious orientation of the practices. To move according
to the dao is to move with a natural spontaneity as an embodiment of
the well-known concept “non-action” (wuwei
無爲). Acting spontaneously involves moving beyond the
binary of activity or passivity; that is, the world moves the body as
much as the body moves in the world. Accordingly, as Nishida comments,
we can say that “Sesshū painted nature or that nature
painted itself through Sesshū” (Nishida 1990, 135). The
graceful naturalness of the swordsman, the calligrapher, or the Nō
actor is also characteristic of the painter’s gestures. All are
bodily practices that seek to harmonize with the spontaneous motions of
the dao through non-action. Thus, to estimate the aesthetic value of
Sesshū’s brushwork is to appreciate its religious source in
Daoist-informed Buddhist practice. Because observers can harmonize
their own bodies with the movements animating the painting, the work
elicits more than aesthetic judgments, it is itself a site for
cultivating religious-philosophic discipline.
The “splashed ink” technique Sesshū employed is
particularly exemplary of the expanded frame of Japanese aesthetics.
“Splashed Ink” (hatsuboku) was one of several
“broken ink” (haboku) spontaneous techniques
originating in China, which Sesshū learned while travelling to
study with painters and conduct religious practice at its
monasteries. The techniques ranged from spontaneous washes and
splashes to actual ink-flinging and dripping. While these methods
sound reckless and were associated with an “aesthetics of
inebriation” and “aesthetics of accident,” the
splashed ink idiom is in fact the most demanding style, regarded as
the highest form of expression and the supreme test of the
artist’s skill. Likewise, it was thought to test the
observer’s sensitivity like no other genre.  The style
originated with the “literati” artists of the Southern
Song School of Chinese landscape painting who favored
yūgen-style abbreviated poetic suggestion, rather than
the detailed and descriptive “academic” approach of the
Northern School. Thus, following this tradition, painters such as
Sesshū did not aim to develop virtuoso skill to create a fully
formed art image, but in negating the self and becoming continuous
with the motions of nature, they follow the Daoist precept that
“the great image has no form”.
The Structure of “Iki” (“Iki” no
kōzō) by Kuki Shūzō (1888–1941) is arguably
the most significant work in Japanese aesthetics from the twentieth
century—and certainly one of the shortest. Kuki wrote the first
draft in 1926 while living in Paris, toward the end of a seven-year
stay in Europe, and published the book shortly after returning to
Japan in 1929. It’s a phenomenological and hermeneutic study of a
phenomenon, iki, that was central to Japanese aesthetic life
during the previous two or three hundred years and derived from forms
of erotic relations between men and geisha in the pleasure quarters of
the big cities. Kuki remarks that although the French
terms chic, coquet, and raffiné
share connotations with the term iki, no European word is
capable of translating the richness of its
meanings—unsurprisingly, since it emerged from a particular
cultural context and Kuki is concerned to grasp the “living
form” of the phenomenon as experienced. Kuki mentions the
French esprit and the German Sehnsucht as terms that
are similarly untranslatable, for similar reasons of cultural
embeddedness (Nara, 15–16).
Kuki distinguishes two further “moments” of iki
in addition to its basis in seductiveness or coquetry
(bitai): “brave composure” (ikiji) and
“resignation” (akirame). Insofar as iki
as seductiveness is concerned “to maintain a dualistic
relationship, protecting the possibility as
possibility”—an allusion to Heidegger’s existential
conception of death as ultimate possibility—it already embraces
impermanence and mortality. This protection of possibility is thus
enhanced by brave composure, which for Kuki is exemplified in the
attitude toward death (his own and others’) on the part of the samurai
warrior and his way of living (bushidō). It is enhanced
too by the moment of resignation, which Kuki understands as the
Buddhist attitude of non-attachment to a world of impermanence. All
together they enable a kind of aesthetic “play”, thanks to
a (phenomenological) “bracketing” of the concerns of
everyday life (Nara, 18–23).
After positioning the phenomenon of iki among a variety of
other aesthetic feelings such as sweet (amami) versus
astringent (shibumi), flashy (hade) versus quiet
(jimi), and crude (gehin) versus refined
(jōhin), Kuki goes on to examine the objective
expressions of the phenomenon, which are either “natural”
or “artistic” (Nara, 24–34). In nature, willow trees
and slow, steady rain exemplify iki; in the human body a
slight relaxation, a voice of medium rather than high pitch, a face
that is long rather than round, a certain tension and relaxation
together of the eyes, mouth, and cheeks, the hand curved or slightly
bent back. Also iki is the wearing of thin fabric, makeup
thinly applied, hair styled not too formally, with the aid of water
rather than oil, and a décolletage designed to call
attention to the nape of the neck laid bare (Nara, 35–39).
In the “free art” of design, parallel lines, and
especially vertical stripes, are expressive of iki: almost
all the other beautiful patterns developed by Japanese fabric arts,
since they often involve curved lines, are un-iki. The only
colors that embody iki are certain grays, browns, and
blues. In architecture the small (four-and-a-half mat) Zen teahouse is
a paradigm of iki, especially insofar as it initiates an
interplay between wood and bamboo. Lighting must be subdued: indirect
daylight or else the kind of illumination provided by a paper
lantern. The scales, melodies, and rhythms of various kinds of music
are correspondingly iki, insofar as (alluding to Goethe,
Schelling, and Schopenhauer)“Architecture is frozen music, and
music as flowing architecture” (Nara, 41–51).
In his conclusion, Kuki asks whether various nineteenth-century and
contemporary European arts might exemplify iki and decides
probably not exactly, though he allows that various aspects of
Baudelaire’s poetry and aesthetics come very close (with the
difference that dandyism is a male prerogative whereas iki is
associated with both sexes). During his seven years in Germany and
France he listened to lectures and seminars by, and conversed
with, such figures as Heinrich Rickert, Edmund Husserl, Martin
Heidegger, Henri Bergson, and Jean-Paul Sartre. Kuki thereby developed a
sophisticated understanding of European philosophy and aesthetics, and
was concerned after his return to Japan to apply methods he had
learned to a Japanese aesthetic phenomenon. He didn’t therefore
aspire to any kind of universal aesthetics—since iki is
rooted in the culture of a particular ethnic group. Yet because the
Japanese at that time, under geopolitical pressure to modernise more
efficiently, were losing touch with their own traditions, Kuki took it
as one of his tasks to celebrate the aesthetic values of the past
(Nara, 58–60).
  

He has unfortunately been excoriated on these grounds as an
ultranationalist and even a fascist, notably by Leslie Pincus in her
book Authenticating Culture in Imperial Japan: Kuki
Shūzō and the Rise of National Aesthetics, and this
deters some people from reading him. But while Pincus’s book provides
a good deal of helpful historical background of the milieu in which
Kuki was working in Japan, her claims that he was a fascist are
groundless (see Parkes 1997, 2007). An unprejudiced reading of The
Structure of Iki reveals no fascist tendencies whatsoever, and
the nationalist themes are innocuous, simply calling for a remembering
of what is valuable in the Japanese tradition and likely to be lost
beneath the waves of modernization—in a world where connections
with the past were withering and Japan was warding off the
colonization of East and South Asia by the Western powers.
 Kuki is a fascinating thinker, and The Structure of Iki,
while occasionally tortuous because of its commitment to a strictly
European methodology, illuminates some fascinating aspects of the
Japanese aesthetic tradition while at the same time engaging the
deepest levels of experience anywhere.
A distinctive notion in Japanese aesthetic discourse is that of the
“cut” (kire) or,
“cut-continuity” (kire-tsuzuki). The
“cut” is a basic trope in the Rinzai School of Zen Buddhism,
especially as exemplified in the teachings of the Zen master Hakuin
(1686–1769). For Hakuin the aim of “seeing into one’s own
nature” can only be realized if one has “cut off the root
of life”: “You must be prepared to let go your hold when
hanging from a sheer precipice, to die and return again to life”
(Hakuin, 133–35). The cut appears as a fundamental feature in the
distinctively Japanese art of flower arrangement called
ikebana. The term means literally “making flowers
live”—a strange name, on first impression at least, for an
art that begins by initiating their death. There is an exquisite essay
by Nishitani Keiji on this marvelous art, in which organic life is cut
off precisely in order to let the true nature of the flower to come to
the fore (Nishitani, 23–7). There is something curiously
deceptive, from the Buddhist viewpoint of the impermanence of all
things, about plants, which, lacking locomotion and by sinking roots
into the earth, assume an appearance of being especially “at
home” wherever they are. In severing the flowers from their
roots, Nishitani suggests, and placing them in an alcove (itself cut
off from direct light, as Tanizaki remarks), one is letting them show
themselves as they truly are: as absolutely rootless as every other
being in this world of radical impermanence.
The notion of cut-continuation is exemplified in the highly stylized
gait of the actors in the Nō drama. The actor slides
the foot along the floor with the toes raised, and then
“cuts” off the movement by quickly lowering the toes to
the floor—and beginning at that precise moment the sliding
movement along the floor with the other foot. This stylization of the
natural human walk draws attention to the episodic nature of life,
which is also reflected in the pause between every exhalation of air
from the lungs and the next inhalation. Through attending to the
breath in zen meditation one becomes aware that the pause between
exhalation and inhalation is different—more of a cut—from
that between inhalation and exhalation. This reflects the possibility
of life’s being cut off at any moment: the one exhalation that isn’t
followed by an inhalation, known as “breathing one’s
last.”
Cutting also appears in the “cut-syllable”
(kireji) in the art of haiku poetry, which
cuts off one image from—at the same time as it links it
to—the next. There is a famous cut-syllable, ya, at the end of the
first line of the best known haiku by Bashō, the most famous
haiku poet:
The most distinctively Japanese style of garden, the “dry
landscape” (karesansui) garden, owes its existence to
the landscape’s being “cut off” from the natural world
beyond its borders. The epitome of this style is the rock garden at
Ryōanji in Kyoto, where fifteen “mountain”-shaped
rocks are set in beds of moss in a rectangular “sea” of
white gravel. 
Larger Photographs of the Dry Landscape Garden at Ryōanji
 (The Japanese word for landscape, sansui, means literally
“mountains waters”: see Berthier 2000.) At Ryōanji
the rock garden is cut off from the outside by a splendid wall that is
nevertheless low enough to permit a view of the natural
surroundings. This cut, which is in a way doubled by the angled roof
that runs along the top of the wall and seems to cut it off, is most
evident in the contrast between movement and stillness. Above and
beyond the wall there is nature in movement: branches wave and sway,
clouds float by, and the occasional bird flies past. But unless rain
or snow is falling, or a stray leaf is blown across, the only movement
visible within the garden is shadowed or illusory, as the sun or moon
casts slow-moving shadows of tree branches on the motionless gravel.
The garden is cut off on the near side too, by a border of pebbles
(larger, darker, and more rounded than the pieces of gravel) that runs
along the east and north edges. There is a striking contrast between
the severe rectangularity of the garden’s borders and the irregular
natural forms of the rocks within them. The expanse of gravel is also
cut through by the upthrust of the rocks from below: earth energies
mounting and peaking in irruptions of stone. Each group of rocks is
cut off from the others by the expanse of gravel, and the separation is
enhanced by the “ripple” patterns in the raking that
surrounds each group (and some individual rocks). And yet the overall
effect of these cuttings is actually to intensify the invisible lines
of connection among the rocks, whose interrelations exemplify the
fundamental Buddhist insight of “dependent co-arising”
(engi).
The rock garden also embodies the central Buddhist insight of impermanence. Insofar as its
being cut off from the surrounding nature has the effect of drying up
its organic life, which then no longer decays in the usual manner.
Being dried up (the kare of karesansui means
“withered”), the mountains and waters of the garden at
Ryōanji at first appear less temporary than their counterparts
outside, which manifest the cyclical changes that organic life is heir
to. But just as plants look deceptively permanent thanks to their
being rooted in the earth, so the rocks of the dry landscape garden
give a misleading impression of permanence, especially when one
revisits them over a period of years. As participants in (what Thoreau
called) “the great central life” of the earth, rocks have
a life that unfolds in time sequences that are quite different from
ours—and yet also subject to the impermanence that conditions
all things.
The garden at Ryōanji makes a brief but significant appearance
in one of the classics of Japanese cinema, Ozu Yasujirō’s
Late Spring (1949). It comes right after one of the film’s
most famous images: a vase standing on a tatami mat in front of a
window on which silhouettes of bamboo are projected. The scene in
question consists of eight shots, seven of which show the
Ryōanji rocks (of which there are fifteen in total), and which
are separated and joined by seven cuts. (Ozu hardly ever uses any
other transition than the cut, such as the wipe.) After two shots of
rocks in the garden, the camera angle reverses and we see the main
protagonist with his friend—they are both fathers of
daughters—sitting on the wooden platform with the tops of two
rocks occupying the lower part of the frame. Two rocks and two
fathers. Cut to a close-up of the fathers from their left side, with
no rocks in view. In their dark suits, and seated in the classic Ozu
“overlapping triangles” configuration, leaning forward
toward the garden with their arms around knees drawn up toward their
chins, they resemble two rocks. They talk about how they raise
children who then go off to live their own lives. As they invoke such
manifestations of impermanence, they remain motionless except for the
occasional nod or turn of the head.
Enlarged Sequence of Stills from Late Spring
In their brief conversation by the edge of the garden, the two fathers
do little more than exchange platitudes about family life—and
yet the scene is a profoundly moving expression of the human
condition. It gains this effect from the assimilation of the figures
of the two men to rocks, which seems to affirm the persistence of
cycles of impermanence. These images of assimilation capture one of
the central ideas behind the dry landscape garden: that of the
continuum between human consciousness and stone, which is also
understandable as the kinship of awareness with its original
basis.
The opening shots of Tokyo Story (1953), which some consider
Ozu’s greatest film, are also exemplary with respect to the
cutting. The first shot shows a shrine sculpture to the left of center
and behind it an estuary with a boat chugging along to the right, in
the direction of a gradual rise of hills on the horizon. After ten
seconds, just as the boat is about to disappear beyond the
frame—there is a cut to the pavement on the side of a street. A
cart now occupies the left foreground of the frame, and beside it
stand two large bottles (Ozu’s signature shapes). Eight small children
in school uniform walk away from the camera to the right. Continuity
is provided by a parallel between the river and horizon of the first
scene and the horizontal lines of the pavement and houses in the
second, as well as by the movement toward the right. Also aurally by
the continuing sound of the boat’s putt-putting. A ninth child appears
and as he passes the bottles and reaches the center of the
frame—there is a cut to a shot over the roofs of houses of a
train traveling to the right, with behind it the buildings of a shrine
or temple, and then hills behind those. The putting sound of the boat
continues before being drowned out by the sound of the train, and the
almost horizontal line of the train’s passage continue to be congruent
with those of the street, descending gradually to the right. Smoke
issues from two chimneys at left and center, the scene lasting fifteen
seconds.
As the end of the train reaches the center of the frame—the
sound continues but there is a cut to a closer shot of the train from
the hill side, so that it is now moving up along a diagonal to the
left. Behind the houses on the other side of the train is the estuary
again. As the train’s whistle blows—there is a cut to a shrine
surrounded by pine trees and statuary standing on an embankment with
the estuary in the background on the far left. Continuity is provided
by a chimney in the foreground that spouts smoke as the train’s steam
whistle continues. The main line has reverted to a horizontal line
rising toward the right. After six seconds, the shortest scene so
far—there is a cut to a grandfather and grandmother sitting on
the tatami matting of their home in the village, facing toward the
right. The grandfather, consulting a timetable, says, “We’ll
pass Osaka at around 6:00 this evening,” referring to a train
trip they are just about to take to Tokyo, which will initiate the
film’s main action.
Enlarged Sequence of Stills from Tokyo Story
 For each cut Ozu has arranged for at least one formal element to
provide continuity (kire-tsuzuki) between the adjacent
scenes. There are of course other directors capable of consummate
cuts, but a study of Ozu’s show them
to constitute what may be “the kindest cut of all” in
world cinema.