“Confucianism” is a term used by westerners to refer to a
diverse set of philosophical movements that have been variously known
in Japanese as Jugaku (the learning of the scholars),
Jukyō (the teachings of the scholars), seigaku
(the learning of the sages), seirigaku (the learning of human nature
and principle), rigaku (the learning related to principle),
and shingaku (the learning of the mind). There was no single
word in the traditional East Asian lexicon that corresponded exactly
and consistently to “Confucianism,” yet by late-medieval
and early-modern times, there was a fairly distinct understanding
among Japanese intellectuals of an essential unity to the diverse
Confucian teachings otherwise variously referred to. This is clear in
references to the “three teachings”, Confucianism,
Buddhism, and Daoism (and/or Shintō). One of many examples is
Matsunaga Sekigo’s (1592–1657) Irinshō (Selected
Writings on Ethics, 1640), which opens by stating, “Between
heaven and earth, there are three major ways: the Confucian, which is
the way of Confucius; the Buddhist, which is the way of Shakyamuni;
and the Daoist, which is the way of Laozi.”
The most commonly used references to Confucianism in Japanese
history, traditional and modern, are the terms Jugaku and
Jukyō. In these, Ju is the Japanese reading of
the Chinese word Ru, literally referring to “weaklings.” The
latter was a reference to scholars who tended to
work with their minds rather than their bodies and were, as a result,
perceived as being weaker. The term was used by later
scholars in explaining the teachings of Confucius (551–479
B.C.E.). Acceptance of the term partly reflected Confucius’
distaste for coercive force as opposed to the softer power of
ethical examples and the allegedly irresistible efficacy of moral
suasion.
In the west, the term “Confucianism” first came into use
following contacts between Jesuit missionaries and Chinese
scholars. The Jesuit term “Confucianism” is a Latinized
version of the honorific reference to the great sage of China, Kong
Fuzi. Minus the honorific fuzi, Confucius’ name was Kong
Qiu. The relatively recent origins of the western term should not
obscure the fact that there had long before developed, among East
Asian intellectuals, an understanding of Confucianism expressed not
through a root reference to the founder Confucius, but instead to
those who followed his teachings, the Ju, or scholars.
Viewing Confucianism as “philosophy” began, in western studies, with
the Jesuit anthology, Confucius Sinarum Philosophus
(Confucius, China’s Philosopher), published in Paris in 1687
and dedicated to King Louis XIV. This work introduced Confucius’
thought with high praise and selected translations from the Great
Learning, the Analects, and the Doctrine of the
Mean. Originally published in Latin, Confucius Sinarum
Philosophus was soon translated into French, German, and
English. It influenced early admirers of Confucianism and Chinese
philosophy, as it quickly came to be known, including Gottfried
Liebniz (1646–1716) and Voltaire (1694–1778). The anthology was also
known to those who later disparaged Confucianism, including
G. W. F. Hegel (1770–1831) who remarked that Confucius’ reputation
would have been enhanced had his works never been
translated. Regardless, Hegel never flatly denied that Confucian
thinking merited consideration as “philosophy,” even though he did not
regard it well.
In this article, the term “Confucian” is used in reference
to things (people, practices, discussions, texts, etc.) that derive
from or relate directly to the Analects, as well as other
works of ancient literature associated with the Analects and
Confucius. The five classics of ancient China—including the
Book of History, the Book of Changes, the Book
of Poetry, the Book of Rites, and the Spring and
Autumn Annals—are here considered as Confucian classics because
they were, for the most part, thought to have been edited by
Confucius. While modern scholars might well doubt that claim, most
scholars in Chinese and East Asian history accepted the traditional
accounts crediting Confucius with having edited the classics. The term
“Neo-Confucian” refers to thinkers, ideas, texts,
practices, and institutions that developed out of Confucian traditions
as they were reinterpreted in the wake of Chinese and East Asian
encounters with Buddhism. The term “Confucian” could
equally apply to Neo-Confucians for simplicity’s sake, though
differences between Confucian and Neo-Confucian are sufficiently
substantial to merit the distinction between the two groups.
Understood most comprehensively, the importance of Confucianism in
Japanese history is undeniable: as in China and Korea, Confucian
philosophizing in Japan came to define one major if not dominant layer
of the early-modern and modern worldviews. Its lexicographic legacy is
omnipresent in modern Japanese discourse, with Confucian terms playing
new roles in discourses ranging from modern philosophy to science,
religion, the humanities and the social sciences. One indication of
the importance of Confucianism to Japan today is that the modern word
for “university” (J: daigaku; C: Daxue) is taken
from the title of the first of the four books of Neo-Confucianism, the
Daxue (The Great Learning; J:
Daigaku), a text that was understood as the gateway to
learning for adults. This legacy, incidentally, is one that originated
in Japan, with the founding of Tokyo Imperial University and a number
of other imperial universities including Kyoto Imperial University,
but soon spread throughout East Asia. The acceptance of this
designation signaled the consensus among East Asian statesmen and
intellectuals regarding the significance of Confucianism for the
advanced educational values of the region as well as the multifaceted
lexicon of Confucianism as the most apt for conceptualizing and
ultimately translating modernity.
Hegel’s view that the history of philosophy included Asian philosophy
as well as Chinese philosophy, with Confucius as the prime
representative of the latter, influenced the first definition of
“Japanese philosophy” and “Japanese Confucian philosophy.” Between
1884 and 1890, Inoue Tetsujirō (1855–1944), studied in
Heidelberg and Leipzig, focusing on German Idealism and Hegel. A
decade after his return to Japan and appointment as the first Japanese
professor of philosophy at Tokyo Imperial University, Inoue began
publishing his monumental three-volume account of Japanese philosophy,
the Philosophy of the Japanese School of Wang Yangming
(Nihon Yōmeigakuha no tetsugaku, 1900), the
Philosophy of the Japanese School of Ancient Learning
(Nihon kogakuha no tetsugaku, 1902), and the Philosophy
of the Japanese School of Zhu Xi (Nihon Shushigakuha no
tetsugaku, 1905). Standing as Hegel’s antithesis, Inoue presented
a detailed and fairly positive account of Japanese philosophy as
Japanese Confucianism. In doing so, Inoue suggested that well before
the introduction of western philosophy, Japan had developed a
substantial philosophical tradition of its own, one that in terms of
volume and diversity compared impressively with any national tradition
of philosophy in the west. 



Although overtly nationalistic and so not
always cited in contemporary scholarship on the history of philosophy
in Japan, Inoue’s trilogy remains the first extended statement of what
Japanese philosophical thought consisted of. Its descriptions of
Confucian thinking as philosophical in nature decisively impacted
later East Asian estimations of Confucianism. Even as Inoue elevated
Japanese Confucian thinking as philosophical, late-Qing China
abandoned its civil service examination system which for over five
centuries had tested one’s mastery of Confucian texts. That Chinese
thinkers did later recognize value in Confucianism as the most
compelling statement of traditional Chinese philosophy owed much,
ironically enough, to Inoue’s earlier vision of the role of Japanese
Confucianism in the philosophical development, prior to western
contact, of Japan. It is no exaggeration to say that the study of
Japanese Confucianism as philosophy began with Inoue’s trilogy.


Many western scholars typically distinguish between Confucianism and
Neo-Confucianism. As an interpretive category, Neo-Confucianism has a
variety of nuances but most scholars who use the term do so in
reference to forms of Confucian philosophizing that emerged in the
wake of Buddhism. Many of the philosophical positions that Buddhism
endorsed had not been well addressed by earlier Confucian
philosophers. For example, Buddhists often affirmed that
metaphysically all things are empty of self-substantial being. Along
similar lines, Buddhists offered a psychology of introspection claiming that the reality constructed by ordinary experience is permeated with delusions arising from egocentrism and ignorance. As such the reality of common sense is one of anguish or suffering.. As such, it is the realm of suffering. Early Confucians had not typically
discussed metaphysics, apparently thinking that common sense
assumptions about the reality of this world were not in question. As
Buddhist estimations of reality gained a greater hearing, Confucians
formulated a metaphysics affirming the reality of the world of
experience, explaining the substantial nature of the world by way of
the notion of ki, a term indicating the generative force that
is the transformative stuff of all that exists in an unending process
of becoming. In positing this metaphysics of ki along with
various other ideas related to ethics, politics, spirituality, and
humanity, Confucian scholars expanded upon the basics of early
Confucian thinking so much so that many modern interpreters have
referred to them as “Neo-Confucians.”

1. Origins and Varieties of Confucian Philosophy


Confucianism began with the teachings of Confucius, despite the fact
that Confucius in no way saw himself as founding a school of
philosophy. Arguably his foremost concern was to effect a restoration
of the kind of socio-political order that had prevailed, at least in
his mind, at the beginning of the Zhou dynasty (1027–256 B.C.E.). In
search of a position of influence that would enable him to contribute
to a return to such order, Confucius traveled from realm to realm
within the Zhou kingdom, hoping that his ideas about how government
and society ought to be aligned would find an enthusiastic
patron. Although Confucius never succeeded in this, along the way a
group of interested students came to associate themselves with
him. For his followers Confucius appears to have emerged as much as a
teacher as he was a political figure. While Confucius never wrote any
independent treatises or dialogues that were meant to serve as
systematic expressions of his personal ideas, over time reports about
his discussions with his disciples came to be recorded and edited into
a work most commonly translated as the Analects. Some
scholars have long questioned the extent to which the
Analects actually represents a true and consistent expression
of Confucius’ thought. Nevertheless, the text has been accepted
(perhaps naively) by sufficient numbers of followers over the
centuries to make it, whether authentic or not, a work that must be
read and understood by anyone hoping to develop more than a
superficial appreciation of what have been received as Confucius’
teachings.


Confucius set in motion the project of
philosophy as a search for and love of wisdom in ancient
China. Shortly after his passing, around 500 B.C.E., a variety of
philosophical teachings emerged, including those associated with
Daoism, Mohism, and Legalism. So many were the philosophical positions
that commentators of the time noted, with hyperbole, that a
“hundred schools of thought” had appeared. Each of these
new developments in classical philosophy, which interestingly enough
appeared at about the same time as did the ideas of the ancient Greek
philosophers, emerged at least in part as a pointed critique of the
ideas associated with Confucius.


The most original philosophical notion attributed to Confucius was,
first and foremost, that of humaneness (C: ren;
J: jin). Though never so much clearly and concisely
explained as it was discussed and explored, the Analects
suggests that the practice of humaneness consists in not treating
others in a way that one would not want to be treated. Not
surprisingly, this notion has been characterized as the Confucian
“golden rule,” and likened as well to Kant’s categorical
imperative calling on people to act according to rules that they would
be willing to deem universal laws. The Analects situates
humaneness at the center of its moral philosophy, emphasizing it as
the most universal ethical notion. Indicative of that quintessential
nature, almost all thinkers in East Asian history who could in any way
be considered “Confucian” had to address it in their own
writings.


Equally significant in the Analects is the notion of the
junzi (Japanese: kunshi), or the
“prince.” The term literally refers to the “son of a
ruler,” but the
Analects emphasizes that anyone who cultivates himself to the
extent that his virtue is worthy of a prince is indeed a
“prince.” Conversely, it makes clear that those born to
high standing who do not cultivate their virtue are not worthy of being
deemed a prince. In effect, by developing this notion, the
Analects was outlining an ethical perspective whereby even the
highest levels of the socio-political hierarchy could be critically
assessed.


Politically, the Analects suggests that rule by moral example
is far more effective than rule by law and the threat of
punishment. The latter might elicit compliance, but not a sense of
moral conscience. Rule by virtue, on the other hand, not only brings
forth compliance when the coercive power of the ruler is manifest, but
also when it is not. Confucius also emphasized the primary importance
of language and its correct use for rightly governing the realm. In
one passage, Confucius suggests that making sure language and words
are used correctly is the first step to good government (13/3). Without
denying the importance of rule by law, Confucius rejected
narrow-minded legalism. At one point, the Analects (13/18)
even portrays Confucius affirming that it would be right for a father
to conceal the crimes of a son rather than turn him over to the
authorities. The Analects hardly meant to endorse evasion so
much as the responsibility of family members to take care of their
kin.


The Analects is also well known for what it does not
discuss: metaphysics and spiritual matters. In particular, Confucius is
known for asking students who wanted to hear about spiritual matters
why they were interested in such topics when they had yet to master the
moral way of humanity. In another context, the Analects
suggests that Confucius revered spirits, even while keeping his
distance from them. These passages imply that Confucius was not so
much uninterested in metaphysical issues as he was in what he considered to be more fundamental and practical moral
teachings.


Confucius’ teachings were advanced by various disciples in the
late-Zhou period, the most systematic being Mengzi (371–289 B.C.E.),
known most commonly in the west by his Latinized name, Mencius. A text
by the same name conveys Mencius’ most important elaborations of
Confucian philosophy. Undoubtedly the most significant contribution
Mencius made to Confucian thought was his unequivocal affirmation that
human nature is, at birth, good. Confucius had observed that people are
alike by birth, but differ in practice. However, it was not entirely
clear how or in what sense people were actually alike. Mencius argued
for the inborn goodness of humanity, noting how that goodness issued
naturally from a mind endowed with the beginnings of humaneness,
righteousness, propriety, and wisdom. Yet, Mencius also acknowledged
that evil, all too evident in the world, resulted when people abandoned
the beginnings of goodness they were born with. The project of
Confucian learning as Mencius described it was to maintain this mind of
goodness and recover it if lost.


Politically, Mencius defined a more aggressive and confrontational
approach than evident in the Analects. In one passage, Mencius
suggests that when a ruler forsakes ethical behavior and engages in
extreme misrule, he can and should be removed, even executed, without
such amounting to regicide. In another instance, Mencius defines a more
people-centered understanding of legitimacy, suggesting that crucial to
acquiring legitimate rule is the ability to win the hearts-and-minds of
the people. Without that, a ruler might never hope for success. Equally
important was Mencius’ affirmation that legitimate government
consists of ethical, humane government, or renzheng (J:
jinsei).


Confucius was credited, according to traditional accounts, with
editing the various classics of ancient Chinese writing that
supposedly existed prior to his day. While there might be some truth
to this attribution, the classics that were known to Chinese history
have been shown to derive, as a matter of textual fact, from the
early-Han dynasty (206 B.C.E.-220 C.E.). These classics, often
referred to as six in number, only consisted of some five books by Han
times: the Book of Changes (Yijing); the Book of
History (Shujing); the Book of Poetry
(Shijing); the Book of Rites (Liji); the
Spring and Autumn Annals (Chunqiu). Whatever the
truth of the matter, it was widely believed among later Confucians
that the classics they studied had been in part edited by Confucius
and so, in subtle ways, conveyed his understandings of history,
literature, etiquette, and even change itself. In the Han dynasty,
these texts came to be studied widely as part of the expanding
“Confucian” curriculum. After a brief but brutal
persecution of Confucian scholars and Confucian literature during the
Qin dynasty (221–206 B.C.E.), Confucius began to emerge, during the
Han dynasty, as the much exalted and revered sage-philosopher of
China, and Confucians as a more distinctly identifiable group of
scholars.


It was also in the Han that another philosophical system, that of
Buddhism, entered China. Following the fall of the Han, Buddhism
gradually expanded, often in association with the ruling power of
non-Chinese elites. While a conspicuous presence during the Sui and
most of the Tang dynasties, Buddhism eventually fell victim to
imperial persecution at the highest level and widespread ethnocentric
reactions issuing from an increasing consciousness of the foreign
nature of the teachings. In tandem with the reaction against Buddhism
and all of its philosophical claims, Confucian teachings were
variously reasserted. In many cases, these reassertions of
Confucianism were made along such distinctively novel lines that
western scholars have referred to them as expressions of Neo-Confucian
philosophy. The term does have its counterparts in East Asian
discourse in the form of designations such as Songxue,
“the learning of the Song dynasty,” xinglixue,
“the learning of human nature and principle,”
xinxue, “the learning of the mind,” and
lixue, “the learning of principle.”


Undoubtedly the newest thing about Neo-Confucianism was its
metaphysics: while Confucius and Mencius had apparently assumed the
reality of the world, they had not felt obliged to explain that
assumption theoretically, even in passing. In the wake of Buddhism’s
sway during much of the Tang dynasty, Neo-Confucians of the Song and
later dynasties explicitly accounted for the reality of the world by
positing a generative substantial force, qi (:
ki), capable of assuming a variety of forms: liquid, solid,
and ethereal. This generative force was the Neo-Confucian response to
Buddhist claims regarding the essential insubstantiality of the world.
Providing a sort of intelligible order to the world of generative force
was the Neo-Confucian conception of an essential rational principle (C:
li; J: ri) inhering in all things. Together,
rational principle and generative force constituted the basic
ingredients of a variety of expressions of the Neo-Confucian
affirmation of the reality of the world. Theorists often differed
regarding the priority of one notion in relation to the other, or
whether there was in fact any priority between them at all, but rarely
was it the case that later Confucian forays into metaphysical
speculation abandoned either of the two metaphysical ingredients
entirely.


Another novel area of philosophical speculation was that related to
spiritual forces. Confucius said little about them, other than that
people’s proper concern should be how to live in the world of humanity.
Yet following the Buddhist discourses on the afterlife, rebirth, and
various heavens and hells, Neo-Confucians were compelled to articulate
various understandings of the spirit world. One of the more commonly
accepted positions defined ghosts and spirits (C:
guishen; J: kishin) in terms of the
spontaneous activities of yin and yang in the world.
Without denying that there were spiritual forces, this account provided
for a kind of naturalistic understanding of spiritual phenomena.


Neo-Confucians were not always so innovative. Virtually all affirmed
the Mencian line that human nature was at birth good. Furthermore, most
acknowledged that the mind is endowed with the four beginnings of this
goodness as expressed in humaneness, righteousness, propriety, and
wisdom. Supplementing Mencius’ claims, however, many Neo-Confucians
added that human nature was rational principle, giving all of humanity
a common bond with the rational structure of the world, and conversely
giving the rational structure of reality common ground with the
essential goodness that otherwise characterized humanity through human
nature.


The interpenetration of the cosmos and the individual was pursued
along several other lines as well, perhaps most notably in the new
explanations of the ancient Confucian notion of humaneness in terms of
forming one body with everything in the universe. This sort of
mysticism, more characteristic of Daoism than classical Confucianism,
was one of the more distinctive features of many expressions of
Neo-Confucianism. Clearly the theoretical insights of the later
Confucian scholars were not formulated simply to oppose Buddhism: not a
few instances of Neo-Confucian philosophizing emerged as reformulations
of appealing aspects of either Buddhism or Daoism. Such reformulations
prompted many later critics of these innovative ideas to see in them
offensive amounts of heterodox thinking that should have been given no
harbor in Confucian thought.


One example of Neo-Confucians reformulating ideas and/or introspective practices
from Buddhism took the form of the often practiced, albeit somewhat
controversial method of meditation known as jingzuo (Japanese:
seiza), or “quiet-sitting.” With this practice, Neo-Confucians
developed an alternative to the popular Chan (Zen) form of meditation
known as zuochan (Japanese: zazen). The latter was
meant to help the practitioner intuit the essential emptiness of the
ego, also understood as intuiting their Buddha nature, as well as the
emptiness or insubstantiality of all things. Neo-Confucians, however,
emphasized that the introspective moments achieved during quiet-sitting
would lead to a comprehensive enlightenment wherein the person realized
clearly the essential goodness of their original nature as moral
principle and its simultaneous identity with the principle informing
all things in the universe. This understanding of the ethical unity of
the self and world was the ground, as Neo-Confucians understood
quiet-sitting, not for withdrawal or inactivity but instead for a
dynamic engagement with the world.

2. Introduction of Confucianism into Japan: Early Developments


With the territorial and cultural expansion of the Han dynasty into
what is today known as the Korean peninsula, the stage was set for the
introduction of Confucian texts and teachings into Japan by way of the
Korean kingdom of Paekche in the mid-6th century, along with Buddhism
and the essentials of Chinese civilization. It must be noted that an
ancient Japanese text, Records of Ancient Matters
(Kojiki, 712), relates that earlier, Keun Ch’ogo, the ruler of
the kingdom of Paekche, had sent an instructor named Wani, along with a
copy of the Analects and another Chinese text, the
Thousand Character Classic (Qianziwen; Japanese:
Senjimon), to the ruler of Yamato around 400 C.E. Presumably
the intent was that of educating the Yamato prince in Confucianism and
the Chinese language. Controversy surrounds this account, however,
making acceptance of it problematic. Still, if nothing more, Wani was a
figure of considerable legendary and cultural significance who,
according to traditional accounts, was the first scholar-teacher of the
Analects to enter the Japanese islands.


By all accounts, Paekche served as an effective transmitter of
Confucian texts and scholars in the mid-6th century. The most
conspicuous new philosophical force conveyed by this transmission was
that of Buddhism, especially as represented in art and architecture.
Yet, alongside Buddhism came Confucianism, especially evident as a
conceptually-defined philosophical system informing social, political,
and economic relations and institutions.


An enduring early Confucian contribution to Japanese culture related
to conceptions of historical time. In particular, it was in the wake of
the introduction of Buddhism that the Japanese imperial court came to
use nengō (C: nianhao), or “year-names,”
as a means of counting the years within the reign of an emperor. This
system had originated in China, during the Han dynasty, as emperors
named the span of their rule to reflect the agenda and values they
sought to embody. In 1912, with the founding of the Chinese republic,
the practice ended in China, but it is followed even today as the
standard means of counting years in Japan. Insofar as virtually every
one of the nengō used in Japanese history as names for
annual time has derived from Confucian texts, there can be little
question that Japanese understandings of calendric time have been
nuanced in accordance with Confucian philosophy.


Much the same can be said about the names associated with emperors.
Though supposedly descended from an unbroken succession of Shintō
deities tracing back to Izanagi and Izanami, progenitors of Amaterasu
and Susanoo, Japanese emperors, mythic as well as historical, have
taken names that were distinctly Confucian in character. This
connection has remained throughout Japanese imperial history. In this
respect, the Confucian nuances of imperial names in Japan reveal
significant limits of Shintō as the sole foundation for all
things imperial.


To an extent, ancient Japanese conceptions of space also reflected
distinctly Confucian nuances. Yamato and Nippon were terms used to
refer to the imperial realm that came to be known, in the West, as
Japan, but when ancient Japanese spoke in the most universal terms,
referring not just to their own socio-political realm but to the larger
world, they often did so by use of the expression tenka
(C: tianxia), or “all-below-heaven.” This term first
appears in the ancient Confucian classical literature including in
particular the Book of History and Book of Changes
(Yijing).


Cosmologically, the ancient Japanese explained their origins, in
part, in terms that were noticeably Confucian. Both the Records of
Ancient Matters (Kojiki) and the Chronicles of
Japan (Nihon shoki) open with cosmological narratives
accounting for the origins of the world, Japan, and the Japanese
people. One noteworthy ingredient in the narratives was that of the
“five processes” (C: wuxing; J:
gogyō): wood, fire, earth, metal, and water. These
processes were in effect ontological forces that unfolded in
progressive incremental combinations, giving in turn a particular
metaphysical character to a time, place, or thing, as well as a
discernible dynamic rhythm to change. Not surprisingly, the cosmology
of the Kojiki, and the Nihon shoki as well, reflects
the eclectic outlook of Han Confucianism.


Textually, perhaps the most conspicuously Confucian-influenced writing
of ancient Japan is the so-called “Seventeen-Article
Constitution” (Jūshichijō kenpō)
attributed to Prince Shōtoku (573–621). Although this document
was not so much a constitution in the sense of a blueprint for
government and political organization as a set of maxims meant to
serve as standards for political society, it is clearly influenced by
Confucianism throughout. The opening article states, “Harmony is
to be valued,” alluding to the Analects (1/12). In most
of the remaining articles, the Constitution advances a secular
advocacy of Confucian social principles such as the importance of the natural
hierarchy informing the political realm, as well as political virtues
such as loyalty, obedience, ritual decorum, impartiality, diligence,
trustworthiness, moderation, and public-mindedness. Though these could
be easily dismissed as mere platitudes, their affirmation reflected
the extent to which even at an early stage of political development
Confucian notions were privileged at the very core of official
discourse.


The political nomenclature that came to be used in ancient Japan,
including the term, tennō, meaning
“emperor,” also derived, at least in part, from a host of
Confucian texts. To a large degree, Confucius and later Confucians were
teachers who emphasized the importance of learning as both a source of
pleasure and as a means for self-cultivation and even perfection in the
form of sagehood. Given the political orientation of Confucianism, it
should come as no surprise that study and learning came to be
considered the prerequisites for properly governing the realm and
bringing peace to the world.


Important political policies of ancient Japan also derived from
Confucian philosophical teachings. The handen system of equal
land distribution in Japan was an outgrowth of the Mencius’
account (3 A/3) of “humane government.” Mencius explained that people
cannot be expected to be good law-abiding members of society if they do
not have the basic material needs of life including food, clothing, and
shelter. To ensure that people have these, Mencius advocated the
“well-field” (C: jingtian) system of land distribution,
allotting an equal share for all families. According to Mencius, humane
government begins with this system of land distribution. Although
implemented in the wake of the Taika reforms of the seventh century,
this idealistic approach to land distribution was incrementally
compromised by special allowances of semi-permanent land holdings for
Buddhist temples, Shintō shrines, aristocrats, and samurai
rulers. Still, the very attempt at its implementation reflected the
extent to which the ancient Japanese initially sought to realize egalitarian
Confucian thinking about landholding as a means of establishing the
ethical foundations of political society.


Another noteworthy institution was the daigakuryō, or
the imperial academy, established for the education of imperial princes
and aristocrats who were likely to be involved in government service.
Ancient Japan never followed the Chinese practice of selecting
bureaucrats by way of civil service exams based on Confucian learning
and its practical applications. Yet, in sponsoring the
daigakuryō and a variety of provincial schools modeled
on the blueprint articulated in the Confucian Book of Rites,
ancient Japan established an elite educational system centered largely
around the study of Confucian texts and the socio-political values
advanced in them.


Following the Genpei War (1180–1185), a samurai regime was
established in Kamakura. Religiously and philosophically, the Kamakura
regime was far more eager to advance the development of Rinzai Zen
Buddhism, for example, rather than the teachings of Confucius. While
the latter had grown significantly during the peaceful years of
aristocratic imperial rule, they suffered for centuries during the
medieval period when warrior regimes preferred the arts of war as a
means to power over the Confucian foundations of moral virtue and
ritual refinement. The medieval period thus witnessed a relative
eclipse of Confucianism as it came to be enveloped, at best, in a new
syncretic cultural order, typically dominated by either one form of
Buddhism or another.


Confucianism and Buddhism were, however, always closely interrelated
throughout Japanese history. The introduction of Confucianism, for
example, came alongside of the introduction of Buddhism. Later the
Neo-Confucian teachings of various Song philosophers including the
Cheng brothers, Zhu Xi, and Lu Xiangshan, were introduced to Japan
beginning in the thirteenth century, by Zen monks who had traveled to
China for advanced study of Chan teachings there. For centuries, the
teachings of the Song philosophers remained subjects of study largely
within the confines of Zen monasteries, attaining no independent
existence or philosophical integrity apart from Zen. This should hardly
be surprising, given that Neo-Confucian philosophers such as Zhu Xi had
themselves come to develop their Confucian thinking after earlier study
and practice of Chan Buddhism. While Zhu Xi came to criticize Buddhism,
other Neo-Confucians did not see Buddhism as necessarily antithetical
to Confucianism or Neo-Confucianism. Ultimately, however, many
Neo-Confucians did come to be more distinctive and unrelenting critics
of Buddhism than tolerant competitors.


Some of the first indications of an effort to establish
Neo-Confucian learning as an independent branch of study and practice
can be seen in the reigns of Emperor Hanazono (r. 1308–1318) and
Godaigo (r. 1318–1339). Godaigo’s ill-fated Kenmu Restoration, an
attempt at restoring full political power to the imperial line, was
grounded in part in his understanding of imperial authority as defined
by Neo-Confucian texts. This complemented efforts by Watarai Shintō theorists like Kitabatake Chikafusa who, at about the same time, were trying to shore up Shintō arguments for imperial authority. Also, during the Ashikaga period, some Rinzai
Zen monks returned from study in China advocating forms of
Neo-Confucian learning for their shoguns. And in the early 15th
century, the Ashikaga shogunate established the Ashikaga Academy where
supposedly several thousand students of Neo-Confucian teachings
studied. Yet still, the students were Zen monks.


If the inclusion of Confucian icons within samurai architecture be
construed as evidence of the philosophical comeback of Confucianism,
Oda Nobunaga’s (1534–1582) Azuchi Castle, featuring paintings of
Confucius and a host of Confucian sage figures, is surely worthy of
mention. The ultimate standing accorded Confucianism in Azuchi Castle
suggests that Nobunaga’s thinking was moving away from
battlefield strategies and toward the task of governing the realm and
providing for peace and order throughout, especially as he understood Buddhist institutions to be a threat rather than aid to his plans for political control.
3. Early-Modern Confucianism: Major Philosophical Themes


Japanese developments of Confucian philosophy are often discussed in
relation to the Tokugawa period (1600–1868), with scant mention of what
came before, other than to say that Confucian thought had been
submerged earlier in an eclecticism dominated by Zen monks. Tokugawa
Confucianism is typically described by recitation of a succession of
names and schools. Much of this approach to the philosophical history
of Japanese Confucianism derives from interpretations advanced by Inoue
Tetsujirō (1855–1944), professor at Tōkyō Imperial
University, in his monumental trilogy dating from the late 19th and
early 20th centuries. Inoue is noteworthy for having viewed Japanese
Confucianism as “philosophy” (tetsugaku), and for affirming
that Confucian scholars had set forth substantial and diverse
philosophical perspectives in Japan well in advance of the introduction
of Western philosophy.


Vaguely following Hegelian notions of thesis, antithesis, and
synthesis, Inoue described the unfolding of Japanese philosophy by
explaining the dialectical relationships of three major philosophical
schools: the Zhu Xi School, the Wang Yangming School, and the School
of Ancient Learning. Ever since Inoue, Japanese Confucianism has been
most typically explained in terms of these three schools, as
represented by a succession of philosophers associated with each,
including Zhu Xi philosophers such as Fujiwara Seika (1561–1617),
Hayashi Razan (1583–1657), Yamazaki Ansai (1619–1682); Wang Yangming
philosophers such as Nakae Tōju (1608–1648) and Kumazawa Banzan
(1619–1691); and so–called Ancient Learning philosophers such as
Yamaga Sokō (1622–1685), Itō Jinsai (1627–1705), and
Ogyū Sorai (1666–1728).


Rather than recite this interpretive schema, which in many respects,
despite its trilogistic appeal, simply does not accurately represent
developments of Japanese Confucianism, this essay will offer an
alternative approach. Here, Confucian philosophy is explained as a
discourse comprised of major concepts addressed by virtually all who
would be called Confucian philosophers. Quite typically, Japanese
Confucians articulated their philosophical visions by defining terms
that were at the core of their systems. While accounts of the meanings
of words varied widely, an easily discernible discourse developed.


Overall, Japanese Confucianism from the seventeenth through the
early-nineteenth centuries reasserts the
integrity of language, meaning, and discursive truth. This reassertion
was made in opposition to the Buddhist view of language which was,
despite myriad sutras in the Tripitaka, or the Buddhist canon,
rather negative. Or at least this was how many early-modern Japanese
Confucians understood it. According to these Confucian critics, the
Buddhists held that ordinary language lacked ultimate meaning and the
ability to convey absolute truth. Rather than packed with significant
meaning, Buddhists insisted that words were to be viewed as inherently
empty. If wrongly understood as conveyors of substantial meaning, they
became the source of profound error. Perhaps the unifying feature of
Confucian philosophizing in the early modern period was the view that
words were crucially important as vehicles for substantial meaning.
Moreover, words and their correct usage were deemed by Confucians as
absolutely essential to self-understanding, self-cultivation, and at
the grandest level, to governing the realm and bringing peace and
prosperity to the world. In this regard, Japanese Confucian philosophy
can be viewed as an East Asian philosophy of language engaged in a
search for right meaning. This “right meaning” was
considered fundamental to any attempt to resolve philosophical
problems.


Insofar as the ultimate achievement of Japanese Confucian
philosophizing amounted to a relative turn away from nominalist
Buddhist claims about the semantic emptiness of words and the merely
conventional nature of meaning and truth, it set the philosophical
stage in profound ways for the conceptual assimilation of Western
philosophical learning during the Meiji period (1868–1912). Because it
was, when viewed comprehensively, a conceptual movement of enormous
consequence relative the development of modern philosophy in Japan,
the period from the seventeenth through the early-nineteenth centuries
is referred to here as “early modern,” emphasizing its
role in establishing the foundations of modernity, rather than in
terms of the more traditional terminology of historical periodization
where the “Tokugawa” or “Edo” period is often
associated with either “late medieval” or
“feudalistic” developments. Apart from the contributions
of Confucian philosophy to early-modern understandings of language,
meaning, and discursive truth, Confucian philosophizing in Japan
during this period was simply not always related to or an expression
of the interests of the Tokugawa shoguns, nor did it always issue from
the shogun’s capital, Edo. Thus, the terms “Tokugawa” and
“Edo” as historical categories do not satisfactorily
convey the generally progressive proto-modern thrust of Confucian
philosophizing as a whole during this period.

Additionally, Japanese Confucian philosophy emerged in no small part
in opposition to the western religion of Christianity and all that was
associated with it, including the threat of possible domination. While
this was true throughout the Tokugawa period and in the Meiji as well,
it is nowhere more conspicuous than in an early Tokugawa work,
Ethics (Irinshō) by Matsunaga Sekigo. Writing
shortly after the brutal defeat of the Christian-nuanced Shimabara
Rebellion of 1637–38, Sekigo used words rather than swords to combat
what he viewed as the dangerous foreign heterodoxy might mean ruin to
the Japanese polity. Unlike the earlier debates against the Christians carried out by the Buddhists on strictly metaphysical grounds Seikigo aimed to demonstrate the superiority of Confucianism as a philosophy that was universal, in his view, and yet distinctively East Asian and Japanese in its cultural roots. Arguably,
later affirmations of Confucianism were meant to do much the same,
even long after the effective threat of the spread of Christianity had
been stopped by government policies such as Buddhist temple
registration. Somewhat similarly, in the late Meiji, Inoue
Tetsujirō defined Japanese Confucianism as Japan’s first
philosophy, yet he also stood as one of the most outspoken and
vehement critics of Christianity as a system of thought that was
inherently mistaken and completely inappropriate for
Japanese. Throughout much of its history, Japanese Confucianism
has therefore implicitly if not explicitly opposed Christianity on philosophical grounds.


3.1 Language


As various forms of Buddhism dominated the medieval period of
Japanese philosophical history, so did Buddhist estimations of words
and meaning come to inform the minds of many of the philosophically
inclined. While some aspects of Rinzai Zen esteemed components of traditional Chinese arts and letters, the more central spiritual praxis was more renowned for its their anti-intellectualism. This latter stance was well
expressed in the use of kōan, or paradoxical exchanges
meant to facilitate realization of Buddha-nature. The gist of the Zen
teachings was that words, at best, are mere conventions useful for
everyday communication. The transitory, insubstantial way of things
(suchness or emptiness) cannot be adequately captured by the fixed
meanings of conventional language. When transmitted from teacher to
disciple, the highest level of truth could only be conveyed in a
mind-to-mind transmission, one that typically eluded simple
discursive language.


Generally speaking, the Neo-Confucian position of early-modern Japan
was defined in opposition to assertions of the semantic emptiness or
radical nominalism so often advanced by Buddhists. While the
Neo-Confucian affirmation that words convey significant meaning might
seem commonplace, it was hardly so at the juncture of Japan’s
medieval and early modern history. Indeed, the rise of Neo-Confucian
discourse in the Tokugawa should be understood as a reassertion of the
meaningfulness of language and its ultimate value in relation to any
understandings of truth.


An early expression of the Neo-Confucian belief in the ultimate
value of language and meaning was made by Hayashi Razan in the preface
to his colloquial rendition of Chen Beixi’s (1159–1223) The
Meanings of Neo-Confucian Terms (Xingli ziyi).
Incidentally, the latter text can easily be interpreted as a sustained
reaffirmation of the correct meanings of terms in the wake of an age of
semantic skepticism, and as a defense of Confucian realism over rampant
Buddhist nominalism. That Razan devoted much of his final years to
authoring a lengthy colloquial explication of Beixi’s Ziyi
speaks volumes about his view of the importance of language. In his
preface, Razan explained the crucial nature of language by reasoning
that “the minds of the sages and worthies are manifest in their words,
and their words are found in their writings. Unless we understand the
meanings of their words, how can we comprehend the minds of the sages
and worthies?” Elsewhere Razan emphasized that people could never
realize the minds of the sages and worthies in themselves unless they
first understood the remarks of the sages and worthies as recorded in
the words of texts communicating them.


Razan even suggested that thorough immersion in the words of the
sages was the best way to achieve a kind of comprehensive, mystic
enlightenment experience. Thus when asked about the methods involved in
the study of words, Razan explained,
Read them horizontally! Read them vertically! Read them from the
left and from the right! Comprehend their source! Analyze them and
synthesize them until you thoroughly penetrate them from beginning to
end. Ultimately you will understand that everything in the sages’
writings culminates in a unified grasp of principle. When you realize a
mystical unity with the sages’ writings, one in which the self and
those texts are non-dual, you will have read them well! How could that
be true only of the Six Classics? The same method holds for reading
other classics!


Razan was hardly alone in emphasizing the semantic integrity of
words. Itō Jinsai’s most comprehensive philosophical text, the
Gomō jigi (The Meaning of Words in the Analects and
Mencius), articulates both a defense of the meaningfulness of
words, and in-depth, systematic analyses of the meanings of some two
dozen high-level philosophical terms. In his preface to the
Gomō jigi, Jinsai explained his pedagogical approach in
terms of the study of language and meaning. There he stated,
I teach students to scrutinize the Analects and
Mencius thoroughly so that they will discern the lineage and
semantic importance of the sagely Confucian concepts. When so trained,
students recognize the true lineage of [philosophical] notions and
fathom their meanings without error. Too few scholars study such
philological matters as they relate to the study of meaning, despite
the fact that a single misinterpretation can lead to errors that are
hardly trivial. Detailed philological studies of the Analects
and Mencius facilitate understanding of those sagely texts and
keep students from erratically manipulating them by imposing their
subjective thoughts on them.


Jinsai’s emphasis on semantic etymology and philological instruction
was meant to offset Buddhist training and presuppositions: he wanted
his students to recognize the difference between Buddhist terms with
their various nuances and those of Confucianism. In particular Jinsai
was offended to see so many seemingly Buddhist terms in Neo-Confucian
discourse. In an attempt to rid such terms from Neo-Confucianism,
Jinsai took great pains to document the heterodox lineages of words so
that they could be eliminated from Neo-Confucian writings.


Brief introductory essays defending the ability of language to refer
to reality are relatively common in early-modern Neo-Confucianism.
Ogyū Sorai’s (1666–1728) Benmei (Distinguishing
Names), presents an even more in-depth analysis of philosophical
terminology than Jinsai’s Gomō jigi. In the preface to
his Benmei, Sorai highlighted the political edge intrinsic to
language and meaning, at least as understood by many Confucians and
Neo-Confucians alike. After allowing that some words are coined by
commoners, Sorai emphasized that the more abstract and philosophical
terms are the very ones articulated by sages for the sake of
instructing people in the foundations of civilized life. Sorai then
added that because these terms convey such powerful teachings, princes
are cautious in using them.


Sorai next alludes to a passage from the Analects (13/3)
which relates that Confucius had said that if given charge of the
government of a state, his first priority would be correcting the
meanings and usages of words. When asked the reason for this, Confucius
replied in effect that socially and politically, all else depends upon
correct usage of language. Without that, there would be no limits to
which people might go. Sorai proceeds to sketch his understanding of
the problems related to philosophical meaning in his day, adding that
his intent in authoring the Benmei was to understand the right
relationships between words and things so that the minds of the sages
could be fathomed.


In essence, Sorai believed that by rightly defining words he was
providing the foundations for the integrity of a rightly governed
social and political order. Ultimately, then, Confucians and
Neo-Confucians in their repeated reaffirmations of the importance of
language and meaning were not simply indulging in philological
exercises or arcane semantic research. Instead, they were engaged in an
effort to recover the way (C: dao/J:
michi) for the sake of establishing a means to sagely truth,
and a ground for a righteous political order.


Many other examples of the Confucian reassertion of meaning in
the early-modern period could be given. Suffice it to say that the
concern for language so evident in Confucian writings reflected both a
profound turn away from what they considered to be the empty talk of
Buddhists, especially Zen Buddhists, and toward a concern for defining
the conceptual bases for a well-ordered society. The need to defend the
integrity of language gradually subsided as Japanese thinkers
increasingly recognized the importance of words and meaning for
philosophical analysis. This reinforced an emphasis on linguistic truth
and meaning as a means for providing political order, an emphasis that
continued well into the modern period.

3.2 Metaphysics


An important Neo-Confucian contribution to the philosophical
consciousness of early-modern Japan was its metaphysical account of the
world of ordinary experience as fully real. Early in the Tokugawa period, Hayashi Razan was
among the leaders of those Japanese theorists who reiterated, with some
distinctive variations, the metaphysical accounts synthesized by Zhu Xi
during late-Song China. Essentially, this metaphysics explained reality
in terms of two components, ri (“principle” or
“pattern”) and ki (“generative force”).
Ri referred to the rational and moral order of things
generally, as well as that of each and every thing in terms of their
particulars. In Razan’s view, there is a ri for each aspect of
existence, making all particulars what they are in actuality. At the
same time, there is an essential universal element in ri that
defined a larger realm of commonality in terms of what things can potentially be.
Thus, for example, the human nature that defines all people as people
is referred to as ri, indicating that the rational order
integral to humanity is shared in common. But more importantly, there
is a normative, moral side of ri which makes it as much an
ethical aspect of existence as it is a rational one. In the case of
humanity, as well as virtually all of the ten-thousand things of the
cosmos, ri is defined as morally good. This affirmation means,
in the case of humanity, that human nature is good. Viewed in the
perspective of all things existing between heaven and earth, the
goodness of ri means that the world as such is also ethically
good by nature and in terms of what it is to become as well. No doubt
evil enters in, but that is not the original state, nor should it be
the ultimate fate of things.


The other component of reality, that of ki, accounts for
the substantial, creative reality of all that exists in the world.
Ki is the vital, transformative stuff of all that exists,
including things that are solid, liquid, and gaseous. This ki
is described variously in terms of its clarity or turbidity, but
invariably things that exist have it as their substantial being. Simply
put, nothing exists without ki. In certain respects,
Neo-Confucian philosophers such as Zhu Xi and Razan affirmed that
ki was the stuff of reality in order to counter the Buddhist
claim that all things are insubstantial or empty. While admitting that
things are not always as they might seem, Neo-Confucians typically
affirmed that there was a substantial basis even behind the illusory and ephemeral.


Generally speaking, Razan and other Neo-Confucian philosophers who
affirmed the duality of ri and ki added that it was
impossible for there to be ri without ki, or
ki without ri. In reality, the two were absolutely
inseparable. Yet there were moments of equivocation, especially while
analyzing the two notions, when Razan, following a long line of
Neo-Confucian philosophers including Zhu Xi himself, emphasized the
priority of ri over ki. No sooner was this broached,
however, than it was also denied, with the appended insistence that one
could not exist without the other. Nevertheless, later critics of the
more standard Neo-Confucian line rarely bypassed the opportunity to
criticize at length those who privileged ri over
ki.


Itō Jinsai was one such critic. It would be easy to conclude
that since Jinsai differed with orthodox Neo-Confucians such as Zhu Xi
and their Japanese exponents, including Razan and others, that he was
not a Neo-Confucian himself. There can be no doubt that Jinsai was not
an orthodox, Zhu-Xi style Neo-Confucian. But then being a Neo-Confucian
did not necessarily mean that one had to agree with Zhu Xi on all
counts. Indeed Neo-Confucians often criticized one another to no end,
but nonetheless remained Neo-Confucians. Doubt, questioning, and rigorous critique were at the heart of
Neo-Confucianism as a philosophical movement. Jinsai’s inclusion of a
metaphysics of ki and ri, along with his critical
disagreement with Zhu Xi over their relative priority, arguably made
him an exemplary Neo-Confucian. Certainly, there was scant ground for
such a systematic metaphysics as Jinsai affirmed in any of the ancient
texts, especially the Analects and Mencius, that he
otherwise identified with. In this respect, the common
characterization of Jinsai as an “ancient learning”
(kogaku) philosopher who simply rejected Neo-Confucianism is
misleading.


Rather than a dualism of generative force and principle, Jinsai
affirmed an ostensible monism of ki, one which held that
nothing existed other than ki. Yet Jinsai did not deny that
there is ri in the world: rather, he simply subordinated it to
ki, suggesting that while only ki exists, ri
dwells within ki. Apart from its embedded nature within
ki, ri has neither priority nor independent
ontological status of any sort. It is wholly enveloped within
ki. In making these claims, Jinsai was in effect rebalancing
the more orthodox but often ambiguous Neo-Confucian metaphysics, away
from its more standard equivocation hesitantly favoring some sort of
prior status for ri by insisting in a more thoroughgoing
manner a monism of generative force.


A corollary of Jinsai’s outspoken subordination of principle within
generative force was his denial of the relatively orthodox
Neo-Confucian claim that human nature is united in morally good
ri. Rather than a universalistic affirmation of the goodness
of human nature, Jinsai emphasizes the diversity of human nature as a
person’s inborn disposition, ranging from good to bad. Needless to say,
Jinsai saw the Cheng-Zhu claim that human nature is principle, or
ri, as profoundly mistaken. After all, in Jinsai’s view,
ri, which as a written word depicts the veins in a piece of
jade, was a “dead word,” i.e., one that refers to an inanimate
order not typically associated with the vitality of the human world. In
contrast to ri, Jinsai extolled michi, or the way, as
a “living word,” i.e., one which symbolized the dynamism of human
activity.


Jinsai and Sorai both criticized the Neo-Confucian metaphysical
notion of principle, stating that rather than a word with ancient, and
therefore legitimate, Confucian origins, ri was a term that
had derived in part from Daoist and Buddhist discourse and so was often
wrongly construed in Neo-Confucian discussions out of ignorance of, or
disregard for, the sanctity of the original teachings of Confucianism.
Jinsai’s standard on this count was supposedly the lexicon of the
Analects and Mencius, while Sorai’s was the more
ancient Six Classics. Despite their disagreements on the level
of antiquity that should be considered as the source of legitimate
philosophical discourse, both agreed that principle was a problematic
part of it and so should not be naively highlighted in metaphysical
discussions.


Jinsai and Sorai’s critiques notwithstanding, the metaphysics of
ri and ki came to enjoy a degree of philosophical
domination in the remainder of the early modern period, especially
among orthodox Neo-Confucians. Although often modified in one respect
or another, the dualism of substantial, energetic generative force and
rational, ethical order seemed like a compelling and sufficient account
for the diversity of experience. Not surprisingly, both ri and
ki were appropriated in any number of neologisms of the Meiji
period to refer to terms from western philosophy and the sciences as
they were translated into Japanese. One example is the word “logic,” or
ronri in Japanese. The word ronri, when considered
not as a unified word but as two words that can be read apart,
indicates “discussions (ron) of principle (ri),” a
typically Neo-Confucian activity. Although there were Huayan Buddhist usages of these terms, when the modern lexicon of theoretical discourse crystalized in the Meiji period, it was the Neo-Confucian usages that were then most relevant to the new terms coined such as ronri.

3.3 Doubt and the Critical Spirit


One of the more distinctive features of the various expressions of
Neo-Confucian philosophy in early-modern Japan was their shared
emphasis on the importance of doubt in learning. Chinese philosophers
from the Song dynasty, from Zhang Zai (1020–1077) through Zhu Xi,
emphasized the need for doubt and skepticism in relation to achieving
any real progress in philosophical learning. In Japan, doubt came to
have notable advocates, first with Hayashi Razan, one of the earliest
and most consistent advocates of Neo-Confucianism, and later with
Kaibara Ekken (1630–1714), to the end a professed Neo-Confucian, but
one who advanced one of the most systematic expressions of
philosophical doubt in the early-modern period. With Razan and Ekken,
skepticism was never an end in itself, but rather a significant
waypoint on the way toward coming to more solid conclusions
regarding philosophical questions, and indeed, all matters related to
informed engagement in this world.


One of Ekken’s most famous texts, the Taigiroku, is an
account of his professed doubts about the validity of the teachings of
Zhu Xi. Ekken opens his work by quoting Lu Xiangshan (1139–1192), Zhu
Xi’s contemporary, who observed, “In learning, a person should be
worried when he has no doubts. If he has doubts, then progress follows.
As a result, he will learn something.” Zhu Xi made the case for
doubting along similar lines, noting, “Those with major doubts make
much progress. Those with minor doubts make little progress. Those
without doubts make no progress.” Such remarks relating to the need for
doubt and its resolution were quoted and paraphrased repeatedly by
Razan, Ekken, and a number of others, as they sought to realize higher
levels of philosophical confidence or even certitude regarding their
positions.


One reason for the invitation to doubt extended by Neo-Confucians
seems to have been their realization that many Neo-Confucian tenets,
especially metaphysical ones, were profoundly novel. Upon first hearing
these new ideas, students might have many questions before they could
accept them. So, the Neo-Confucians typically encouraged students to
ask questions and reflect critically on the matters prompting their
doubts. By doing so, the critical spirit so often associated with
philosophy as a discipline in the West was clearly instilled in the
early-modern students of Neo-Confucian thought. There can be little
question that the number of extended critiques of Neo-Confucian
thinking in the early-modern period were in part an outgrowth of the
invitation to doubt advocated by proponents of Neo-Confucianism. Far
from a rigid and unchanging orthodoxy that allowed for little if any
questioning and doubt, Neo-Confucianism actively engaged doubt as a
prerequisite to progress in learning.

3.4 Ethics


Confucian philosophy in Japan, ancient, medieval, and early-modern,
is often caricatured as a teaching of loyalty and trustworthiness, that
is, one suited to authoritarian rulers and obedient subjects, as well
as warrior-lords and their samurai followers. No doubt loyalty and
trustworthiness were integral to the Confucian ethic, but equally
important were more universal ethical prescriptions such as humaneness
(jin). Humaneness was described variously, but most often
associated with the injunction not to do to others what one would not
want done to oneself. Humaneness might well be deemed the most
quintessential of all Confucian and Neo-Confucian virtues. While
Neo-Confucians affirmed the ancient and fundamental meaning of
humaneness as the “golden rule,” they added substantially to the
meaning of humaneness by suggesting that being truly humane led one to
become mystically one body with everything in existence. While such a unity was grounded substantially in the single generative force constituting all reality (ichigenki), it was equally a function of recognizing other selves as oneself, and other entities, sentient or not, as part of a cosmic, familial continuum of essential oneness and wholeness. Moreover, the unity reflected one’s immersive participation in the generative activities of heaven and earth, and ultimate identification with the all-inclusive unity of the limitless creative potential of the cosmos. At a more rationalistic level, this unity was equally grounded in a cognitive grasp of the rational principles defining human nature’s goodness and the core ethical goodness of all things and their limitless becoming.


Another ethical notion crucial to Confucian and Neo-Confucian ethics
was that of gi, or justice. Often translated as
“righteousness” and “rightness,” gi
also conveys a sense, in some contexts, of duty, responsibility, and
obligation. To affirm that something or someone is gi
amounted to ethical praise of the highest order, while denying the
same meant virtual condemnation.
Gi was often combined with humaneness to form the compound,
jingi, indicating humaneness and justice, inherently political
virtues that established the clear legitimacy of a regime embodying
them.


From Mencius forward, fidelity to gi was often defined in
terms of one’s willingness to sacrifice one’s life if realization of
gi and one’s continued existence could not be realized in
tandem. One of the most famous debates of the Tokugawa period centered
around an incident occurring in 1703 concerning a group of forty-seven
samurai who had been left masterless (rōnin) due to the
shogun’s forcing the suicide of their lord. The question was
whether the rōnin were acting according to gi
in taking revenge upon the man who had, in the first place, prompted
their deceased lord to commit the offense that led to his being
condemned to self-destruction. Clearly, the issue was not the legal one
of whether the rōnin obeyed or disobeyed the law, but
instead the moral one of whether they acted on the basis of a sense of
rightness and justice. Opinions varied, of course, but that the debate
was widespread and meaningful reveals the extent to which Neo-Confucian
ethical notions such as gi had become integral, substantive
factors in public discourse in early-modern Japan.

3.5 Mind


The early-modern Neo-Confucians commonly described mind as the
master of the body. All of the body’s activities are under the
control of the mind. As a combination of ri (principle)
and ki (generative force), the mind can serve as the master of
the body because of its capacity for clear and unclouded intelligence.
Due to the ri within it, the mind is originally good. Though
evil might intrude into its workings, the mind’s original state
is one of ethical goodness.


The Neo-Confucian position may not seem particularly profound unless
we consider the Buddhist position it opposes. Namely, some Buddhists
held that the discriminating mind is essentially empty and the seat, in everyday
cognition, of delusion and ignorance. Rather than dismissing the everyday mind
as the source of error, or advocating the realization of a mind that is
“no-mind,” Neo-Confucians sought to describe the mind as a real,
substantial entity in which intelligible ethical and rational
principles indwelled, enabling humanity to know both what is, and what
is right. The knowledge provided by the mind was not considered
delusional or unreal, but rather as real as any could possibly be.
Insofar as the principles that dwell within the mind are identical with
those pervading the external world, the mind became the foundation for
a mystic union with all existent things.


Often the mind was discussed in relation to the feelings issuing
from it. Most Neo-Confucians considered human feelings—pleasure,
anger, sorrow, fear, love, hate, and desire—to issue from the mind
when it encounters things. As long as these feelings are expressed in
accord with principle, they are considered natural outgrowths of the
mind. If manifested insufficiently or to excess, the feelings are
judged to be negative and in need of control. So as to enable the mind
to master itself appropriately, Neo-Confucians sometimes advocated a
Zen-like practice called “quiet-sitting.” Essentially a
meditation upon one’s original, moral nature, quiet-sitting perceives
the calmness and stillness of the mind before its engagement with the
world of activity. The latter was typically seen as a source of
overstimulation, one which could easily distract or distort the
mind. If properly practiced, quiet-sitting could enable one to engage
in any activity without overstepping or falling short in terms of
emotive reactions. Such a mind was viewed as one well-regulated in
accordance with the mean.


Neo-Confucian critics such as Itō Jinsai and Ogyū Sorai
objected to characterizations of the mind in terms of
“stillness” and “calmness,” asserting that
those attributes harked back to Buddhism or Daoism, not
Confucianism. Whereas their criticisms had some merit, previous
orthodox Neo-Confucians such as Hayashi Razan had insisted that the
Confucian usage of terms such as “stillness” and
“calmness” meant something profoundly different from what
was meant by Buddhists and Daoists. Ultimately, Razan insisted, the
mind is an active thing, meant to be engaged in ongoing relations with
the world at large and so, “stillness” is being poised for
engagement, rather than an end in itself.

3.6 Human Nature


One of the many terms used in East Asian philosophical discussions to
refer generally to the ideas of the Song philosophers of the Cheng-Zhu
tradition and their exponents in later dynastic periods, was
seirigaku (C: xinglixue), or “the school
of human nature and principle.” The two words “human
nature” (C: xing; J: sei) and
“principle” (C: li; J: ri)
were joined in part as a reflection of the Neo-Confucian
identification of human nature with principle. In Japan, this
position, equating human nature and principle, was affirmed by
orthodox proponents of the Cheng-Zhu teachings such as Hayashi Razan
and later, Yamazaki Ansai and their followers. In many respects, their
accounts of human nature can be construed as an egalitarian
affirmation of the commonly shared nature of all people. The grammar
of most statements asserting the identity of human nature and
principle support this understanding: they leave little room for doubt
that orthodox Cheng-Zhu thinkers were saying that all people have the
same human nature, and that that human nature is principle. To the
extent that they explained the myriad differences in humanity, they
did so by reference to variations in the clarity or turbidity of the
generative force (ki) of particular individuals.


The ethical nuance assigned to human nature was a function of the
Cheng-Zhu understanding of principle in both positive and normative
terms. Not only did principle indicate what “is,” it also
referred to what “ought to be” in a particular entity. In
all matters, including human nature, principle was considered to be
morally good. Thus at the macrocosmic level, the world of ordinary life was
viewed not as the Buddhists saw it in terms of delusion, error, and
anguish, but rather as the bountiful and morally good creation of
heaven and earth, leading to the on-going production and reproduction
of the ten-thousand things of the world in which we live. At the
microcosmic level, rather than stressing human thoughts and feelings
as given to attachments leading to one painful rebirth after another,
the orthodox early-modern Neo-Confucians viewed the person as
ethically good by virtue of their human nature. Those with clear
generative force perhaps better understood and manifested the goodness
of their human nature, while those with more turbid generative force
did so less aptly. Nevertheless, with education and effort all could
perfect themselves so as to realize fully the original goodness of
their human nature. The human ideal of sagehood, more sought after
than perhaps ever actually realized, was recognized as one that all
could, with sufficient effort, achieve.


The orthodox Neo-Confucian explanation of human nature was
frequently affirmed in early-modern Japan, especially in
philosophically informed circles. However, those circles tended to be
populated by individuals representing hereditary, status-bound social
estates. At the top of the social system were the aristocrats of the
ancient imperial capital, Kyōto, including the imperial family.
Yet, during the Tokugawa period, the aristocracy was both respected and
controlled by the samurai leadership exercising coercive governing
power. Apart from the aristocracy, which was by and large restricted to
the ancient imperial capital, the samurai were at the top of the
secular social system. Below them were peasant farmers, then artisans,
and finally merchants. Shintō and Buddhist clergy, often defined
by hereditary lines as well, were esteemed as outside the secular
social system. Thus, in practice, there was precious little
egalitarianism in the early-modern social system.


Reflecting the inequalities of the day, Itō Jinsai challenged
the orthodox Neo-Confucian view by asserting that human nature is
simply the physical disposition (kishitsu) that each person
is born with. In formulating this view, Jinsai was essentially
agreeing with Dong Zhongshu (ca. 179–104 B.C.E.), who defined human
nature as “the inborn disposition” of each person. But
Jinsai also sympathized with the thinking of Zhou Dunyi (1017–1073), a
Song philosopher who is often considered an early exponent of the
Neo-Confucian philosophy that found its most complete form in the
thought of Zhu Xi. Zhou Dunyi differentiated five natures including
the morally strong, the immorally strong, the morally weak, the
immorally weak, and the mean which relies on neither strength or
weakness.


Jinsai did not seek to advance Zhou’s position as much as to expand
it into a recognition of the manifold diversity of human natures. A
scholar by profession, Jinsai’s own social standing was that of a
townsperson, presumably of merchant background. The orthodox
Neo-Confucian egalitarian position was at odds with the official
hierarchy, but so was Jinsai’s view insofar as it affirmed a far
more individualized diversity than the established hierarchy allowed.
Though Jinsai’s theory of human nature as innate, individual physical
disposition was reformulated by Ogyū Sorai, it did not achieve
wide acceptance in early-modern Japan. Despite the extent to which it
was at odds with reality, Confucian pronouncements on human nature in
the early-modern period tended to repeat the Neo-Confucian line that
human nature, as principle (ri), is morally good.

3.7 Political Thought


There is always a political nuance to Confucian philosophizing.
Confucius himself first sought to offer his teachings to a ruler,
thinking that they would provide an effective solution to the
political crises of his times. The human ideal extolled by Confucius
was that of the junzi (J: kunshi), or the
“son of a ruler” that is, a “prince.” (Some
translators have rendered this term as “gentleman,”
“noble person,” or “exemplary person.”) But
for Confucius, the true prince was not one born to the
position. Rather, Confucius most admired the person who cultivated
himself to such a point that he embodied a host of virtues associated
with royal birth. Confucius had little use for the person who was born
to that station but neglected the task of self-cultivation. Such a
person, in Confucius’ view, hardly merited the standing accorded by
birth. This understanding of the true prince implied that those born
to high rank must strive to earn, through self-cultivation, the kind
of respect and right to exercise power otherwise associated with their
standing.


Mencian political thought was grounded in the view that government
ought to be humane, and provide for the best interests of humanity. In
this context, the ruler was characterized as the parent of the people,
and his subjects as his own children, emphasizing the importance that
he should attach to their welfare. Mencius at points explained success
in governing as a matter of gaining the hearts-and-minds of the people
at large, suggesting that without popular support rule would not be
effective. In addressing questions related to instances in the past
where tyrants had been executed, Mencius argued that there had been no
instances of regicide. Instead, those put to death had been common
criminals, having forfeited their legitimacy by their very mistreatment
of people. Implied, of course, was that rulers who did the same might
be legitimately dealt with in a similar manner.


Given the conditional perspective that Confucianism affirmed in
relation to governing, it is not surprising that Confucian teachings
tended to circulate first and foremost among the ruling elite
throughout most of Japanese history. After all, had they had a wider
circulation, the political implications might have resulted in even
more challenges to those in power than actually occurred. Even more
problematic than the views of Confucius and Mencius were those in the
Book of Historical Documents related to the notion of
tianming (J: tenmei), or “the mandate of
heaven.” According to numerous passages in the History, if a
ruler repeatedly abandoned his concern for the people, heaven would
eventually give the mandate to rule to a new line, one that
distinguished itself on the basis of concern for the people. In this
process, the role of the people was instrumental. One passage in the
History even states that heaven and the people are nearly the
same: “heaven sees with the eyes of the people, and hears with the ears
of the people.”


There can be no question that this notion entered Japan, as surely
as the classical literature of China did. That the tianming
notion attained no wide circulation reflects the extent to which
Confucian political teachings in particular were restricted to the
ruling elite rather than taught to the population at large. It must be
added, however, that as Confucian learning became more widespread, even
the peasantry began to understand the basics of Confucian political
thought and developed clear expectations regarding humane government.
Early-modern peasant protest movements and uprisings were often
grounded in the notion that righteous and humane rulers ought to
provide for the just interests of society as a whole. When such
expectations were not fulfilled, it was not uncommon for peasants to
make their dissatisfaction evident through remonstration and
rebellion.


By comparison with the ancient, foundational writings, Neo-Confucian
political philosophy was far more concerned with the project of
ensuring that the ruler understood the benefits of self-cultivation.
One of the most pertinent texts, the Great Learning (C:
Daxue; J: Daigaku), outlines how a ruler
should proceed if he wishes to manifest luminous virtue, noting that
the project most fundamentally involves self-cultivation. For the
latter to be realized, the ruler must first make his mind correct and
his thoughts sincere. To realize this project, he must extend his
understanding of things by studying and investigating them. If those
ruling could cultivate themselves in this way, then they would find
their families well ordered, their states well governed, and all below
heaven enjoying great peace. Effective rule was thus cast as a matter
of self-cultivation on the part of those ruling. This was the central
political philosophy taught by orthodox Neo-Confucians such as Hayashi
Razan, Yamazaki Ansai and their followers in Tokugawa Japan.


One major challenge to this approach came from Ogyū Sorai.
According to Sorai, the orthodox Neo-Confucian position was impractical
because it was based on the assumption that the human mind can control
itself. In Sorai’s view, this was simply impossible because it would
entail dividing the mind into two entities: the controlling mind and
the controlled mind. Rather than expect the mind to control the mind,
Sorai appealed to the Book of History and its teaching that
the rites of “the early kings” be used to control not only the mind,
but the socio-political realm at large. Sorai claimed that his
philosophy was based on a correct reading of the ancient classics,
especially the Book of History, but it is clear that he leaves
a great deal out. Most particularly, he passes over the
tianming notion completely, even though it is at the very core
of the Book of History. Sorai also extolled the rites and
music and their effectiveness for ruling, but never provided great
clarity regarding what these included. Moreover, he repeatedly praised
“the early kings” as the only sages who had and would ever exist in
human history. The sagehood of the early kings was a function of their
having established the way of social and political organization, a way
that could never be surpassed, only followed. Sorai identified that
way, “the way of the sages,” as consisting in the rites and
music, as well as the laws and bureaucratic forms necessary for good
government.


Ultimately, it seems that Sorai’s political philosophy meant to
extol in later history those who stood as the representatives of the
early kings. For him, these were the samurai ruling elite of his day,
and their imposition of rites, laws, and administrative government as a
means of implementing the greatest peace and prosperity for the
greatest number. Sorai surely had little faith in the efficacy of
internal means of self control; instead, he consistently advocated
external strategies such as rites and music, penal laws, and
administrative government as the means for providing, along utilitarian
lines, for the welfare of all.


Sorai’s political philosophy, though one of the most systematic
statements offered during the early-modern period, was never fully
accepted as the philosophy of the ruling elite, despite the fact that
that seems to have been Sorai’s explicit intent. Rather, his political
philosophy ended up being viewed as a heterodox alternative, one much
akin to that of Xunzi in ancient China.

3.8 Education


A most important contribution of Neo-Confucianism to early-modern
Japanese culture was its emphasis on education at virtually all levels.
Orthodox Neo-Confucianism viewed learning as one of the most basic
methods of self-cultivation, one that contributed positively to the
full realization of a person’s morally good human nature. At the
highest level, education and learning were considered integral
components in the realization of a well-governed state and peace
throughout the world.


According to Zhu Xi, learning involved most basically the process of
emulation. This account of learning came to be widely endorsed in
early-modern Japan, even by heterodox thinkers such as Itō Jinsai
and Ogyū Sorai. The model that Jinsai used in explaining learning
as emulation was that of calligraphy. In learning to write, a student
is presented with the example of his teacher, and then is expected to
emulate it. Sustained efforts at emulation lead eventually to
comprehension and the ability of the student to perform thoughtfully
the task that has been learned.


While the practice of learning as emulation was widely endorsed,
early-modern philosophers disagreed over the subject matter of education.
Orthodox Neo-Confucians typically emphasized broad learning in the
ancient classics and historical literature, but most importantly they
extolled the value of studying the Four Books and Zhu Xi’s
commentaries on them. Reflecting the orthodox Neo-Confucian value
placed on education is the first of the Four Books, the
Great Learning . Described as the “gateway” to all subsequent
learning, the Great Learning outlines the series of methods to
be mastered in order for a person to manifest luminous virtue. In this
process, the investigation of things is preliminary. With such
investigation, our understanding of things becomes complete and our
thoughts sincere. Then, our minds are rectified. With this comes the
realization of a cultivated self, one capable of regulating families,
governing states, and bringing peace to the world.


Orthodox Neo-Confucians viewed the Great Learning as a work
for mature students. To provide for the most widely educated society
possible, other texts, such as the Elementary Learning,
addressed topics for younger minds. In early-modern Japan, the
Neo-Confucian emphasis on education also led to the formulation of a
curriculum for women, as is evident in the Great Learning for
Women (Onna daigaku), attributed to Kaibara Ekken, the
Elementary Learning on Samurai Teachings (Bukyō
shōgaku) by Yamaga Sokō, and other educational works
for townspeople and farmers.


Heterodox thinkers such as Jinsai and Sorai often challenged
orthodox Neo-Confucians on matters related to the texts elevated for
study. Jinsai in particular affirmed that the most important works for
students were the Analects of Confucius and the
Mencius. Distancing himself considerably from the orthodox
position, Jinsai offered a series of arguments seeking to prove, on
textual and philosophical grounds, that the Great Learning was
not a Confucian text. While he admitted that there was value in the
study of the ancient classics, Jinsai believed that the
Analects and Mencius were by and large sufficient for
meaningful education.


By contrast, Ogyū Sorai emphasized the efficacy of studying
the Six Classics. In Sorai’s view, the Six Classics
conveyed the words of the sages predating Confucius. He considered
their words unique insofar as they enabled humanity to fathom the minds
of the sages themselves. Sorai did value texts such as the
Analects, but decidedly less so. After all, Sorai reasoned,
Confucius had not been fully a sage, at least not in his strictest
sense of the term. For him, the sages were those ancient figures who
had established the basic way of socio-political civilized life, the
way that Confucius later championed as a transmitter. Yet, far more
than learning through books, Sorai valued learning gained through
practice in following the way. With this kind of performative learning,
students were expected to come gradually to realize a full level of
practical knowledge: knowing how to do something rather than knowing
that something is the case.


The proliferation of education in early-modern Japan, producing
mid-nineteenth-century literacy rates comparable to those of the most
advanced Western nations, resulted from a complex set of factors,
including the development of mass printing, the creation of schools in
the various samurai domains, and the rise of educational movements
related to Japanese literature and culture that were highly critical of
Chinese-style philosophy of any sort. Yet, at the base of much of this
was the Neo-Confucian view, shared generally by orthodox and heterodox
thinkers, that education, whether practical or discursive or both, was
a necessary ingredient in the life of all persons who might hope to
realize their full potential.

3.9 Critiques of Buddhism


The liberation of Neo-Confucianism from the domination of Zen
learning only became possible in the late-sixteenth and
early-seventeenth centuries, following Toyotomi Hideyoshi’s (1537–1598)
invasions of the Korean peninsula. As a result, a number of
Neo-Confucian texts that included pointed critiques of Buddhism came
into Japan. As the anti-Buddhist perspectives of these texts came to be
ever more influential throughout the seventeenth century, an
increasingly common theme in Japanese Neo-Confucian discourse was its
relationship, positive or negative, to Buddhism.


One of the more interesting Confucian critiques of Buddhism was
articulated by Itō Jinsai (1627–1705), a Kyōto-based
scholar who, significantly enough, had neither been brought up nor
educated by Buddhists. In his discussion of “the way,” Jinsai suggested
that the Buddha believed emptiness was the way, and that mountains,
rivers, and land masses were all unreal. In opposition, Jinsai argued
along distinctly commonsensical lines: that for myriad ages heaven and
earth have sustained life; the sun and moon have illuminated the world;
mountains have stood and rivers flowed; birds, beasts, fish,
insects, trees, and grasses have lived as they do now. Given this
evidence from the phenomenal world, Jinsai asked how the Buddhists
could claim that all is emptiness or nothingness. Answering his own
question, Jinsai said that their emphasis on emptiness derived from
their tending to retire to mountains and to sit silently while emptying
their minds. Thus, Jinsai argued, the theoretical principles affirmed
by the Buddhists—emptiness and nothingness—exist neither within
this world nor outside it.


Instead of Buddhist emptiness which he claimed to be groundless,
Jinsai affirmed that the principles of love and social relations are
found in every aspect of life from humanity down to bamboo plants,
trees, grasses, insects, fish, and even grains of sand. Jinsai denied
that Buddhist principles received any corroboration in any level of
existence whatsoever, dismissing them as heterodoxies utterly lacking
any basis in reality.


Jinsai maintained that the Confucian way is how people should
conduct themselves ethically in their daily lives. In doing so, he
asserted that the Confucian way is both natural and universal insofar
as it is understood by everyone in every part of the universe as the
inescapable path of all. Because this has been and will be true for all
time, it is simply called “the way.” Amplifying his point,
Jinsai added that the Confucian way does not exist simply because it is
taught. Rather, its vitality is naturally and universally so. By
contrast, the teachings of Buddhism exist only because certain people
revere them. If those people vanished, Jinsai maintained, so would
Buddhism. Emphasizing their lack of practicality, Jinsai observed that
even when Buddhist teachings are accepted, they bring no benefits. If
they are rejected, people lose nothing. Worst of all, Jinsai said, when
the world followed the teachings of the ancient Confucian sages, it was
at peace, but since Buddhism had become dominant, great chaos and
disturbances have ensued. Thus, Jinsai’s rejection of Buddhism follows,
at least in part, pragmatic lines, emphasizing that at best there is no
gain from it, and at worst that it brings chaos and disorder to the
world.


Jinsai also criticized Buddhists for abandoning ethics, in
particular righteousness and justice (gi). While he allowed
that Buddhists taught the virtue of compassion, Jinsai added that they
ultimately extolled nirvana as the way. This led them to downplay
righteousness rather than recognize it as “the great path of all below
heaven.”


Jinsai emphasized the mind as the seat of the moral sentiments
giving rise in action to the virtues of humaneness and righteousness.
In making this point and at the same time emphasizing the vital
activity of the mind, Jinsai enthusiastically endorsed the views of
Mencius. Jinsai pointedly criticized Buddhists and others who followed
them for claiming that the mind is empty. He also argued against the
Buddhist belief that the mind ought to be made pure, utterly rid of
human desires, and empty like a bright mirror or calm like still water.
Jinsai rejected such images for being at odds with the energetic
approach to moral action that Confucianism endorses. For Jinsai, moral
action emerges from moral sentiments and can never be divorced from the
passions. Because the Buddhists sought, according to Jinsai, to
eliminate passions in their pursuit of nirvana, their view of
the mind was fundamentally mistaken.


Yet for all of his criticisms of Buddhism, Jinsai explained, in one
of the appendices to his Gomō jigi, that the best way to
refute Buddhism and heterodoxies generally was not by means of debate,
but instead by manifesting the Confucian way of ethical engagement with
the world in daily practical activities. Debate, argument, and rhetoric
were, in Jinsai’s view, little more than empty formulations reflecting
descent into the same kind of emptiness that so characterized the
Buddhist teachings one sought to oppose.


It might be added in this connection that Tokugawa Confucians often
sought to outdo one another in their opposition to Buddhism. In one of
his more tolerant moments, Jinsai wrote a farewell letter to a Buddhist
monk, Dōkō (b: 1675?), who was about to depart Kyōto
after a period of study there. In the letter, which Jinsai surely never
meant to be construed as a definitive statement of his views on
Buddhism, he praised Dōkō’s study of Confucianism. At one
point, Jinsai graciously added, “From the perspective of scholars, both
Confucianism (Ju) and Buddhism (Butsu) definitely
exist. However from the vantage point of heaven and earth, there is
most fundamentally neither Confucianism nor Buddhism. Rather, there is
only one way and that is all.” Jinsai’s letter, which was subsequently
published, shocked many Confucians who were far more doctrinaire in
their opposition to Buddhism. One scholar, Satō Naokata
(1650–1719), went so far as to republish Jinsai’s letter with a running
commentary, sharply critical of both Buddhism and Jinsai. The latter
was the subject of Naokata’s wrath because Jinsai, in Naokata’s
intolerant view, had been insufficiently hostile to the “evil thing,”
namely, Buddhism.


Confucian discourse on Buddhism, then, was much more complex than
Jinsai’s critiques alone might suggest. But what is clear is that
during the early-modern period of Japanese intellectual history,
Confucianism and Buddhism came to be fairly distinct philosophical
forces, with much critical antipathy issuing from the Confucian camp.
As Confucian learning became increasingly secure and respected in its
own right, these critiques tended to diminish. Ogyū Sorai, for
example, rarely discussed Buddhism, though when he did his remarks were
critical. Still one senses that for Sorai and his audience, Buddhism
did not need to be subjected yet again to a Confucian critique.
Buddhism had its own relevance for some people at certain times, and
Confucianism had its own. Confucianism had arrived, apparently, as a
largely secular ethic with clear and distinct socio-political relevance
that to many suggested not just independence, but even philosophical
dominance.

3.10 Ghosts and Spirits


Neo-Confucian philosophical discussions, often featuring lengthy
explanations of “ghosts and spirits” (C: guishen;
J: kishin), differed markedly from ancient
Confucianism. Confucius declined to discuss spiritual matters at
length, even when asked about them specifically. Why address the world
after, Confucius asked, when one has yet to master the way of humanity
within this world? Confucius was not disrespectful of ceremonies for
the spirits, but he did emphasize that he maintained a respectful
distance from them. Still, if he found himself in attendance at such a
ceremony, he behaved as if the spirits were actually there. Confucius’
reluctance to discuss the spiritual dimension in any real detail has
led many to speculate that he was an atheist, or perhaps a polite
agnostic.


In the wake of Buddhism, however, it was impossible for Confucians
to ignore the topic of ghosts and spirits. Buddhist literature went
into great detail about the Western Paradise, or the Buddhist Pure Land,
and the many layers of hell where sinners would be punished by wardens
of hell. Graphic depictions of the spirit world,
heaven, hell, demons, hungry ghosts, and angelic bodhisattvas made the
accounts seem all the more credible. In Japan, Shinto as well had its
own traditions of ghosts, spirits, goblins, and changelings. To counter
such discourse, Neo-Confucians formulated their own explanations of
spiritual phenomena, ones offering a more naturalistic account of the
apparent activities of ghosts and spirits. These accounts can be
interpreted as bordering on atheism or agnosticism and so are in
keeping with Confucius’ position, at least as some have interpreted it.
Yet, they were far more lengthy overall than anything that Confucius or
most prior Confucians had offered.


A key feature of Neo-Confucian philosophical discussions of ghosts
and spirits is their naturalistic metaphysical character. Rather than
purporting to describe particular spirits, many Neo-Confucians,
following Cheng Yi, explained ghosts and spirits as “traces of the
creative transformations of the world.” More specifically,
Neo-Confucians often interpreted what appeared to be ghosts and spirits
as “the spontaneous activities of the two generative forces,” yin and
yang. As yin and yang expanded and contracted, spiritual forces purportedly emerged with
yang, and ghostly forces with yin.


While casting ghosts and spirits in metaphysical terms that in
certain respects seemed intent on explaining away ghosts and spirits,
Neo-Confucians also affirmed that just as yin and yang pervade reality,
so do ghosts and spirits. The spirits are simply the expansive and
ghosts, the contractive forces of the world. Recognizing the
interrelatedness of ghosts and spirits with the world at large, many
Neo-Confucians associated spirits with heaven, spring and summer,
morning, the sun, light, music, and so on, while ghosts were linked to
the earth, fall and winter, evening, the moon, darkness, rituals, and
so forth. With this analysis, Neo-Confucians did not deny spirits, but
instead asserted that they infuse every aspect of reality just as
surely as do yin and yang.


Providing a basis for ancestor worship, Neo-Confucians typically
claimed that within a family line, there is a shared generative force,
which entails a shared spirituality. This common spirituality is
communicated through the male line in ancestral rites performed by sons
to their fathers, grandfathers, and so on. Because the shared family
line was considered essential to the shared spiritual basis,
Neo-Confucians emphasized that if a family had to adopt a child, then
it should take care to adopt a son from a male relative of the father
so that the sacrifices offered by the adopted son might be happily
accepted by the spirits. If adoption was outside the male line of the
family, then offerings to the family ancestors would actually be
communicated to the family line of the adopted son, leaving the family
that had adopted the son unhappily neglected. In an effort to curb
popular involvement in spiritualistic movements and practices,
Neo-Confucians generally described as wanton and improper any
participation in a religious ritual or ceremony that had no
relationship with the larger family involved with them.


One of the more heterodox Neo-Confucian accounts of ghosts and
spirits came from Ogyū Sorai. Unlike the naturalistic
explanations provided by most Neo-Confucians, Sorai emphasized the
integrity of the accounts of ghosts and spirits set forth by the
ancient sage kings. Sorai asserted that since the ancient kings had
said that there were spirits, then there must indeed be spirits.
Likewise with ghosts, as well as a host of other spiritual beings. To
question the existence of ghosts and spirits was, in Sorai’s
view, to disrespect the ancient sage kings. Sorai’s insistence upon an
unquestioning belief in ghosts and spirits, however, was more the
exception than the mainstream view among early-modern Japanese
Confucians.

3.11 Environment: Mountains, Rivers, and Forests


One of the great texts of Song dynasty Confucianism is Zhang Zai’s
(1020–1070) “Western Inscription” (Ximing). In its opening
lines, Zhang states that he views heaven as his father, earth as his
mother, and the ten thousand things of the world as his brothers and
sisters. All that fills the space between heaven and earth he
considers as his body. Elsewhere Zhang spoke more metaphysically,
describing that which fills all between heaven and earth
as qi, or the generative force (J: ki) that is the
creative substantial being and energy of becoming in all things. Zhang
also explained qi in terms of the great vacuity, a notion
that sounds Buddhistic but was meant to capture the openness of all
becoming to change and transformation. Yet in the end, qi was
the rock bottom of Confucian realism, metaphysically speaking, and was
in large part the ontological dimension of things that prompted
Confucians throughout East Asia to take the world seriously not as a
site of delusion and ignorance, but instead as a both the crucible of
their being and an extension of themselves in becoming. Reportedly,
Zhang’s sense of oneness and kinship with everything between heaven
and earth left him unable to cut the grass and bushes outside his
window. Other Song Confucians offered their own vision of oneness with
reality by declaring that the humane person forms one body with the
ten thousand things of existence. These visions of oneness and kinship
prompted Confucians to paint landscape (shanshui) paintings,
literally paintings of mountains (shan) and water
(shui), compose poetry alluding to the interrelatedness of
things, and to direct public works projects meant to maintain the
harmony and balance of heaven, earth, and humanity.


Zhang’s “Western Inscription” inspired Confucians throughout East Asia
to develop philosophical thinking about their oneness with the natural
world and its generative being, and to advance practical thinking
about how to respectfully engage with the realm of heaven and
earth. In Tokugawa Japan, this environmental concern took many
forms. Kaibara Ekken’s Plants of Japan (Yamato
honzō), a kind of botanical study of Japanese medicinal
plants and herbs, is one example. In his Instructions of
Cultivating Life (Yōjōkun), Ekken emphasized
the importance of nourishing one’s ki, or generative force,
in harmony with that of all between heaven and earth. Equally
important, especially as an indicator of the perennial significance of
Zhang Zai’s “Western Inscription” is Kumazawa Banzan’s (1619–1691)
“Western Inscription for Japanese” (Yamato nishi no mei), an
expansive, vernacular commentary on Zhang Zai’s brief text. In
his Questions and Answers on the Great Learning (Daigaku
wakumon), Banzan outlined various policy proposals, including
limits on the construction of Buddhist temples and samurai castles, as
a means of preventing deforestation. He also declared mountains,
forests, and rivers – metaphors for the natural world—to be the
foundations of the state, and essential components in the longevity of
political lines. If a ruler forfeited these components of nature and
his realm’s balance with the natural world, then his line would pay
the price. Banzan’s writings reveal that even Confucians in the
private sector were thinking proactively about achieving a sustainable
equilibrium with the forces of nature, one that provided for both the
best interests of human society and the integrity of natural growth
and development.
4. Confucianism in Modern Japan


An important legacy of Confucian philosophy in modern Japanese
history derives from Confucian understandings of the philosophy of
history. This is evident in the transition from the Tokugawa period,
dominated politically by a samurai regime led by a shogun, to the Meiji
period, at least billed as a restoration of imperial rule.
Rather than assuming that history was progressing ever forward to
incrementally better levels, Confucians tended to see ideals in the
past. Therefore, they often advocated a return to a supposed golden age
as a means to improve conditions in the present. Confucius himself had
denied that he was an innovator, insisting that he only sought to
transmit the ideals of the past. Although Confucius might have cast his
work as mere transmission, he was clearly innovating in revolutionary
philosophical ways. The political transformation giving rise to the
Meiji imperial regime, at least in terms of its philosophical
presentation as a return to an ancient, supposedly more ideal model,
was characteristically Confucian. So was the fact that this purported
return to the past ushered in a profoundly new historical period, one
that revolutionized most aspects of life.


One of the philosophical minds behind the Meiji restoration, at
least insofar as several of the anti-Tokugawa, pro-Meiji samurai
leaders were concerned, was the Confucian scholar, Yoshida Shōin
(1830–1859). He was a hereditary master, in the Chōshū
domain, of the Confucian teachings of Yamaga Sokō.
Philosophically, Sokō is best known for his Essential Records
of the Sagely Teachings (Seikyō yōroku), a
brief but pointed critique of orthodox Neo-Confucian thinking. It
advocated instead Sokō’s own understanding of the
Analects. As transmitted to Shōin through the Yamaga
line of scholarship, and then embodied by Shōin’s students such
as Itō Hirobumi (1841–1909), a Chōshū revolutionary
turned Meiji statesman, the restorationism that was at the core of both
Confucianism and Neo-Confucianism was clearly echoed in the spirit of
the Meiji restoration.


The Meiji period, however, soon involved a profound turn away from
traditional patterns and toward more distinctively Western ones. This
was true in philosophy as well, resulting in the relative atrophy of
Confucian studies. However, it is significant that most of the Meiji
leaders who promoted Western philosophical ideas had backgrounds in
Confucian studies. Nishi Amane (1829–1897), often referred to as the
father of western philosophy in Japan, read Ogyū Sorai’s
philosophical works before turning to the study of the ideas of Auguste
Comte and John Stuart Mill. During the people’s rights movement of the
1870s and early 1880s, advocates such as Nakae Chōmin (1847–1901)
often cast their understandings of liberty, equality, and natural
rights in terms of notions drawn from Confucian discourse.


With the swing toward conservatism and nationalism in the late-Meiji
period, philosophical voices such as that of Inoue Tetsujirō
advocated not so much a faithful return to Confucianism per se but to
what Inoue called kokumin dōtoku, or “national
ethics.” This set of teachings was based largely on selective
Confucian virtues such as loyalty and filial piety. Inoue is also
noteworthy for having led the way, albeit along highly nationalistic
lines, in interpreting Confucian developments of the early-modern
period as movements in “philosophy,” using the newly
coined Japanese word, tetsugaku. This Japanese word chosen as
the gloss for “philosophy” alluded back to, in Chinese
literature, the Book of History, a Confucian classic, where
tetsu (C: zhi) refers to the
“wisdom” manifested by the ancient sages of China. In that
respect, the “study of wisdom,” the literal meaning of
tetsugaku, was as much an apt characterization of the
Confucian project as it was one of the western field of
philosophy.


Unfortunately, Inoue’s claim that there had been traditional forms of
philosophy, specifically the Neo-Confucian schools of the early-modern
period, well prior to the introduction of western philosophy had one
disturbing side effect. He increasingly elevated the status of
Confucian notions not necessarily as Confucian notions in themselves,
but as integral parts of a nationalistic, imperialistic, and
militaristic blend serving the interests of Japanese militarists of
the 1930s and 1940s. In particular, Inoue’s later years were devoted
to expounding bushidō, the so-called “way of the
warrior,” as a core ingredient in kokumin
dōtoku. Inoue produced such a large corpus of
bushidō-related literature that one might claim that
the way of the warrior was far more his invention than something
grounded in tradition.


With the defeat of Japan in 1945, Confucian notions came to be
regarded negatively because of their unfortunate appropriation by
Inoue and other philosopher-ideologues. They had manipulated the core
ethics of Confucian philosophy into a teaching of loyalty to the
imperial state and self-sacrifice for the sake of its glory. Those
Confucian philosophers whose writings had been most enthusiastic about
Japan, and so easily appropriated — as was the case with Yamaga
Sokō who had argued at one point in his multifaceted
philosophical corpus, that Japan, not China, was the true Central
Kingdom — have consequently suffered from significant neglect in
the postwar period. By contrast, those earlier Confucians whose
writings had disparaged Japan and celebrated China, such as those of
Ogyū Sorai, rebounded from their former pariah status in
jingoistic Japan to becoming the focus of repeated postwar
studies. Usually, however, because of the overall feeling that
Confucianism of any sort was more ideology than philosophy (and this
was surely the most egregious legacy of its prewar appropriation)
Confucianism has most frequently been interpreted simply as
“thought” (shisō) or “ideology”
(ideorogii), typically of a “feudalistic”
sort. In other countries, including contemporary China,
interpreters are reexamining Confucianism as a living philosophy of
ongoing significance, but Japanese scholars have more viewed it as a
historical artifact, not a vital philosophy. Instead, philosophy
departments in most major Japanese universities today continue to
define “philosophy” as western philosophy, finding relatively little
place for the study of Confucianism under its rubric.


Exaggerating the extent to which the fortunes of Japanese Confucianism declined in the postwar period, one scholar, Kiri Paramore, in his Japanese Confucianism: A Cultural Study, has suggested that in Japan, Confucianism ended up becoming taboo, a topic shunned by scholars and public intellectuals who would not so much utter the word, “Confucianism,” in their writings. As evidence, Paramore cites the oeuvre of Maruyama Masao, one of the greatest political thinkers of the mid-twentieth century. One of Maruyama’s most widely read works, Studies in the Intellectual History of Tokugawa Japan (Nihon shisōshi kenkyū), had discussed Neo-Confucianism in some detail, albeit in the flawed interpretive framework that Hegel had provided. Thus, Maruyama saw Neo-Confucianism as antithetical to change, and its continuative metaphysics linking the natural and ethical spheres, in need of dissolution. 



Written during Japan’s war years, Maruyama identified a succession of Japanese Confucian scholars, including Ogyū Sorai, as vanquishers of the Zhu Xi mode of thought. The latter was, in Japan, little more—according to Maruyama–than an expression of spiritual slavery to the ossified philosophy of Song dynasty China, that of Zhu Xi. The dissolution of the Zhu Xi mode of thought credited to Japanese thinkers such as Sorai seemingly echoed the battlefield advances of the imperial Japanese forces in their conquest of large swathes of China and East Asia. Even though Maruyama was ideologically opposed to the war, his narrative hardly transcended the war rhetoric of Japanese nationalism in its ascent over China. Despite the fact that Maruyama later acknowledged errors and misjudgments in his presentation of Japanese Confucianism, his thinking came to be widely deemed as “a starting point” for future studies of the subject. There can be little doubt that as translated by Mikiso Hane and published by Princeton University Press, Maruyama’s Studies in the Intellectual History of Tokugawa Japan prompted many students of Japanese thought to renewed thinking about Confucianism and its importance in Japanese history.


Paramore claims that in the postwar period, Maruyama soon turned away from Confucian studies and only rarely used the term, “Confucianism” (Jukyō). This shunning of the notion supposedly announced a new era in which, according to Paramore, Confucianism was “taboo.” Put differently, Maruyama’s avoidance of the term, “Confucianism,” established the so-called “Maruyama rule” that “Confucianism” was not to be broached. However, familiarity with Maruyama’s oeuvre proves this analysis mistaken. After all, well after Studies, Maruyama authored a lengthy essay on the Yamazaki Ansai school, “Yamazaki Ansai’s Learning and the School of Yamazaki Ansai” (Ansai gaku to Ansai gakuha). Maruyama’s essay was published in a substantial volume on Ansai’s school, The School of Yamazaki Ansai (Yamazaki Ansai gakuha) in 1980. This volume was co-edited by Maruyama himself, and published by Iwanami shoten as part of its Nihon shisō taikei series. In the essay, Maruyama discusses Confucianism repeatedly, and admittedly, critically. Nevertheless, in discussing Confucianism, Maruyama violated the so-called “Maruyama rule” that had supposedly rendered Confucianism taboo. Clearly, Maruyama’s continued engagement with Confucianism proves that that was hardly the case.


Evidence of the continued vitality of Confucianism within Japanese philosophical discourse is also at the University of Tokyo
Center for Philosophy. Since its founding in 2002, UTCP has sought
to establish itself as an international base for the discussion of
philosophical problems. UTCP has also sponsored discussions addressing dimensions of Confucianism within Japanese philosophy. In doing so, UTCP has emerged as a leader in affirming the notion of “Japanese philosophy” and that of “Japanese Confucian
philosophy.” Much the same is true with the recently established
journal, the Journal of Japanese Philosophy published by the
State University of New York Press. Along with the longstanding
efforts of the East-West Center and the University of Hawai‘i’s
Department of Philosophy, the UTCP and JJP promise to
significantly contribute to the revival of interest in Japanese
Confucianism and its contributions to Japanese philosophical
discourse. 



Along similar lines, the International Association for Japanese Philosophy (IAJP), founded in 2014 by the editors of the Journal of Japanese Philosophy, provides opportunities, through regular conferences and panels, for discussion of a range of topics and themes in Japanese philosophy, including Japanese Confucianism, keeping the latter very much in the mainstream, rather than taboo, going forward. Recent calls for “Green Confucianism,” or an emphasis on environmentally-oriented dimensions of Confucian tradition that might serve as the foundations for an expansion of environmental philosophy within Japanese philosophical thinking, have also contributed to the ongoing relevance of the tradition in ways that go well beyond the confines of family morality, ancestor worship, and the basics of everyday morality in society and the political sphere. “Green Confucianism” is just one of many possible re-expressions of Confucian thinking vis-a-vis the evolving contexts of Japanese modernity that establish the perennial significance of Confucian cosmological thinking, alongside its ethical and sociopolitical and spiritual teachings.
Although overtly nationalistic and so not
always cited in contemporary scholarship on the history of philosophy
in Japan, Inoue’s trilogy remains the first extended statement of what
Japanese philosophical thought consisted of. Its descriptions of
Confucian thinking as philosophical in nature decisively impacted
later East Asian estimations of Confucianism. Even as Inoue elevated
Japanese Confucian thinking as philosophical, late-Qing China
abandoned its civil service examination system which for over five
centuries had tested one’s mastery of Confucian texts. That Chinese
thinkers did later recognize value in Confucianism as the most
compelling statement of traditional Chinese philosophy owed much,
ironically enough, to Inoue’s earlier vision of the role of Japanese
Confucianism in the philosophical development, prior to western
contact, of Japan. It is no exaggeration to say that the study of
Japanese Confucianism as philosophy began with Inoue’s trilogy.
Many western scholars typically distinguish between Confucianism and
Neo-Confucianism. As an interpretive category, Neo-Confucianism has a
variety of nuances but most scholars who use the term do so in
reference to forms of Confucian philosophizing that emerged in the
wake of Buddhism. Many of the philosophical positions that Buddhism
endorsed had not been well addressed by earlier Confucian
philosophers. For example, Buddhists often affirmed that
metaphysically all things are empty of self-substantial being. Along
similar lines, Buddhists offered a psychology of introspection claiming that the reality constructed by ordinary experience is permeated with delusions arising from egocentrism and ignorance. As such the reality of common sense is one of anguish or suffering.. As such, it is the realm of suffering. Early Confucians had not typically
discussed metaphysics, apparently thinking that common sense
assumptions about the reality of this world were not in question. As
Buddhist estimations of reality gained a greater hearing, Confucians
formulated a metaphysics affirming the reality of the world of
experience, explaining the substantial nature of the world by way of
the notion of ki, a term indicating the generative force that
is the transformative stuff of all that exists in an unending process
of becoming. In positing this metaphysics of ki along with
various other ideas related to ethics, politics, spirituality, and
humanity, Confucian scholars expanded upon the basics of early
Confucian thinking so much so that many modern interpreters have
referred to them as “Neo-Confucians.”
Confucianism began with the teachings of Confucius, despite the fact
that Confucius in no way saw himself as founding a school of
philosophy. Arguably his foremost concern was to effect a restoration
of the kind of socio-political order that had prevailed, at least in
his mind, at the beginning of the Zhou dynasty (1027–256 B.C.E.). In
search of a position of influence that would enable him to contribute
to a return to such order, Confucius traveled from realm to realm
within the Zhou kingdom, hoping that his ideas about how government
and society ought to be aligned would find an enthusiastic
patron. Although Confucius never succeeded in this, along the way a
group of interested students came to associate themselves with
him. For his followers Confucius appears to have emerged as much as a
teacher as he was a political figure. While Confucius never wrote any
independent treatises or dialogues that were meant to serve as
systematic expressions of his personal ideas, over time reports about
his discussions with his disciples came to be recorded and edited into
a work most commonly translated as the Analects. Some
scholars have long questioned the extent to which the
Analects actually represents a true and consistent expression
of Confucius’ thought. Nevertheless, the text has been accepted
(perhaps naively) by sufficient numbers of followers over the
centuries to make it, whether authentic or not, a work that must be
read and understood by anyone hoping to develop more than a
superficial appreciation of what have been received as Confucius’
teachings.
Confucius set in motion the project of
philosophy as a search for and love of wisdom in ancient
China. Shortly after his passing, around 500 B.C.E., a variety of
philosophical teachings emerged, including those associated with
Daoism, Mohism, and Legalism. So many were the philosophical positions
that commentators of the time noted, with hyperbole, that a
“hundred schools of thought” had appeared. Each of these
new developments in classical philosophy, which interestingly enough
appeared at about the same time as did the ideas of the ancient Greek
philosophers, emerged at least in part as a pointed critique of the
ideas associated with Confucius.
The most original philosophical notion attributed to Confucius was,
first and foremost, that of humaneness (C: ren;
J: jin). Though never so much clearly and concisely
explained as it was discussed and explored, the Analects
suggests that the practice of humaneness consists in not treating
others in a way that one would not want to be treated. Not
surprisingly, this notion has been characterized as the Confucian
“golden rule,” and likened as well to Kant’s categorical
imperative calling on people to act according to rules that they would
be willing to deem universal laws. The Analects situates
humaneness at the center of its moral philosophy, emphasizing it as
the most universal ethical notion. Indicative of that quintessential
nature, almost all thinkers in East Asian history who could in any way
be considered “Confucian” had to address it in their own
writings.
Equally significant in the Analects is the notion of the
junzi (Japanese: kunshi), or the
“prince.” The term literally refers to the “son of a
ruler,” but the
Analects emphasizes that anyone who cultivates himself to the
extent that his virtue is worthy of a prince is indeed a
“prince.” Conversely, it makes clear that those born to
high standing who do not cultivate their virtue are not worthy of being
deemed a prince. In effect, by developing this notion, the
Analects was outlining an ethical perspective whereby even the
highest levels of the socio-political hierarchy could be critically
assessed.
Politically, the Analects suggests that rule by moral example
is far more effective than rule by law and the threat of
punishment. The latter might elicit compliance, but not a sense of
moral conscience. Rule by virtue, on the other hand, not only brings
forth compliance when the coercive power of the ruler is manifest, but
also when it is not. Confucius also emphasized the primary importance
of language and its correct use for rightly governing the realm. In
one passage, Confucius suggests that making sure language and words
are used correctly is the first step to good government (13/3). Without
denying the importance of rule by law, Confucius rejected
narrow-minded legalism. At one point, the Analects (13/18)
even portrays Confucius affirming that it would be right for a father
to conceal the crimes of a son rather than turn him over to the
authorities. The Analects hardly meant to endorse evasion so
much as the responsibility of family members to take care of their
kin.
The Analects is also well known for what it does not
discuss: metaphysics and spiritual matters. In particular, Confucius is
known for asking students who wanted to hear about spiritual matters
why they were interested in such topics when they had yet to master the
moral way of humanity. In another context, the Analects
suggests that Confucius revered spirits, even while keeping his
distance from them. These passages imply that Confucius was not so
much uninterested in metaphysical issues as he was in what he considered to be more fundamental and practical moral
teachings.
Confucius’ teachings were advanced by various disciples in the
late-Zhou period, the most systematic being Mengzi (371–289 B.C.E.),
known most commonly in the west by his Latinized name, Mencius. A text
by the same name conveys Mencius’ most important elaborations of
Confucian philosophy. Undoubtedly the most significant contribution
Mencius made to Confucian thought was his unequivocal affirmation that
human nature is, at birth, good. Confucius had observed that people are
alike by birth, but differ in practice. However, it was not entirely
clear how or in what sense people were actually alike. Mencius argued
for the inborn goodness of humanity, noting how that goodness issued
naturally from a mind endowed with the beginnings of humaneness,
righteousness, propriety, and wisdom. Yet, Mencius also acknowledged
that evil, all too evident in the world, resulted when people abandoned
the beginnings of goodness they were born with. The project of
Confucian learning as Mencius described it was to maintain this mind of
goodness and recover it if lost.
Politically, Mencius defined a more aggressive and confrontational
approach than evident in the Analects. In one passage, Mencius
suggests that when a ruler forsakes ethical behavior and engages in
extreme misrule, he can and should be removed, even executed, without
such amounting to regicide. In another instance, Mencius defines a more
people-centered understanding of legitimacy, suggesting that crucial to
acquiring legitimate rule is the ability to win the hearts-and-minds of
the people. Without that, a ruler might never hope for success. Equally
important was Mencius’ affirmation that legitimate government
consists of ethical, humane government, or renzheng (J:
jinsei).
Confucius was credited, according to traditional accounts, with
editing the various classics of ancient Chinese writing that
supposedly existed prior to his day. While there might be some truth
to this attribution, the classics that were known to Chinese history
have been shown to derive, as a matter of textual fact, from the
early-Han dynasty (206 B.C.E.-220 C.E.). These classics, often
referred to as six in number, only consisted of some five books by Han
times: the Book of Changes (Yijing); the Book of
History (Shujing); the Book of Poetry
(Shijing); the Book of Rites (Liji); the
Spring and Autumn Annals (Chunqiu). Whatever the
truth of the matter, it was widely believed among later Confucians
that the classics they studied had been in part edited by Confucius
and so, in subtle ways, conveyed his understandings of history,
literature, etiquette, and even change itself. In the Han dynasty,
these texts came to be studied widely as part of the expanding
“Confucian” curriculum. After a brief but brutal
persecution of Confucian scholars and Confucian literature during the
Qin dynasty (221–206 B.C.E.), Confucius began to emerge, during the
Han dynasty, as the much exalted and revered sage-philosopher of
China, and Confucians as a more distinctly identifiable group of
scholars.
It was also in the Han that another philosophical system, that of
Buddhism, entered China. Following the fall of the Han, Buddhism
gradually expanded, often in association with the ruling power of
non-Chinese elites. While a conspicuous presence during the Sui and
most of the Tang dynasties, Buddhism eventually fell victim to
imperial persecution at the highest level and widespread ethnocentric
reactions issuing from an increasing consciousness of the foreign
nature of the teachings. In tandem with the reaction against Buddhism
and all of its philosophical claims, Confucian teachings were
variously reasserted. In many cases, these reassertions of
Confucianism were made along such distinctively novel lines that
western scholars have referred to them as expressions of Neo-Confucian
philosophy. The term does have its counterparts in East Asian
discourse in the form of designations such as Songxue,
“the learning of the Song dynasty,” xinglixue,
“the learning of human nature and principle,”
xinxue, “the learning of the mind,” and
lixue, “the learning of principle.”
Undoubtedly the newest thing about Neo-Confucianism was its
metaphysics: while Confucius and Mencius had apparently assumed the
reality of the world, they had not felt obliged to explain that
assumption theoretically, even in passing. In the wake of Buddhism’s
sway during much of the Tang dynasty, Neo-Confucians of the Song and
later dynasties explicitly accounted for the reality of the world by
positing a generative substantial force, qi (:
ki), capable of assuming a variety of forms: liquid, solid,
and ethereal. This generative force was the Neo-Confucian response to
Buddhist claims regarding the essential insubstantiality of the world.
Providing a sort of intelligible order to the world of generative force
was the Neo-Confucian conception of an essential rational principle (C:
li; J: ri) inhering in all things. Together,
rational principle and generative force constituted the basic
ingredients of a variety of expressions of the Neo-Confucian
affirmation of the reality of the world. Theorists often differed
regarding the priority of one notion in relation to the other, or
whether there was in fact any priority between them at all, but rarely
was it the case that later Confucian forays into metaphysical
speculation abandoned either of the two metaphysical ingredients
entirely.
Another novel area of philosophical speculation was that related to
spiritual forces. Confucius said little about them, other than that
people’s proper concern should be how to live in the world of humanity.
Yet following the Buddhist discourses on the afterlife, rebirth, and
various heavens and hells, Neo-Confucians were compelled to articulate
various understandings of the spirit world. One of the more commonly
accepted positions defined ghosts and spirits (C:
guishen; J: kishin) in terms of the
spontaneous activities of yin and yang in the world.
Without denying that there were spiritual forces, this account provided
for a kind of naturalistic understanding of spiritual phenomena.
Neo-Confucians were not always so innovative. Virtually all affirmed
the Mencian line that human nature was at birth good. Furthermore, most
acknowledged that the mind is endowed with the four beginnings of this
goodness as expressed in humaneness, righteousness, propriety, and
wisdom. Supplementing Mencius’ claims, however, many Neo-Confucians
added that human nature was rational principle, giving all of humanity
a common bond with the rational structure of the world, and conversely
giving the rational structure of reality common ground with the
essential goodness that otherwise characterized humanity through human
nature.
The interpenetration of the cosmos and the individual was pursued
along several other lines as well, perhaps most notably in the new
explanations of the ancient Confucian notion of humaneness in terms of
forming one body with everything in the universe. This sort of
mysticism, more characteristic of Daoism than classical Confucianism,
was one of the more distinctive features of many expressions of
Neo-Confucianism. Clearly the theoretical insights of the later
Confucian scholars were not formulated simply to oppose Buddhism: not a
few instances of Neo-Confucian philosophizing emerged as reformulations
of appealing aspects of either Buddhism or Daoism. Such reformulations
prompted many later critics of these innovative ideas to see in them
offensive amounts of heterodox thinking that should have been given no
harbor in Confucian thought.
One example of Neo-Confucians reformulating ideas and/or introspective practices
from Buddhism took the form of the often practiced, albeit somewhat
controversial method of meditation known as jingzuo (Japanese:
seiza), or “quiet-sitting.” With this practice, Neo-Confucians
developed an alternative to the popular Chan (Zen) form of meditation
known as zuochan (Japanese: zazen). The latter was
meant to help the practitioner intuit the essential emptiness of the
ego, also understood as intuiting their Buddha nature, as well as the
emptiness or insubstantiality of all things. Neo-Confucians, however,
emphasized that the introspective moments achieved during quiet-sitting
would lead to a comprehensive enlightenment wherein the person realized
clearly the essential goodness of their original nature as moral
principle and its simultaneous identity with the principle informing
all things in the universe. This understanding of the ethical unity of
the self and world was the ground, as Neo-Confucians understood
quiet-sitting, not for withdrawal or inactivity but instead for a
dynamic engagement with the world.
With the territorial and cultural expansion of the Han dynasty into
what is today known as the Korean peninsula, the stage was set for the
introduction of Confucian texts and teachings into Japan by way of the
Korean kingdom of Paekche in the mid-6th century, along with Buddhism
and the essentials of Chinese civilization. It must be noted that an
ancient Japanese text, Records of Ancient Matters
(Kojiki, 712), relates that earlier, Keun Ch’ogo, the ruler of
the kingdom of Paekche, had sent an instructor named Wani, along with a
copy of the Analects and another Chinese text, the
Thousand Character Classic (Qianziwen; Japanese:
Senjimon), to the ruler of Yamato around 400 C.E. Presumably
the intent was that of educating the Yamato prince in Confucianism and
the Chinese language. Controversy surrounds this account, however,
making acceptance of it problematic. Still, if nothing more, Wani was a
figure of considerable legendary and cultural significance who,
according to traditional accounts, was the first scholar-teacher of the
Analects to enter the Japanese islands.
By all accounts, Paekche served as an effective transmitter of
Confucian texts and scholars in the mid-6th century. The most
conspicuous new philosophical force conveyed by this transmission was
that of Buddhism, especially as represented in art and architecture.
Yet, alongside Buddhism came Confucianism, especially evident as a
conceptually-defined philosophical system informing social, political,
and economic relations and institutions.
An enduring early Confucian contribution to Japanese culture related
to conceptions of historical time. In particular, it was in the wake of
the introduction of Buddhism that the Japanese imperial court came to
use nengō (C: nianhao), or “year-names,”
as a means of counting the years within the reign of an emperor. This
system had originated in China, during the Han dynasty, as emperors
named the span of their rule to reflect the agenda and values they
sought to embody. In 1912, with the founding of the Chinese republic,
the practice ended in China, but it is followed even today as the
standard means of counting years in Japan. Insofar as virtually every
one of the nengō used in Japanese history as names for
annual time has derived from Confucian texts, there can be little
question that Japanese understandings of calendric time have been
nuanced in accordance with Confucian philosophy.
Much the same can be said about the names associated with emperors.
Though supposedly descended from an unbroken succession of Shintō
deities tracing back to Izanagi and Izanami, progenitors of Amaterasu
and Susanoo, Japanese emperors, mythic as well as historical, have
taken names that were distinctly Confucian in character. This
connection has remained throughout Japanese imperial history. In this
respect, the Confucian nuances of imperial names in Japan reveal
significant limits of Shintō as the sole foundation for all
things imperial.
To an extent, ancient Japanese conceptions of space also reflected
distinctly Confucian nuances. Yamato and Nippon were terms used to
refer to the imperial realm that came to be known, in the West, as
Japan, but when ancient Japanese spoke in the most universal terms,
referring not just to their own socio-political realm but to the larger
world, they often did so by use of the expression tenka
(C: tianxia), or “all-below-heaven.” This term first
appears in the ancient Confucian classical literature including in
particular the Book of History and Book of Changes
(Yijing).
Cosmologically, the ancient Japanese explained their origins, in
part, in terms that were noticeably Confucian. Both the Records of
Ancient Matters (Kojiki) and the Chronicles of
Japan (Nihon shoki) open with cosmological narratives
accounting for the origins of the world, Japan, and the Japanese
people. One noteworthy ingredient in the narratives was that of the
“five processes” (C: wuxing; J:
gogyō): wood, fire, earth, metal, and water. These
processes were in effect ontological forces that unfolded in
progressive incremental combinations, giving in turn a particular
metaphysical character to a time, place, or thing, as well as a
discernible dynamic rhythm to change. Not surprisingly, the cosmology
of the Kojiki, and the Nihon shoki as well, reflects
the eclectic outlook of Han Confucianism.
Textually, perhaps the most conspicuously Confucian-influenced writing
of ancient Japan is the so-called “Seventeen-Article
Constitution” (Jūshichijō kenpō)
attributed to Prince Shōtoku (573–621). Although this document
was not so much a constitution in the sense of a blueprint for
government and political organization as a set of maxims meant to
serve as standards for political society, it is clearly influenced by
Confucianism throughout. The opening article states, “Harmony is
to be valued,” alluding to the Analects (1/12). In most
of the remaining articles, the Constitution advances a secular
advocacy of Confucian social principles such as the importance of the natural
hierarchy informing the political realm, as well as political virtues
such as loyalty, obedience, ritual decorum, impartiality, diligence,
trustworthiness, moderation, and public-mindedness. Though these could
be easily dismissed as mere platitudes, their affirmation reflected
the extent to which even at an early stage of political development
Confucian notions were privileged at the very core of official
discourse.
The political nomenclature that came to be used in ancient Japan,
including the term, tennō, meaning
“emperor,” also derived, at least in part, from a host of
Confucian texts. To a large degree, Confucius and later Confucians were
teachers who emphasized the importance of learning as both a source of
pleasure and as a means for self-cultivation and even perfection in the
form of sagehood. Given the political orientation of Confucianism, it
should come as no surprise that study and learning came to be
considered the prerequisites for properly governing the realm and
bringing peace to the world.
Important political policies of ancient Japan also derived from
Confucian philosophical teachings. The handen system of equal
land distribution in Japan was an outgrowth of the Mencius’
account (3 A/3) of “humane government.” Mencius explained that people
cannot be expected to be good law-abiding members of society if they do
not have the basic material needs of life including food, clothing, and
shelter. To ensure that people have these, Mencius advocated the
“well-field” (C: jingtian) system of land distribution,
allotting an equal share for all families. According to Mencius, humane
government begins with this system of land distribution. Although
implemented in the wake of the Taika reforms of the seventh century,
this idealistic approach to land distribution was incrementally
compromised by special allowances of semi-permanent land holdings for
Buddhist temples, Shintō shrines, aristocrats, and samurai
rulers. Still, the very attempt at its implementation reflected the
extent to which the ancient Japanese initially sought to realize egalitarian
Confucian thinking about landholding as a means of establishing the
ethical foundations of political society.
Another noteworthy institution was the daigakuryō, or
the imperial academy, established for the education of imperial princes
and aristocrats who were likely to be involved in government service.
Ancient Japan never followed the Chinese practice of selecting
bureaucrats by way of civil service exams based on Confucian learning
and its practical applications. Yet, in sponsoring the
daigakuryō and a variety of provincial schools modeled
on the blueprint articulated in the Confucian Book of Rites,
ancient Japan established an elite educational system centered largely
around the study of Confucian texts and the socio-political values
advanced in them.
Following the Genpei War (1180–1185), a samurai regime was
established in Kamakura. Religiously and philosophically, the Kamakura
regime was far more eager to advance the development of Rinzai Zen
Buddhism, for example, rather than the teachings of Confucius. While
the latter had grown significantly during the peaceful years of
aristocratic imperial rule, they suffered for centuries during the
medieval period when warrior regimes preferred the arts of war as a
means to power over the Confucian foundations of moral virtue and
ritual refinement. The medieval period thus witnessed a relative
eclipse of Confucianism as it came to be enveloped, at best, in a new
syncretic cultural order, typically dominated by either one form of
Buddhism or another.
Confucianism and Buddhism were, however, always closely interrelated
throughout Japanese history. The introduction of Confucianism, for
example, came alongside of the introduction of Buddhism. Later the
Neo-Confucian teachings of various Song philosophers including the
Cheng brothers, Zhu Xi, and Lu Xiangshan, were introduced to Japan
beginning in the thirteenth century, by Zen monks who had traveled to
China for advanced study of Chan teachings there. For centuries, the
teachings of the Song philosophers remained subjects of study largely
within the confines of Zen monasteries, attaining no independent
existence or philosophical integrity apart from Zen. This should hardly
be surprising, given that Neo-Confucian philosophers such as Zhu Xi had
themselves come to develop their Confucian thinking after earlier study
and practice of Chan Buddhism. While Zhu Xi came to criticize Buddhism,
other Neo-Confucians did not see Buddhism as necessarily antithetical
to Confucianism or Neo-Confucianism. Ultimately, however, many
Neo-Confucians did come to be more distinctive and unrelenting critics
of Buddhism than tolerant competitors.
Some of the first indications of an effort to establish
Neo-Confucian learning as an independent branch of study and practice
can be seen in the reigns of Emperor Hanazono (r. 1308–1318) and
Godaigo (r. 1318–1339). Godaigo’s ill-fated Kenmu Restoration, an
attempt at restoring full political power to the imperial line, was
grounded in part in his understanding of imperial authority as defined
by Neo-Confucian texts. This complemented efforts by Watarai Shintō theorists like Kitabatake Chikafusa who, at about the same time, were trying to shore up Shintō arguments for imperial authority. Also, during the Ashikaga period, some Rinzai
Zen monks returned from study in China advocating forms of
Neo-Confucian learning for their shoguns. And in the early 15th
century, the Ashikaga shogunate established the Ashikaga Academy where
supposedly several thousand students of Neo-Confucian teachings
studied. Yet still, the students were Zen monks.
If the inclusion of Confucian icons within samurai architecture be
construed as evidence of the philosophical comeback of Confucianism,
Oda Nobunaga’s (1534–1582) Azuchi Castle, featuring paintings of
Confucius and a host of Confucian sage figures, is surely worthy of
mention. The ultimate standing accorded Confucianism in Azuchi Castle
suggests that Nobunaga’s thinking was moving away from
battlefield strategies and toward the task of governing the realm and
providing for peace and order throughout, especially as he understood Buddhist institutions to be a threat rather than aid to his plans for political control.
Japanese developments of Confucian philosophy are often discussed in
relation to the Tokugawa period (1600–1868), with scant mention of what
came before, other than to say that Confucian thought had been
submerged earlier in an eclecticism dominated by Zen monks. Tokugawa
Confucianism is typically described by recitation of a succession of
names and schools. Much of this approach to the philosophical history
of Japanese Confucianism derives from interpretations advanced by Inoue
Tetsujirō (1855–1944), professor at Tōkyō Imperial
University, in his monumental trilogy dating from the late 19th and
early 20th centuries. Inoue is noteworthy for having viewed Japanese
Confucianism as “philosophy” (tetsugaku), and for affirming
that Confucian scholars had set forth substantial and diverse
philosophical perspectives in Japan well in advance of the introduction
of Western philosophy.
Vaguely following Hegelian notions of thesis, antithesis, and
synthesis, Inoue described the unfolding of Japanese philosophy by
explaining the dialectical relationships of three major philosophical
schools: the Zhu Xi School, the Wang Yangming School, and the School
of Ancient Learning. Ever since Inoue, Japanese Confucianism has been
most typically explained in terms of these three schools, as
represented by a succession of philosophers associated with each,
including Zhu Xi philosophers such as Fujiwara Seika (1561–1617),
Hayashi Razan (1583–1657), Yamazaki Ansai (1619–1682); Wang Yangming
philosophers such as Nakae Tōju (1608–1648) and Kumazawa Banzan
(1619–1691); and so–called Ancient Learning philosophers such as
Yamaga Sokō (1622–1685), Itō Jinsai (1627–1705), and
Ogyū Sorai (1666–1728).
Rather than recite this interpretive schema, which in many respects,
despite its trilogistic appeal, simply does not accurately represent
developments of Japanese Confucianism, this essay will offer an
alternative approach. Here, Confucian philosophy is explained as a
discourse comprised of major concepts addressed by virtually all who
would be called Confucian philosophers. Quite typically, Japanese
Confucians articulated their philosophical visions by defining terms
that were at the core of their systems. While accounts of the meanings
of words varied widely, an easily discernible discourse developed.
Overall, Japanese Confucianism from the seventeenth through the
early-nineteenth centuries reasserts the
integrity of language, meaning, and discursive truth. This reassertion
was made in opposition to the Buddhist view of language which was,
despite myriad sutras in the Tripitaka, or the Buddhist canon,
rather negative. Or at least this was how many early-modern Japanese
Confucians understood it. According to these Confucian critics, the
Buddhists held that ordinary language lacked ultimate meaning and the
ability to convey absolute truth. Rather than packed with significant
meaning, Buddhists insisted that words were to be viewed as inherently
empty. If wrongly understood as conveyors of substantial meaning, they
became the source of profound error. Perhaps the unifying feature of
Confucian philosophizing in the early modern period was the view that
words were crucially important as vehicles for substantial meaning.
Moreover, words and their correct usage were deemed by Confucians as
absolutely essential to self-understanding, self-cultivation, and at
the grandest level, to governing the realm and bringing peace and
prosperity to the world. In this regard, Japanese Confucian philosophy
can be viewed as an East Asian philosophy of language engaged in a
search for right meaning. This “right meaning” was
considered fundamental to any attempt to resolve philosophical
problems.
Insofar as the ultimate achievement of Japanese Confucian
philosophizing amounted to a relative turn away from nominalist
Buddhist claims about the semantic emptiness of words and the merely
conventional nature of meaning and truth, it set the philosophical
stage in profound ways for the conceptual assimilation of Western
philosophical learning during the Meiji period (1868–1912). Because it
was, when viewed comprehensively, a conceptual movement of enormous
consequence relative the development of modern philosophy in Japan,
the period from the seventeenth through the early-nineteenth centuries
is referred to here as “early modern,” emphasizing its
role in establishing the foundations of modernity, rather than in
terms of the more traditional terminology of historical periodization
where the “Tokugawa” or “Edo” period is often
associated with either “late medieval” or
“feudalistic” developments. Apart from the contributions
of Confucian philosophy to early-modern understandings of language,
meaning, and discursive truth, Confucian philosophizing in Japan
during this period was simply not always related to or an expression
of the interests of the Tokugawa shoguns, nor did it always issue from
the shogun’s capital, Edo. Thus, the terms “Tokugawa” and
“Edo” as historical categories do not satisfactorily
convey the generally progressive proto-modern thrust of Confucian
philosophizing as a whole during this period.
Additionally, Japanese Confucian philosophy emerged in no small part
in opposition to the western religion of Christianity and all that was
associated with it, including the threat of possible domination. While
this was true throughout the Tokugawa period and in the Meiji as well,
it is nowhere more conspicuous than in an early Tokugawa work,
Ethics (Irinshō) by Matsunaga Sekigo. Writing
shortly after the brutal defeat of the Christian-nuanced Shimabara
Rebellion of 1637–38, Sekigo used words rather than swords to combat
what he viewed as the dangerous foreign heterodoxy might mean ruin to
the Japanese polity. Unlike the earlier debates against the Christians carried out by the Buddhists on strictly metaphysical grounds Seikigo aimed to demonstrate the superiority of Confucianism as a philosophy that was universal, in his view, and yet distinctively East Asian and Japanese in its cultural roots. Arguably,
later affirmations of Confucianism were meant to do much the same,
even long after the effective threat of the spread of Christianity had
been stopped by government policies such as Buddhist temple
registration. Somewhat similarly, in the late Meiji, Inoue
Tetsujirō defined Japanese Confucianism as Japan’s first
philosophy, yet he also stood as one of the most outspoken and
vehement critics of Christianity as a system of thought that was
inherently mistaken and completely inappropriate for
Japanese. Throughout much of its history, Japanese Confucianism
has therefore implicitly if not explicitly opposed Christianity on philosophical grounds.
As various forms of Buddhism dominated the medieval period of
Japanese philosophical history, so did Buddhist estimations of words
and meaning come to inform the minds of many of the philosophically
inclined. While some aspects of Rinzai Zen esteemed components of traditional Chinese arts and letters, the more central spiritual praxis was more renowned for its their anti-intellectualism. This latter stance was well
expressed in the use of kōan, or paradoxical exchanges
meant to facilitate realization of Buddha-nature. The gist of the Zen
teachings was that words, at best, are mere conventions useful for
everyday communication. The transitory, insubstantial way of things
(suchness or emptiness) cannot be adequately captured by the fixed
meanings of conventional language. When transmitted from teacher to
disciple, the highest level of truth could only be conveyed in a
mind-to-mind transmission, one that typically eluded simple
discursive language.
Generally speaking, the Neo-Confucian position of early-modern Japan
was defined in opposition to assertions of the semantic emptiness or
radical nominalism so often advanced by Buddhists. While the
Neo-Confucian affirmation that words convey significant meaning might
seem commonplace, it was hardly so at the juncture of Japan’s
medieval and early modern history. Indeed, the rise of Neo-Confucian
discourse in the Tokugawa should be understood as a reassertion of the
meaningfulness of language and its ultimate value in relation to any
understandings of truth.
An early expression of the Neo-Confucian belief in the ultimate
value of language and meaning was made by Hayashi Razan in the preface
to his colloquial rendition of Chen Beixi’s (1159–1223) The
Meanings of Neo-Confucian Terms (Xingli ziyi).
Incidentally, the latter text can easily be interpreted as a sustained
reaffirmation of the correct meanings of terms in the wake of an age of
semantic skepticism, and as a defense of Confucian realism over rampant
Buddhist nominalism. That Razan devoted much of his final years to
authoring a lengthy colloquial explication of Beixi’s Ziyi
speaks volumes about his view of the importance of language. In his
preface, Razan explained the crucial nature of language by reasoning
that “the minds of the sages and worthies are manifest in their words,
and their words are found in their writings. Unless we understand the
meanings of their words, how can we comprehend the minds of the sages
and worthies?” Elsewhere Razan emphasized that people could never
realize the minds of the sages and worthies in themselves unless they
first understood the remarks of the sages and worthies as recorded in
the words of texts communicating them.
Razan even suggested that thorough immersion in the words of the
sages was the best way to achieve a kind of comprehensive, mystic
enlightenment experience. Thus when asked about the methods involved in
the study of words, Razan explained,
Razan was hardly alone in emphasizing the semantic integrity of
words. Itō Jinsai’s most comprehensive philosophical text, the
Gomō jigi (The Meaning of Words in the Analects and
Mencius), articulates both a defense of the meaningfulness of
words, and in-depth, systematic analyses of the meanings of some two
dozen high-level philosophical terms. In his preface to the
Gomō jigi, Jinsai explained his pedagogical approach in
terms of the study of language and meaning. There he stated,
Jinsai’s emphasis on semantic etymology and philological instruction
was meant to offset Buddhist training and presuppositions: he wanted
his students to recognize the difference between Buddhist terms with
their various nuances and those of Confucianism. In particular Jinsai
was offended to see so many seemingly Buddhist terms in Neo-Confucian
discourse. In an attempt to rid such terms from Neo-Confucianism,
Jinsai took great pains to document the heterodox lineages of words so
that they could be eliminated from Neo-Confucian writings.
Brief introductory essays defending the ability of language to refer
to reality are relatively common in early-modern Neo-Confucianism.
Ogyū Sorai’s (1666–1728) Benmei (Distinguishing
Names), presents an even more in-depth analysis of philosophical
terminology than Jinsai’s Gomō jigi. In the preface to
his Benmei, Sorai highlighted the political edge intrinsic to
language and meaning, at least as understood by many Confucians and
Neo-Confucians alike. After allowing that some words are coined by
commoners, Sorai emphasized that the more abstract and philosophical
terms are the very ones articulated by sages for the sake of
instructing people in the foundations of civilized life. Sorai then
added that because these terms convey such powerful teachings, princes
are cautious in using them.
Sorai next alludes to a passage from the Analects (13/3)
which relates that Confucius had said that if given charge of the
government of a state, his first priority would be correcting the
meanings and usages of words. When asked the reason for this, Confucius
replied in effect that socially and politically, all else depends upon
correct usage of language. Without that, there would be no limits to
which people might go. Sorai proceeds to sketch his understanding of
the problems related to philosophical meaning in his day, adding that
his intent in authoring the Benmei was to understand the right
relationships between words and things so that the minds of the sages
could be fathomed.
In essence, Sorai believed that by rightly defining words he was
providing the foundations for the integrity of a rightly governed
social and political order. Ultimately, then, Confucians and
Neo-Confucians in their repeated reaffirmations of the importance of
language and meaning were not simply indulging in philological
exercises or arcane semantic research. Instead, they were engaged in an
effort to recover the way (C: dao/J:
michi) for the sake of establishing a means to sagely truth,
and a ground for a righteous political order.
Many other examples of the Confucian reassertion of meaning in
the early-modern period could be given. Suffice it to say that the
concern for language so evident in Confucian writings reflected both a
profound turn away from what they considered to be the empty talk of
Buddhists, especially Zen Buddhists, and toward a concern for defining
the conceptual bases for a well-ordered society. The need to defend the
integrity of language gradually subsided as Japanese thinkers
increasingly recognized the importance of words and meaning for
philosophical analysis. This reinforced an emphasis on linguistic truth
and meaning as a means for providing political order, an emphasis that
continued well into the modern period.
An important Neo-Confucian contribution to the philosophical
consciousness of early-modern Japan was its metaphysical account of the
world of ordinary experience as fully real. Early in the Tokugawa period, Hayashi Razan was
among the leaders of those Japanese theorists who reiterated, with some
distinctive variations, the metaphysical accounts synthesized by Zhu Xi
during late-Song China. Essentially, this metaphysics explained reality
in terms of two components, ri (“principle” or
“pattern”) and ki (“generative force”).
Ri referred to the rational and moral order of things
generally, as well as that of each and every thing in terms of their
particulars. In Razan’s view, there is a ri for each aspect of
existence, making all particulars what they are in actuality. At the
same time, there is an essential universal element in ri that
defined a larger realm of commonality in terms of what things can potentially be.
Thus, for example, the human nature that defines all people as people
is referred to as ri, indicating that the rational order
integral to humanity is shared in common. But more importantly, there
is a normative, moral side of ri which makes it as much an
ethical aspect of existence as it is a rational one. In the case of
humanity, as well as virtually all of the ten-thousand things of the
cosmos, ri is defined as morally good. This affirmation means,
in the case of humanity, that human nature is good. Viewed in the
perspective of all things existing between heaven and earth, the
goodness of ri means that the world as such is also ethically
good by nature and in terms of what it is to become as well. No doubt
evil enters in, but that is not the original state, nor should it be
the ultimate fate of things.
The other component of reality, that of ki, accounts for
the substantial, creative reality of all that exists in the world.
Ki is the vital, transformative stuff of all that exists,
including things that are solid, liquid, and gaseous. This ki
is described variously in terms of its clarity or turbidity, but
invariably things that exist have it as their substantial being. Simply
put, nothing exists without ki. In certain respects,
Neo-Confucian philosophers such as Zhu Xi and Razan affirmed that
ki was the stuff of reality in order to counter the Buddhist
claim that all things are insubstantial or empty. While admitting that
things are not always as they might seem, Neo-Confucians typically
affirmed that there was a substantial basis even behind the illusory and ephemeral.
Generally speaking, Razan and other Neo-Confucian philosophers who
affirmed the duality of ri and ki added that it was
impossible for there to be ri without ki, or
ki without ri. In reality, the two were absolutely
inseparable. Yet there were moments of equivocation, especially while
analyzing the two notions, when Razan, following a long line of
Neo-Confucian philosophers including Zhu Xi himself, emphasized the
priority of ri over ki. No sooner was this broached,
however, than it was also denied, with the appended insistence that one
could not exist without the other. Nevertheless, later critics of the
more standard Neo-Confucian line rarely bypassed the opportunity to
criticize at length those who privileged ri over
ki.
Itō Jinsai was one such critic. It would be easy to conclude
that since Jinsai differed with orthodox Neo-Confucians such as Zhu Xi
and their Japanese exponents, including Razan and others, that he was
not a Neo-Confucian himself. There can be no doubt that Jinsai was not
an orthodox, Zhu-Xi style Neo-Confucian. But then being a Neo-Confucian
did not necessarily mean that one had to agree with Zhu Xi on all
counts. Indeed Neo-Confucians often criticized one another to no end,
but nonetheless remained Neo-Confucians. Doubt, questioning, and rigorous critique were at the heart of
Neo-Confucianism as a philosophical movement. Jinsai’s inclusion of a
metaphysics of ki and ri, along with his critical
disagreement with Zhu Xi over their relative priority, arguably made
him an exemplary Neo-Confucian. Certainly, there was scant ground for
such a systematic metaphysics as Jinsai affirmed in any of the ancient
texts, especially the Analects and Mencius, that he
otherwise identified with. In this respect, the common
characterization of Jinsai as an “ancient learning”
(kogaku) philosopher who simply rejected Neo-Confucianism is
misleading.
Rather than a dualism of generative force and principle, Jinsai
affirmed an ostensible monism of ki, one which held that
nothing existed other than ki. Yet Jinsai did not deny that
there is ri in the world: rather, he simply subordinated it to
ki, suggesting that while only ki exists, ri
dwells within ki. Apart from its embedded nature within
ki, ri has neither priority nor independent
ontological status of any sort. It is wholly enveloped within
ki. In making these claims, Jinsai was in effect rebalancing
the more orthodox but often ambiguous Neo-Confucian metaphysics, away
from its more standard equivocation hesitantly favoring some sort of
prior status for ri by insisting in a more thoroughgoing
manner a monism of generative force.
A corollary of Jinsai’s outspoken subordination of principle within
generative force was his denial of the relatively orthodox
Neo-Confucian claim that human nature is united in morally good
ri. Rather than a universalistic affirmation of the goodness
of human nature, Jinsai emphasizes the diversity of human nature as a
person’s inborn disposition, ranging from good to bad. Needless to say,
Jinsai saw the Cheng-Zhu claim that human nature is principle, or
ri, as profoundly mistaken. After all, in Jinsai’s view,
ri, which as a written word depicts the veins in a piece of
jade, was a “dead word,” i.e., one that refers to an inanimate
order not typically associated with the vitality of the human world. In
contrast to ri, Jinsai extolled michi, or the way, as
a “living word,” i.e., one which symbolized the dynamism of human
activity.
Jinsai and Sorai both criticized the Neo-Confucian metaphysical
notion of principle, stating that rather than a word with ancient, and
therefore legitimate, Confucian origins, ri was a term that
had derived in part from Daoist and Buddhist discourse and so was often
wrongly construed in Neo-Confucian discussions out of ignorance of, or
disregard for, the sanctity of the original teachings of Confucianism.
Jinsai’s standard on this count was supposedly the lexicon of the
Analects and Mencius, while Sorai’s was the more
ancient Six Classics. Despite their disagreements on the level
of antiquity that should be considered as the source of legitimate
philosophical discourse, both agreed that principle was a problematic
part of it and so should not be naively highlighted in metaphysical
discussions.
Jinsai and Sorai’s critiques notwithstanding, the metaphysics of
ri and ki came to enjoy a degree of philosophical
domination in the remainder of the early modern period, especially
among orthodox Neo-Confucians. Although often modified in one respect
or another, the dualism of substantial, energetic generative force and
rational, ethical order seemed like a compelling and sufficient account
for the diversity of experience. Not surprisingly, both ri and
ki were appropriated in any number of neologisms of the Meiji
period to refer to terms from western philosophy and the sciences as
they were translated into Japanese. One example is the word “logic,” or
ronri in Japanese. The word ronri, when considered
not as a unified word but as two words that can be read apart,
indicates “discussions (ron) of principle (ri),” a
typically Neo-Confucian activity. Although there were Huayan Buddhist usages of these terms, when the modern lexicon of theoretical discourse crystalized in the Meiji period, it was the Neo-Confucian usages that were then most relevant to the new terms coined such as ronri.
One of the more distinctive features of the various expressions of
Neo-Confucian philosophy in early-modern Japan was their shared
emphasis on the importance of doubt in learning. Chinese philosophers
from the Song dynasty, from Zhang Zai (1020–1077) through Zhu Xi,
emphasized the need for doubt and skepticism in relation to achieving
any real progress in philosophical learning. In Japan, doubt came to
have notable advocates, first with Hayashi Razan, one of the earliest
and most consistent advocates of Neo-Confucianism, and later with
Kaibara Ekken (1630–1714), to the end a professed Neo-Confucian, but
one who advanced one of the most systematic expressions of
philosophical doubt in the early-modern period. With Razan and Ekken,
skepticism was never an end in itself, but rather a significant
waypoint on the way toward coming to more solid conclusions
regarding philosophical questions, and indeed, all matters related to
informed engagement in this world.
One of Ekken’s most famous texts, the Taigiroku, is an
account of his professed doubts about the validity of the teachings of
Zhu Xi. Ekken opens his work by quoting Lu Xiangshan (1139–1192), Zhu
Xi’s contemporary, who observed, “In learning, a person should be
worried when he has no doubts. If he has doubts, then progress follows.
As a result, he will learn something.” Zhu Xi made the case for
doubting along similar lines, noting, “Those with major doubts make
much progress. Those with minor doubts make little progress. Those
without doubts make no progress.” Such remarks relating to the need for
doubt and its resolution were quoted and paraphrased repeatedly by
Razan, Ekken, and a number of others, as they sought to realize higher
levels of philosophical confidence or even certitude regarding their
positions.
One reason for the invitation to doubt extended by Neo-Confucians
seems to have been their realization that many Neo-Confucian tenets,
especially metaphysical ones, were profoundly novel. Upon first hearing
these new ideas, students might have many questions before they could
accept them. So, the Neo-Confucians typically encouraged students to
ask questions and reflect critically on the matters prompting their
doubts. By doing so, the critical spirit so often associated with
philosophy as a discipline in the West was clearly instilled in the
early-modern students of Neo-Confucian thought. There can be little
question that the number of extended critiques of Neo-Confucian
thinking in the early-modern period were in part an outgrowth of the
invitation to doubt advocated by proponents of Neo-Confucianism. Far
from a rigid and unchanging orthodoxy that allowed for little if any
questioning and doubt, Neo-Confucianism actively engaged doubt as a
prerequisite to progress in learning.
Confucian philosophy in Japan, ancient, medieval, and early-modern,
is often caricatured as a teaching of loyalty and trustworthiness, that
is, one suited to authoritarian rulers and obedient subjects, as well
as warrior-lords and their samurai followers. No doubt loyalty and
trustworthiness were integral to the Confucian ethic, but equally
important were more universal ethical prescriptions such as humaneness
(jin). Humaneness was described variously, but most often
associated with the injunction not to do to others what one would not
want done to oneself. Humaneness might well be deemed the most
quintessential of all Confucian and Neo-Confucian virtues. While
Neo-Confucians affirmed the ancient and fundamental meaning of
humaneness as the “golden rule,” they added substantially to the
meaning of humaneness by suggesting that being truly humane led one to
become mystically one body with everything in existence. While such a unity was grounded substantially in the single generative force constituting all reality (ichigenki), it was equally a function of recognizing other selves as oneself, and other entities, sentient or not, as part of a cosmic, familial continuum of essential oneness and wholeness. Moreover, the unity reflected one’s immersive participation in the generative activities of heaven and earth, and ultimate identification with the all-inclusive unity of the limitless creative potential of the cosmos. At a more rationalistic level, this unity was equally grounded in a cognitive grasp of the rational principles defining human nature’s goodness and the core ethical goodness of all things and their limitless becoming.
Another ethical notion crucial to Confucian and Neo-Confucian ethics
was that of gi, or justice. Often translated as
“righteousness” and “rightness,” gi
also conveys a sense, in some contexts, of duty, responsibility, and
obligation. To affirm that something or someone is gi
amounted to ethical praise of the highest order, while denying the
same meant virtual condemnation.
Gi was often combined with humaneness to form the compound,
jingi, indicating humaneness and justice, inherently political
virtues that established the clear legitimacy of a regime embodying
them.
From Mencius forward, fidelity to gi was often defined in
terms of one’s willingness to sacrifice one’s life if realization of
gi and one’s continued existence could not be realized in
tandem. One of the most famous debates of the Tokugawa period centered
around an incident occurring in 1703 concerning a group of forty-seven
samurai who had been left masterless (rōnin) due to the
shogun’s forcing the suicide of their lord. The question was
whether the rōnin were acting according to gi
in taking revenge upon the man who had, in the first place, prompted
their deceased lord to commit the offense that led to his being
condemned to self-destruction. Clearly, the issue was not the legal one
of whether the rōnin obeyed or disobeyed the law, but
instead the moral one of whether they acted on the basis of a sense of
rightness and justice. Opinions varied, of course, but that the debate
was widespread and meaningful reveals the extent to which Neo-Confucian
ethical notions such as gi had become integral, substantive
factors in public discourse in early-modern Japan.
The early-modern Neo-Confucians commonly described mind as the
master of the body. All of the body’s activities are under the
control of the mind. As a combination of ri (principle)
and ki (generative force), the mind can serve as the master of
the body because of its capacity for clear and unclouded intelligence.
Due to the ri within it, the mind is originally good. Though
evil might intrude into its workings, the mind’s original state
is one of ethical goodness.
The Neo-Confucian position may not seem particularly profound unless
we consider the Buddhist position it opposes. Namely, some Buddhists
held that the discriminating mind is essentially empty and the seat, in everyday
cognition, of delusion and ignorance. Rather than dismissing the everyday mind
as the source of error, or advocating the realization of a mind that is
“no-mind,” Neo-Confucians sought to describe the mind as a real,
substantial entity in which intelligible ethical and rational
principles indwelled, enabling humanity to know both what is, and what
is right. The knowledge provided by the mind was not considered
delusional or unreal, but rather as real as any could possibly be.
Insofar as the principles that dwell within the mind are identical with
those pervading the external world, the mind became the foundation for
a mystic union with all existent things.
Often the mind was discussed in relation to the feelings issuing
from it. Most Neo-Confucians considered human feelings—pleasure,
anger, sorrow, fear, love, hate, and desire—to issue from the mind
when it encounters things. As long as these feelings are expressed in
accord with principle, they are considered natural outgrowths of the
mind. If manifested insufficiently or to excess, the feelings are
judged to be negative and in need of control. So as to enable the mind
to master itself appropriately, Neo-Confucians sometimes advocated a
Zen-like practice called “quiet-sitting.” Essentially a
meditation upon one’s original, moral nature, quiet-sitting perceives
the calmness and stillness of the mind before its engagement with the
world of activity. The latter was typically seen as a source of
overstimulation, one which could easily distract or distort the
mind. If properly practiced, quiet-sitting could enable one to engage
in any activity without overstepping or falling short in terms of
emotive reactions. Such a mind was viewed as one well-regulated in
accordance with the mean.
Neo-Confucian critics such as Itō Jinsai and Ogyū Sorai
objected to characterizations of the mind in terms of
“stillness” and “calmness,” asserting that
those attributes harked back to Buddhism or Daoism, not
Confucianism. Whereas their criticisms had some merit, previous
orthodox Neo-Confucians such as Hayashi Razan had insisted that the
Confucian usage of terms such as “stillness” and
“calmness” meant something profoundly different from what
was meant by Buddhists and Daoists. Ultimately, Razan insisted, the
mind is an active thing, meant to be engaged in ongoing relations with
the world at large and so, “stillness” is being poised for
engagement, rather than an end in itself.
One of the many terms used in East Asian philosophical discussions to
refer generally to the ideas of the Song philosophers of the Cheng-Zhu
tradition and their exponents in later dynastic periods, was
seirigaku (C: xinglixue), or “the school
of human nature and principle.” The two words “human
nature” (C: xing; J: sei) and
“principle” (C: li; J: ri)
were joined in part as a reflection of the Neo-Confucian
identification of human nature with principle. In Japan, this
position, equating human nature and principle, was affirmed by
orthodox proponents of the Cheng-Zhu teachings such as Hayashi Razan
and later, Yamazaki Ansai and their followers. In many respects, their
accounts of human nature can be construed as an egalitarian
affirmation of the commonly shared nature of all people. The grammar
of most statements asserting the identity of human nature and
principle support this understanding: they leave little room for doubt
that orthodox Cheng-Zhu thinkers were saying that all people have the
same human nature, and that that human nature is principle. To the
extent that they explained the myriad differences in humanity, they
did so by reference to variations in the clarity or turbidity of the
generative force (ki) of particular individuals.
The ethical nuance assigned to human nature was a function of the
Cheng-Zhu understanding of principle in both positive and normative
terms. Not only did principle indicate what “is,” it also
referred to what “ought to be” in a particular entity. In
all matters, including human nature, principle was considered to be
morally good. Thus at the macrocosmic level, the world of ordinary life was
viewed not as the Buddhists saw it in terms of delusion, error, and
anguish, but rather as the bountiful and morally good creation of
heaven and earth, leading to the on-going production and reproduction
of the ten-thousand things of the world in which we live. At the
microcosmic level, rather than stressing human thoughts and feelings
as given to attachments leading to one painful rebirth after another,
the orthodox early-modern Neo-Confucians viewed the person as
ethically good by virtue of their human nature. Those with clear
generative force perhaps better understood and manifested the goodness
of their human nature, while those with more turbid generative force
did so less aptly. Nevertheless, with education and effort all could
perfect themselves so as to realize fully the original goodness of
their human nature. The human ideal of sagehood, more sought after
than perhaps ever actually realized, was recognized as one that all
could, with sufficient effort, achieve.
The orthodox Neo-Confucian explanation of human nature was
frequently affirmed in early-modern Japan, especially in
philosophically informed circles. However, those circles tended to be
populated by individuals representing hereditary, status-bound social
estates. At the top of the social system were the aristocrats of the
ancient imperial capital, Kyōto, including the imperial family.
Yet, during the Tokugawa period, the aristocracy was both respected and
controlled by the samurai leadership exercising coercive governing
power. Apart from the aristocracy, which was by and large restricted to
the ancient imperial capital, the samurai were at the top of the
secular social system. Below them were peasant farmers, then artisans,
and finally merchants. Shintō and Buddhist clergy, often defined
by hereditary lines as well, were esteemed as outside the secular
social system. Thus, in practice, there was precious little
egalitarianism in the early-modern social system.
Reflecting the inequalities of the day, Itō Jinsai challenged
the orthodox Neo-Confucian view by asserting that human nature is
simply the physical disposition (kishitsu) that each person
is born with. In formulating this view, Jinsai was essentially
agreeing with Dong Zhongshu (ca. 179–104 B.C.E.), who defined human
nature as “the inborn disposition” of each person. But
Jinsai also sympathized with the thinking of Zhou Dunyi (1017–1073), a
Song philosopher who is often considered an early exponent of the
Neo-Confucian philosophy that found its most complete form in the
thought of Zhu Xi. Zhou Dunyi differentiated five natures including
the morally strong, the immorally strong, the morally weak, the
immorally weak, and the mean which relies on neither strength or
weakness.
Jinsai did not seek to advance Zhou’s position as much as to expand
it into a recognition of the manifold diversity of human natures. A
scholar by profession, Jinsai’s own social standing was that of a
townsperson, presumably of merchant background. The orthodox
Neo-Confucian egalitarian position was at odds with the official
hierarchy, but so was Jinsai’s view insofar as it affirmed a far
more individualized diversity than the established hierarchy allowed.
Though Jinsai’s theory of human nature as innate, individual physical
disposition was reformulated by Ogyū Sorai, it did not achieve
wide acceptance in early-modern Japan. Despite the extent to which it
was at odds with reality, Confucian pronouncements on human nature in
the early-modern period tended to repeat the Neo-Confucian line that
human nature, as principle (ri), is morally good.
There is always a political nuance to Confucian philosophizing.
Confucius himself first sought to offer his teachings to a ruler,
thinking that they would provide an effective solution to the
political crises of his times. The human ideal extolled by Confucius
was that of the junzi (J: kunshi), or the
“son of a ruler” that is, a “prince.” (Some
translators have rendered this term as “gentleman,”
“noble person,” or “exemplary person.”) But
for Confucius, the true prince was not one born to the
position. Rather, Confucius most admired the person who cultivated
himself to such a point that he embodied a host of virtues associated
with royal birth. Confucius had little use for the person who was born
to that station but neglected the task of self-cultivation. Such a
person, in Confucius’ view, hardly merited the standing accorded by
birth. This understanding of the true prince implied that those born
to high rank must strive to earn, through self-cultivation, the kind
of respect and right to exercise power otherwise associated with their
standing.
Mencian political thought was grounded in the view that government
ought to be humane, and provide for the best interests of humanity. In
this context, the ruler was characterized as the parent of the people,
and his subjects as his own children, emphasizing the importance that
he should attach to their welfare. Mencius at points explained success
in governing as a matter of gaining the hearts-and-minds of the people
at large, suggesting that without popular support rule would not be
effective. In addressing questions related to instances in the past
where tyrants had been executed, Mencius argued that there had been no
instances of regicide. Instead, those put to death had been common
criminals, having forfeited their legitimacy by their very mistreatment
of people. Implied, of course, was that rulers who did the same might
be legitimately dealt with in a similar manner.
Given the conditional perspective that Confucianism affirmed in
relation to governing, it is not surprising that Confucian teachings
tended to circulate first and foremost among the ruling elite
throughout most of Japanese history. After all, had they had a wider
circulation, the political implications might have resulted in even
more challenges to those in power than actually occurred. Even more
problematic than the views of Confucius and Mencius were those in the
Book of Historical Documents related to the notion of
tianming (J: tenmei), or “the mandate of
heaven.” According to numerous passages in the History, if a
ruler repeatedly abandoned his concern for the people, heaven would
eventually give the mandate to rule to a new line, one that
distinguished itself on the basis of concern for the people. In this
process, the role of the people was instrumental. One passage in the
History even states that heaven and the people are nearly the
same: “heaven sees with the eyes of the people, and hears with the ears
of the people.”
There can be no question that this notion entered Japan, as surely
as the classical literature of China did. That the tianming
notion attained no wide circulation reflects the extent to which
Confucian political teachings in particular were restricted to the
ruling elite rather than taught to the population at large. It must be
added, however, that as Confucian learning became more widespread, even
the peasantry began to understand the basics of Confucian political
thought and developed clear expectations regarding humane government.
Early-modern peasant protest movements and uprisings were often
grounded in the notion that righteous and humane rulers ought to
provide for the just interests of society as a whole. When such
expectations were not fulfilled, it was not uncommon for peasants to
make their dissatisfaction evident through remonstration and
rebellion.
By comparison with the ancient, foundational writings, Neo-Confucian
political philosophy was far more concerned with the project of
ensuring that the ruler understood the benefits of self-cultivation.
One of the most pertinent texts, the Great Learning (C:
Daxue; J: Daigaku), outlines how a ruler
should proceed if he wishes to manifest luminous virtue, noting that
the project most fundamentally involves self-cultivation. For the
latter to be realized, the ruler must first make his mind correct and
his thoughts sincere. To realize this project, he must extend his
understanding of things by studying and investigating them. If those
ruling could cultivate themselves in this way, then they would find
their families well ordered, their states well governed, and all below
heaven enjoying great peace. Effective rule was thus cast as a matter
of self-cultivation on the part of those ruling. This was the central
political philosophy taught by orthodox Neo-Confucians such as Hayashi
Razan, Yamazaki Ansai and their followers in Tokugawa Japan.
One major challenge to this approach came from Ogyū Sorai.
According to Sorai, the orthodox Neo-Confucian position was impractical
because it was based on the assumption that the human mind can control
itself. In Sorai’s view, this was simply impossible because it would
entail dividing the mind into two entities: the controlling mind and
the controlled mind. Rather than expect the mind to control the mind,
Sorai appealed to the Book of History and its teaching that
the rites of “the early kings” be used to control not only the mind,
but the socio-political realm at large. Sorai claimed that his
philosophy was based on a correct reading of the ancient classics,
especially the Book of History, but it is clear that he leaves
a great deal out. Most particularly, he passes over the
tianming notion completely, even though it is at the very core
of the Book of History. Sorai also extolled the rites and
music and their effectiveness for ruling, but never provided great
clarity regarding what these included. Moreover, he repeatedly praised
“the early kings” as the only sages who had and would ever exist in
human history. The sagehood of the early kings was a function of their
having established the way of social and political organization, a way
that could never be surpassed, only followed. Sorai identified that
way, “the way of the sages,” as consisting in the rites and
music, as well as the laws and bureaucratic forms necessary for good
government.
Ultimately, it seems that Sorai’s political philosophy meant to
extol in later history those who stood as the representatives of the
early kings. For him, these were the samurai ruling elite of his day,
and their imposition of rites, laws, and administrative government as a
means of implementing the greatest peace and prosperity for the
greatest number. Sorai surely had little faith in the efficacy of
internal means of self control; instead, he consistently advocated
external strategies such as rites and music, penal laws, and
administrative government as the means for providing, along utilitarian
lines, for the welfare of all.
Sorai’s political philosophy, though one of the most systematic
statements offered during the early-modern period, was never fully
accepted as the philosophy of the ruling elite, despite the fact that
that seems to have been Sorai’s explicit intent. Rather, his political
philosophy ended up being viewed as a heterodox alternative, one much
akin to that of Xunzi in ancient China.
A most important contribution of Neo-Confucianism to early-modern
Japanese culture was its emphasis on education at virtually all levels.
Orthodox Neo-Confucianism viewed learning as one of the most basic
methods of self-cultivation, one that contributed positively to the
full realization of a person’s morally good human nature. At the
highest level, education and learning were considered integral
components in the realization of a well-governed state and peace
throughout the world.
According to Zhu Xi, learning involved most basically the process of
emulation. This account of learning came to be widely endorsed in
early-modern Japan, even by heterodox thinkers such as Itō Jinsai
and Ogyū Sorai. The model that Jinsai used in explaining learning
as emulation was that of calligraphy. In learning to write, a student
is presented with the example of his teacher, and then is expected to
emulate it. Sustained efforts at emulation lead eventually to
comprehension and the ability of the student to perform thoughtfully
the task that has been learned.
While the practice of learning as emulation was widely endorsed,
early-modern philosophers disagreed over the subject matter of education.
Orthodox Neo-Confucians typically emphasized broad learning in the
ancient classics and historical literature, but most importantly they
extolled the value of studying the Four Books and Zhu Xi’s
commentaries on them. Reflecting the orthodox Neo-Confucian value
placed on education is the first of the Four Books, the
Great Learning . Described as the “gateway” to all subsequent
learning, the Great Learning outlines the series of methods to
be mastered in order for a person to manifest luminous virtue. In this
process, the investigation of things is preliminary. With such
investigation, our understanding of things becomes complete and our
thoughts sincere. Then, our minds are rectified. With this comes the
realization of a cultivated self, one capable of regulating families,
governing states, and bringing peace to the world.
Orthodox Neo-Confucians viewed the Great Learning as a work
for mature students. To provide for the most widely educated society
possible, other texts, such as the Elementary Learning,
addressed topics for younger minds. In early-modern Japan, the
Neo-Confucian emphasis on education also led to the formulation of a
curriculum for women, as is evident in the Great Learning for
Women (Onna daigaku), attributed to Kaibara Ekken, the
Elementary Learning on Samurai Teachings (Bukyō
shōgaku) by Yamaga Sokō, and other educational works
for townspeople and farmers.
Heterodox thinkers such as Jinsai and Sorai often challenged
orthodox Neo-Confucians on matters related to the texts elevated for
study. Jinsai in particular affirmed that the most important works for
students were the Analects of Confucius and the
Mencius. Distancing himself considerably from the orthodox
position, Jinsai offered a series of arguments seeking to prove, on
textual and philosophical grounds, that the Great Learning was
not a Confucian text. While he admitted that there was value in the
study of the ancient classics, Jinsai believed that the
Analects and Mencius were by and large sufficient for
meaningful education.
By contrast, Ogyū Sorai emphasized the efficacy of studying
the Six Classics. In Sorai’s view, the Six Classics
conveyed the words of the sages predating Confucius. He considered
their words unique insofar as they enabled humanity to fathom the minds
of the sages themselves. Sorai did value texts such as the
Analects, but decidedly less so. After all, Sorai reasoned,
Confucius had not been fully a sage, at least not in his strictest
sense of the term. For him, the sages were those ancient figures who
had established the basic way of socio-political civilized life, the
way that Confucius later championed as a transmitter. Yet, far more
than learning through books, Sorai valued learning gained through
practice in following the way. With this kind of performative learning,
students were expected to come gradually to realize a full level of
practical knowledge: knowing how to do something rather than knowing
that something is the case.
The proliferation of education in early-modern Japan, producing
mid-nineteenth-century literacy rates comparable to those of the most
advanced Western nations, resulted from a complex set of factors,
including the development of mass printing, the creation of schools in
the various samurai domains, and the rise of educational movements
related to Japanese literature and culture that were highly critical of
Chinese-style philosophy of any sort. Yet, at the base of much of this
was the Neo-Confucian view, shared generally by orthodox and heterodox
thinkers, that education, whether practical or discursive or both, was
a necessary ingredient in the life of all persons who might hope to
realize their full potential.
The liberation of Neo-Confucianism from the domination of Zen
learning only became possible in the late-sixteenth and
early-seventeenth centuries, following Toyotomi Hideyoshi’s (1537–1598)
invasions of the Korean peninsula. As a result, a number of
Neo-Confucian texts that included pointed critiques of Buddhism came
into Japan. As the anti-Buddhist perspectives of these texts came to be
ever more influential throughout the seventeenth century, an
increasingly common theme in Japanese Neo-Confucian discourse was its
relationship, positive or negative, to Buddhism.
One of the more interesting Confucian critiques of Buddhism was
articulated by Itō Jinsai (1627–1705), a Kyōto-based
scholar who, significantly enough, had neither been brought up nor
educated by Buddhists. In his discussion of “the way,” Jinsai suggested
that the Buddha believed emptiness was the way, and that mountains,
rivers, and land masses were all unreal. In opposition, Jinsai argued
along distinctly commonsensical lines: that for myriad ages heaven and
earth have sustained life; the sun and moon have illuminated the world;
mountains have stood and rivers flowed; birds, beasts, fish,
insects, trees, and grasses have lived as they do now. Given this
evidence from the phenomenal world, Jinsai asked how the Buddhists
could claim that all is emptiness or nothingness. Answering his own
question, Jinsai said that their emphasis on emptiness derived from
their tending to retire to mountains and to sit silently while emptying
their minds. Thus, Jinsai argued, the theoretical principles affirmed
by the Buddhists—emptiness and nothingness—exist neither within
this world nor outside it.
Instead of Buddhist emptiness which he claimed to be groundless,
Jinsai affirmed that the principles of love and social relations are
found in every aspect of life from humanity down to bamboo plants,
trees, grasses, insects, fish, and even grains of sand. Jinsai denied
that Buddhist principles received any corroboration in any level of
existence whatsoever, dismissing them as heterodoxies utterly lacking
any basis in reality.
Jinsai maintained that the Confucian way is how people should
conduct themselves ethically in their daily lives. In doing so, he
asserted that the Confucian way is both natural and universal insofar
as it is understood by everyone in every part of the universe as the
inescapable path of all. Because this has been and will be true for all
time, it is simply called “the way.” Amplifying his point,
Jinsai added that the Confucian way does not exist simply because it is
taught. Rather, its vitality is naturally and universally so. By
contrast, the teachings of Buddhism exist only because certain people
revere them. If those people vanished, Jinsai maintained, so would
Buddhism. Emphasizing their lack of practicality, Jinsai observed that
even when Buddhist teachings are accepted, they bring no benefits. If
they are rejected, people lose nothing. Worst of all, Jinsai said, when
the world followed the teachings of the ancient Confucian sages, it was
at peace, but since Buddhism had become dominant, great chaos and
disturbances have ensued. Thus, Jinsai’s rejection of Buddhism follows,
at least in part, pragmatic lines, emphasizing that at best there is no
gain from it, and at worst that it brings chaos and disorder to the
world.
Jinsai also criticized Buddhists for abandoning ethics, in
particular righteousness and justice (gi). While he allowed
that Buddhists taught the virtue of compassion, Jinsai added that they
ultimately extolled nirvana as the way. This led them to downplay
righteousness rather than recognize it as “the great path of all below
heaven.”
Jinsai emphasized the mind as the seat of the moral sentiments
giving rise in action to the virtues of humaneness and righteousness.
In making this point and at the same time emphasizing the vital
activity of the mind, Jinsai enthusiastically endorsed the views of
Mencius. Jinsai pointedly criticized Buddhists and others who followed
them for claiming that the mind is empty. He also argued against the
Buddhist belief that the mind ought to be made pure, utterly rid of
human desires, and empty like a bright mirror or calm like still water.
Jinsai rejected such images for being at odds with the energetic
approach to moral action that Confucianism endorses. For Jinsai, moral
action emerges from moral sentiments and can never be divorced from the
passions. Because the Buddhists sought, according to Jinsai, to
eliminate passions in their pursuit of nirvana, their view of
the mind was fundamentally mistaken.
Yet for all of his criticisms of Buddhism, Jinsai explained, in one
of the appendices to his Gomō jigi, that the best way to
refute Buddhism and heterodoxies generally was not by means of debate,
but instead by manifesting the Confucian way of ethical engagement with
the world in daily practical activities. Debate, argument, and rhetoric
were, in Jinsai’s view, little more than empty formulations reflecting
descent into the same kind of emptiness that so characterized the
Buddhist teachings one sought to oppose.
It might be added in this connection that Tokugawa Confucians often
sought to outdo one another in their opposition to Buddhism. In one of
his more tolerant moments, Jinsai wrote a farewell letter to a Buddhist
monk, Dōkō (b: 1675?), who was about to depart Kyōto
after a period of study there. In the letter, which Jinsai surely never
meant to be construed as a definitive statement of his views on
Buddhism, he praised Dōkō’s study of Confucianism. At one
point, Jinsai graciously added, “From the perspective of scholars, both
Confucianism (Ju) and Buddhism (Butsu) definitely
exist. However from the vantage point of heaven and earth, there is
most fundamentally neither Confucianism nor Buddhism. Rather, there is
only one way and that is all.” Jinsai’s letter, which was subsequently
published, shocked many Confucians who were far more doctrinaire in
their opposition to Buddhism. One scholar, Satō Naokata
(1650–1719), went so far as to republish Jinsai’s letter with a running
commentary, sharply critical of both Buddhism and Jinsai. The latter
was the subject of Naokata’s wrath because Jinsai, in Naokata’s
intolerant view, had been insufficiently hostile to the “evil thing,”
namely, Buddhism.
Confucian discourse on Buddhism, then, was much more complex than
Jinsai’s critiques alone might suggest. But what is clear is that
during the early-modern period of Japanese intellectual history,
Confucianism and Buddhism came to be fairly distinct philosophical
forces, with much critical antipathy issuing from the Confucian camp.
As Confucian learning became increasingly secure and respected in its
own right, these critiques tended to diminish. Ogyū Sorai, for
example, rarely discussed Buddhism, though when he did his remarks were
critical. Still one senses that for Sorai and his audience, Buddhism
did not need to be subjected yet again to a Confucian critique.
Buddhism had its own relevance for some people at certain times, and
Confucianism had its own. Confucianism had arrived, apparently, as a
largely secular ethic with clear and distinct socio-political relevance
that to many suggested not just independence, but even philosophical
dominance.
Neo-Confucian philosophical discussions, often featuring lengthy
explanations of “ghosts and spirits” (C: guishen;
J: kishin), differed markedly from ancient
Confucianism. Confucius declined to discuss spiritual matters at
length, even when asked about them specifically. Why address the world
after, Confucius asked, when one has yet to master the way of humanity
within this world? Confucius was not disrespectful of ceremonies for
the spirits, but he did emphasize that he maintained a respectful
distance from them. Still, if he found himself in attendance at such a
ceremony, he behaved as if the spirits were actually there. Confucius’
reluctance to discuss the spiritual dimension in any real detail has
led many to speculate that he was an atheist, or perhaps a polite
agnostic.
In the wake of Buddhism, however, it was impossible for Confucians
to ignore the topic of ghosts and spirits. Buddhist literature went
into great detail about the Western Paradise, or the Buddhist Pure Land,
and the many layers of hell where sinners would be punished by wardens
of hell. Graphic depictions of the spirit world,
heaven, hell, demons, hungry ghosts, and angelic bodhisattvas made the
accounts seem all the more credible. In Japan, Shinto as well had its
own traditions of ghosts, spirits, goblins, and changelings. To counter
such discourse, Neo-Confucians formulated their own explanations of
spiritual phenomena, ones offering a more naturalistic account of the
apparent activities of ghosts and spirits. These accounts can be
interpreted as bordering on atheism or agnosticism and so are in
keeping with Confucius’ position, at least as some have interpreted it.
Yet, they were far more lengthy overall than anything that Confucius or
most prior Confucians had offered.
A key feature of Neo-Confucian philosophical discussions of ghosts
and spirits is their naturalistic metaphysical character. Rather than
purporting to describe particular spirits, many Neo-Confucians,
following Cheng Yi, explained ghosts and spirits as “traces of the
creative transformations of the world.” More specifically,
Neo-Confucians often interpreted what appeared to be ghosts and spirits
as “the spontaneous activities of the two generative forces,” yin and
yang. As yin and yang expanded and contracted, spiritual forces purportedly emerged with
yang, and ghostly forces with yin.
While casting ghosts and spirits in metaphysical terms that in
certain respects seemed intent on explaining away ghosts and spirits,
Neo-Confucians also affirmed that just as yin and yang pervade reality,
so do ghosts and spirits. The spirits are simply the expansive and
ghosts, the contractive forces of the world. Recognizing the
interrelatedness of ghosts and spirits with the world at large, many
Neo-Confucians associated spirits with heaven, spring and summer,
morning, the sun, light, music, and so on, while ghosts were linked to
the earth, fall and winter, evening, the moon, darkness, rituals, and
so forth. With this analysis, Neo-Confucians did not deny spirits, but
instead asserted that they infuse every aspect of reality just as
surely as do yin and yang.
Providing a basis for ancestor worship, Neo-Confucians typically
claimed that within a family line, there is a shared generative force,
which entails a shared spirituality. This common spirituality is
communicated through the male line in ancestral rites performed by sons
to their fathers, grandfathers, and so on. Because the shared family
line was considered essential to the shared spiritual basis,
Neo-Confucians emphasized that if a family had to adopt a child, then
it should take care to adopt a son from a male relative of the father
so that the sacrifices offered by the adopted son might be happily
accepted by the spirits. If adoption was outside the male line of the
family, then offerings to the family ancestors would actually be
communicated to the family line of the adopted son, leaving the family
that had adopted the son unhappily neglected. In an effort to curb
popular involvement in spiritualistic movements and practices,
Neo-Confucians generally described as wanton and improper any
participation in a religious ritual or ceremony that had no
relationship with the larger family involved with them.
One of the more heterodox Neo-Confucian accounts of ghosts and
spirits came from Ogyū Sorai. Unlike the naturalistic
explanations provided by most Neo-Confucians, Sorai emphasized the
integrity of the accounts of ghosts and spirits set forth by the
ancient sage kings. Sorai asserted that since the ancient kings had
said that there were spirits, then there must indeed be spirits.
Likewise with ghosts, as well as a host of other spiritual beings. To
question the existence of ghosts and spirits was, in Sorai’s
view, to disrespect the ancient sage kings. Sorai’s insistence upon an
unquestioning belief in ghosts and spirits, however, was more the
exception than the mainstream view among early-modern Japanese
Confucians.
One of the great texts of Song dynasty Confucianism is Zhang Zai’s
(1020–1070) “Western Inscription” (Ximing). In its opening
lines, Zhang states that he views heaven as his father, earth as his
mother, and the ten thousand things of the world as his brothers and
sisters. All that fills the space between heaven and earth he
considers as his body. Elsewhere Zhang spoke more metaphysically,
describing that which fills all between heaven and earth
as qi, or the generative force (J: ki) that is the
creative substantial being and energy of becoming in all things. Zhang
also explained qi in terms of the great vacuity, a notion
that sounds Buddhistic but was meant to capture the openness of all
becoming to change and transformation. Yet in the end, qi was
the rock bottom of Confucian realism, metaphysically speaking, and was
in large part the ontological dimension of things that prompted
Confucians throughout East Asia to take the world seriously not as a
site of delusion and ignorance, but instead as a both the crucible of
their being and an extension of themselves in becoming. Reportedly,
Zhang’s sense of oneness and kinship with everything between heaven
and earth left him unable to cut the grass and bushes outside his
window. Other Song Confucians offered their own vision of oneness with
reality by declaring that the humane person forms one body with the
ten thousand things of existence. These visions of oneness and kinship
prompted Confucians to paint landscape (shanshui) paintings,
literally paintings of mountains (shan) and water
(shui), compose poetry alluding to the interrelatedness of
things, and to direct public works projects meant to maintain the
harmony and balance of heaven, earth, and humanity.
Zhang’s “Western Inscription” inspired Confucians throughout East Asia
to develop philosophical thinking about their oneness with the natural
world and its generative being, and to advance practical thinking
about how to respectfully engage with the realm of heaven and
earth. In Tokugawa Japan, this environmental concern took many
forms. Kaibara Ekken’s Plants of Japan (Yamato
honzō), a kind of botanical study of Japanese medicinal
plants and herbs, is one example. In his Instructions of
Cultivating Life (Yōjōkun), Ekken emphasized
the importance of nourishing one’s ki, or generative force,
in harmony with that of all between heaven and earth. Equally
important, especially as an indicator of the perennial significance of
Zhang Zai’s “Western Inscription” is Kumazawa Banzan’s (1619–1691)
“Western Inscription for Japanese” (Yamato nishi no mei), an
expansive, vernacular commentary on Zhang Zai’s brief text. In
his Questions and Answers on the Great Learning (Daigaku
wakumon), Banzan outlined various policy proposals, including
limits on the construction of Buddhist temples and samurai castles, as
a means of preventing deforestation. He also declared mountains,
forests, and rivers – metaphors for the natural world—to be the
foundations of the state, and essential components in the longevity of
political lines. If a ruler forfeited these components of nature and
his realm’s balance with the natural world, then his line would pay
the price. Banzan’s writings reveal that even Confucians in the
private sector were thinking proactively about achieving a sustainable
equilibrium with the forces of nature, one that provided for both the
best interests of human society and the integrity of natural growth
and development.
An important legacy of Confucian philosophy in modern Japanese
history derives from Confucian understandings of the philosophy of
history. This is evident in the transition from the Tokugawa period,
dominated politically by a samurai regime led by a shogun, to the Meiji
period, at least billed as a restoration of imperial rule.
Rather than assuming that history was progressing ever forward to
incrementally better levels, Confucians tended to see ideals in the
past. Therefore, they often advocated a return to a supposed golden age
as a means to improve conditions in the present. Confucius himself had
denied that he was an innovator, insisting that he only sought to
transmit the ideals of the past. Although Confucius might have cast his
work as mere transmission, he was clearly innovating in revolutionary
philosophical ways. The political transformation giving rise to the
Meiji imperial regime, at least in terms of its philosophical
presentation as a return to an ancient, supposedly more ideal model,
was characteristically Confucian. So was the fact that this purported
return to the past ushered in a profoundly new historical period, one
that revolutionized most aspects of life.
One of the philosophical minds behind the Meiji restoration, at
least insofar as several of the anti-Tokugawa, pro-Meiji samurai
leaders were concerned, was the Confucian scholar, Yoshida Shōin
(1830–1859). He was a hereditary master, in the Chōshū
domain, of the Confucian teachings of Yamaga Sokō.
Philosophically, Sokō is best known for his Essential Records
of the Sagely Teachings (Seikyō yōroku), a
brief but pointed critique of orthodox Neo-Confucian thinking. It
advocated instead Sokō’s own understanding of the
Analects. As transmitted to Shōin through the Yamaga
line of scholarship, and then embodied by Shōin’s students such
as Itō Hirobumi (1841–1909), a Chōshū revolutionary
turned Meiji statesman, the restorationism that was at the core of both
Confucianism and Neo-Confucianism was clearly echoed in the spirit of
the Meiji restoration.
The Meiji period, however, soon involved a profound turn away from
traditional patterns and toward more distinctively Western ones. This
was true in philosophy as well, resulting in the relative atrophy of
Confucian studies. However, it is significant that most of the Meiji
leaders who promoted Western philosophical ideas had backgrounds in
Confucian studies. Nishi Amane (1829–1897), often referred to as the
father of western philosophy in Japan, read Ogyū Sorai’s
philosophical works before turning to the study of the ideas of Auguste
Comte and John Stuart Mill. During the people’s rights movement of the
1870s and early 1880s, advocates such as Nakae Chōmin (1847–1901)
often cast their understandings of liberty, equality, and natural
rights in terms of notions drawn from Confucian discourse.
With the swing toward conservatism and nationalism in the late-Meiji
period, philosophical voices such as that of Inoue Tetsujirō
advocated not so much a faithful return to Confucianism per se but to
what Inoue called kokumin dōtoku, or “national
ethics.” This set of teachings was based largely on selective
Confucian virtues such as loyalty and filial piety. Inoue is also
noteworthy for having led the way, albeit along highly nationalistic
lines, in interpreting Confucian developments of the early-modern
period as movements in “philosophy,” using the newly
coined Japanese word, tetsugaku. This Japanese word chosen as
the gloss for “philosophy” alluded back to, in Chinese
literature, the Book of History, a Confucian classic, where
tetsu (C: zhi) refers to the
“wisdom” manifested by the ancient sages of China. In that
respect, the “study of wisdom,” the literal meaning of
tetsugaku, was as much an apt characterization of the
Confucian project as it was one of the western field of
philosophy.
Unfortunately, Inoue’s claim that there had been traditional forms of
philosophy, specifically the Neo-Confucian schools of the early-modern
period, well prior to the introduction of western philosophy had one
disturbing side effect. He increasingly elevated the status of
Confucian notions not necessarily as Confucian notions in themselves,
but as integral parts of a nationalistic, imperialistic, and
militaristic blend serving the interests of Japanese militarists of
the 1930s and 1940s. In particular, Inoue’s later years were devoted
to expounding bushidō, the so-called “way of the
warrior,” as a core ingredient in kokumin
dōtoku. Inoue produced such a large corpus of
bushidō-related literature that one might claim that
the way of the warrior was far more his invention than something
grounded in tradition.
With the defeat of Japan in 1945, Confucian notions came to be
regarded negatively because of their unfortunate appropriation by
Inoue and other philosopher-ideologues. They had manipulated the core
ethics of Confucian philosophy into a teaching of loyalty to the
imperial state and self-sacrifice for the sake of its glory. Those
Confucian philosophers whose writings had been most enthusiastic about
Japan, and so easily appropriated — as was the case with Yamaga
Sokō who had argued at one point in his multifaceted
philosophical corpus, that Japan, not China, was the true Central
Kingdom — have consequently suffered from significant neglect in
the postwar period. By contrast, those earlier Confucians whose
writings had disparaged Japan and celebrated China, such as those of
Ogyū Sorai, rebounded from their former pariah status in
jingoistic Japan to becoming the focus of repeated postwar
studies. Usually, however, because of the overall feeling that
Confucianism of any sort was more ideology than philosophy (and this
was surely the most egregious legacy of its prewar appropriation)
Confucianism has most frequently been interpreted simply as
“thought” (shisō) or “ideology”
(ideorogii), typically of a “feudalistic”
sort. In other countries, including contemporary China,
interpreters are reexamining Confucianism as a living philosophy of
ongoing significance, but Japanese scholars have more viewed it as a
historical artifact, not a vital philosophy. Instead, philosophy
departments in most major Japanese universities today continue to
define “philosophy” as western philosophy, finding relatively little
place for the study of Confucianism under its rubric.
Exaggerating the extent to which the fortunes of Japanese Confucianism declined in the postwar period, one scholar, Kiri Paramore, in his Japanese Confucianism: A Cultural Study, has suggested that in Japan, Confucianism ended up becoming taboo, a topic shunned by scholars and public intellectuals who would not so much utter the word, “Confucianism,” in their writings. As evidence, Paramore cites the oeuvre of Maruyama Masao, one of the greatest political thinkers of the mid-twentieth century. One of Maruyama’s most widely read works, Studies in the Intellectual History of Tokugawa Japan (Nihon shisōshi kenkyū), had discussed Neo-Confucianism in some detail, albeit in the flawed interpretive framework that Hegel had provided. Thus, Maruyama saw Neo-Confucianism as antithetical to change, and its continuative metaphysics linking the natural and ethical spheres, in need of dissolution. 



Written during Japan’s war years, Maruyama identified a succession of Japanese Confucian scholars, including Ogyū Sorai, as vanquishers of the Zhu Xi mode of thought. The latter was, in Japan, little more—according to Maruyama–than an expression of spiritual slavery to the ossified philosophy of Song dynasty China, that of Zhu Xi. The dissolution of the Zhu Xi mode of thought credited to Japanese thinkers such as Sorai seemingly echoed the battlefield advances of the imperial Japanese forces in their conquest of large swathes of China and East Asia. Even though Maruyama was ideologically opposed to the war, his narrative hardly transcended the war rhetoric of Japanese nationalism in its ascent over China. Despite the fact that Maruyama later acknowledged errors and misjudgments in his presentation of Japanese Confucianism, his thinking came to be widely deemed as “a starting point” for future studies of the subject. There can be little doubt that as translated by Mikiso Hane and published by Princeton University Press, Maruyama’s Studies in the Intellectual History of Tokugawa Japan prompted many students of Japanese thought to renewed thinking about Confucianism and its importance in Japanese history.


Paramore claims that in the postwar period, Maruyama soon turned away from Confucian studies and only rarely used the term, “Confucianism” (Jukyō). This shunning of the notion supposedly announced a new era in which, according to Paramore, Confucianism was “taboo.” Put differently, Maruyama’s avoidance of the term, “Confucianism,” established the so-called “Maruyama rule” that “Confucianism” was not to be broached. However, familiarity with Maruyama’s oeuvre proves this analysis mistaken. After all, well after Studies, Maruyama authored a lengthy essay on the Yamazaki Ansai school, “Yamazaki Ansai’s Learning and the School of Yamazaki Ansai” (Ansai gaku to Ansai gakuha). Maruyama’s essay was published in a substantial volume on Ansai’s school, The School of Yamazaki Ansai (Yamazaki Ansai gakuha) in 1980. This volume was co-edited by Maruyama himself, and published by Iwanami shoten as part of its Nihon shisō taikei series. In the essay, Maruyama discusses Confucianism repeatedly, and admittedly, critically. Nevertheless, in discussing Confucianism, Maruyama violated the so-called “Maruyama rule” that had supposedly rendered Confucianism taboo. Clearly, Maruyama’s continued engagement with Confucianism proves that that was hardly the case.


Evidence of the continued vitality of Confucianism within Japanese philosophical discourse is also at the University of Tokyo
Center for Philosophy. Since its founding in 2002, UTCP has sought
to establish itself as an international base for the discussion of
philosophical problems. UTCP has also sponsored discussions addressing dimensions of Confucianism within Japanese philosophy. In doing so, UTCP has emerged as a leader in affirming the notion of “Japanese philosophy” and that of “Japanese Confucian
philosophy.” Much the same is true with the recently established
journal, the Journal of Japanese Philosophy published by the
State University of New York Press. Along with the longstanding
efforts of the East-West Center and the University of Hawai‘i’s
Department of Philosophy, the UTCP and JJP promise to
significantly contribute to the revival of interest in Japanese
Confucianism and its contributions to Japanese philosophical
discourse. 



Along similar lines, the International Association for Japanese Philosophy (IAJP), founded in 2014 by the editors of the Journal of Japanese Philosophy, provides opportunities, through regular conferences and panels, for discussion of a range of topics and themes in Japanese philosophy, including Japanese Confucianism, keeping the latter very much in the mainstream, rather than taboo, going forward. Recent calls for “Green Confucianism,” or an emphasis on environmentally-oriented dimensions of Confucian tradition that might serve as the foundations for an expansion of environmental philosophy within Japanese philosophical thinking, have also contributed to the ongoing relevance of the tradition in ways that go well beyond the confines of family morality, ancestor worship, and the basics of everyday morality in society and the political sphere. “Green Confucianism” is just one of many possible re-expressions of Confucian thinking vis-a-vis the evolving contexts of Japanese modernity that establish the perennial significance of Confucian cosmological thinking, alongside its ethical and sociopolitical and spiritual teachings.
Written during Japan’s war years, Maruyama identified a succession of Japanese Confucian scholars, including Ogyū Sorai, as vanquishers of the Zhu Xi mode of thought. The latter was, in Japan, little more—according to Maruyama–than an expression of spiritual slavery to the ossified philosophy of Song dynasty China, that of Zhu Xi. The dissolution of the Zhu Xi mode of thought credited to Japanese thinkers such as Sorai seemingly echoed the battlefield advances of the imperial Japanese forces in their conquest of large swathes of China and East Asia. Even though Maruyama was ideologically opposed to the war, his narrative hardly transcended the war rhetoric of Japanese nationalism in its ascent over China. Despite the fact that Maruyama later acknowledged errors and misjudgments in his presentation of Japanese Confucianism, his thinking came to be widely deemed as “a starting point” for future studies of the subject. There can be little doubt that as translated by Mikiso Hane and published by Princeton University Press, Maruyama’s Studies in the Intellectual History of Tokugawa Japan prompted many students of Japanese thought to renewed thinking about Confucianism and its importance in Japanese history.
Paramore claims that in the postwar period, Maruyama soon turned away from Confucian studies and only rarely used the term, “Confucianism” (Jukyō). This shunning of the notion supposedly announced a new era in which, according to Paramore, Confucianism was “taboo.” Put differently, Maruyama’s avoidance of the term, “Confucianism,” established the so-called “Maruyama rule” that “Confucianism” was not to be broached. However, familiarity with Maruyama’s oeuvre proves this analysis mistaken. After all, well after Studies, Maruyama authored a lengthy essay on the Yamazaki Ansai school, “Yamazaki Ansai’s Learning and the School of Yamazaki Ansai” (Ansai gaku to Ansai gakuha). Maruyama’s essay was published in a substantial volume on Ansai’s school, The School of Yamazaki Ansai (Yamazaki Ansai gakuha) in 1980. This volume was co-edited by Maruyama himself, and published by Iwanami shoten as part of its Nihon shisō taikei series. In the essay, Maruyama discusses Confucianism repeatedly, and admittedly, critically. Nevertheless, in discussing Confucianism, Maruyama violated the so-called “Maruyama rule” that had supposedly rendered Confucianism taboo. Clearly, Maruyama’s continued engagement with Confucianism proves that that was hardly the case.
Evidence of the continued vitality of Confucianism within Japanese philosophical discourse is also at the University of Tokyo
Center for Philosophy. Since its founding in 2002, UTCP has sought
to establish itself as an international base for the discussion of
philosophical problems. UTCP has also sponsored discussions addressing dimensions of Confucianism within Japanese philosophy. In doing so, UTCP has emerged as a leader in affirming the notion of “Japanese philosophy” and that of “Japanese Confucian
philosophy.” Much the same is true with the recently established
journal, the Journal of Japanese Philosophy published by the
State University of New York Press. Along with the longstanding
efforts of the East-West Center and the University of Hawai‘i’s
Department of Philosophy, the UTCP and JJP promise to
significantly contribute to the revival of interest in Japanese
Confucianism and its contributions to Japanese philosophical
discourse. 



Along similar lines, the International Association for Japanese Philosophy (IAJP), founded in 2014 by the editors of the Journal of Japanese Philosophy, provides opportunities, through regular conferences and panels, for discussion of a range of topics and themes in Japanese philosophy, including Japanese Confucianism, keeping the latter very much in the mainstream, rather than taboo, going forward. Recent calls for “Green Confucianism,” or an emphasis on environmentally-oriented dimensions of Confucian tradition that might serve as the foundations for an expansion of environmental philosophy within Japanese philosophical thinking, have also contributed to the ongoing relevance of the tradition in ways that go well beyond the confines of family morality, ancestor worship, and the basics of everyday morality in society and the political sphere. “Green Confucianism” is just one of many possible re-expressions of Confucian thinking vis-a-vis the evolving contexts of Japanese modernity that establish the perennial significance of Confucian cosmological thinking, alongside its ethical and sociopolitical and spiritual teachings.
Along similar lines, the International Association for Japanese Philosophy (IAJP), founded in 2014 by the editors of the Journal of Japanese Philosophy, provides opportunities, through regular conferences and panels, for discussion of a range of topics and themes in Japanese philosophy, including Japanese Confucianism, keeping the latter very much in the mainstream, rather than taboo, going forward. Recent calls for “Green Confucianism,” or an emphasis on environmentally-oriented dimensions of Confucian tradition that might serve as the foundations for an expansion of environmental philosophy within Japanese philosophical thinking, have also contributed to the ongoing relevance of the tradition in ways that go well beyond the confines of family morality, ancestor worship, and the basics of everyday morality in society and the political sphere. “Green Confucianism” is just one of many possible re-expressions of Confucian thinking vis-a-vis the evolving contexts of Japanese modernity that establish the perennial significance of Confucian cosmological thinking, alongside its ethical and sociopolitical and spiritual teachings.