Jean-Jacques Rousseau was born in the independent Calvinist
city-state of Geneva in 1712, the son of Isaac Rousseau, a watchmaker,
and Suzanne Bernard. Rousseau’s mother died nine days after his birth,
with the consequence that Rousseau was raised and educated by his
father until the age of ten. Isaac Rousseau was one of the small
minority of Geneva’s residents who enjoyed the rank of citizen of
Geneva, a status which Jean-Jacques was to inherit. According
to Rousseau’s own subsequent accounts, the haphazard education that he
received from his father included both the inculcation of republican
patriotism and the reading of classical authors such as Plutarch
who dealt with the Roman republic.
On his father’s exile from the city to avoid arrest,
Jean-Jacques was put in the care of a pastor at nearby Bossey and
subsequently apprenticed to an engraver. Rousseau left the city
at the age of sixteen and came under the influence of a Roman Catholic
convert noblewoman, Francoise-Louise de la Tour, Baronne de Warens. Mme
de Warens arranged for Rousseau to travel to Turin, where he converted
to Roman Catholicism in April 1728. Rousseau spent some time
working as a domestic servant in a noble household in Turin, and during this time
a shameful episode occurred in which he falsely accused a fellow
servant of the theft of a ribbon. This act marked him deeply and he
returns to it in his autobiographical works.
Rousseau then spent a brief period training to become a Catholic
priest before embarking on another brief career as an itinerant
musician, music copyist and teacher. In 1731 he returned to Mme de
Warens at Chambéry and later briefly became her lover and
then her household manager. Rousseau remained with Mme de Warens
through the rest of the 1730s, moving to Lyon in 1740 to take up a
position as a tutor. This appointment brought him within the orbit
of both Condillac and d’Alembert and was his first contact
with major figures of the French Enlightenment. In
1742 he travelled to Paris, having devised a plan for a new
numerically-based system of musical notation which he presented to the
Academy of Sciences. The system was rejected by the Academy, but in this
period Rousseau met Denis Diderot. A brief spell as
secretary to the French Ambassador in Venice followed before Rousseau
moved to Paris on a more permanent basis from 1744, where he continued
to work mainly on music and began to write contributions to the
Encyclopédie of Diderot and d’Alembert.
In 1745 Rousseau met Thérèse Levasseur, a
barely literate laundry-maid who became his lover and, later, his wife.
According to Rousseau’s own account, Thérèse
bore him five children, all of whom were deposited at the foundling
hospital shortly after birth, an almost certain sentence of death in
eighteenth-century France. Rousseau’s abandonment of his children was
later to be used against him by Voltaire.
In 1749, while walking to Vincennes to visit the briefly-imprisoned
Diderot, Rousseau came across a newspaper announcement of an essay competition
organized by the Academy of Dijon. The Academy sought submissions
on the theme of whether the development of the arts and sciences had
improved or corrupted public morals. Rousseau later claimed that he then and there experienced an epiphany which
included the thought, central to his world view, that humankind is good
by nature but is corrupted by society. Rousseau entered his
Discourse on the Sciences and Arts (conventionally known as
the First Discourse) for the competition and won first prize
with his contrarian thesis that social development, including of the
arts and sciences, is corrosive of both civic virtue and individual moral
character. The Discourse was published in 1750 and is mainly
important because Rousseau used it to introduce themes that
he then developed further in his later work, especially the natural
virtue of the ordinary person and the moral corruption fostered by the
urge to distinction and excellence. The First Discourse made
Rousseau famous and provoked a series
of responses to which he in turn replied.
Music remained Rousseau’s primary interest in this period, and the
years 1752 and 1753 saw his most important contributions to the field.
The first of these was his opera Le Devin du Village (The
Village Soothsayer), which was an immediate success (and
stayed in the repertoire for a century). The second was his
participation in the “querelle des bouffons”, a controversy that
followed the performance in Paris of Pergolesi’s La Serva
Padrona by a visiting Italian company and which pitted the
partisans of Italian music against those of the French style. Rousseau,
who had already developed a taste for Italian music during his stay in
Venice, joined the dispute through his Letter on French Music
and the controversy also informed his (unpublished) Essay on the Origin
of Languages. Rousseau’s emphasis on the importance of melody and
the communication of emotion as central to the function of music was in
opposition to the views of Rameau, who stressed harmony and the
relationship between music, mathematics, and physics. Rousseau went so
far as to declare the French language inherently unmusical, a view
apparently contradicted by his own practice in Le Devin.
Rousseau’s conversion to Catholicism had rendered him ineligible for
his hereditary status as Citizen of Geneva. In 1754 he regained this
citizenship by reconverting to Calvinism. In the following year he
published his Discourse on the Origins of Inequality, again in
response to an essay competition from the Academy of Dijon. Though he
did not win the Academy’s prize a second time, the Second
Discourse is a far more accomplished work, and in it Rousseau begins to
develop his theories of human social development and moral psychology.
With the Second Discourse, the distance
between Rousseau and the Encyclopédiste
mainstream of the French Enlightenment thought became clear. This rift
was cemented with his 1758 publication of the Letter to
d’Alembert on the Theater, in which he denounced the idea that his
native city would benefit from the construction of a theater. In
Rousseau’s view theater, far from improving the population, tends to
weaken their attachment to the life of the polis.
The years following the publication of the Second Discourse
in 1755 were the most productive and important of Rousseau’s career. He
withdrew from Paris and, under the patronage of, first Mme d’Epinay and
then the Duke and Duchess of Luxembourg, worked on a novel, Julie,
ou La Nouvelle Héloïse, and then on
Emile and The Social Contract. Julie appeared in 1761
and was an immediate success. The novel is centred on a love triangle
between Julie, her tutor Saint Preux and her husband Wolmar. The work
is cast in epistolary form, and is an important supplementary source
for the interpretation of Rousseau’s social philosophy, containing, as
it does, such elements as a vision of rural community and the presence
of a manipulative genius who achieves the appearance of natural harmony
through cunning artifice and who thus anticipates both the tutor in
Emile and the legislator of The Social Contract. Both
works appeared in 1762, marking the high point of Rousseau’s
intellectual achievement. 
Unfortunately for Rousseau, the publication of these works led to personal catastrophe. Emile was condemned in Paris and both Emile and The Social Contract were condemned in Geneva on grounds of religious
heterodoxy. Partly in response to this, Rousseau finally renounced his Genevan citizenship in May 1763. Rousseau was forced to flee to escape arrest, seeking refuge
first in Switzerland and later, in January 1766, at the invitation
of David Hume, travelling to England.
Rousseau’s stay in England was marked by increasing mental
instability and he became wrongly convinced that Hume was at the center of a
plot against him. He spent fourteen months in Staffordshire where he
worked on his autobiographical work, the Confessions, which
also contains evidence of his paranoia in its treatment of figures like
Diderot and the German author Friedrich Melchior, Baron von Grimm. 
He returned to France in 1767 and then spent much of
the rest of his life working on autobiographical texts, completing the
Confessions but also composing the Dialogues: Rousseau
Judge of Jean-Jacques and The Reveries of the Solitary
Walker. He also completed his Considerations on the Government
of Poland in this period. In later life he further developed his
interest in botany (where his work proved influential in England via
his letters on the subject to the Duchess of Portland) and in music, as
he met and corresponded with the operatic composer Christoph Gluck. 
Rousseau died in 1778. In 1794 the
French revolutionaries transferred his remains to the
Panthéon in Paris.
Rousseau repeatedly claims that a single idea is at the centre of
his world view, namely, that human beings are good by nature but are
rendered corrupt by society. Unfortunately, despite the alleged
centrality of this claim, it is difficult to give it a clear and
plausible interpretation. One obvious problem is present from the
start: since society, the alleged agent of corruption, is composed
entirely of naturally good human beings, how can evil ever get a
foothold? It is also difficult to see what “natural goodness” might be.
In various places Rousseau clearly states that morality is not a
natural feature of human life, so in whatever sense it is that human
beings are good by nature, it is not the moral sense that the casual
reader would ordinarily assume. In order, therefore, to address this
puzzling central claim, it is best to look first at the details of
Rousseau’s moral psychology, especially as developed in the
Discourse on the Origins of Inequality and in Emile.
Rousseau attributes to all creatures an instinctual drive towards
self-preservation. Human beings therefore have such a drive,
which he terms amour de soi (self love). Amour de soi
directs us first to attend to our most basic biological needs for
things like food, shelter and warmth. Since, for Rousseau, humans, like
other creatures, are part of the design of a benevolent creator, they
are individually well-equipped with the means to satisfy their natural
needs. Alongside this basic drive for self-preservation,
Rousseau posits another passion which he terms
pitié (compassion). Pitié
directs us to attend to and relieve the suffering of others (including
animals) where we can do so without danger to our own
self-preservation. In some of his writings, such as the Second
Discourse, pitié is an original drive that
sits alongside amour de soi, whereas in others, such as
Emile and the Essay on the Origin of Languages, it is
a development of amour de soi considered as the origin of all
passions.
In the Discourse on the Origins of Inequality Rousseau
imagines a multi-stage evolution of humanity from the most primitive
condition to something like a modern complex society. Rousseau denies that this is a reconstruction of history as it actually was, and Frederick Neuhouser (2014) has argued that the evolutionary story is merely a philosophical device designed to separate the natural and the artificial elements of our psychology. At each step of
this imagined evolution human beings change their material and psychological
relations to one another and, correspondingly, their conception of
themselves, or what Rousseau calls the “sentiment of their
existence.” According to this narrative, humans live basically
solitary lives in the original state of the human race, since they do
not need one another to provide for their material needs. The human
race barely subsists in this condition, chance meetings between
proto-humans are the occasions for copulation and reproduction,
child-care is minimal and brief in duration. If humans are naturally
good at this stage of human evolution, their goodness is merely a
negative and amounts to the absence of evil.  In this story, human
beings are distinguished from the other creatures with which they
share the primeval world only by two characteristics: freedom, and
perfectibility. Freedom, in this context, is simply the ability not to
be governed solely by appetite; perfectibility is the capacity to
learn and thereby to find new and better means to satisfy
needs. Together, these characteristics give humans the potential to
achieve self-consciousness, rationality, and morality. Nevertheless,
it will turn out that such characteristics are more likely to condemn
them to a social world of deception, dissimulation, dependence,
oppression, and domination.
As human populations grow, simple but unstable forms of co-operation
evolve around activities like hunting. According to Rousseau, the
central transitional moment in human history occurs at a stage of
society marked by small settled communities.  At this point a change,
or rather a split, takes place in the natural drive humans have to
care for themselves: competition among humans to attract sexual
partners leads them to consider their own attractiveness to others and
how that attractiveness compares to that of potential
rivals. In Emile, where Rousseau is concerned with the
psychological development of an individual in a modern society, he
also associates the genesis of amour propre with sexual
competition and the moment, puberty, when the male adolescent starts
to think of himself as a sexual being with rivals for the favours of
girls and women.
Rousseau’s term for this new type of self-interested drive,
concerned with comparative success or failure as a social being, is
amour propre (love of self, often rendered as pride or vanity
in English translations). Amour propre makes a central
interest of each human being the need to be recognized by others as
having value and to be treated with respect. The presentation of amour
propre in the Second Discourse—and especially in his
note XV to that work—often suggests that Rousseau sees it as a
wholly negative passion and the source of all evil. Interpretations of
amour propre centered on the Second Discourse
(which, historically, are the most common ones (for example Charvet 1974)), often focus on the fact
that the need for recognition always has a comparative aspect, so that
individuals are not content merely that others acknowledge their value,
but also seek to be esteemed as superior to them. This aspect of our
nature then creates conflict as people try to exact this recognition
from others or react with anger and resentment when it is denied to
them. More recent readings of both the Second Discourse, and especially of
Emile, have indicated that a more nuanced view is possible (Den 1988, Neuhouser 2008).
According to these interpretations, amour propre is both the
cause of humanity’s fall as well as the promise of its redemption because
of the way in which it develops humans’ rational capacities and their sense
of themselves as social creatures among others. Although Rousseau
held that the overwhelming tendency, socially and historically, is
for amour propre to take on toxic and self-defeating
(‘inflamed’) forms, he also held that there are, at least in
principle, ways of organizing social life and individual education
that allow it to take on a benign character. This project of containing and
harnessing amour propre finds expression in both The
Social Contract and Emile. In some works, such as the
Second Discourse, Rousseau presents amour propre as a
passion that is quite distinct from amour de soi. In others,
including Emile, he presents it as a form that amour de
soi takes in a social environment. The latter is consistent with
his view in Emile that all the passions are
outgrowths or developments of amour de soi.
Although amour propre has its origins in sexual competition
and comparison within small societies, it does not achieve its full
toxicity until it is combined with a growth in material interdependence
among human beings. In the Discourse on Inequality, Rousseau
traces the growth of agriculture and metallurgy and the first
establishment of private property, together with the emergence of
inequality between those who own land and those who do not. In an
unequal society, human beings who need both the social good of recognition
and such material goods as food, warmth, etc. become enmeshed in
social relations that are inimical both to their freedom and to their
sense of self worth. Subordinates need superiors in order to have
access to the means of life; superiors need subordinates to work
for them and also to give them the recognition they crave. In such a structure
there is a clear incentive for people to misrepresent their true
beliefs and desires in order to attain their ends. Thus,
even those who receive the apparent love and adulation of their
inferiors cannot thereby find satisfaction for their amour
propre. This trope of misrepresentation and frustration receives
its clearest treatment in Rousseau’s account of the figure of the
European minister, towards the end of the Discourse on
Inequality, a figure whose need to flatter others in order to
secure his own wants leads to his alienation from his own self.
Amour de soi, amour propre and
pitié are not the full complement of passions in
Rousseau’s thinking. Once people have achieved consciousness of
themselves as social beings, morality also becomes possible and this
relies on the further faculty of conscience. The fullest accounts of
Rousseau’s conception of morality are found in the Lettres
Morales and in sections of the Confession of Faith of the
Savoyard Vicar, a part of Emile. In the most primitive
forms of human existence, before the emergence of amour
propre, pitié balances or restrains
self-interest. It is, to that extent, akin to a moral sentiment such as
Humean sympathy. But as something that is merely instinctual it lacks,
for Rousseau, a genuinely moral quality. Genuine morality, on the other
hand, consists in the application of reason to human affairs and
conduct. This requires the mental faculty that is the source of genuinely moral
motivation, namely conscience. Conscience impels us to the love of
justice and morality in a quasi-aesthetic manner. As the appreciation
of justice and the desire to act to further it, conscience is based on a rational
appreciation of the well-orderedness of a benign God’s plan for the
world. However, in a world dominated by inflamed amour propre,
the normal pattern is not for a morality of reason to supplement or
supplant our natural proto-moral sympathies. Instead, the usual course
of events in civil society is for reason and sympathy to
be displaced while humans’ enhanced capacity for reasoning is
put at the service, not of morality, but of the impulse to dominate,
oppress and exploit. (For recent discussion of Rousseau on conscience and reason, see Neidleman, 2017, ch. 7.)
A theme of both the Second Discourse and the Letter to
d’Alembert is the way in which human beings can deceive themselves
about their own moral qualities. So, for example, theatre audiences
derive enjoyment from the eliciting of their natural compassion by a
tragic scene on the stage; then, convinced of their natural goodness,
they are freed to act viciously outside the theater. Philosophy, too, can
serve as a resource for self-deception. It can give people reasons to ignore
the promptings of pitié or,
as in Rousseau’s
essay Principles of the Right of War, it can underpin legal codes (such as the
law of war and peace) that the powerful may use to license
oppressive violence whilst deadening their natural feelings of
compassion.
Rousseau’s contributions to political philosophy are scattered among
various works, most notable of which are the Discourse on the
Origins of Inequality, the Discourse on Political
Economy, The Social Contract, and Considerations on
the Government of Poland. However, many of his other works,
both major and minor, contain passages that amplify or illuminate the political
ideas in those works. His central doctrine in politics is that a state
can be legitimate only if it is guided by the “general will” of its
members. This idea finds its most detailed treatment in The Social
Contract.
In The Social Contract, Rousseau sets out to answer what he
takes to be the fundamental question of politics, the reconciliation of
the freedom of the individual with the authority of the state. This
reconciliation is necessary because human society has evolved to a
point where individuals can no longer supply their needs through their
own unaided efforts, but rather must depend on the co-operation
of others. The process whereby human needs expand and interdependence
deepens is set out in the Discourse on the Origins of
Inequality. In that work, the final moment of Rousseau’s
conjectural history involves the emergence of endemic conflict among
the now-interdependent individuals and the argument that the Hobbesian
insecurity of this condition would lead all to consent to the establishment
of state authority and law. In the Second Discourse, this
establishment amounts to the reinforcement of unequal and exploitative
social relations that are now backed by law and state power. In an echo
of Locke and an anticipation of Marx, Rousseau argues that this state
would, in effect, be a class state, guided by the common interest of
the rich and propertied and imposing unfreedom and subordination on the
poor and weak. The propertyless consent to such an establishment
because their immediate fear of a Hobbesian state of war leads them to
fail to attend to the ways in which the new state will systematically
disadvantage them.
The Social Contract aims to set out an alternative to this
dystopia, an alternative in which, Rousseau claims, each person will
enjoy the protection of the common force whilst remaining as free as
they were in the state of nature. The key to this reconciliation is the
idea of the general will: that is, the collective will of the citizen
body taken as a whole. The general will is the source of law and is
willed by each and every citizen. In obeying the law each citizen is
thus subject to his or her own will, and consequently, according to Rousseau,
remains free.
Rousseau’s account of the general will is marked by unclarities and
ambiguities that have attracted the interest of commentators since its first publication.
The principal tension is between a democratic conception,
where the general will is simply what the citizens of the state
have decided together in their sovereign assembly, and an alternative
interpretation where the general will is the transcendent incarnation of
the citizens’ common interest that exists in abstraction from
what any of them actually wants (Bertram 2012). Both views find some
support in Rousseau’s texts, and both have been influential. Contemporary
epistemic conceptions of democracy often make reference to
Rousseau’s discussion in Book 2 chapter 3 of of
The Social Contract. These accounts typically take
Condorcet’s jury theorem as a starting point, where democratic
procedures are conceived of as a method for discovering the truth
about the public interest; they then interpret the general will as a
deliberative means of seeking outcomes that satisfy the preferences of
individuals and render the authority of the state legitimate (see for
example, Grofman and Feld 1988).  The tension between the
“democratic” and the “transcendental”
conceptions can be reduced if we take Rousseau to be arguing for the
view that, under the right conditions and subject to the right
procedures, citizen legislators will be led to converge on laws that
correspond to their common interest; however, where those conditions
and procedures are absent, the state necessarily lacks legitimacy. On
such a reading, Rousseau may be committed to something like an a
posteriori philosophical anarchism. Such a view holds that it is
possible, in principle, for a state to exercise legitimate authority
over its citizens, but all actual states—and indeed all states
that we are likely to see in the modern era—will fail to meet
the conditions for legitimacy.
Rousseau argues that in order for the general will to be truly general
it must come from all and apply to all. This thought has both
substantive and formal aspects. Formally, Rousseau argues that the law
must be general in application and universal in scope. The law cannot
name particular individuals and it must apply to everyone within the
state. Rousseau believes that this condition will lead citizens, though
guided by a consideration of what is in their own private interest, to
favor laws that both secure the common interest impartially and that
are not burdensome and intrusive. For this to be true, however, it has
to be the case that the situation of citizens is substantially similar
to one another. In a state where citizens enjoy a wide diversity of
lifestyles and occupations, or where there is a great deal of cultural
diversity, or where there is a high degree of economic inequality, it
will not generally be the case that the impact of the laws will be the
same for everyone. In such cases it will often not be true that a
citizen can occupy the standpoint of the general will merely by
imagining the impact of general and universal laws on his or her own case.
In The Social Contract Rousseau envisages three
different types or levels of will as being in play. First, individuals
all have private wills corresponding to their own selfish interests as
natural individuals; second, each individual, insofar as he or she identifies
with the collective as a whole and assumes the identity of citizen,
wills the general will of that collective as his or her own, setting aside
selfish interest in favor of a set of laws that allow all to
coexist under conditions of equal freedom; third, and very
problematically, a person can identify with the corporate will of a
subset of the populace as a whole. The general will is therefore both a property of
the collective and a result of its deliberations, and a property of the
individual insofar as the individual identifies as a member of the
collective. In a well-ordered society, there is no tension between
private and general will, as individuals accept that both justice and
their individual self-interest require their submission to a law which
safeguards their freedom by protecting them from the private violence
and personal domination that would otherwise hold sway. In practice,
however, Rousseau believes that many societies will fail to have this
well-ordered character. One way in which they can fail is if private
individuals are insufficiently enlightened or virtuous and therefore
refuse to accept the restrictions on their own conduct which the
collective interest requires. Another mode of political failure arises
where the political community is differentiated into factions (perhaps
based on a class division between rich and poor) and where one faction
can impose its collective will on the state as a whole.
The Social Contract harbors a further tension between
two accounts of how the general will emerges and its relation to the
private wills of citizens. Sometimes Rousseau favors a procedural story
according to which the individual contemplation of self interest
(subject to the constraints of generality and universality and under
propitious sociological background conditions such as rough equality
and cultural
similarity) will result in the emergence of the general will from the
assembly of citizens (see Sreenivasan 2000). In this account of the emergence of the general
will, there seems to be no special need for citizens to have any
specifically moral qualities: the constraints on their choice should be
enough. However, Rousseau also clearly believes that the mere contemplation
of self interest would be inadequate to generate a general will.
This may partly concern issues of
compliance, since selfish citizens who can will the general will might
still not be moved to obey it. But Rousseau also seems to believe that
citizen virtue is a necessary condition for the emergence of the
general will in the first place. This presents him with a problem for
which his figure of the legislator is one attempted solution. As a
believer in the plasticity of human nature, Rousseau holds that good
laws make for good citizens. However, he also believes both that good
laws can only be willed by good citizens and that, in order to be
legitimate, they must be agreed upon by the assembly. This puts him in some
difficulty, as it is unlikely that the citizens who come together to
form a new state will have the moral qualities required to will good
laws, shaped as those citizens will have been by unjust institutions.
The legislator or lawgiver therefore has the function of inspiring a
sense of collective identity in the new citizens that allows them to
identify with the whole and be moved to support legislation
that will eventually transform them and their children into good
citizens. In this story, however, the new citizens at first lack the
capacity to discern the good reasons that support the new laws and the
lawgiver has to persuade them by non-rational means to legislate in
their own best interests.
The figure of the legislator is a puzzle. Like the tutor in
Emile, the legislator has the role of manipulating the desires
of his charges, giving them the illusion of free choice without its
substance. Little wonder then that many critics have seen these
characters in a somewhat sinister light. In both cases there is a
mystery concerning where the educator figure comes from and how he
could have acquired the knowledge and virtue necessary to perform his
role. This, in turn, raises a problem of regress. If the legislator was
formed by a just society, then who performed the legislator’s role for that
society, and how was that legislator formed? How did the tutor acquire his
education if not from a tutor who, in turn, was educated according to
Rousseau’s program by an earlier tutor?
What then of Rousseau’s key claim that freedom and authority are
reconciled in his ideal republic through obedience to the general will?
This claim finds notorious and deliberately paradoxical expression in
Book 1 chapter 7 of The Social Contract, where Rousseau writes
of citizens being “forced to be free” when they are constrained to obey
the general will. The opening words of The Social Contract themselves
refer to freedom, with the famous saying that “Man is born free, but is
everywhere in chains”. This ringing declaration, however, is almost
immediately followed by a note of paradox, as Rousseau declares that
he can make this subjection “in chains” legitimate. The
thought that Rousseau’s commitment to freedom might not be all that it
first appears is strengthened by other passages in the book, most
notably his declaration that those subject to the general will are
“forced to be free.” The value of freedom or liberty is at the center
of Rousseau’s concerns throughout his work. Since he uses the notion in
several distinct ways, though, it is important to distinguish several
uses of the term. First, we should note that Rousseau regards the
capacity for choice, and therefore the ability to act against instinct
and inclination, as one of the features that distinguishes the human
race from animal species and makes truly moral action possible.
In the Discourse on the Origins of Inequality, for example, he
characterizes animal species in essentially Cartesian terms, as
mechanisms programmed to a fixed pattern of behavior. Human beings, on
the other hand are not tied to any particular mode of life and can
reject the promptings of instinct. This makes possible both the
development of the human species and also its fall from grace, since
individuals can ignore benign impulses (such as pitié) if
they wish to. The freedom to act contrary to the “mechanism of the
senses”, and the power of willing and choosing is, for Rousseau,
something entirely outside the laws of the physical world and is
therefore not subject to scientific explanation. Rousseau also takes
this freedom to choose
to act as the basis of all distinctively moral action.
In The Social Contract the connection between freedom of
choice and morality is central to his argument against despotic
government, where he writes that the renunciation of freedom is contrary
to human nature and that to renounce freedom in favour of another
person’s authority is to “deprive one’s actions of all morality” (SC
1.4).
In Book I chapter 8 of the The Social Contract, Rousseau
tries to illuminate his claim that the formation of the legitimate
state involves no net loss of freedom, but in fact, he makes a
slightly different claim. The new claim involves the idea of an exchange
of one type of freedom (natural freedom) for another type (civil
freedom). Natural freedom involves an unlimited right to all things, an
idea that is reminiscent of Hobbes’s “right of nature” in Leviathan.
Since all human beings enjoy this liberty right to all things, it is
clear that in a world occupied by many interdependent humans, the
practical value of that liberty may be almost nonexistent.
This is because any
individual’s capacity to get what he or she wants will be limited by his or her
physical power and the competing physical power of others. 
Further, inevitable conflict over scarce resources will pit individuals
against each other, so that unhindered exercise of natural freedom will result
in violence and uncertainty. The
formation of the state, and the promulgation of laws willed by the
general will, transforms this condition. With sovereign power in place,
individuals are
guaranteed a sphere of equal freedom under the law with protection for
their own persons and security for their property. Provided that the
law bearing equally on everyone is not meddlesome or intrusive (and
Rousseau believes it will not be, since no individual has a motive to
legislate burdensome laws) there will be a net
benefit compared to the pre-political state.
Rousseau makes a further claim in the same chapter of The Social Contract,
namely
that in conditions of civil society the citizen achieves “moral freedom,” by
which he means obedience to a law that one has prescribed to oneself (for discussion see especially Neuhouser 1993).
Although this latter claim is presented almost as an afterthought, it
is the form of freedom most directly responsive to the challenge
Rousseau had set for himself two chapters earlier, which involved
finding “a form of association” in which each citizen would “obey only
himself.” Naturally, this raises the question of whether the citizen
does in fact obey only himself when he obeys the general will. On the
face of it, this claim looks difficult to reconcile with the fact of
majorities and minorities within a democratic state, since those
citizens who find themselves outvoted would seem to be
constrained by a decision with which they disagree. Rousseau’s solution
to this puzzle is found much later, in Book 4 chapter 3 of The
Social Contract, where he argues that those who obey laws
they did not vote for remain bound by a will that is their own, since
the democratic process has enabled them to discover the content of a
general will in which that they share. Many commentators have not found this
argument fully convincing.
Rousseau’s invocation of three types of freedom (natural, civil, and moral)
in the text of
The Social Contract  can appear confusing. The picture is
further complicated by the fact that he also relies on a fourth
conception of freedom, related to civil freedom but distinct from it,
which he nowhere names explicitly. This is “republican freedom” and
consists, not in my being subject to my own will, but rather in
the fact that the law protects me from being subject to the will
of any other particular person in the manner of a slave or serf.
To find Rousseau’s explicit endorsement
of this idea, we have to look not to The Social Contract, but
rather to some of his unpublished notes. Yet the concept is clearly implicit in
the notorious “forced to be free” passage in Book 1 chapter 7, since he
there explains that when each citizen is constrained to obey the
general will, he is thereby provided with a guarantee against “all
personal dependence”.
One feature of Rousseau’s political philosophy that has
proved least persuasive to later thinkers is his doctrine of
sovereignty and representation, with his apparent rejection of
“representative government”. At the center of Rousseau’s view in
The Social Contract is his rejection of the Hobbesian idea
that a people’s legislative will can be vested in some group or
individual that then acts with their authority but rules over them.
Instead, he takes the view that to hand over one’s general right of
ruling oneself to another person or body constitutes a form a slavery,
and that to recognize such an authority would amount to an abdication
of moral agency. This hostility to the representation of sovereignty
also extends to the election of representatives to sovereign
assemblies, even where those representatives are subject to periodic
re-election. Even in that case, the assembly would be legislating on
a range of topics on which citizens have not deliberated. Laws passed by
such assemblies would therefore bind citizens in terms that they have
not themselves agreed upon. Not only does the representation of
sovereignty constitute, for Rousseau, a surrender of moral agency, the
widespread desire to be represented in the business of self-rule is a
symptom of moral decline and the loss of virtue.
The practical difficulties of direct self-rule by the entire citizen
body are obvious. Such arrangements are potentially onerous and must
severely limit the size of legitimate states. It is noteworthy that
Rousseau takes a different view in a text aimed at practical
politics: Considerations on the Government of
Poland. Nevertheless, it is not entirely clear that the
widespread interpretation of Rousseau as rejecting all forms of
representative government is correct. One of the key distinctions
in The Social Contract is between sovereign and
government. The sovereign, composed of the people as a whole,
promulgates laws as an expression of its general will. The government
is a more limited body that administers the state within the bounds
set by the laws, and which issues decrees applying the laws in
particular cases. If the laws are conceived of as the people setting a
constitutional framework for society, with the government’s decrees
comprising the more normal business of “legislation,” then
the distance between a Rousseauian republic and a modern
constitutional democracy may be smaller than it at first
appears. In effect, the institution of the sovereign may be
inconsistent with a representative model, where the executive power of
the government can be understood as requiring it.  Such a picture
gains credibility when the details of Rousseau’s views on government
are examined. Although a variety of forms of government turn out to be
theoretically compatible with popular sovereignty, Rousseau is
sceptical about the prospects for both democracy (where the people
conduct the day to day running of the state and the application of the
laws) and monarchy. Instead, he favors some form of elective
aristocracy: in other words, he supports the idea that the day-to-day
administration should be in the hands of a subset of the population,
elected by them according to merit.
Two important issues arise in relation to Rousseau’s account of
relations between sovereign and government. The first of these
concerns his political pessimism, even in the case of the
best-designed and most perfect republic. Just as any group has a
collective will as opposed to the individual private will of its
members, so does the government. As the state becomes larger and more
diffuse, and as citizens become more distant from one another both
spatially and emotionally, so the effective government of the republic
will need a proportionally smaller and more cohesive group of
magistrates. Rousseau thinks it almost inevitable that this group will
end up usurping the legitimate sovereign power of the people and
substituting its corporate will for the people’s general will. The
second issue concerns how democratic Rousseau envisaged his republic
to be. He sometimes suggests a picture in which the people would be
subject to elite domination by the government, since the magistrates
would reserve the business of agenda-setting for the assembly to
themselves. In other cases, he endorses a conception of a more fully
democratic republic. (For competing views of this question see Fralin
1978 and Cohen 2010.)
Although Rousseau rejects Hobbes’s view of the sovereign as
representing or acting in the person of the subject, he has a similar
view of what sovereignty is and its relation to the rights of the
individual. He rejects the idea that individuals associated together
in a political community retain some natural rights over themselves
and their property. Rather, such rights as individuals have over
themselves, land, and external objects, are a matter of sovereign
competence and decision. Individual rights must be specified by the
sovereign in ways that are compatible with the interests of all in a
just polity, and Rousseau rejects the idea that such rights could be
insisted on as a check on the sovereign’s power.
The final full chapter of The Social Contract expounds
Rousseau’s doctrine of civil religion. Contemporary readers were
scandalized by it, and particularly by its claim that true (original
or early) Christianity is useless in fostering the spirit of
patriotism and social solidarity necessary for a flourishing state. In
many ways the chapter represents a striking departure from the main
themes of the book. First, it is the only occasion where Rousseau
prescribes the content of a law that a just republic must
have. Second, it amounts to his acceptance of the inevitability of
pluralism in matters of religion, and thus of religious toleration;
this is in some tension with his encouragement elsewhere of cultural
homogeneity as a propitious environment for the emergence of a general
will. Third, it represents a very concrete example of the limits of
sovereign power: following Locke, Rousseau insists upon the inability
of the sovereign to examine the private beliefs of citizens. The
tenets of Rousseau’s civil religion include the affirmation of the
existence of a supreme being and of the afterlife, the principle that
the just will prosper and the wicked will be punished, and the claim
that the social contract and the laws are sacred.  In addition, the
civil religion requires the provision that all those willing to
tolerate others should themselves be tolerated, but those who insist
that there is no salvation outside their particular church cannot be
citizens of the state. The structure of religious beliefs within the
just state is that of an overlapping consensus: the dogmas of the
civil religion are such that they can be affirmed by adherents of a
number of different faiths, both Christian and non-Christian.
Despite Rousseau’s concern for religious toleration both in the
chapter and elsewhere, modern readers have often been repelled by one
striking note of intolerance. Rousseau argues that those who cannot
accept the dogmas can be banished from the state. This is because he
believes that atheists, having no fear of divine punishment, cannot be
trusted by their fellow citizens to obey the law. He goes even further, to
suggest the death penalty for those who affirm the dogmas but later act
as if they do not believe them.
Rousseau’s writings on language and languages are contained in
two places, the unpublished Essay on the Origin of Languages
and in a section of the Discourse on the Origins of
Inequality. In the Essay, Rousseau tells us that human
beings want to communicate as soon as they recognize that there are
other beings like themselves. But he also raises the question of why
language, specifically, rather than gesture is needed for this purpose.
The answer, strangely enough, is that language permits the
communication of the passions in a way that gesture does not, and that
the tone and stress of linguistic communication are crucial,
rather than its content. This point enables Rousseau to make a close
connection between the purposes of speech and melody. Such vocabulary
as there originally was, according to Rousseau, was merely figurative
and words only acquire a literal meaning much later. Theories that
locate the origin of language in the need to reason together about
matters of fact are, according to Rousseau, deeply mistaken. While the
cry of the other awakens our natural compassion and causes us to
imagine the inner life of others, our purely physical needs have an
anti-social tendency because they scatter human beings more widely
across the earth in search of subsistence. Although language and song
have a common origin in the need to communicate emotion, over time the
two become separated, a process that becomes accelerated as a result of
the invention of writing. In the south, language stays closer to its
natural origins and southern languages retain their melodic and
emotional quality (a fact that suits them for song and opera). Northern
languages, by contrast, become oriented to more practical tasks and are
better for practical and theoretical reasoning.
In Part I of the Second Discourse, Rousseau’s focus is slightly
different and occurs in the context of a polemic against philosophers
(such as natural law theorists like Condillac) who attribute to primitive human beings
a developed capacity for abstract reasoning. Rousseau proposes need as
the cause of the development of language, but since language depends on
convention to assign arbitrary signs to objects, he puzzles about
how it could ever get started and how primitive people could
accomplish the feat of giving names to universals.
Rousseau’s ideas about education are mainly expounded in
Emile. In that work, he advances the idea of “negative
education”, which is a form of “child-centered” education. His
essential idea is that education should be carried out, so far as
possible, in harmony with the development of the child’s natural
capacities by a process of apparently autonomous discovery. This is in
contrast to a model of education where the teacher is a figure of
authority who conveys knowledge and skills according to a
pre-determined curriculum. Rousseau depends here on his thesis of
natural goodness, which he asserts at the beginning of the book, and
his educational scheme involves the protection and development of the
child’s natural goodness through various stages, along with the isolation of
the child from the domineering wills of others. Up to adolescence at
least, the educational program comprises a sequence of manipulations of
the environment by the tutor. The child is not told what to do or think
but is led to draw its own conclusions as a result of its own
explorations, the context for which has been carefully arranged. The
first stage of the program starts in infancy, where Rousseau’s crucial
concern is to avoid conveying the idea that human relations are
essentially ones of domination and subordination, an idea that can too
easily by fostered in the infant by the conjunction of its own
dependence on parental care and its power to get attention by crying.
Though the young child must be protected from physical harm, Rousseau
is keen that it gets used to the exercise of its bodily powers and he
therefore advises that the child be left as free as possible rather
than being confined or constrained. From the age of about twelve or so,
the program moves on to the acquisition of abstract skills and concepts.
This is not done with the use of books or formal lessons, but rather
through practical experience. The third phase of education coincides
with puberty and early adulthood. The period of isolation comes to an
end and the child starts to take an interest in others (particularly
the opposite sex), and in how he or she is regarded. At this stage
the great danger is that excessive amour propre will extend to
exacting recognition from others, disregarding their worth, and demanding
subordination. The task of the tutor is to ensure that the pupil’s
relations with others are first mediated through the passion of
pitié (compassion) so that through the idea of
the suffering others, of care, and of gratitude, the pupil finds a secure place
for the recognition of his own moral worth where his amour
propre is established on a non-competitive basis. The final period
of education involves the tutor changing from a manipulator of the
child’s environment into the adult’s trusted advisor. The young and
autonomous adult finds a spouse who can be another source of secure and
non-competitive recognition. This final phase also involves instruction
into the nature of the social world, including the doctrines of
Rousseau’s political philosophy.
Rousseau’s thinking has had a profound influence on later
philosophers and political theorists, although the tensions and
ambiguities in his work have meant that his ideas have been developed
in radically incompatible and divergent ways. In modern political
philosophy, for example, it is possible to detect Rousseau as a source
of inspiration for liberal theories, communitarian ideas, civic
republicanism, and in theories of deliberative and participatory
democracy. Hostile writers have portrayed Rousseau as a source of
inspiration for the more authoritarian aspects of the French revolution
and thence for aspects of fascism and communism.
Rousseau’s most important philosophical impact was on Immanuel Kant.
A portrait of Rousseau was the only image on display in Kant’s house,
and legend has it that the only time that Kant forgot to take his daily
walk was when reading Emile. Instances of direct influence
include Kant’s idea of the categorical imperative, the third
formulation of which in the Groundwork of the Metaphysic of
Morals (the so-called formula of the kingdom of ends) recalls
Rousseau’s discussion of the general will in The Social
Contract. Ironically, Kant’s detachment of the idea of
universal legislation from its context in the particularity of single
society reverses Rousseau’s own approach, since Rousseau had, in
preparatory work for The Social Contract rejected the idea of
a general will of the human race as that notion appeared in Diderot’s
article “Natural Right” in the Encyclopédie.
Rousseau’s influence can also be seen in Kant’s moral psychology,
especially in work such as Religion Within the Limits of Reason
Alone, in Kant’s own thinking about conjectural history, and in
his writings on international justice which draw on Rousseau’s
engagement with the work of the Abbé St. Pierre.
The cases of Hegel and Marx are more complex. Hegel’s direct
references to Rousseau are often uncomplimentary. In
the Philosophy of Right, while praising Rousseau for the idea
that will is the basis of the state, he misrepresents the idea of the
general will as being merely the idea of the overlap between the
contingent wills of private individuals. In the Encyclopedia
Logic he demonstrates an awareness that this was not Rousseau’s
view. Hegel’s discussion of the master-slave dialectic and the problem
of recognition in the Phenomenology of Spirit also draws on
Rousseau, in this case on the notion of amour propre and the
ways in which attempts to exact respect and recognition from others
can be self-defeating. Karl Marx’s concerns with alienation and
exploitation have also been thought to bear some kind of relationship
to Rousseau’s thinking on related topics. Here the evidence is more
indirect, since the references to Rousseau in Marx’s work are few and
insubstantial.
In contemporary political philosophy, it is clear that the thinking
of John Rawls, especially in A Theory of Justice reflects the
influence of Rousseau. A good example of this is the way in which Rawls
uses the device of the “original position” to put self-interested
choice at the service of the determination of the principles of
justice. This exactly parallels Rousseau’s argument that citizens will
be drawn to select just laws as if from an impartial perspective,
because the universality and generality of the law means that when
considering their own interests they will select the measure that best
reflects their own interests.