Sartre was born in Paris where he spent most of his life. After a
traditional philosophical education in prestigious Parisian schools
that introduced him to the history of Western philosophy with a bias
toward Cartesianism and neoKantianism, not to mention a strong strain
of Bergsonism, Sartre succeeded his former school friend, Raymond
Aron, at the French Institute in Berlin (1933–1934) where he read the
leading phenomenologists of the day, Husserl, Heidegger and
Scheler. He prized Husserl's restatement of the principle of
intentionality (all consciousness aims at or “intends” an
other-than-consciousness) that seemed to free the thinker from the
inside/outside epistemology inherited from Descartes while retaining
the immediacy and certainty that Cartesians prized so highly. What he
read of Heidegger at that time is unclear, but he deals with the
influential German ontologist explicitly after his return and
especially in his masterwork, Being and Nothingness
(1943). He exploits the latter's version of Husserlian intentionality
by insisting that human reality (Heidegger's Dasein or human
way of being) is “in the world” primarily via its
practical concerns and not its epistemic relationships. This lends
both Heidegger's and Sartre's early philosophies a kind of
“pragmatist” character that Sartre, at least, will never
abandon. It has been remarked that many of the Heideggerian concepts
in Sartre's existentialist writings also occur in those of Bergson,
whose “Les Données immediates de la
conscience” (Time and Free Will) Sartre once
credited with drawing him toward philosophy. But it is clear that
Sartre devoted much of his early philosophical attention to combating
the then influential Bergsonism and that mention of Bergson's name
decreases as that of Heidegger grows in Sartre's writings during the
“vintage” existentialist years. Sartre seems to have read
the phenomenological ethicist Max Scheler, whose concept of the
intuitive grasp of paradigm cases is echoed in Sartre's reference to
the “image” of the kind of person one should be that both
guides and is fashioned by our moral choices. But where Scheler in the
best Husserlian fashion argues for the “discovery” of such
value images, Sartre insists on their creation.  The properly
“existentialist” version of phenomenology is already in
play.
Though Sartre was not a serious reader of Hegel or Marx until during
and after the war, like so many of his generation, he came under the
influence of Kojève's Marxist and protoexistentialist
interpretation of Hegel, though he never attended his famous lectures
in the 1930s as did Lacan and Merleau-Ponty. It was Jean Hyppolite's
translation of and commentary on Hegel's Phenomenology of
Spirit that marked Sartre's closer study of the seminal German
philosopher. This is especially evident in his posthumously published
Notebooks for an Ethics written in 1947–48 to fulfill the
promise of an “ethics of authenticity” made in Being and
Nothingness. That project was subsequently abandoned but the
Hegelian and Marxist presence became dominant in Sartre's next major
philosophical text, the Critique of Dialectical Reason (1960)
and in an essay that came to serve as its Introduction, Search
for a Method (1957). Dilthey had dreamt of completing Kant's
famous triad with a fourth Kritik, namely, a critique of
historical reason. Sartre pursued this project by combining a
Hegelian-Marxist dialectic with an Existentialist “psychoanalysis”
that incorporates individual responsibility into class relationships,
thereby adding a properly Existentialist dimension of moral
responsibility to a Marxist emphasis on collective and structural
causality—what Raymond Aron would later criticize as an impossible
union of Kierkegaard and Marx. In the final analysis, Kierkegaard wins
out; Sartre's “Marxism” remains adjectival to his existentialism and
not the reverse. This becomes apparent in the last phase of his
work.
Sartre had long been fascinated with the French novelist Gustave
Flaubert. In what some would consider the culmination of his thought,
he weds Existentialist biography with Marxian social critique in a
Hegelian “totalization” of an individual and his era, to
produce the last of his many incompleted projects, a multi-volume
study of Flaubert's life and times, The Family Idiot
(1971–1972). In this work, Sartre joins his Existentialist
vocabulary of the 1940s and early 1950s with his Marxian lexicon of
the late 1950s and 1960s to ask what we can know about a man in the
present state of our knowledge.  This study, which he describes as
“a novel that is true,” incarnates that mixture of
phenomenological description, psychological insight, and social
critique that has become the hallmark of Sartrean philosophy. These
features doubtless contributed to his being awarded the Nobel prize
for literature, which he characteristically refused along with its
substantial cash grant lest his acceptance be read as approval of the
bourgeois values that the honor seemed to emblemize.
In his last years, Sartre, who had lost the use of one eye in
childhood, became almost totally blind. Yet he continued to work with
the help of a tape recorder, producing with Benny Lévy portions
of a “co-authored” ethics, the published parts of which
indicate, in the eyes of many, that its value may be more biographical
than philosophical.
After his death, thousands spontaneously joined his funeral
cortège in a memorable tribute to his respect and esteem among
the public at large. As the headline of one Parisian newspaper
lamented: “France has lost its conscience.”
Like Husserl and Heidegger, Sartre distinguished ontology from
metaphysics and favored the former. In his case, ontology is primarily
descriptive and classificatory, whereas metaphysics purports to be
causally explanatory, offering accounts about the ultimate origins and
ends of individuals and of the universe as a whole. Unlike Heidegger,
however, Sartre does not try to combat metaphysics as a deleterious
undertaking. He simply notes in a Kantian manner that it raises
questions we cannot answer. On the other hand, he subtitles Being
and Nothingness a “Phenomenological Ontology.” Its descriptive
method moves from the most abstract to the highly concrete. It begins
by analyzing two distinct and irreducible categories or kinds of
being: the in-itself (en-soi) and the for-itself
(pour-soi), roughly the nonconscious and consciousness
respectively, adding a third, the for-others (pour-autrui),
later in the book. He concludes with a sketch of the practice of
“existential psychoanalysis” that interprets our actions to uncover
the fundamental project that unifies our lives.
Being-in-itself and being-for-itself have mutually exclusive
characteristics and yet we (human reality) are entities that combine
both, which is the ontological root of our ambiguity. The in-itself is
solid, self-identical, passive and inert. It simply “is.” The
for-itself is fluid, nonself-identical, and dynamic. It is the
internal negation or “nihilation” of the in-itself, on which it
depends. Viewed more concretely, this duality is cast as “facticity”
and “transcendence.” The “givens” of our situation such as our
language, our environment, our previous choices and our very selves in
their function as in-itself constitute our facticity. As conscious
individuals, we transcend (surpass) this facticity in what constitutes
our “situation.” In other words, we are always beings “in situation,”
but the precise mixture of transcendence and facticity that forms any
situation remains indeterminable, at least while we are engaged in it.
Hence Sartre concludes that we are always “more” than our situation
and that this is the ontological foundation of our freedom. We are
“condemned” to be free, in his hyperbolic phrase.
One can see why Sartre is often described as a Cartesian dualist but
this is imprecise. Whatever dualism pervades his thought is one of
spontaneity/inertia. His is not a “two substance” ontology like the
thinking thing and the extended thing (mind and matter) of Descartes.
Only the in-itself is conceivable as substance or “thing.” The
for-itself is a no-thing, the internal negation of things. The
principle of identity holds only for being-in-itself. The for-itself
is an exception to this rule. Accordingly, time with all of its
paradoxes is a function of the for-itself's nihilating or “othering”
the in-itself. The past is related to the future as in-itself to
for-itself and as facticity to possibility, with the present, like
“situation” in general, being an ambiguous mixture of both. This is
Sartre's version of Heidegger's “Ekstatic temporality,” the
qualitative “lived” time of our concerns and practices, the time that
rushes by or hangs heavy on our hands, rather than the quantitative
“clock” time that we share with physical nature.
The category or ontological principle of the for-others comes into
play as soon as the other subject or Other appears on the scene. The
Other cannot be deduced from the two previous principles but must be
encountered. Sartre's famous analysis of the shame one experiences at
being discovered in an embarrassing situation is a phenomenological
argument (what Husserl called an “eidetic reduction”) of our awareness
of another as subject. It carries the immediacy and the certainty that
philosophers demand of our perception of other “minds” without
suffering the weakness of arguments from analogy commonly used by
empiricists to defend such knowledge.
The roles of consciousness and the in-itself in his earlier work are
assumed by “praxis” (human activity in its material context) and the
“practico-inert” respectively in the Critique of Dialectical
Reason. Praxis is dialectical in the Hegelian sense that it
surpasses and subsumes its other, the practico-inert. The latter, like
the in-itself, is inert but as “practico-” is the sedimentation of
previous praxes. Thus speech acts would be examples of praxis but
language would be practico-inert; social institutions are
practico-inert but the actions they both foster and limit are
praxes.
The Other in Being and Nothingness alienates or objectifies
us (in this work Sartre seems to use these terms equivalently) and the
third party is simply this Other writ large. The “us” is objectified
by an Other and hence has the ontological status of being-in-itself
but the collective subject or “we,” he insists, is simply a
psychological experience. In the Critique another ontological
form appears, the “mediating” third, that denotes the group member as
such and yields a collective subject without reducing the respective
agents to mere ciphers of some collective consciousness. In other
words, Sartre accords an ontological primacy to individual praxis
while recognizing its enrichment as group member of a praxis that
sustains predicates such as command/obedience and right/duty that are
properly its own. The concepts of praxis, practico-inert and mediating
third form the basis of a social ontology that merits closer attention
than the prolix Critique encourages.
Sartre's gifts of psychological description and analysis are widely
recognized. What made him so successful a novelist and playwright
contributed to the vivacity and force of his phenomenological
“arguments” as well. His early studies of emotive and
imaging consciousness in the late 1930s press the Husserlian principle
of intentionality farther than their author seemed willing to go. For
example, in The Psychology of Imagination (1940), Sartre
argues that Husserl remains captive to the idealist principle of
immanence (the object of consciousness lies within consciousness),
despite his stated goal of combating idealism, when he seems to
consider images as miniatures of the perceptual object reproduced or
retained in the mind. On the contrary, Sartre argues, if one insists
that all consciousness is intentional in nature, one must conclude
that even so-called “images” are not objects “in the
mind” but are ways of relating to items “in the
world” in a properly imaginative manner, namely, by what he
calls “derealizing” them or rendering them
“present-absent.”
Similarly, our emotions are not “inner states” but are ways of
relating to the world; they too are “intentional.” In this case,
emotive behavior involves physical changes and what he calls a quasi
“magical” attempt to transform the world by changing ourselves. The
person who gets “worked up” when failing to hit the golf ball or to
open the jar lid, is, on Sartre's reading, “intending” a world where
physiological changes “conjure up” solutions in the problematic world.
The person who literally “jumps for joy,” to cite another of his
examples, is trying by a kind of incantation to possess a good “all at
once” that can be realized only across a temporal spread. If emotion
is a joke, he warns, it is a joke we believe in. These are all
spontaneous, prereflective relations. They are not the products of
reflective decision. Yet insofar as they are even prereflectively
conscious, we are responsible for them. And this raises the question
of freedom, a necessary condition for ascribing responsibility and the
heart of his philosophy.
The basis of Sartrean freedom is ontological: we are free because we
are not a self (an in-itself) but a presence-to-self (the
transcendence or “nihilation” of our self). This implies that we are
“other” to our selves, that whatever we are or whatever others may
ascribe to us, we are “in the manner of not being it,” that is, in the
manner of being able to assume a perspective in its regard. This inner
distance reflects not only the nonself-identity of the for-itself and
the ekstatic temporality that it generates but forms the site of what
Sartre calls “freedom as the definition of man.” To that freedom
corresponds a coextensive responsibility. We are responsible for our
“world” as the horizon of meaning in which we operate and thus for
everything in it insofar as their meaning and value are assigned by
virtue of our life-orienting fundamental “choice.” At this point the
ontological and the psychological overlap while remaining distinct as
occurs so often in phenomenology.
Such fundamental “choice” has been criticized as being criterionless
and hence arbitrary. But it would be better to speak of it as
criterion-constituting in the sense that it grounds the set of criteria
on the basis of which our subsequent choices are made. It resembles
what ethicist R. M. Hare calls “decisions of principle” (that
establish the principles for subsequent decisions but are themselves
unprincipled) and what Kierkegaard would describe as “conversion.” In
fact, Sartre sometimes employed this term himself to denote a radical
change in one's basic project. It is this original sustaining “choice”
that Existential psychoanalysis seeks to uncover.
Sartre's use of intentionality is the backbone of his psychology.  And
his psychology is the key to his ontology that is being fashioned at
this time. In fact, the concept of imaging consciousness as the locus
of possibility, negativity and lack emerges as the model for
consciousness in general (being-for-itself) in Being and
Nothingness. That said, it would not be an exaggeration to
describe Sartre as a philosopher of the imaginary, so important a role
does imaging consciousness or its equivalent play in his work.
Sartre was a moralist but scarcely a moralizer. His earliest studies,
though phenomenological, underscored the freedom and by implication
the responsibility of the practitioner of the phenomenological method.
Thus his first major work, Transcendence of the Ego, in
addition to constituting an argument against the transcendental ego
(the epistemological subject that cannot be an object) central to
German idealism and Hussserlian phenomenology, introduces an ethical
dimension into what was traditionally an epistemological project by
asserting that this appeal to a transcendental ego conceals a
conscious flight from freedom. The phenomenological reduction that
constitutes the objects of consciousness as pure meanings or
significations devoid of the existential claims that render them
liable to skeptical doubt-such a reduction or “bracketing of the
being question” carries a moral significance as well. The
“authentic” subject, as Sartre will later explain in
his Notebooks for an Ethics, will learn to live without an
ego, whether transcendental or empirical, in the sense that the
transcendental ego is superfluous and the empirical ego (of scientific
psychology) is an object for consciousness when it reflects on itself
in an objectifying act that he calls “accessory reflection.” His works
take pains either to ascribe moral responsibility to agents
individually or collectively or to set the ontological foundations for
such ascriptions.
Authenticity is achieved, Sartre claims, by a conversion that entails
abandonment of our original choice to coincide with ourselves
consciously (the futile desire to be in-itself-for-itself or God) and
thereby free ourselves from identification with our egos as
being-in-itself. In our present alienated condition, we are
responsible for our egos as we are for any object of
consciousness. Earlier he said that it was bad faith
(self-deception)to try to coincide with our egos since the fact is
that whatever we are we are in the manner of not being it due to the
“othering” nature of consciousness. Now his mention of “conversion” to
authenticity via a “purifying”(non-objectifying) reflection elaborates
that authentic project. He insists that we must allow our spontaneous
“selfness” (what he terms ipseity here and in  Being and
Nothingness) to replace the “Me” or Ego, which he criticizes as
an “abusive intermediary” whose future prefigures my future. The shift
is from relations of “appropriation” or being where I focus on
identifying with my ego in a bad-faith flight from freedom,to
relations of “existence” and autonomy where I attend entirely to my
project and its goal. The former is egoistic, Sartre now implies,
where the latter is outgoing and generous. This resonates with what he
will say about the creative artist's work as a gift, an appeal to
another freedom and an act of generosity.
It is now common to distinguish three distinct ethical positions in
Sartre's writings. The first and best known, existentialist ethics is
one of disalienation and authenticity. It assumes that we live in a
society of oppression and exploitation. The former is primary and
personal, the latter structural and impersonal. While he enters into
extended polemics in various essays and journal articles of the late
1940s and ‘50s concerning the systematic exploitation of people
in capitalist and colonialist institutions, Sartre always sought a way
to bring the responsibility home to individuals who could in principle
be named. As Merleau-Ponty observed, Sartre stressed oppression over
exploitation, individual moral responsibility over structural
causation but without denying the importance of the latter. In fact,
as his concept of freedom thickened from the ontological to the social
and historical in the mid ‘40s, his appreciation of the
influence of factical conditions in the exercise of freedom grew
apace.
Sartre's concept of authenticity, occasionally cited as the only
existentialist “virtue,” is often criticized as denoting more a style
than a content. Admittedly, it does seem compatible with a wide
variety of life choices. Its foundation, again, is ontological-the
basic ambiguity of human reality that “is what it is not” (that is,
its future as possibility) and “is not what it is” (its past as
facticity, including its ego or self, to which we have seen it is
related via an internal negation). We could say that authenticity is
fundamentally living this ontological truth of one's situation,
namely, that one is never identical with one's current state but
remains responsible for sustaining it. Thus, the claim “that's just the
way I am” would constitute a form of self-deception or bad faith as
would all forms of determinism, since both instances involve lying to
oneself about the ontological fact of one's nonself-coincidence and
the flight from concomitant responsibility for “choosing” to remain
that way.
Given the fundamental division of the human situation into facticity
and transcendence, bad faith or inauthenticity can assume two
principal forms: one that denies the freedom or transcendence
component (“I can't do anything about it”) and the other that ignores
the factical dimension of every situation (“I can do anything by just
wishing it”).  The former is the more prevalent form of self deception
but the latter is common to people who lack a sense of the real in
their lives.
Sartre sometimes talks as if any choice could be authentic so long as
it is lived with a clear awareness of its contingency and
responsibility. But his considered opinion excludes choices that
oppress or consciously exploit others. In other words, authenticity is
not entirely style; there is a general content and that content is
freedom. Thus the “authentic Nazi” is explicitly disqualified as being
oxymoronic. Sartre's thesis is that freedom is the implicit object of
any choice, a claim he makes but does not adequately defend in his
Humanism lecture. He seems to assume that “freedom” is the aspect under which any choice is made, its “formal object,” to revive an ancient term. But a stronger argument than that would be required to disqualify an “authentic” Nazi.
Though critical of its bourgeois variety, Sartre does support an
existentialist humanism, the motto of which could well be his remark
that “you can always make something out of what you've been made
into” (Situations 9:101). In fact, his entire career could be summarized in these words
that carry an ethical as well as a critical message. The first part of
his professional life focused on the freedom of the existential
individual (you can always make something out of…); the second
concentrated on the socioeconomic and historical conditions which
limited and modified that freedom (what you've been made into), once
freedom ceased to be merely the definition of “man” and included the
possibility of genuine options in concrete situations. That phase
corresponded to Sartre's political commitment and active involvement
in public debates, always in search of the exploitative “systems” such
as capitalism, colonialism and racism at work in society and the
oppressive practices of individuals who sustained them. As he grew
more cognizant of the social dimension of individual life, the
political and the ethical tended to coalesce. In fact, he explicitly
rejected “Machiavellianism.”
If Sartre's first and best known ethics corresponds to the ontology of
Being and Nothingness, his second, “dialectical” ethics
builds on the philosophy of history developed in the Critique of
Dialectical Reason. In a series of posthumously published notes for lectures
in the 1960s, some of which were never delivered, Sartre sketched a
theory of ethics based on the concepts of human need and the ideal of
“integral man” in contrast with its counter-concept, the
“subhuman.”What this adds to his published ethics is a more specific
content and a keener sense of the social conditions for living a
properly human life.
Sartre's third attempt at an ethics, which he called an ethics of the
“we,” was undertaken in interview format with his
secretary, Benny Lévy, toward the end of his life. It purports
to question many of the main propositions of his ethics of
authenticity, yet what has appeared in print chiefly elaborates claims
already stated in his earlier works.  But since the tapes on which
these remarks were recorded are unavailable to the public and Sartre's
illness at the time they were made was serious, their authority as
revisionary of his general philosophy remains doubtful. If ever
released in its entirety, this text will constitute a serious
hermeneutical challenge.
Sartre was not politically involved in the 1930s though his heart, as
he said, “was on the left, like everyone's.” The War years, occupation
and resistance made the difference. He emerged committed to social
reform and convinced that the writer had the obligation to address the
social issues of the day. He founded the influential journal of
opinion, Les Temps modernes, with his partner Simone de
Beauvoir, as well as Merleau-Ponty, Raymond Aron and others.  In the
“Présentation” to the initial issue (October, 1945),
he elaborated his idea of committed literature and insisted that
failure to address political issues amounted to supporting the status
quo. After a brief unsuccessful attempt to help organize a
nonCommunist leftist political organization, he began his long
love-hate relationship with the French Communist Party, which he never
joined but which for years he considered the legitimate voice of the
working class in France. This continued till the Soviet invasions of
Hungary in 1956.  Still, Sartre continued to sympathize with the movement,
if not the Party, for some time afterwards. He summarized his
disillusionment in an essay “The Communists are afraid of Revolution,”
following the “events of May,” 1968. By then he had moved toward the
radical Left and what the French labeled “les Maos,” whom he likewise
never joined but whose mixture of the ethical and the political
attracted him.
Politically, Sartre tended toward what the French call “libertarian
socialism,” which is a kind of anarchism. Ever distrustful of
authority, which he considered “the Other in us,” his ideal was a
society of voluntary eye-level relations that he called “the city of
ends.” One caught a glimpse of this in his description of the forming
group (le groupe en fusion) in the Critique. There
each was “the same” as the others in terms of practical concern. Each
suspended his or her personal interests for the sake of the common
goal. No doubt these practices hardened into institutions and freedom
was compromised once more in bureaucratic machinery. But that brief
taste of genuine positive reciprocity was revelatory of what an
authentic social existence could be.
Sartre came to recognize how the economic conditions the political in
the sense that material scarcity, as both Ricardo and Marx insisted,
determines our social relations. In Sartre's reading, scarcity emerges
as the source of structural and personal violence in human history as
we know it. It follows, he believes, that liberation from such violence will come
only through the counter violence of revolution and the advent of a
“socialism of abundance.”
What Sartre termed the “progressive/regressive method” for historical
investigation is a hybrid of historical materialism and existentialist
psychoanalysis. It respects the often decisive role of economic
considerations in historical explanation (historical materialism)
while insisting that “the men that History makes are not the men that
make history”; in other words, he resists complete economic
determinism by implicit appeal to his humanist motto: “You can always
make something out of…”
Never one to avoid a battle, Sartre became embroiled in the Algerian
War, generating deep hostility from the Right to the point that a bomb
was detonated at the entrance to his apartment building on two occasions by supporters
of a French Algeria. Sartre's political critique conveyed in a series
of essays, interviews and plays, especially The Condemned of
Altona, once more combined a sense of structural exploitation (in
this case, the institution of colonialism and its attendant racism)
with an expression of moral outrage at the oppression of the Muslim
population and the torture of captives by the French military.
Mention of the play reminds us of the role of imaginative art in
Sartre's philosophical work. This piece, whose chief protagonist is
Frantz “the butcher of Smolensk,” though ostensibly about the effect
of Nazi atrocities at the Eastern front on a postwar industrialist
family in Hamburg, is really addressing the question of collective
guilt and the French suppression of the Algerian war for independence
raging at that time. Sartre often turned to literary art to convey or
even to work through philosophical thoughts that he had already or
would later conceptualize in his essays and theoretical studies. Which
brings us to the relation between imaginative literature and
philosophy in his work.
The strategy of “indirect communication” has been an instrument of
“Existentialists” since Kierkegaard adopted the use of pseudonyms in
his philosophical writings in the early nineteenth century. The point
is to communicate a feeling and an attitude that the reader/spectator
adopts in which certain existentialist themes such as anguish,
responsibility or bad faith are suggested but not dictated as in a
lecture. Asked why his plays were performed only in the bourgeois
sections of the city, Sartre replied that no bourgeois could leave a
performance of one of them without “thinking thoughts traitorous to
his class.” The so-called aesthetic “suspension of disbelief” coupled
with the tendency to identify with certain characters and to
experience their plight vicariously conveys conviction rather than
information.  And this is what existentialism is chiefly about:
challenging the individual to examine their life for intimations of
bad faith and to heighten their sensitivity to oppression and
exploitation in their world.
Sartre's early work Nausea (1938) is the very model of a
philosophical novel. Its protagonist, Roquentin, works through many of
the major themes of Being and Nothingness that will appear
five years later. It can be read as an extended meditation on the
contingency of our existence and on the psychosomatic experience that
captures that phenomenon. In his famous meditation on a tree root,
Roquentin experiences the brute facticity of its existence and of his
own: both are simply there, without justification, in excess (de
trop). The physicality of this revelatory “sickly sweet”
sensation should not be overlooked. Like the embarrassment felt before
the Other's gaze in the voyeur example cited earlier, our bodily
intentionality (what he calls “the body as for-itself”) is revealing
an ontological reality.
The case at hand is an artistic way of conveying what Sartre in
Being and Nothingness will call “the phenomenon of being.” He
agrees with the tradition that “being” or “to be” is not a
concept. But if not that, how is it to be indexed? What does it mean
“to be”?  Sartre's existential phenomenology appeals to certain kinds
of experience such as nausea and joy to articulate the
“transphenomenal” character of being. Pace Kant, “being” does not
denote a realm behind the phenomena that the descriptive method
analyzes. Neither is it the object of an “eidetic” reduction (the
phenomenological method that would grasp it as an essence). Rather,
being accompanies all phenomena as their existential dimension. But
this dimension is revealed by certain experiences such as that of the
utter contingency which Roquentin felt. This is scarcely
rationalism, but neither is it mysticism.  Anyone can experience this
contingency and, once brought to reflective awareness, can ponder
its implications. What this novel does imaginatively, Being and
Nothingness, subtitled “A Phenomenological Ontology,”
pursues conceptually, though with the aid of phenomenological
“arguments,” as we have seen.
In a series of essays published as What is Literature?
(1947), Sartre expounds his notion of “committed”
literature, a turn in his thought first indicated in the inaugural
issue of Les Temps modernes two years earlier. Though steeped
in the polemics of the day, this continues to be a seminal text of
criticism. It underscores what I have called the
“pragmatist” dimension of Sartre's thought: writing is a
form of acting in the world; it produces effects for which the author
must assume responsibility. Addressing the problem of “writing
for our time,” Sartre underscores the harsh facts of oppression
and exploitation that were not erased by the upheaval of world
war. Ours remains “a society based on violence.”
Accordingly, the author is responsible for addressing that violence
with a counter-violence (for example, by his choice of topics to
discuss) or sharing in it by his silence. Drawing a distinction
between prose, which can be committed, and “poetry”
(basically nonrepresentational art such as music and poetry properly
speaking), which cannot—a distinction that will return to
haunt him—Sartre proceeds to urge that the prose-writer reveal
that man is a value to be invented each day and that “the
questions he raises are always moral” (203). A clear rejection
of “art for art's sake,” Sartre insisted on the social
responsibility of the artist and the intellectual in general.
The artwork, for Sartre, has always carried a special power: that of
communicating among freedoms without alienation or objectification. In
this sense, it has stood as an exception to the objectifying gaze of
his vintage existentialist texts. That relation between artist and
public via the work of art Sartre calls “gift-appeal.” In his The
Imaginary, he speaks of the portrait “inviting”
the viewer to realize its possibilities by regarding it aesthetically.
By the time he gathers these thoughts in What is Literature?
and Notebooks for an Ethics, the concept of writing as an act
of generosity to which the reader responds by an act of “re-creation”
that respects the mutuality of these freedoms—this gift/response model assumes
political significance. It is offered as an example of positive reciprocity in the political realm. And, in fact, it anticipates the “free
alterity” of the group member as analyzed in the Critique. In
other words, Sartre's political and ethical values and concerns
conjoin in the concept of committed literature.
Before concluding with a prognosis of Sartre's philosophical relevance
in the twenty-first century, let me note the several “biographies”
that he produced of important literary figures in addition to his
autobiography, Words. Each of these studies constitutes a
form of existential psychoanalysis. The subject's literary production
is submitted to a kind of “hermeneutic” in which the underlying
life-project is uncovered. He begins to employ the
progressive-regressive method in the late ‘50s whereby the
historical and socioeconomic conditions of the subject are uncovered
in a “regressive” argument from biographical and social facts to the
conditions of their possibility followed by a “progressive” account of
the subjects process of “personalization.” The most extensive, if not
the most successful, of these “biographies” is his analysis of the
life and times of Gustave Flaubert, The Family Idiot.
But these biographies, almost exclusively about literary men, are also
object lessons in an “existentialist” theory of history. Their
hallmark is an attempt to reconstruct the subject's project as his
manner of dialectically “totalizing” his epoch even as he is being
totalized by it. While connecting impersonal historical phenomena in
their dialectical necessity (for example, the unintended consequences
ingredient in any historical account), these narratives are intent on
conveying the subject's sense of the anguish of decision and the pinch
of the real. In effect, biography is an essential part of an
existentialist approach to history and not a mere illustrative
appendage.
Foucault once dismissed Sartre testily as a man of the nineteenth
century trying to think the twentieth. Presumably, he had more in mind
than the fact that most of Sartre's “biographies,” except for Jean Genet's and his own, were
of nineteenth-century figures. With his emphasis on consciousness,
subjectivity, freedom, responsibility and the self, his commitment to
Marxist categories and dialectical thinking, especially in the second
part of his career, and his quasi Enlightenment humanism, Sartre
seemed to personify everything that structuralists and
poststructuralists like Foucault opposed. In effect, the enfant
terrible of mid century France had become the “traditionalist”of
the following generation. A classic example of philosophical
parricide.
In fact, some of this criticism was misdirected while other portions
exhibit a genuine philosophical “choice” about goals and methods.
Though Sartre resolutely insisted on the primacy of “free organic
praxis” methodologically, ontologically, and ethically, on which he
based the freedom and responsibility that define his humanism, he
respected what his critic Louis Althusser called “structural
causality” and made allowance for it with his concept of the
practico-inert. But it is the primacy awarded consciousness/praxis in
this regard that strikes structuralist and poststructuralist critics
as naive and simply wrong. Added to this is Sartre's passion for
“totalizing” thought, whether individually in terms of a life project
or collectively in terms of dialectical rationality, that counters the
fragmenting and anti-teleological claims of poststructuralist
authors. And then there is his famous denial of the Freudian
unconscious and his relative neglect of semiotics and the philosophy of
language in general.
One should note that Sartre's suspicion of Freudian psychoanalysis
became quite nuanced in his later years. His appeal to “the lived”
(le vécu) and to pre-theoretical comprehension,
especially in his Flaubert study, for example, incorporated many
features of the “unconscious” drives and relations proper to
psychoanalytic discourse. And while he was familiar with Saussure and
structural linguistics, to which he occasionally referred, he admitted
that he had never formulated an explicit philosophy of language but
insisted that one could be reconstructed from elements employed
throughout his work.
But at least five features of Sartre's thought seem particularly
relevant to current discussions among philosophers both Anglo-American
and Continental. The first is his concept of the human agent as not a
self but a “presence to self.” This opening up of
the Cartesian “thinking thing” supports a wide variety of
alternative theories of the self while retaining the features of
freedom and responsibility that, one can argue, have been central
tenets of Western philosophy and law since the Greeks.
Emphasis on an ethics of responsibility in contrast to one of rules,
principles or values in recent years has led to a wide-spread
interest in the work of Levinas as a necessary complement to so-called
“postmodern” ethics. But Sartrean
“authenticity” is equally relevant in this regard, as
Charles Taylor and others have pointed out. And its location within a
mundane ontology may resonate better with philosophers of a more
secular bent.
Next, the recent revival of the understanding of philosophy as a
“way of life” as distinct from an academic discipline
focused on epistemology or more recently on the philosophy of
language, while renewing an interest in Hellenistic ethics as well as
in various forms of “spirituality,” can find in Sartrean
existentialism forms of “care of the self” that invite
fruitful conversation with contemporary ethics, aesthetics and
politics without devolving into moralism, aestheticism or
fanaticism. From a philosopher suspicious of moral recipes and focused
on concrete, lived experience, this is perhaps as much as one could
expect or desire.
Sartre dealt implicitly with issue of race in many of his works,
beginning with Being and Nothingness. Race relations,
especially segregation in the South, figured centrally in his reports
from the United States during two visits after the War (1945 and 1946)
and were a major topic of his many writings on colonialism and
neocolonialism thereafter. It formed the theme of his play,
“The Respectful Prostitute” (1946). He claimed that even as
a boy, whenever he heard of the French “colonies,” he
thought of racial exploitation. He wrote in Black Orpheus
about the Africa poets using the colonizers' language against
them in their poems of liberation: “Black poetry in French is the
only great revolutionary poetry of our time.” He fulminated
against the violence of colonialism and its implicit
“justification” by appeal to the subhumanity of the native
population. On several occasions in diverse works Sartre referred to
the cry of the oppressed and exploited: “We too are
humans!” as the guiding ideal of their fight for liberty. His
existential humanism grounded his critique of the capitalist and
colonialist “systems.” He wrote that “the meanness is
in the system”—a claim that resonated with liberation
movements then and now. But his properly existentialist understanding
of that phrase, respecting the ethical primacy of free organic praxis,
requires that he qualify the remark with “not entirely”;
for whatever system he speaks of rides on the backs of responsible
individuals, alone or more likely in social wholes, for whom moral
responsibility can and should be ascribed. This may serve as his lesson
to the ontology and the ethics of race relations in the twenty-first
century. His appeal for violence to counter the inherent violence of
the colonial system in Algeria reached hyperbolic proportions in his
prefatory essay to Franz Fanon's The Wretched of the
Earth (1961).
Of the other topics in current philosophical discussions to which
Sartre offers relevant remarks, I would conclude by mentioning
feminism. This suggestion will certainly raise some eyebrows because
even his fans admit that some of the images and language of his earlier
work were clearly sexist in character. And yet, Sartre always favored
the exploited and oppressed in any relationship and he encouraged his
life-long partner, Simone de Beauvoir, to write The Second
Sex, commonly recognized as the seminal work for the second-wave
of the feminist movement. In addition to the plausible extrapolations
of many remarks made apropos the exploitation of blacks and Arabs, just
mentioned, I shall cite two concepts in Sartre's work that I
believe carry particular promise for feminist arguments.
The first occurs in the short work Anti-Semite and Jew
(1946). Many authors have mined this text for arguments critical of
“masculinist” biases, but I wish to underscore the
“spirit of synthesis” that Sartre champions there in
contrast with the “analytical spirit” that he criticizes.
The issue is whether the Jew should be respected legally in his
concrete Jewishness—his culture, his practices, including dietary
and religious observances—or whether he should be satisfied with
the “Rights of Man and of the Citizen” as his analytic,
liberal democratic “friend” proposes. The abstract,
analytic thinker counsels, in effect, “You enjoy all the rights
of a French Citizen, just don't be so Jewish.” Sartre, on
the other hand, argues “synthetically” (concretely) for the
rights of the Jew or the Arab or the woman (his examples) to vote
as such in any election. In other words, their
“rights” are concrete and not mere abstractions. One should
not sacrifice the Jew (or the Arab or the woman) to the
“man.” In Michael Walzer's words: Sartre is
promoting “multiculturalism…avant la
lettre.”
The second concept that issues from Sartre's later writing
which is of immediate relevance to feminist thought is that of
positive reciprocity and its attendant notion of
generosity. We are familiar with the conflictual nature of
interpersonal relations in Sartre's vintage existentialist
writings: “Hell is other people” and the like. But in his
aesthetic writings and in the Notebooks for an Ethics, he
describes the artist's work as a generous act, an invitation from
one freedom to another. He even suggests that this might serve as a
model for interpersonal relations in general. And in his major work in
social ontology, the Critique of Dialectical Reason, Sartre
charts the move from objectifying and alienating relationships (series)
to the positive reciprocity of the group members. Some
feminist authors have employed these Sartrean concepts in their
arguments. There remains much still to extract from Sartre's
later works in this area.
As Sartrean existentialism frees itself from the limitations
of its post-war adolescence and shows its mature psychological,
ontological and ethical face to the new century, it enters with adult
standing into the ongoing conversation that we call Western philosophy.
Its relevance remains as actual today as does the human condition that
it describes and analyzes.