Johann Gottfried Herder (1744–1803) was born in Mohrungen in
East Prussia. His father was a schoolteacher and he grew up in humble
circumstances. In 1762 he enrolled at the University of
Königsberg, where he studied with Kant, who accorded him special
privileges because of his unusual intellectual abilities. At this
period he also began a lifelong friendship with the irrationalist
philosopher Hamann. In 1764 he left Königsberg to take up a
school-teaching position in Riga. There he wrote the programmatic
essay How Philosophy Can Become More Universal and Useful for the
Benefit of the People (1765); published his first major work,
concerning the philosophy of language and literature, the
Fragments on Recent German Literature (1767–8); and
also published an important work on aesthetics, the Critical
Forests (1769). In 1769 he resigned his position and
travelled—first to France, and then to Strasbourg, where in 1770
he met, and had a powerful impact on, the young Goethe. In 1771 he won
a prize from the Berlin Academy for his best-known work in the
philosophy of language, the Treatise on the Origin of
Language (published in 1772). From 1771–6 he served as
court preacher to the ruling house in Bückeburg. The most
important works from this period are the essay Shakespeare
(1773) and his first major essay on the philosophy of history,
This Too a Philosophy of History for the Formation of
Humanity (1774). In 1776, partly thanks to Goethe’s
influence, he was appointed General Superintendent of the Lutheran
clergy in Weimar, a post he would keep for the rest of his life.
During this period he published an important essay in the philosophy
of mind, On the Cognition and Sensation of the Human Soul
(1778); a seminal work on the Old Testament, On the Spirit of
Hebrew Poetry (1782–3); his well-known longer work on the
philosophy of history, the Ideas for the Philosophy of History of
Humanity (1784–91); an influential essay on the philosophy
of religion, God: Some Conversations (1787); a work largely
on political philosophy, written in response to the French Revolution,
the Letters for the Advancement of Humanity (1793–7); a
series of Christian Writings (1794–8) concerned with
the New Testament; and two works opposing Kant’s critical
philosophy, A Metacritique on the Critique of Pure Reason
(1799) (directed against the theoretical philosophy of the
Critique of Pure Reason (Kant 1781/7)) and the
Calligone (1800) (directed against the aesthetics of the
Critique of the Power of Judgment (Kant 1790)). In addition to the works
just mentioned, Herder also wrote many others in the course of his
career.
Herder’s earlier works are often his best. He himself wrote in
On the Cognition and Sensation (this article will use such
abbreviated titles throughout) that “the first uninhibited work
of an author is … usually his best; his bloom is unfolding, his
soul still dawn” (HPW 219). Whether or not that
is generally true, it does arguably apply to Herder
himself.
In certain ways Herder’s philosophical texts are easier to read
than others from the period. For example, he avoids technical jargon,
writes in a way that is lively and rich in examples rather than dry
and abstract, and has no large, complex system for the reader to keep
track of. But his texts also have certain peculiarities that can
impede a proper understanding and appreciation of his thought, and it
is important to be alerted to these.
To begin with, Herder’s writing often seems emotional and
grammatically undisciplined in ways that might perhaps be expected in
casual speech but not in philosophical texts. This is intentional.
Indeed, Herder sometimes deliberately “roughed up”
material in this direction between drafts. Moreover, he has serious
philosophical reasons for writing in such a way, including the
following: (1) This promises to make his writing more broadly
accessible and interesting to people—a decidedly non-trivial
goal for him, since he believes it to be an essential part of
philosophy’s vocation to have a broad social impact. (2) He
believes in the expressive superiority of speech over writing. (3) One
of his central theses in the philosophy of mind holds that thought is
not and should not be separate from volition, or affect, that types of
thinking that attempt to exclude affect are inherently distorting and
inferior. Standard academic writing has this vice, whereas spontaneous
speech, and writing that imitates it, do not. (4) Herder is opposed to
any lexical or grammatical straitjacketing of language, any slavish
obedience to dictionaries and grammar books. In his view, such
straitjacketing is inimical, not only to linguistic creativity and
inventiveness, but also (much worse), since thought is essentially
dependent on and confined in its scope by language, thereby to
creativity and inventiveness in thought itself.
Another peculiarity of Herder’s philosophical texts is their
unsystematic nature. This is again deliberate. For Herder is
largely hostile toward systematicity in philosophy (a fact that is
reflected both in explicit remarks and in many of his titles:
Fragments … , Ideas … , etc.). He is
particularly hostile to the ambitious sort of systematicity that is
aspired to in the tradition of Spinoza, Wolff, Kant, Fichte,
Schelling, and Hegel: the ideal of a comprehensive theory whose parts
display some sort of strict overall pattern of derivation. He has
compelling reasons for this hostility: (1) He is very skeptical that
such systematic designs can be made to work (as opposed to creating,
through illicit means, an illusion that they do). (2) He
believes that such system-building leads to a premature closure of
inquiry, and in particular to a disregarding or distortion of new
empirical evidence. Scrutiny of such systems amply bears out both of
these concerns. Herder’s well-grounded hostility to this type of
systematicity established an important counter-tradition in German
philosophy (which subsequently included, for example, Friedrich
Schlegel, Nietzsche, Wittgenstein, and Adorno).
On the other hand, Herder is in favor of
“systematicity” in a more modest sense: the ideal of a
theory that is self-consistent and supported by argument (this marks
an important point of methodological contrast with Hamann, whom Herder
already criticizes for failing to provide arguments in an essay from
early 1765, Dithyrambic Rhapsody [G1:38]). He by no
means always achieves this ideal (so that interpreting him calls for
more selectivity and reconstruction than is the case with some
philosophers). However, his failures to do so are more often apparent
than real: First, in many cases where he may seem to be guilty of
inconsistency he is really not. For he is sometimes developing
philosophical dialogues between two or more opposing viewpoints, in
which cases it would clearly be a mistake to accuse him of
inconsistency in any usual or pejorative sense. And (less obviously)
in many other cases he is in effect still working in this
dialogue-mode, only without bothering to distribute the positions
among different interlocutors explicitly, and so is again innocent of
real inconsistency (examples of this occur in How Philosophy Can
Become and This Too a Philosophy of History). Moreover,
he has serious motives for using this method of (implicit) dialogue:
(1) Sometimes his main motive is simply that when dealing with
religiously or politically delicate matters it permits him to state
his views but without quite stating them as his own and therefore
without inviting trouble. But he also has philosophically deeper
motives: (2) He takes over from the pre-critical Kant an idea
(inspired by ancient skepticism) that the best way for a philosopher
to pursue the truth is by setting contrary views on a subject into
opposition with one another in order to advance toward, and hopefully
attain, the truth through their mutual testing and modification. (3)
In addition, he develops a more original variant of that idea on the
socio-historical plane: analogously, the way for humankind as a whole
to attain the elusive goal of truth is through an ongoing contest
between opposing positions, in the course of which the best ones will
eventually win out (this idea anticipates and indirectly influenced a
central thesis of John Stuart Mill’s On Liberty
(1859)). This yields a further motive for the dialogue-method (even
when it does not lead Herder himself to any definite conclusion), in
effect warranting the rhetorical question, And what does it matter to
the cause of humankind and its discovery of truth whether those
various opposing positions are advanced by different people or by
the same person? Second, Herder’s frequent appearance
of neglecting to give arguments is often, rather, a principled
rejection of arguments of certain sorts. For example, he has
a general commitment to empiricism and against apriorism in philosophy
that usually leads him to avoid giving familiar sorts of a priori
arguments in philosophy; and a commitment to sentimentalism in ethics
that leads him to refrain from familiar sorts of cognitivist arguments
in ethics.
The extent of Hamann’s influence on Herder’s best thought
has been greatly exaggerated by some of the secondary literature
(e.g., Isaiah Berlin). But Kant’s influence was early,
fundamental, and enduring. However, the Kant who influenced Herder in
this way was the pre-critical Kant of the early and middle
1760s, not the critical Kant (against whom Herder later engaged in
the—rather distracting and ineffective—public polemics of
the Metacritique and the Calligone).
Some of the pre-critical Kant’s key positions in the 1760s,
sharply contrasting with ones that he would later adopt during the
critical period, were: a (Pyrrhonist-influenced) skepticism about
metaphysics; a form of empiricism; and a (Hume-influenced)
sentimentalism in ethics. Herder took over these positions in the
1760s and retained them throughout his career. It should by no means
be assumed that this debt to the early Kant is a debt to a
philosophically inferior Kant, though; a good case could be
made for the very opposite.
Herder’s 1765 essay How Philosophy Can Become More Universal
and Useful for the Benefit of the People is a key text for
understanding both his debt to Kant and the broad orientation of his
philosophy. The essay was written under strong influence from Kant,
especially, it seems, Kant’s 1766 essay Dreams of a Spirit
Seer, which Kant sent to Herder prior to its publication
(“a sheet at a time”, Herder reports [B2:259]).
Herder’s essay answers a prize question set by a society in
Bern, Switzerland: “How can the truths of philosophy become more
universal and useful for the benefit of the people?” This
question was conceived in the spirit of the
Popularphilosophie that was competing with school-philosophy
in the German-speaking world at the time. Kant himself tended to
identify with Popularphilosophie at this period, and
Herder’s selection of this question shows him doing so as well.
But in his case the identification would last a lifetime. Philosophy
should become relevant and useful for the people as a whole—this
is a basic ideal of Herder’s philosophy.
Largely in the service of this ideal, Herder’s essay argues in
favor of two sharp turns in philosophy, turns that would again remain
fundamental throughout the rest of his career. The first turn consists
in a rejection of traditional metaphysics, and closely follows an
argument of Kant’s in Dreams of a Spirit Seer.
Herder’s case is roughly this: (1) Traditional metaphysics,
through undertaking to transcend experience (or strictly speaking, a
little more broadly, “healthy understanding”, which
includes, in addition to empirical knowledge, also ordinary morality,
intuitive logic, and mathematics), succumbs to unresolvable
contradictions between its claims, and hence to the Pyrrhonian
skeptical problem of an equal plausibility on both sides that requires
a suspension of judgment (“I am writing for Pyrrhonists”,
Herder says [HPW 8]). Moreover (Herder goes on to add in the 
Fragments of 1767–8), given the truth of a broadly 
empiricist theory of
concepts, much of the terminology of traditional metaphysics turns out
to lack the basis in experience that is required in order even to be
meaningful, and is consequently meaningless (the illusion of
meaningfulness arising through the role of language, which
spins on, creating illusions of meaning, even after the empirical
conditions of meaning have been left behind). (2) Traditional
metaphysics is not only, for these reasons, useless; it is also
harmful, because it distracts its adherents from the matters
that should be their focus: empirical nature and human society. (3) By
contrast, empirical knowledge (or strictly speaking, a little more
broadly, “healthy understanding”) is free of these
problems. Philosophy should therefore be based on and continuous with
this.
Herder’s second sharp turn concerns ethics. Here again he is
indebted to the pre-critical Kant, but he also goes somewhat further
beyond him. Herder’s basic claims are these: (1) Morality is
fundamentally more a matter of sentiments than of cognitions. (2)
Cognitivist theories of morality—of the sort espoused in this
period by Rationalists such as Wolff, but also by many other
philosophers before and since (for example, Plato, the critical Kant,
and G.E. Moore)—are therefore based on a mistake, and so useless
as means of moral enlightenment or improvement. (3) But (and here
Herder’s theory moves beyond Kant’s), worse than that,
they are actually harmful to morality, because they weaken
the moral sentiments on which morality really rests. In This Too a
Philosophy of History and On the Cognition and Sensation
Herder suggests several reasons why: (a) Abstract theorizing weakens
sentiments generally, and hence moral sentiments in
particular (this is perhaps his least interesting reason). (b) The
cognitivists’ theories turn out to be so strikingly
implausible that they bring morality itself into disrepute, people
reacting to them roughly along the lines of thinking, If this is the
best that even the experts can say in explanation and
justification of morality, then morality must certainly be a sham, and
I may as well ignore it and do as I please.  (c) Such theories
distract people from recognizing, and working to reinforce, the
real foundations of morality: not an imaginary theoretical
insight of some sort, but a set of causal mechanisms that inculcate
and sustain the moral sentiments. (4) More constructively, Herder
accordingly turns instead to discovering theoretically and promoting
in practice just such a set of causal mechanisms. In How
Philosophy Can Become he mainly emphasizes forms of education and
an emotive type of preaching in this connection. But elsewhere he
identifies and promotes a much broader set of mechanisms as well,
including: the influence of morally exemplary individuals; morally
relevant laws; and literature (along with other forms of art).
Literature is a special focus of Herder’s theory and practice
here. He sees literature as exerting a moral influence in several
ways—for instance, not only through fairly direct moral
instruction, but also through the literary perpetuation (or creation)
of morally exemplary individuals (e.g., Jesus in the New Testament),
and through the exposure of readers to other people’s inner
lives and a consequent enhancement of their sympathies for them (a
motive that lies behind his epoch-making publication of the
Popular Songs [Volkslieder] [1774/1778–9], a
collection of translations of poems from peoples around the world).
Herder’s development of this theory and practice of moral
pedagogy was lifelong and tireless.
The Treatise On the Origin of Language from 1772 is
Herder’s best known work in the philosophy of language by far.
However, it is in certain respects both unrepresentative and inferior
in comparison with other works, such as the Fragments and
On the Cognition and Sensation, and should not monopolize
attention.
The Treatise on the Origin is primarily concerned with the
question whether the origin of language can be explained in purely
natural, human terms or (as Süßmilch had recently argued)
only in terms of a divine source. Herder argues in support of the
former position and against the latter. His argument is quite
persuasive (especially when supplemented on its positive side from the
Fragments). But it will probably not constitute a modern
philosopher’s main reason for interest in Herder’s views about
language – deriving its zest, as it does, from a religious background
that is no longer ours.
Of far greater modern relevance are three interrelated theories that
Herder develops: a philosophy of language concerning the very nature
of language, thought, and meaning; a theory of interpretation; and a
theory of translation. These theories are found scattered through a
large number of Herder’s works. The following are their main
features.
Already in the mid-1760s—for example, in On Diligence in
Several Learned Languages (1764) and the Fragments
(1767–8)—Herder began advancing three fundamental theses
in this area:
The first two of these theses dramatically overturned the sort of
dualistic picture of the relation between language, on the one hand,
and thought/meaning, on the other, that had predominated during the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. They thereby essentially founded
the philosophy of language as we still know it today.
Hamann has often been credited with introducing something like these
two revolutionary theses and then passing them on to Herder (e.g., by
Isaiah Berlin). But that is a mistake; Herder was already committed to
them by the mid-1760s, Hamann only later and under Herder’s
influence.
The third thesis, quasi-empiricism, would be far less widely accepted
by philosophers of language today. However, it may well be correct
too. Contrary to first appearances, it need not conflict with thesis
(2), the equation of meanings with word-usages. And the most likely
modern ground for skepticism about it, namely, a
Fregean-Wittgensteinian anti-psychologism concerning meaning that is
popular today, may well itself be mistaken.
In addition to making a fundamental contribution to the philosophy of
language, these three theses also underpin Herder’s theories of
interpretation and translation (as we are about to see).
Herder’s theories of interpretation and translation both rest on
a certain epoch-making insight of his: Whereas such eminent
Enlightenment philosopher-historians as Hume and Voltaire had normally
still held that, as Hume put it, “mankind are so much the same
in all times and places that history informs us of nothing new or
strange” (1748: section VIII, part I, 65), Herder discovered, or
at least saw more clearly than anyone before him, that this was false,
that peoples from different historical periods and cultures
vary tremendously in their concepts, beliefs, values,
(perceptual and affective) sensations, and so forth. He also
recognized that similar, albeit usually less dramatic, variations
occur even between individuals within a single period and
culture. These positions are prominent in many of Herder’s works
(see, e.g., On the Change of Taste [1766], This Too a
Philosophy of History, and On the Cognition and
Sensation). Let us call them together his principle
of radical mental difference.
Given this principle, and the gulf that consequently often
initially divides an interpreter’s own thought from that of the
person whom he wants to interpret, interpretation is often an
extremely difficult task, requiring extraordinary efforts on
the part of the interpreter. (See in this connection, e.g.,
Herder’s discussion of interpreting ancient Hebrew in
Treatise on the Origin.)
In particular, the interpreter often faces, and needs to resist, a
temptation falsely to assimilate the thought that he is
interpreting to someone else’s, especially his own. (This theme
is prominent in This Too a Philosophy of History, for
instance.)
How, given these challenges, is the interpreter supposed to achieve
accurate interpretation? Herder’s answer comprises several
points:
His three theses in the philosophy of language undergird his whole
theory of interpretation and entail certain parts of the answer to the
question just raised. It is an implication of his thesis that all
thought is essentially dependent on and bounded by language that an
interpreted subject’s language is in a certain sense bound to be
a reliable indicator of the nature of his thought, so that the
interpreter at least need not worry that the interpreted subject might
be entertaining ineffable thoughts or thoughts whose character is
systematically distorted by his expression of them in language. It is
an implication of Herder’s thesis that meaning consists in
word-usage that interpretation essentially and fundamentally requires
pinning down an interpreted subject’s word-usages, and thereby
his meanings. Finally, it is an implication of Herder’s
quasi-empiricist thesis concerning concepts that an
interpreter’s understanding of an interpreted subject’s
concepts must include some sort of recapturing of their basis in the
interpreted subject’s sensations.
Herder also espouses three further important principles in
interpretation-theory that contribute to answering the question raised
above:
A principle of secularism in interpretation: Contrary to
a practice that was still common in Herder’s day in relation to
the Bible, the interpretation of texts must never rely on religious
assumptions or means, even when the texts are sacred ones, but must
instead rely only on secular ones. (This principle is already
prominent in Herder’s writings on biblical interpretation from
the 1760s.)
A principle of generic interpretation. In addition to the
nature of a work’s meanings, interpretation must also identify
the nature of its genre (i.e., roughly, a certain set of
general purposes and rules that it aspires to realize and conform to).
As in the case of meanings, genres vary from age to age, culture to
culture, and even individual to individual, and the interpreter
therefore faces, and needs to resist, constant temptations falsely to
assimilate a work’s genre to others with which he happens to be
more familiar (for example, Shakespearean “tragedy” to
Sophoclean “tragedy”, or vice versa). (This principle is
already prominent in the Critical Forests from 1769, but
finds its classic statement in the essay Shakespeare from
1773.)
A principle of methodological empiricism in
interpretation: Interpretation must always be based on, and kept
faithful to, exact observations of relevant linguistic (and other)
evidence. This applies when the interpreter investigates word-usages
in order to discover meanings (a point that is already prominent in
the Fragments); when he makes conjectures about an
author’s psychology (see esp. On Thomas Abbt’s
Writings [1768]); and when he attempts to pin down a work’s
genre, or the purposes and rules that constitute it (see esp.
Shakespeare).
So far, these principles will probably seem sensible enough. But
beyond them, Herder also advances a further set of interpretive
principles that are likely to sound much more
touchy-feely at first hearing (the first of them rather
literally so!). However, I want to suggest that they are in fact on
the contrary quite hard-nosed.
Herder proposes (prominently in This Too a Philosophy of
History, for instance) that the way to bridge radical mental
difference when interpreting is through Einfühlung,
“feeling one’s way in”. This proposal has often been
thought (for example, by Friedrich Meinecke) to mean that the
interpreter should perform some sort of psychological self-projection
onto texts. However, that is not Herder’s main idea
here—for making it so would amount to advocating just the sort
of distorting assimilation of the thought in a text to one’s own
that he is above all concerned to avoid. As can be seen from
This Too a Philosophy of History, what he mainly has in mind
is instead an arduous process of historical-philological inquiry.
What, though, more specifically, is the cash value of his metaphor of
Einfühlung? It has at least five components, which are
quite various in nature and all quite sensible and deep: (1) First of
all, the metaphor implies (once again) that the interpreter typically
faces a radical difference, a gulf, between his own mentality and that
of the interpreted subject, making interpretation a difficult,
laborious task (it implies that there is an “in” there
that the interpreter must carefully and laboriously “feel his
way into”). (2) The metaphor also implies more specifically
(This Too a Philosophy of History shows) that the
“feeling one’s way in” should include thorough
research not only into a text’s use of language but also into
its whole geographical, historical, and social context. (3) It also
implies a claim—based on Herder’s quasi-empiricist theory
of concepts—that in order to understand an interpreted
subject’s language the interpreter must achieve an imaginative
reproduction of his (perceptual and affective) sensations. (4) It also
implies (This Too a Philosophy of History again shows) that
hostility in an interpreter toward the people whom he interprets will
generally distort his interpretation, and should therefore be avoided.
(Herder is equally opposed to excessive identification with
them for the same reason.) (5) Finally, it also implies that the
interpreter should strive to develop his grasp of linguistic usage,
contextual facts, and relevant sensations to the point where it
achieves something like the same immediacy and automaticness that it
had for a text’s original author and audience when they
understood the text in light of such factors (so that it acquires for
him, as it had for them, the phenomenology more of a feeling
than a cognition).
In addition, Herder insists (for example, in the Critical
Forests) on a principle of holism in interpretation.
This principle rests on several motives, including the following: (1)
Parts of a text taken in isolation are typically ambiguous in various
ways (in relation to background linguistic possibilities). In order to
resolve such ambiguities, an interpreter needs the guidance provided
by surrounding text. (2) That problem arises once a range of
possible linguistic meanings is established for a piece of text. But
in the case of a text that is separated from the interpreter by
radical mental difference, knowledge of such a range itself presents a
problem. How is he to pin down the range of possible meanings, i.e.,
possible usages, for a word? This requires a collation of the
word’s actual uses and an inference from these to the rules that
govern them, i.e., to their usages, a collation that in turn requires
looking to remoter contexts in which the same word occurs (other parts
of the text, other works in the author’s corpus, works by his
contemporaries, etc.), or in short: holism. (3) Authors typically
write a work as a whole, conveying ideas not only in its
particular parts but also through the way in which these fit together
to make up a whole. Consequently, readings that fail to interpret the
work as a whole will miss essential aspects of its meaning—both
the ideas in question themselves and meanings of the particular parts
on which they shed important light.
In On Thomas Abbt’s Writings, On the Cognition
and Sensation, and elsewhere Herder makes one of his most
important innovations: interpretation must supplement its focus on
word-usage with attention to the author’s psychology.
Herder implies various reasons for this (several of which would
subsequently be elaborated more explicitly by successors such as
Schleiermacher and Friedrich Schlegel): (1) As was already mentioned,
he embraces a quasi-empiricist theory of concepts that entails that in
order to understand an author’s concepts an interpreter must
imaginatively recapture the author’s relevant sensations. (2) As
Quentin Skinner has recently emphasized, understanding the linguistic
meaning of an utterance or text is only a necessary, not a sufficient,
condition for understanding it tout court; in addition, one
needs to establish the author’s illocutionary
intentions. For example, I meet a stranger by a frozen lake
who tells me, “The ice is thin over there”; I understand
his linguistic meaning perfectly; but is he simply informing me?,
warning me?, threatening me?, joking? … (3) Skinner tends to
imply that one can determine linguistic meanings prior to establishing
authorial intentions. That may sometimes be so (e.g., in the
example just given). But is it generally? Herder implies not.
And this seems right, because the linguistic meaning of a formula is
often ambiguous (in terms of the background linguistic possibilities),
and in order to identify the relevant meaning one must turn, not only
(as was already mentioned) to larger bodies of text, but also to
hypotheses, largely derived from them, concerning the author’s
intentions (e.g., concerning the subject-matter that he intends to
treat). This is a further reason why interpreters need to invoke
psychology. (4) As was already mentioned, Herder implies that an
author often conveys ideas in his work, not explicitly in its parts,
but rather via these and the way in which they are put together to
form a textual whole. It is necessary for the interpreter to capture
these ideas, both for their own sake and because doing so is often
essential for resolving ambiguities at the level of the parts. (5)
Herder also refers to the second half of his doctrine of radical
mental difference—individual variations in mode of
thought even within a single period and culture—as a source of
the need for psychological interpretation. Why does any special need
arise here? Part of the answer seems to be that when an interpreter is
dealing with a concept that is distinctive of a particular author
rather than common to a whole period/culture, he typically faces a
problem of relative paucity and lack of contextual variety in
the actual uses of the word that are available as empirical evidence
from which to infer the rule for use, or usage, constitutive of its
meaning. Hence he needs extra help—and the author’s
general psychology may provide this.
In On Thomas Abbt’s Writings, On the Cognition and
Sensation, and elsewhere Herder also indicates that
interpretation, especially in its psychological aspect, requires the
interpreter to use “divination”. This is another principle
that is liable to sound disturbingly touchy-feely at first
hearing—in particular, it can sound as though Herder means some
sort of prophetic process that has a religious basis and is perhaps
even infallible. However, what he really has in mind here is instead,
far more sensibly, a process of hypothesis, based on the meager
empirical evidence that is available, but also going well beyond it,
and therefore vulnerable to subsequent falsification, and abandonment
or revision if falsified.
Finally, Herder also implies an additional important point concerning
the general nature of interpretation:
After Herder, the question was explicitly raised whether
interpretation is a science or an art. Herder does not himself
explicitly raise or address this question. But his strong inclination
would clearly be to say that interpretation is like rather
than unlike natural science. He has several reasons for thinking so:
(1) He assumes (as indeed did virtually everyone at this period) that
the meaning of an author’s text is as much an objective
matter as the subjects investigated by the natural scientist. (2) The
difficulty of interpretation that results from radical mental
difference, and the consequent need for a methodologically
sophisticated and painstaking approach to interpretation
in many cases, make for further points of similarity between
interpretation and natural science. (3) The essential role of
“divination”, qua hypothesis, in interpretation
constitutes yet a further point of similarity between interpretation
and natural science. Moreover, (4) even the subject-matter of
interpretation is not, in Herder’s view, sharply different from
that dealt with by natural science: the latter investigates observable
physical processes in nature in order to determine the forces that
underlie and produce them, but, similarly, interpretation investigates
observable human verbal (and non-verbal) physical behavior in order to
determine the forces that underlie and produce it (Herder
explicitly identifying mental conditions, such as conceptual
understanding, as “forces”).
Herder’s theory of interpretation had an enormous and beneficial
impact on subsequent hermeneutics. His theory was taken over almost in
its entirety by Schleiermacher in his much more famous lectures on
hermeneutics, delivered during the first third of the nineteenth
century. In particular, such fundamental and famous positions in
Schleiermacher’s hermeneutics as his supplementing of
“linguistic” with “psychological”
interpretation and his identification of “divination” as
the main method of the latter are due entirely to Herder. Moreover,
where Herder and Schleiermacher do occasionally disagree
concerning interpretation, Herder’s position almost always turns
out to be philosophically superior on inspection.
By decisively influencing Schleiermacher’s hermeneutic theory
Herder also exercised an indirect decisive influence on that of
Schleiermacher’s great pupil August Boeckh, whose
Encyclopedia and Methodology of the Philological Sciences
(posthumously published in 1877) essentially
reproduced Schleiermacher’s theory with only modest
elaborations, and became the standard methodological work for
classical scholars and others. Moreover, Boeckh’s one
significant departure from Schleiermacher’s theory, namely, his
addition of generic interpretation to the aspects of
interpretation that Schleiermacher had already distinguished, in
effect simply reincorporated the strong emphasis that Herder had
already placed on this.
Herder already in the Fragments of 1767–8 developed an
important new theory of translation that subsequently went on to have
an enormous and beneficial impact on both the theory and the practice
of translation in Germany. The following are some of its key
theses:
Translation (like interpretation) faces a deep challenge due to
the phenomenon of radical mental difference. It especially does so
because of the deep differences in concepts that occur between
different historical periods and cultures, and even to some extent
between individuals within a single period and culture.
As a result, translation is in many cases an extremely difficult
undertaking.
Again as a result, translation commonly confronts a choice between
two possible approaches: what Herder calls a “lax”
approach (i.e., one in which the language and thought of the target
text are allowed to diverge rather freely from those of the source
text) and an “accommodating” approach (i.e., one in which
they are made to conform closely to those of the source text).
Herder rejects the former approach. He does so largely because it
fails to achieve the most widely accepted and fundamental goal of
translation: semantic faithfulness.
He in particular rejects a certain rationale for it that Dryden
and others had advocated, namely, that a translation should provide
the work that the author would have written had his native
language not been the one he actually had but instead the target
language.  Herder objects to this that in cases such as that of
translating Homer, for example, the author could not have
written his work in the modern target language.
So Herder urges that the translator should instead err in the
other direction, toward “accommodating”.
But how is this to be achieved?
One essential means to achieving it that Herder identifies is that
the translator must have interpretive expertise. So Herder
requires this.
Another, much less obvious, means is a certain vitally important
technique that Herder develops for overcoming conceptual discrepancies
between the source language and the target language. That might seem
simply impossible (indeed, some more recent philosophers, such as
Donald Davidson, have mistakenly assumed that it would be). But Herder, drawing on
his novel philosophy of language, finds a solution: Since meanings or
concepts are word-usages, in order to reproduce (or at least optimally
approximate) in the target language a concept from the source language
that the target language currently lacks, the translator should take
the closest corresponding word from the target language and
“bend” its usage for the course of the translation in such
a way as to make it mimic the usage of the source word. This technique
essentially requires that the source word be translated uniformly
across its multiple occurrences in a work (and also that the single
target word chosen not be used to translate any other source words).
Such an approach is far from being common in translation practice, so
far indeed that it is rarely found in translations. However, Herder
scrupulously uses it in his own translations, as does an important
subsequent tradition that has followed him in adopting it (including
Schleiermacher, Franz Rosenzweig, and Martin Buber).
Herder is well aware that using this “bending”
approach will inevitably make for translations that are more difficult
to read than those that can be produced by a more “lax”
method (e.g., by using multiple words in the target language to
translate a single word in the source language). However, he considers
this price well worth paying in order to achieve maximal semantic
accuracy.
Another key means that Herder adopts is to complement the goal of
semantic faithfulness with that of faithfulness to the musical
form of a literary work (e.g., meter, rhyme, alliteration, and
assonance). As might be expected, his motives for doing this are
partly extra-semantic: in particular, aesthetic fidelity, and fidelity
to the exact expression of feelings that is effected by means of a
literary work’s musical features. But they are also in part
semantic: in his view, musical form and semantic content are strictly
inseparable, so that fully realizing even the goal of semantic
faithfulness in fact requires that a translation also be faithful to
the work’s musical form. Why does he believe that musical form
and semantic content are inseparable in this way? He has two main
reasons: First, musical forms often carry their own meanings (think,
for example, of the humorous and bawdy connotations of the
meter/rhyme-scheme of a limerick). Second, as was recently mentioned,
Herder believes that musical form is essential to an exact expression
of feelings; but, as we saw earlier, he also thinks that feelings are
internal to meanings (this is part of the force of his
quasi-empiricism in the philosophy of language); so reproducing a
work’s musical form in translation turns out to be essential
even for accurately conveying the meanings of its words and sentences
in translation.
In addition to being necessary in order to achieve
translation’s traditional fundamental goal of exactly
reproducing meaning (as well as aesthetic fidelity and fidelity in the
expression of feelings) as fully as possible, the more
“accommodating” sort of translation that has been
described is also necessary, in Herder’s view, in order to
achieve certain further important goals. One of these lies in a
potential that translation has for enriching the target language (both
conceptually and in musical forms). Herder argues convincingly that
whereas “lax” translation forgoes this opportunity,
“accommodating” translation capitalizes on it.
Another of these further goals lies in both expressing and
cultivating in a translation’s readers a cosmopolitan respect
for the Other—something that requires that the translation
reproduce the Other’s meanings and musical forms as accurately
as possible.
Herder holds that the preferred “accommodating” sort
of translation demands that the translator be in a sense a
“creative genius”, i.e., skilled and creative enough to
satisfy the heavy demands that this sort of translation imposes on
him, in particular, skilled and creative enough to invent the new
conceptual and musical forms in the target language that it
requires.
Despite his commitment to the central importance of this sort of
translation (largely, as we have seen, due to its necessity for
achieving translation’s traditional fundamental goal of
faithfully reproducing meaning), Herder is also in the end quite
liberal about the forms that translation—or interlinguistic
transfer more generally, including, for example, what he sometimes
distinguishes from “translation
[Übersetzung]” proper as “imitation
[Nachbildung]” or “rejuvenation
[Verjüngung]”—can legitimately take. He
allows that its possible forms are quite various, and that which one
is most appropriate in a particular case will largely depend on the
author or genre in question and on the translator’s (or
transferer’s) purposes.
Herder’s theory of translation (as just summarized), together
with his demonstration of its viability in practice, for example, in
his sample translations of Shakespeare in the Popular Songs,
had an enormous and beneficial impact on a whole generation of German
translation theorists and practitioners—including Johann
Heinrich Voss (the great translator of Homer), August Wilhelm Schlegel
(an important translation theorist and the great translator of
Shakespeare), Goethe (a significant theorist of translation), Wilhelm
von Humboldt (a significant theorist of translation and translator),
and Schleiermacher (an important theorist of translation and
Germany’s great translator of the Platonic dialogues).
Herder’s principle of complementing semantic faithfulness with
faithfulness in the reproduction of musical form had an especially
powerful impact on these successors. His principle of
“bending” word-usages in order to cope with conceptual
incommensurabilities was less widely followed, but was adopted by
Schleiermacher among others.
Herder’s philosophy of language, interpretation, and translation
owes significant debts to predecessors—for example, his
philosophy of language to Leibniz, Christian Wolff, Spinoza, and
Ernesti, his theory of interpretation again to Spinoza and Ernesti,
and his theory of translation to Thomas Abbt. However, even his
borrowings incorporate important refinements, and his overall
contribution was enormous.
Herder’s philosophy of language and interpretation, together
with several further philosophical principles that he developed, made
a vitally important contribution to the birth of two whole new
academic disciplines that did not yet exist in his day but which we
today take for granted: linguistics and cultural anthropology. (For
further details, see Section 1 of the
 Supplementary Discussion.)
In On the Cognition and Sensation from 1778 and elsewhere
Herder develops a very interesting and influential position in the
philosophy of mind. The following are some of its central
features.
Concerning the fundamental mind-body problem, Herder tried out various
positions over the course of his career, but the considered position
at which he arrived was uncompromisingly naturalistic and
anti-dualistic.
In On the Cognition and Sensation he tries to erase the
traditional sharp division between the mental and the physical in two
specific ways: First, he advances a theory that minds and mental
conditions consist in forces [Kräfte] that
manifest themselves in people’s bodily behavior—just as
physical nature involves forces that manifest themselves in the
behavior of bodies. He officially remains agnostic on the question of
what force is, except for conceiving it as something apt to produce a
type of bodily behavior, and as a real source thereof (not merely
something reducible thereto). This, strictly speaking, absolves his
theory of certain common accusations (for example, H.B. Nisbet and
Frederick Beiser’s accusation that it is
“vitalist”). But it also leaves it with enough content to
have great virtues over rival theories: (1) The theory ties types of
mental states conceptually to corresponding types of bodily
behavior—which seems correct, and which therefore marks a point
of superiority over both dualistic theories and mind-brain identity
theories. (2) On the other hand, the theory avoids reducing
mental states to bodily behavior—which again seems correct,
given such obvious facts as that we can be, and indeed often are, in
token mental states that happen to receive no behavioral manifestation
at all, and which hence constitutes a point of superiority over
behaviorist theories. (3) Moreover, Herder’s official
agnosticism about what (mental) force is can be seen as showing
recognition of the important conceptual fact (recently exploited by
functionalists in their “multiple realizability argument”)
that although the concepts of mind and mental conditions imply a real
source of a type of behavior, they do not imply anything about the
nature of that source’s constitution.
Second, Herder also tries to explain the mind in terms of the
phenomenon of irritation [Reiz], a phenomenon that
had recently been identified by the physiologist Albrecht von Haller,
and which is paradigmatically exemplified by muscle fibers contracting
in response to direct physical stimuli and relaxing upon their
removal—in other words, a phenomenon which, while basically
physiological, also exhibits a transition to mental characteristics.
There is an ambiguity in Herder’s position here: Usually, he
wants to resist physicalist reductionism, and so would be reluctant to
say that irritation is purely physiological and fully constitutes
mental states. However, in the 1775 draft of On the Cognition and
Sensation, and even in parts of the published version, that
is his position. And from a modern standpoint, this is
arguably a further virtue of his account (though, of course, we would
today want to recast it in terms of different, and much more complex,
physiological processes than irritation).
This second line of thought might seem at odds with the first one
(forces). But it need not be. For, given Herder’s official
agnosticism about what forces are, this second line of thought could,
so to speak, fill in the “black box” of the hypothesized
real forces, namely in physicalist terms. In other words, it turns out
(not indeed as a conceptual matter, but as a contingent one) that the
real forces in question consist in physiological processes.
Herder’s philosophy of mind also advances another important
thesis: that the mind is a unity, that there is no sharp
division between its faculties. This thesis contradicted theorists
such as Sulzer and Kant. However, it was not in itself new with
Herder, having already been espoused by the Rationalists, especially
Wolff (Herder’s introduction to his 1775 draft shows that he is
fully aware of this debt). Where Herder is more original is in
rejecting the Rationalists’ reduction of sensation and volition
to cognition; establishing the unity thesis in an empirical rather
than an apriorist way; and adding a normative dimension to
it—this is not only how the mind is but also how it
ought to be. This last feature might sound incoherent at
first hearing, since if the mind is this way by its very nature, what
sense can there be in prescribing to people that it should be so
rather than otherwise? However, Herder’s idea here is rather the
quite coherent one that, while the mind is indeed this way by its very
nature, people sometimes behave as though one faculty could be
abstracted from another, and try to effect such an abstraction, but
this then leads to various malfunctions, and should therefore be
avoided.
Herder’s overall thesis of the mind’s unity rests on four
more specific doctrines concerning intimate mutual involvements
between mental faculties, and malfunctions that arise from resisting
them, doctrines that are in large part empirically grounded and hence
lend the overall thesis a sort of empirical basis as well:
A first doctrine concerns the relation between thought and language:
Not only does language of its very nature express thought (an
uncontroversial point), but also (as we noted earlier) for Herder
thought is essentially dependent on and bounded by language. Herder
largely bases this further claim on empirical grounds (for example,
concerning how children’s thought develops in step with language
acquisition). The normative aspect of his position here is that
attempts (in the manner of some metaphysics, for example) to cut
thought free from the constraints of language lead to nonsense.
A second area of intimate mutual involvement concerns cognition and
volition, or affects. The claim that volition is and should be based
on cognition is not particularly controversial. But Herder also argues
the converse, that all cognition is and should be based on volition,
on affects—and indeed, not only on such relatively anemic
affects as the impulse to know the truth, but also on much less anemic
ones. He is especially concerned to combat the idea that theoretical
work in philosophy or the sciences is or should be detached from
volition, from affects. In his view, it never really is even when it
purports to be, and attempts to make it so merely impoverish and
weaken it. His grounds for this whole position are again mainly
empirical in nature.
A third area of intimate mutual involvement concerns thought and
sensation. Conceptualization and belief, on the one hand, and
sensation, on the other, are intimately connected according to Herder.
Thus, he advances the quasi-empiricist theory of concepts that was
mentioned earlier, which entails that all of our concepts (and hence
also all of our beliefs) ultimately depend in one way or another on
sensation. But conversely, he also argues (anticipating much important
twentieth-century work in philosophy) that there is a dependence in
the other direction: that the character of an adult human
being’s sensations depends on his concepts and beliefs.
Normatively, he sees attempts to violate this interdependence as
inevitably leading to intellectual malfunction—for example, as
has already been mentioned, he thinks that metaphysicians’
attempts to cut entirely free from the empirical origin of our
concepts lead to meaninglessness. His grounds for this whole position
are again largely empirical in character.
A fourth area of intimate mutual involvement concerns unity among the
faculties of sensation themselves. For one thing, Herder implies that
our underlying animal nature involves a sort of primordial fusion of
perceptual with affective sensations (albeit that, unlike other
animals, we also have a distinctive ability to suspend this fusion, an
ability that he calls Besonnenheit). For another thing, he
argues that the several faculties of perceptual sensation themselves
form a sort of unity. His grounds for these two positions are again
mainly empirical in character. In particular, he says that the unity of the several
faculties of perceptual sensation is shown by clues that emerge in
unusual situations and in pathological cases. Accordingly, he argues,
for example, that the dependence of the mature sense of sight on the
sense of touch is shown both by the way in which the sense of sight
develops in young children and by the way in which it develops after
medical operations on previously blind people such as
Cheselden’s blind man.
In a further seminal move in the philosophy of mind Herder argues that
linguistic meaning is fundamentally social—so that thought and
other aspects of human mental life (since they are essentially
articulated in terms of meanings), and therefore even the very self
(since the self is essentially dependent on thought and other aspects
of human mental life, and moreover defined in its specific identity by
theirs), are so too. Herder’s version of this position seems
intended only as an empirically based causal claim. It has since
fathered a long tradition of attempts to generate more ambitious cases
for stronger versions of the claim that meaning—and hence also
thought etc. and the very self—is at bottom socially constituted
(for example, in Hegel, Wittgenstein, Kripke, Burge, and Brandom).
However, it may well be that these more ambitious cases and versions
do not work, and that Herder’s original version is exactly what
should be accepted.
Herder also, in tension though not contradiction with this principle
of sociality, holds that (even within a single period and culture)
human minds are as a rule deeply individual, deeply different
from each other—so that in addition to a generalizing psychology
there is also a need for a psychology oriented to individuality. This
is an important idea that has strongly influenced many subsequent
continental thinkers (for example, Schleiermacher, Nietzsche, Proust,
Sartre, and Manfred Frank). Herder himself advances it only as an
empirical rule of thumb. By contrast, a prominent strand in
Schleiermacher and Frank purports to establish it as an a priori
universal truth. However, Herder’s original version is again
arguably the more plausible one.
Finally, like predecessors in the Rationalist tradition and Kant,
Herder sharply rejects the Cartesian idea of the mind’s
self-transparency—instead insisting that much of what occurs in
the mind is unconscious, so that self-knowledge is often deeply
problematic. This is another compelling position that has had a strong
influence on subsequent thinkers.
This whole Herderian philosophy of mind owes much to predecessors,
especially ones in the Rationalist tradition. But it is also in many
ways original. The theory is important in its own right. And it
exercised an enormous influence on Herder’s successors,
including Hegel, Schleiermacher, and Nietzsche.
Unlike his teacher Kant, who had little interest in or knowledge of
literature or art, and whose treatment of them in the Critique of
the Power of Judgment (1790) is correspondingly weak, Herder had a passionate
interest in and a deep knowledge of them, and as a result was able to
develop a rich set of original and important ideas about them. In this
respect he set a valuable precedent that would be followed in the next
generation by the Romantics (especially Friedrich and August Wilhelm
Schlegel) and Hegel.
Herder also anticipated and influenced the Romantics in another
important way. One of the most striking and distinctive positions of
the Romantics was a certain valorization of literature and art over
other areas of culture (such as science, religion, and morality). But
Herder had already developed such a position before them. First, from
an early period he argued that song was the origin of all
language (and consequently also of all thought). Second, in works such
as the Treatise on the Origin and especially the essay On
Image, Poetry, and Fable (1787) he argued that all language (and
consequently also all thought) is fundamentally figurative or
metaphorical in nature—for example, that its grammar typically
projects the two genders onto the whole of nature, and that it
pervasively involves a set of creative transitions from an object to a
sensory stimulus to an individualistically formed image and thence to
thought and language—and is thus poetic. Third, in
works such as his Attempt at a History of Lyric Poetry (1764)
and On the Spirit of Hebrew Poetry he also argued that poetry
has been fundamental to religion from the beginning. And elsewhere he
argued that non-linguistic art, especially sculpture, has played an
important role in religion from an early period as well. Fourth, he
also argued that poetry has a very important function in moral
education, indeed one even more important than that of other
mechanisms of moral education such as laws.
Besides the aforementioned, what are Herder’s most important
contributions to aesthetics? He is skeptical about the sort of
aprioristic and systematic aesthetics that the
inventor of the discipline of aesthetics, the Rationalist philosopher
Baumgarten, had recently developed. Instead, he calls for a bottom-up,
or empirical, approach to the discipline. And his considered
position concerning the ideal of an aesthetic system is
dismissive as well. It is true that he began his career aspiring to
something of the kind and that in the Critical Forests (1769)
he accordingly set out to argue for the following little aesthetic
system: whereas music is a mere succession of objects in time, and
sculpture and painting are merely spatial, poetry has a sense, a soul,
a force; whereas music, sculpture, and painting belong solely to the
senses (namely, to hearing, feeling, and vision, respectively), poetry
not only depends on the senses but also relates to the imagination;
whereas music, sculpture, and painting employ only natural
signs, poetry uses voluntary and conventional signs.
It is also true that this system was later taken over (with only minor
modifications) by Schleiermacher in his aesthetics lectures, and that
it has sometimes been touted as Herder’s main achievement in
aesthetics more recently (for example, by Robert Norton). But as
Herder himself quickly came to realize after formulating it, it is a
naive system. And his real achievements in aesthetics are other than
and contrary to it.
Let us turn to those real achievements, then. One of them concerns the
relation between art and language. As we saw earlier, Herder’s
philosophy of language is committed to the two doctrines that thought
is essentially dependent on and bounded by language, and that meaning
is word-usage. This prompts certain questions. These doctrines make a
plausible break with a common Enlightenment assumption that thought
and meaning are in principle autonomous of whatever material,
perceptible expressions they may happen to receive. Following Charles
Taylor, we might call such a move one to
“expressivism”. But what form should expressivism
take exactly? Is the dependence of thought and meaning on
external symbols strictly one on language (in the usual sense
of “language”)? Or is it rather a dependence on a broader
range of symbolic media including, besides language, also such things
as painting, sculpture, and music—so that a person might be able
to entertain thoughts that he was not able to express in language but
only in some other symbolic medium? Let us call the former
position narrow expressivism and the latter broad
expressivism.
Hamann in his Metacritique espoused a version of broad
expressivism. But, as his first two doctrines in the philosophy of
language already seem to imply, Herder adopted narrow expressivism.
Moreover, after much wrestling with the subject, he eventually
developed a very compelling version of narrow expressivism. The key
work here is again the Critical Forests. By the time of
writing this work, Herder was already committed to the two doctrines
in question, and, as this would suggest, from the start in the work he
is committed to narrow expressivism. However, his commitment to it
there is initially unsatisfactory and even inconsistent. For one
thing, it initially takes the implausible form of denying to the
non-linguistic arts any capacity to express thoughts
autonomously of language by denying that they can express
thoughts at all. This is the force of the naive theory
recently described that the work at first set out to develop. Adding
inconsistency to this unsatisfactoriness, Herder is from the start in
the work also committed to saying (far more plausibly) that visual art
often does express thoughts—for example, he intervenes
in a quarrel between Lessing and Winckelmann on the question of
whether linguistic art (especially poetry) or visual art (especially
sculpture) is expressively superior in ways that tend to support
Winckelmann’s case for visual art. This unsatisfactoriness
and inconsistency mainly result from Herder’s oversight of a
single fact: that it is perfectly possible to reconcile narrow
expressivism with the attribution of thoughts to non-linguistic art,
namely, by insisting that the thoughts expressed by non-linguistic
art must be derivative from and bounded by the artist’s capacity
for linguistic expression. However, by the time Herder writes the
later parts of the Critical Forests, he has found this
solution. Thus in the third part, focusing on a particularly
instructive example, he notes that the pictorial representations on
Greek coins are typically allegorical in nature. And by the time he
writes the fourth part he is prepared to say something similar about
much painting as well, speaking there, for example, of “the
sense, the allegory, the story/history that is put into the whole of a
painting” (G2:313). By 1778 he
extends this account to sculpture as well. Thus in the essay
Sculpture [Plastik] from 1778 he abandons the merely
sensualistic conception of sculpture that had predominated in the
Critical Forests and instead argues that sculpture is
essentially expressive of, and therefore needs to be interpreted by, a
soul. But this no longer forces him to be unfaithful to his
principle that thought is essentially dependent on, and bounded by,
language, for he now conceives the thoughts that are expressed by
sculpture as having a linguistic source: 
The sculptor stands in the dark of night and gropes toward the forms
of gods. The stories of the poets are before and in him. (G4:317)
Subsequently, in the Theological Letters (1780–1) and
the Letters for the Advancement, Herder extends the same
solution to instrumental music as well.
The considered position at which Herder eventually arrived also
implies that “non-linguistic” art is dependent on
thought and language in another way: In the fourth part of the
Critical Forests (which was only published posthumously in
the nineteenth century) he develops the point that human perception is
of its nature infused with concepts and beliefs, and consequently with
language—which of course implies that the same is true of the
perception of “non-linguistic” artworks in particular. So
“non-linguistic” art is really doubly dependent on thought
and language: not only for the thoughts that it expresses but
also for those that it presupposes in perception.
With Herder’s achievement of this refined form of narrow
expressivism and Hamann’s articulation of his broad
expressivism, there were now two plausible but competing theories
available. Nineteenth- and twentieth-century German theorists (e.g.,
Hegel, Schleiermacher, Dilthey, and Gadamer) would subsequently be
deeply torn between them. And the issue remains an important one
today. While the philosophical considerations involved are difficult,
I believe, and have argued elsewhere, that Herder’s position is
the correct one.
Herder’s position here also carries important implications for
hermeneutics. Since, in his considered view, thought/meaning and
language play important roles not only in literature but also in
“non-linguistic” art, for him both cases present similar
interpretive challenges, requiring similar interpretive solutions.
Another of Herder’s most important contributions to aesthetics
lies in his historicism, or, a bit more broadly, his recognition that
there are radical mental differences between historical periods,
cultures, and even individuals. In connection with literature and art
this position takes five main specific forms.
First, as we have already seen, Herder holds that concepts, beliefs,
values, and so on vary deeply between historical periods, cultures,
and even individuals. This obviously applies to literature in
particular. Moreover, since, as we have just seen, for Herder
seemingly non-linguistic arts such as painting, sculpture, and music
likewise presuppose and express concepts, beliefs, and values, it also
applies to them.
Second, Herder holds that genre—i.e., roughly, a certain set of
purposes and rules—is an essential aspect of any work of
literature or art. But he also holds that genres differ in deep ways
between historical periods (as well as between cultures and even
individuals), and this not only in the sense that new genres emerge
and old ones die, but also in the sense that seeming continuities in
genre typically in fact mask important differences. For example, in
the essay Shakespeare (1773) he argues in detail that the
genres of ancient Greek “tragedy” and Shakespearean
“tragedy”, which interpreters have often assumed to be the
same, are in fact deeply different from each other, constituted by
different purposes and rules. Similarly, in This Too a Philosophy
of History (1774), he argues, against Winckelmann, who had tended
to assimilate the genres of ancient Greek portrait sculpture and
Pharaonic Egyptian portrait sculpture, that whereas the former was
dominated by the genre-purpose of portraying this-worldly life, charm,
and beauty, the latter had the quite contrary genre-purpose of
conveying ideas of death and eternity.
Third, Herder argues that literature began predominantly sensuous in
character but then became increasingly intellectual as history
proceeded. In the early essays On the Ode (1764/5) and
Attempt at a History of Lyric Poetry he explains this
development in terms of a diminution of strong feelings (e.g., fear)
and an increase in mental complexity and science, and he regards it as
a sort of decline. Later on, in the Letters for the
Advancement, he retains the descriptive part of this account, but
revises its conception that a decline is involved: the more sensuous
poetry of the ancients and the more intellectualized poetry of the
moderns are two different but equally legitimate types of poetry.
Fourth, Herder holds that aesthetic values such as beauty are
ultimately a matter of feelings and that the feelings in question vary
in important ways between one period, culture, or even individual and
another. This theme is already prominent in On the Ode, where
he discusses major differences in the feelings of beauty that occur
between different periods/cultures—for example, between his own
age and the age of the ancient Greeks. It is also prominent in On
the Change of Taste (1766), where he adds that the changes
involved are indeed sometimes extreme enough to amount to an outright
inversion.
Fifth, Herder holds that it is an essential part of the function of
literature and art to communicate moral values, but he also observes
that the moral values communicated often differ in deep ways from one
period, culture, or individual to another. For example, in Attempt
at a History of Lyric Poetry he argues (very insightfully) that
early Greek poetry, especially Homer, communicates a very different
set of moral values than ours.
These historicist insights concerning literature and art are extremely
important in their own right. In addition, both for Herder and in
fact, they carry deep implications for the interpretation and
the critical evaluation of literature and art. Let us
reconsider the first two of them in this connection.
The first insight concerns radical differences in concepts, beliefs,
values, and so on. Since literature paradigmatically expresses such
things and is linguistic, Herder’s general hermeneutic
principles for interpreting linguistic texts and discourse in the face
of radical mental difference (as already discussed) of course apply to
literature in particular. Accordingly, in the Critical
Forests he emphasizes that it is important to penetrate
Homer’s alien linguistic and conceptual world by using careful
philological means; that it is always necessary to interpret the local
features within a work, for example, “ridiculous”
passages, such as the Thersites passage, in the Iliad (II:
211–277), in light of the economy of the whole work; and (this
time in connection with the example of interpreting the odes of
Horace) that the solution to the problem of achieving such holism
despite the need to interpret the parts of a text sequentially lies in
working through the text in sequence in order to arrive at a
provisional interpretation of all its parts together, then applying
this provisional interpretation of the whole text in order to refine
the interpretation of each part, and so on indefinitely.
But since Herder also holds that such seemingly non-linguistic forms
of art as painting, sculpture, and music likewise presuppose and
express concepts, beliefs, values, and so on that are ultimately
grounded in language, he believes that the same general hermeneutic
principles for interpreting linguistic works in the face of radical
mental difference also make an essential contribution to the
interpretation of this sort of art.
Moreover, since understanding what a piece of literature or art
presupposes or expresses is obviously a prerequisite for evaluating it
properly, this sort of hermeneutic approach is not only essential for
interpreting it but also for evaluating it.
Our second example concerns genre. Herder believes,
plausibly, that a work of art is always written or made in order to
exemplify a certain genre, and that it is vitally important for the
interpreter to identify its genre in order to understand it.
Why does he believe that identifying genre is essential for
understanding? He has at least three reasons (all of them good ones):
First, grasping a work’s genre is itself an essential
constituent of understanding the work and its contents (much as
grasping a sentence’s illocutionary force is an essential
constituent of understanding the sentence and its contents). Second,
since an author intends his work to exemplify a certain genre, there
will normally be aspects of the work’s meaning that are
expressed, not explicitly in any of its parts, but rather through its
intended exemplification of the genre. Third, correctly identifying
the genre is also vitally important for accurately interpreting things
that are expressed explicitly in the parts of a work.
However, as we noted, Herder introduces an important historicist
insight about genre here: he recognizes that even when different
historical periods, cultures, or individuals appear to share a single
genre—for example, ancient Greek “tragedy” and
Shakespearean “tragedy”, or Pharaonic Egyptian
“portrait sculpture” and ancient Greek “portrait
sculpture”—this appearance usually in fact masks important
differences.
This has important consequences for interpretation. For example, it
leads Herder to an emphatic rejection of apriorism as an approach to
identifying a work’s genre—certainly the absolute
apriorism of refusing in one’s definition of the genre to be
guided by an observation of examples at all, but also the more
tempting relative apriorism of indeed allowing oneself to be guided by
the observation of examples though restricting these to a limited
number of cases and excluding others to which the resulting
genre-conception is then to be applied in interpretation. For in light
of the historicist insight just mentioned even the latter procedure
will usually turn out to be disastrous, in Herder’s view.
Instead, according to Herder, the interpreter should approach the task
of identifying the genre that is involved in a work in a thorough and
scrupulous empirical manner. As one might expect, this above all
requires examining the work itself closely in order to discover which
genre-purposes and -rules are operative within it. But it also
requires taking into account the whole social context within which the
work was produced and the historical genesis of its genre through
antecedent genres. In addition, it may sometimes include taking into
account an author’s or artist’s explicit statements about
the genre that he is using.
Moreover, Herder also emphasizes that identifying the genre of a work
correctly by these means is vitally important not only for
interpreting the work correctly, but also for critically
evaluating it correctly: French critics not only make an
interpretive mistake when they go to Shakespeare with a genre
in mind from the ancient world that was not in fact his, but they
also, on this basis, make an evaluative mistake: because they
falsely assume that he somehow must be aspiring to realize the
genre-purpose and -rules that Aristotle found in ancient tragedy, they
fault him for failing to realize these, while at the same time they
overlook the quite different genre-purpose and -rules that he really
does aspire to realize and his success in realizing these.
Similarly, Winckelmann not only makes an interpretive mistake
when he implicitly imputes to the Egyptians a Greek genre-conception
for sculpture that was not theirs, but also, on this basis, makes an
evaluative one: because he falsely assumes that the Egyptians
somehow must be aspiring to realize the Greek genre-purpose and
-rules, he faults them for failing to realize these, and at the same
time he overlooks their success in realizing the very different
genre-purpose and -rules that they really do aspire to realize.
Herder’s new historicist approach to interpreting and evaluating
literature and art led to enormous progress in the actual
interpretation and critical evaluation of both. For example, it
enabled the Schlegel brothers to achieve a much deeper understanding
of tragedy than had been achieved before, and it enabled Friedrich
Schlegel to develop a new, highly sophisticated form of art history
(especially in his work on paintings in the Louvre and on cathedral
architecture), thereby preparing the way for nineteenth- and
twentieth-century scholarship on tragedy and art history.
Herder also has important ideas concerning a topic that is often
thought to be central to aesthetics: beauty. A first
important idea he develops here (both in relation to art and more
generally) is that standards of beauty vary greatly from one
historical period or culture to another. At least, this is his normal
position, from early works such as On the Ode and On the
Change of Taste to late ones such as the Calligone
(where he invokes it against Kant’s Critique of the Power of
Judgment). Occasionally—for example, in the Critical
Forests and even at points in the Calligone—he
instead argues (as other thinkers, such as Hume, had done before him)
that there is a deeper unity in standards of beauty across historical
periods and cultures. However, the former position is his more
considered one and is the more plausible one.
A second important idea, which he already develops in the Critical
Forests (and then repeats later in the Calligone),
concerns the very concept of beauty. He argues, plausibly, that the
concept’s origins lay in visual experience (as, he
thinks, is suggested by the etymological connection in German between
the words schön [beautiful] and Schein [shine,
appearance]), but that it has since been extended from that primary
domain to cover virtually “everything that has a pleasurable
effect on the soul”, that in this sense “sight …
allegorizes the images, the representations, the conceits of the
soul”, so that beauty becomes our most general term of
approval for whatever we find pleasing in relation to any of the
senses and indeed mental life more broadly (G2:289–291).
A third important idea that he develops is that beauty is in fact
considerably less important in literature and art than it has often
been thought to be. This demotion of beauty is not only encouraged by
his somewhat deflationary genealogy of the concept just mentioned but
also by his proto-Romantic conception that literature and art have
fundamental functions in relation to language (and thought), religion,
and morality, and by his mature insistence that meaning and thought
play an important role even in “non-linguistic” art. He
tended to advocate this demotion of beauty increasingly as time went
on. Accordingly, whereas in early works such as On the Ode
and the Critical Forests he still treated beauty as central
to aesthetics, by the time he wrote the Calligone he had
changed his mind and now insisted that it is not nearly as essential
to art as it is often taken to be. In particular, he argues in the
Calligone that art is much more essentially a matter of
Bildung—cultural formation or education (especially in
moral respects).
Finally, let us consider Herder’s thesis that literature and art
have a morally educative function. In On the Effect of Poetic Art
on the Ethics of Peoples in Ancient and Modern Times (1778),
On the Influence of the Belles Lettres on the Higher Sciences
(1781), and the Calligone he not only sees this as one of
their most essential functions, but also holds that literature has a
more powerful effect as an instrument of moral education than other
instruments, such as law.
He also develops a nuanced account of how literature and art do and
should perform this function. For example, in On the
Influence he specifies three distinct ways in which literature or
poetry promotes the formation of moral character. First, it does so
“through light rules”—in other words, through a
subtle articulation of ethical principles. Second, and more
importantly in his view, it does so by presenting good moral role
models in a positive light so that people will emulate them:
“still better, through good examples”. Third, it also does
so by conveying a range of practical experience that is conducive to
the formation of moral character and which would otherwise have to be
acquired, if at all, by the more arduous and painful route of
first-hand experience. In addition, Herder elsewhere implies a fourth
important way in which literature contributes to moral formation: it
is a fundamental principle underlying his Popular Songs that
by vividly conveying the inner lives—for instance, the fears,
hopes, and joys—of other people to its audience or readership,
literature will stir their sympathies for them and hence inculcate
more moral attitudes toward them. Fifth, Herder in the
Calligone adds a further point, concerning
“non-linguistic” art, namely, that visual art has a power
to make moral ideals attractive by presenting them blended with
physical beauty, and that, similarly, music has a power to affect
moral character either for good or for ill depending on the principles
of conduct that are associated with it.
Herder’s conception that the formation of moral character both
is and ought to be the primary function of literature and art serves
him as an important criterion for evaluating individual works. Thus
when he observes in On the Effect that in contrast to earlier
poetry modern poetry has typically lost this function, he means this
as a serious criticism of modern poetry. And he even applied this
criterion as a ground for criticizing certain works by his friends
Goethe and Schiller that he considered to be immoral or amoral in
content.
Herder also develops a philosophically powerful and historically
influential moral philosophy. This consists of a set of positions in
both meta-ethics and first-order morality. Let us consider the former
first.
As in the philosophy of mind, Herder’s position in meta-ethics
is naturalistic in spirit. Such a position was by no means
uncontroversial in Herder’s day, as can be seen, for example,
from his correspondence with Mendelssohn in 1769 concerning
Spalding’s and Mendelssohn’s religious, afterlife-focused
conception of humankind’s “vocation
[Bestimmung]”, which Herder sharply opposed in favor of
a this-worldly conception of the same.
As was mentioned earlier, Herder in particular holds a sentimentalist
position concerning the nature of morality: rather than being a sort
of knowledge of objective facts (as in Plato’s moral theory, for
example) or a set of deliverances of universal reason (as in the
critical Kant’s moral theory, for instance), morality is
fundamentally an expression of human sentiments. Herder already
espoused such a position in How Philosophy Can Become (1765),
continues it in This Too a Philosophy of History (1774)
(where he usually refers to the sentiments in question as
Neigungen, inclinations), and still holds it in Letters
for the Advancement (1793–7) (where he usually refers to
them as Gesinnungen, attitudes).
Herder took over this position from his teacher, the pre-critical
Kant, who had similarly espoused a form of sentimentalism in
Dreams of a Spirit Seer (1766). Via Kant it can ultimately be
traced back to the British sentimentalist tradition, especially Hume,
whose main argument for it Herder seems to echo at points in This
Too a Philosophy of History: moral judgment of its very nature
motivates; but reason does not motivate, only sentiments do that;
therefore moral judgment must fundamentally consist of sentiments.
However, Herder’s sentimentalism is not crude (as Hume’s
arguably was), for he recognizes that cognition—i.e., concepts
and beliefs—plays a major role in morality as well. This can
already be seen from the Critical Forests (1769), where he
argues against cruder theories of moral value that equate them with
sentiments abstracted from all cognition, and where in the fourth part
he indeed argues that sensations in general are concept-, 
belief-, and
theory-laden. It can also be seen from On the Cognition and
Sensation (1778). (Nietzsche would later take over this
sophisticated form of sentimentalism from Herder.)
Where Herder’s position becomes most original, though, is in
historicizing the moral sentiments in question—or (a
little more broadly and more precisely) in seeing them as varying
deeply from one historical period to another, one culture to another,
and even one individual to another. He already champions such a
position in On the Change of Taste (1766), for example,
indeed going as far as to say that the moral sentiments in question
sometimes even get inverted, so that what one period, culture, or
individual found morally praiseworthy another finds morally
reprehensible. This radical position can also be found in his
published writings. This position makes Herder’s sentimentalism
markedly different from Hume’s, rather a precursor of
Nietzsche’s (which it again strongly influenced here).
Another radical thesis that Herder champions is that moral sentiments
as a rule turn out to be both suitable to and explicable in terms of
the particular type of society and mode of life to which they belong.
This is a central thesis in This Too a Philosophy of History.
Thus Herder tries to show there that the moral values of each of the
major period/cultures that he considers in the work can be explained
in terms of their suitability to the character of the society and the
way of life to which they belonged—for example, the ancient
Egyptians’ morality of diligence and civic faithfulness to their
agricultural, industrial, and urban society and mode of life; the
Romans’ morality of courage, prudence, and patriotism to their
imperialistic, war-based society and mode of life; and so on.  This
thesis reinforces Herder’s Humean argument for sentimentalism by
showing that moral attitudes are explicable in terms of their social
function without recourse to moral facts. (Here again Herder’s
approach would later be echoed by Nietzsche.)
Another major contribution that Herder makes in the area of
meta-ethics is his application of his “genetic” method of
explanation to the domain of morality. This method depends on
Herder’s historicism. It purports to make a mentalistic
phenomenon more intelligible by tracing it back to its historical
origins and showing how these developed into it via a series of
intermediate forms. Herder first developed this method in the
mid-1760s in application to literary genres and language (in
Attempt at a History of Lyric Poetry and the
Fragments respectively), but he then went on to apply it to
moral (and other) values in This Too a Philosophy of History
(1774). Since moralities change over time, one can contribute to
explaining or better understanding the morality of a late age, for
example, eighteenth-century Europe, by identifying the earliest
morality in its historical tradition and then showing how this
developed through a chain of subsequent moralities into the late
morality in question. Accordingly, This Too a Philosophy of
History attempts to show (roughly) that after the authoritarian
morality of the ancient Hebrews had laid the foundations, the
Egyptians’ morality of diligence and citizen’s
faithfulness arose; this then gave way to the Phoenicians’
morality of freedom and openness; the Greeks next synthesized the
preceding moralities into a morality of citizen’s faithfulness
and freedom; Rome then modified this inheritance into moral values of
courage, prudence, and patriotism; following the collapse of the Roman
Empire, the northern tribes, together with Christianity, developed a
richer set of values that included courage, faith, honesty, reverence
for gods, humanity, chastity, and knightly honor; and then finally the
(professed) morality of modern Europe emerged as a result of this
whole tradition. This Herderian approach to explaining, or
contributing to a better understanding of, morality would subsequently
be taken over and developed further by Hegel, Nietzsche (especially in
On the Genealogy of Morality [1887]), and Foucault.
A further important aspect of Herder’s meta-ethics has already
been touched on: the complex position that he already develops in
How Philosophy Can Become that sentimentalism is the correct
account of the nature of morality; that cognitivism is therefore
useless as an account of morality or as an approach for inculcating
it, and is moreover harmful because it provokes skepticism about
morality and distracts people from the real foundations of morality
and from reinforcing them; and that philosophy should therefore
instead focus on identifying and reinforcing those real foundations,
namely, a set of causal mechanisms that generate and support the moral
sentiments.
As was also mentioned earlier, How Philosophy Can Become
mainly emphasizes certain forms of education and an emotive type of
preaching in this connection—both activities that Herder went on
to theorize about at greater length elsewhere. But these are only two
parts of a much broader theory and practice of moral pedagogy, or
cultivation of the moral sentiments, that he developed over the course
of his career, in what became one of his most central, distinctive,
and consuming projects. The additional causal mechanisms that he
identified and supported included the influence of morally exemplary
individuals, the law, and literature (as well as the other arts).
Herder’s development of this whole theory and practice of moral
pedagogy was lifelong and tireless. It constitutes perhaps the single
most important philosophical contribution to moral pedagogy since the
(strikingly similar) moral pedagogy that Protagoras developed in
antiquity (as preserved in the Great Discourse of Plato’s
Protagoras).
As can be seen from This Too a Philosophy of History, Herder
believed that this project had a special historical urgency in his day
because since the Renaissance and the Reformation the moral values
that people profess, such as love of humanity, freedom, and honor,
have largely become hollow, no longer genuinely anchored in moral
sentiments, and therefore fail to serve the social function to which
they would correspond.
A final very important aspect of Herder’s meta-ethics, prominent
especially in This Too a Philosophy of History, flows from
several of the meta-ethical positions that have already been
mentioned, specifically, from sentimentalism, the thesis of the
profound variability of moral sentiments between periods, cultures,
and even individuals, and the thesis of the general suitedness of the
various moralities that arise to the societies and modes of life to
which they belong: there can be no justification for making
differential evaluative comparisons between one morality and another,
for saying that one morality is better or worse than another. This is
the implication of a famous remark in This Too a Philosophy of
History that where values are concerned 
at bottom all comparison proves to be problematic … Each nation
has its center of happiness in itself, like every sphere its center of
gravity! (HPW 296–297)
This relativism (as it has often, and quite reasonably, been called)
is arguably one of Herder’s main contributions to moral
philosophy. However, it is also problematic, both in its relation to
other parts of Herder’s philosophy and intrinsically. (For
further details, see Section 2 of the
 Supplementary Discussion.)
Let us now turn more briefly to some of Herder’s distinctive
positions in first-order morality. For at this level too he developed
positions that are of great importance—for their intrinsic
value, their influence on successors, or both.
One very fundamental, original, and attractive principle that he
develops here is what might be called pluralist
cosmopolitanism, in contradistinction to homogenizing
cosmopolitanism. Cosmopolitanism already had a long history by
Herder’s day that reached back to (Cynicism and) Stoicism in the
pagan Greek world. That tradition had usually championed a
homogenizing form of cosmopolitanism, i.e., a form of it that grants
equal ethical respect to all human beings only on the basis of an
assumption that they all share much in common psychologically,
especially in their moral values. In particular, Herder’s
Enlightenment predecessors, including Kant, had held such a position.
Moreover, this version of cosmopolitanism continues to be predominant
among moral philosophers and worthy organizations such as the United
Nations to this day. There is a huge problem with this form of
cosmopolitanism, however: its assumption that human beings all share a
great deal in common psychologically, especially in moral values, is
false (and attempting to make it true would require
massive coercion). Herder recognized this problem, but he did not
throw out the baby of cosmopolitanism with the bathwater of
homogenization. Instead, he developed a distinctive pluralist
form of cosmopolitanism: a commitment to equal moral respect for all
human beings despite, and indeed even in part because of, the
diversity of their psychologies, and in particular their moral values.
This position is prominent in the Letters for the
Advancement, for example. This pluralist cosmopolitanism also
undergirds Herder’s strong stance against imperialism and
colonialism in This Too a Philosophy of History, the
Ideas, and the Letters for the Advancement.
A second moral principle of Herder’s that deserves to be
mentioned here is the closely related principle of humanity
[Humanität], which he develops in the Ideas and
the Letters for the Advancement. This principle has both
descriptive aspects—in particular, an implication of the unity
of the human species and of the mere superficiality of racial
differences—and normative ones. Among the latter, it includes an
implication of cosmopolitanism. It also includes implications of
specific standards of decent treatment (e.g., not killing, physically
abusing, or deceiving people). And it also functions as a sort of
substitute for the concept of human rights, a concept that
constitutes a closer specification of cosmopolitanism but which Herder
tends to shy away from for various reasons (see for this the section
on Political Philosophy).
A further noteworthy component of Herder’s first-order morality
is his moral ideal of Bildung, in the sense of autonomous,
individualistic development of all one’s capacities into a
harmonious whole. He already worked out this ideal in writings from
1769. Later, in On the Cognition and Sensation, he developed
some deeper philosophical foundations for it: an account of human
autonomy or freedom as something compatible with the laws of nature
(an account closely related to one he had already given in
the Treatise on the Origin according to which a distinctive
characteristic of humankind is a certain sort of flexibility, or
freedom from determination by narrow instincts); a quasi-Leibnizian
account of individuality as a general feature of all nature,
including human nature as a special case; and an account of the deep
interdependence of the psychological faculties, which undergirds the
“harmonious whole” component of the ideal. This ideal
would later go on to have an enormous influence on successors such as
Schiller, Wilhelm von Humboldt (who saw its realization as the highest
purpose of the state and indeed even of the whole universe), and
Hegel.
Besides these several striking moral ideals, Herder is also committed
to a range of much less surprising ones, especially ones associated
with the Christian moral tradition, such as sympathy, love,
forgiveness, honesty, justice, and equality. Although not surprising
in themselves, these ideals help to illustrate another striking
feature of Herder’s moral philosophy: his firm avoidance of the
sort of moral monism that began in antiquity with Plato’s
Protagoras (specifically, with its argument for the unity of
the virtues) and which has continued in modernity with Kant (in his
commitment to the categorical imperative as the sole moral principle)
and Utilitarianism (with its commitment to happiness as the sole moral
criterion), in favor of moral pluralism: a commitment to an
irreducible plurality of moral values or ideals. This is arguably
another great merit of his moral philosophy.
Finally, Herder’s ethical theory is important not only for what
it includes but also for what it omits. In particular, he shows little
interest in the issue of free will, hardly ever if at all implying
that such a thing exists or that it is a precondition of moral
responsibility. (Freedom in the sense of a sort of autonomy,
or flexibility, that exists within the limits of laws of
nature and merely amounts to a certain liberty from constraint by
narrow instincts and political freedom are another matter; he
is interested in these.) This position contrasts sharply with
that of most modern moral philosophers, including Hume and Kant, for
example. However, it looks much less idiosyncratic if one takes a
broader perspective and notices, for instance, that neither the
earlier Greeks (e.g., Homer) nor the Chinese ethical tradition have
had any conception of free will or any inclination to think that such
a thing is required for moral responsibility. Moreover, I would argue
that Herder’s position here, like that of these other
traditions, turns out to be a great virtue, since the very conception
of free will and of morality’s dependence on it, which has
dominated western philosophy and religion since late antiquity, turns
out to be thoroughly misbegotten.
Herder’s philosophy of history mainly appears in two works:
first in This Too a Philosophy of History and then later in
the Ideas.
His philosophy of history is striking for its development of a
teleological conception of history as the progressive realization of
“reason” and “humanity”—a conception
that anticipated and strongly influenced Hegel, among others. However,
this conception is very dubious on reflection, and is arguably
not one of Herder’s most intrinsically important
achievements in this area.
His most intrinsically important achievement arguably rather lies in
his development of the thesis already mentioned
earlier—contradicting such Enlightenment philosopher-historians
as Hume and Voltaire—that there exist radical mental differences
between different historical periods (and cultures), that
people’s concepts, beliefs, values, sensations, and so on differ
in deep ways from one period (or culture) to another. This thesis is
already prominent in On the Change of Taste (1766) and it
lasts throughout Herder’s career. It had an enormous influence
on successors such as the Schlegel brothers, Schleiermacher, Hegel,
Nietzsche, and Dilthey.
Herder makes the empirical exploration of the realm of mental
diversity that this thesis posits the very core of the discipline of
history. For, as has often been noted, he takes relatively little
interest in the so-called “great” political and military
deeds and events of history, focusing instead on the
“innerness” of history’s participants. This choice
is quite deliberate and self-conscious. Because of it, psychology
and interpretation inevitably take center-stage as methods in the
discipline of historiography for Herder.
Herder has deep philosophical reasons for this choice, and hence for
assigning psychology and interpretation a central role in
historiography. To begin with, he has negative reasons
directed against traditional political-military historiography. Why
should historiography focus on the “great”
political and military deeds and events of the past, after all? There
are several possible answers: (1) A first would be that they are
fascinating or morally edifying. But Herder will not accept this. For
one thing, he denies that mere fascination or curiosity is a
sufficiently serious motive for doing historiography. For another
thing, his antiauthoritarianism, antimilitarism, and borderless
humanitarianism cause him to find the acts of political domination,
war, and empire that make up the vast bulk of these
“great” deeds and events not morally edifying but morally
repugnant.
This leaves two other types of motivation that might be appealed to
for doing the sort of historiography in question: (2) because
examining the course of such deeds and events reveals some sort of
overall meaning in history, or (3) because it leads to
efficient causal insights that enable us to explain the past and
perhaps also predict or control the future. Herder is again
skeptical about these rationales, however. This skepticism is perhaps
clearest in the Older Critical Forestlet (1767–8)
where, in criticism of rationale (2), he consigns the task of
“the whole ordering together of many occurrences into a
plan” not to the historian but instead to the “creator,
… painter, and artist”, and in criticism of rationale
(3), he goes as far as to assert (on the basis of a Hume- and
Kant-influenced general skepticism about causal knowledge) that with
the search for efficient causes in history “historical seeing
stops and prophecy begins”. His later writings depart from this
early position in some obvious ways, but they also in important
ways remain faithful to it. (For further details, see Section 3 of the
 Supplementary Discussion.)
Herder’s arguments against these three rationales are all
briefly summarized in Letters 121–122 from the 10th
Collection of the Letters for the Advancement (though they
are more fully stated individually elsewhere).
Complementing this negative case against the claims of traditional
political-military history to be of overriding importance, Herder also
has positive reasons for focusing instead on the
“innerness” of human life in history. (1) One reason is
certainly just the sheer interest of this subject-matter (though, as
was mentioned before, that would not be a sufficient reason in his
eyes). (2) Another reason is that his discovery of radical diversity
in human mentality has shown there to be a much broader, less
explored, and more intellectually challenging field for investigation
here than previous generations of historians have realized. Two
further reasons are moral in nature: (3) He believes, quite plausibly,
that studying people’s minds through their literature, visual
art, and so on generally exposes one to them at their moral best (in
sharp contrast to studying their political-military history), so that
there are benefits of moral edification to be gleaned here. (4) He has
cosmopolitan and egalitarian moral motives for studying people’s
minds through their literature, visual art, and so forth: in sharp
contrast to studying unedifying and elite-focused political-military
history, this promises to enhance our sympathies for peoples, and
moreover for peoples at all social levels, including lower ones.
Finally, doing “inner” history is also important as an
instrument for our non-moral self-improvement: (5) It serves
to enhance our self-understanding. One important reason for this is
that it is by, and only by, contrasting one’s own outlook with
the outlooks of other peoples that one comes to recognize what is
universal and invariant in it and what by contrast distinctive and
variable. Another is that in order fully to understand one’s own
outlook one needs to identify its historical origins and how they
developed into it (this is Herder’s justly famous
“genetic” method, about which more will be said in a
moment). (6) Herder believes that an accurate investigation of the
(non-moral) ideals of past ages can serve to enrich our own ideals and
happiness. This motive finds broad application in his work. One
example is his exploration of past literatures in the
Fragments largely with a view to drawing from them lessons
about how better to develop modern German literature.
Herder’s decision to focus on the “innerness” of
history’s participants, and his consequent emphasis on
psychology and interpretation as historical methods, strikingly
anticipated and strongly influenced Dilthey. So too did his rationale
for this decision, as described above, which is indeed arguably
superior to Dilthey’s, especially on its positive side.
Another of Herder’s major contributions to the philosophy of
history, likewise based on his insight into radical mental difference,
is the “genetic” method recently mentioned. This was a
revolutionary invention that proved to be of enormous intrinsic value
and which exercised a huge influence on the philosophies of important
successors such as Hegel, Nietzsche, and Foucault.
Herder’s genetic method is first and foremost a means toward
better understanding, or explaining, psychological outlooks
and psychologically laden practices—especially a means toward
better understanding one’s own, toward better
self-understanding. The method achieves its distinctive
contribution to better understanding such outlooks and practices,
saliently including one’s own, by showing, in a naturalistic
(i.e., non-religious, non-mythical, non-transcendent) way, that and
how they have developed historically out of earlier origins prior to
which they were not yet really present at all and from which they have
emerged via a series of transformations.
Herder initially developed this method in the 1760s mainly in relation
to poetry and language. His unpublished Attempt at a History of
Lyrical Poetry (1764) contains his earliest presentation of the
method and applies it to poetry. His slightly later published work,
the Fragments (1767–8), refines his presentation of it
and applies it to language. He then goes on to apply the method to
moral (and other) values. Thus in This Too a
Philosophy of History (1774) he largely focuses on moral,
aesthetic, and prudential values, developing the large-scale
“genetic” thesis that history has consisted of a great
chain of cultures (Oriental patriarchal culture, then Egyptian, then
Phoenician, then Greek, then Roman, and so on) that have built on each
other cumulatively and thus eventually generated modern European
culture (toward which he is strikingly ambivalent). For example, he
claims that Greek culture combined antecedent Oriental and Egyptian
culture’s obedience with antecedent Phoenician culture’s
freedom in a new synthesis, and then passed this on to subsequent
European cultures.
Hegel, especially in his Phenomenology of Spirit (1807),
Nietzsche, especially in On the Genealogy of Morality (1887),
and Foucault subsequently took over this method and modified it in
various ways.
How exactly is Herder’s method supposed to advance
(self-)understanding? It aspires to do so in
two distinguishable ways, which together constitute what one might
call the essential model of genetic explanation.
The method’s first contribution to (self-)understanding
is roughly as follows. Someone who possesses his or her own
distinctive concepts, beliefs, values, sensations, customs, art forms,
and so on but does not compare them with perspectives that have lacked
them altogether or possessed variant alternatives runs a grave risk of
taking them to be universal and indispensable, and also of overlooking
what is distinctive in their character. The genetic method counteracts
both of these types of (self-)misunderstanding by making one familiar
with earlier historical periods that have lacked the relevant concepts
etc. altogether and with intervening historical periods in which they
were indeed anticipated but only in forms significantly different from
the form in which one possesses them oneself, thereby making it
possible both to perceive the non-universality and dispensability of
the concepts etc. in question and to compare them with others in order
to reveal their distinctive character.
The method’s second main contribution to (self-)understanding
consists at its most basic level in showing two things: first, that
the concepts etc. in question, rather than, say, either having been
innate and therefore present in human minds all along or else having
emerged ex nihilo fully formed at some point in history, are
the products of historical developments before which they did not
really exist at all and in the course of which they only existed in
variant forms; second, what exactly these historical developments that
produced them have been. At a less basic level, it normally also
includes a provision of one or another further sort of explanation
that is more specific in character. For example, the method shows that
lyric poetry began as, and then continued throughout its
transformations to be, an expression of deep emotions; that languages
developed gradually from primitive beginnings to achieve their
striking later complexity; or that modern culture and its values arose
through a series of accumulations and transformations of earlier
cultures and their values.
Finally, Herder is also impressive for having recognized, and, though
not solved, at least grappled with, a problem that flows from his
picture of history (and intercultural comparison) as an arena of deep
variations in human mentality. This is the problem of
skepticism. (For further details, see Section 4 of the
 Supplementary Discussion.)
Herder is not usually thought of as a political philosopher. But he
was one, and moreover one whose political ideals are more admirable,
theoretical stances more defensible, and thematic focuses of more
enduring relevance than those of any other German philosopher of the
period. His most developed treatment of political philosophy occurs
relatively late, in a work prompted by the French Revolution of 1789:
the Letters for the Advancement of Humanity (1793–7)
(including the early draft from 1792, which is important for its frank
statement of his views about domestic politics).
What are the main features of Herder’s political philosophy? Let
us begin with his political ideals, first in domestic and
then in international politics. In domestic politics, the mature
Herder is a liberal, a republican, a democrat, and an egalitarian
(this, it should be noted, in historical circumstances where such
positions were by no means commonplace, and were embraced at a
personal cost).
His liberalism is especially radical in that it advocates
virtually unrestricted freedom of thought and expression (including
freedom of worship). He has several reasons for this position: (1) He
feels that such freedom belongs to people’s moral dignity. (2)
He believes that it is essential for individuals’
self-realization. (3) He believes that people’s capacities for
discerning the truth are very limited and that it is only through an
ongoing contest between opposing viewpoints that the cause of truth
gets advanced. (John Stuart Mill would later borrow from these
considerations—largely via Wilhelm von Humboldt—to form
the core of his own case for freedom of thought and expression in
On Liberty.)
Herder is also committed to republicanism and democracy
(advocating a much broader franchise than Kant, for example). He has
several reasons for this position, ultimately deriving from an
egalitarian concern for the interests of all members of society: (1)
He feels it to be intrinsically right that the mass of people should
share in their government, rather than having it imposed upon them.
(2) He believes that this will better serve their other
interests as well, since government by also tends to be
government for. (3) He in particular believes that it will
diminish the warfare that is pervasive under the prevailing autocratic
political régimes of Europe, where it benefits the few rulers
who decide on it but costs the mass of people dearly.
Finally, Herder’s egalitarianism also extends beyond
this. He does not reject class differences, property, or inequalities
of property outright. But he does oppose all hierarchical oppression;
argue that all people in society have capacities for self-realization,
and must receive the opportunity to fulfill them; and insist that
government must intervene to ensure that they do receive it, for
example, by guaranteeing education and a minimum standard of living
for the poor.
Concerning international politics, Herder has often been classified as
a “nationalist” or (perhaps even worse) a “German
nationalist” (for example, by R.R. Ergang in Herder and the
Foundations of German Nationalism [1931] and K.R. Popper in
The Open Society and its Enemies [1945]). Some other
philosophers from the period deserve such a characterization (for
instance, Fichte). But where Herder is concerned it is deeply
misleading and unjust.  On the contrary, like Kant’s, his
fundamental position in international politics is a
committed cosmopolitanism, an impartial concern
for all human beings.  This is a large part of the force of
his ideal of “humanity”. Hence, for example, in
the Letters for the Advancement he approvingly quotes
Fénelon’s remark, “I love my family more than
myself; more than my family my fatherland; more than my fatherland
humankind” (HPW 389).  Moreover, Herder’s
cosmopolitanism is arguably purer than Kant's. Kant's is undermined by
various prejudices that he harbors – in particular, racism,
antisemitism, and misogyny (Kleingeld 2013). By contrast,
Herder’s is free of such prejudices, which he indeed worked
tirelessly to combat.
Herder does also insist on respecting, preserving, and
advancing national groupings. However, this is entirely unalarming,
for the following reasons: (1) For Herder, this is emphatically
something that must be done for all national groupings
equally—not just or especially Germany! (In the
Letters for the Advancement he emphatically rejects any such
notion of a “favorite people [Favoritvolk]”, as
he puts it [HPW 394].) (2) The “nation” in question
is not racial but linguistic and cultural (in the Ideas and
elsewhere Herder indeed criticizes and rejects the very concept of
race). (3) Herder does not seek to seal off nations from each
other’s influence or to keep them static; he regards
inter-linguistic and -cultural exchange and linguistic-cultural
development as normal and welcomes them. (4) Nor does his commitment
to national groupings involve a centralized, militarized state (in
the Ideas and elsewhere he strongly advocates the
disappearance of such a state and its replacement by loosely federated
local governments with minimal instruments of force). (5) In addition,
his insistence on respecting national groupings is accompanied by the
strongest denunciations of military conflict, colonial exploitation,
and all other forms of harm between nations; a demand that nations
instead peacefully cooperate and compete in trade and intellectual
endeavors for their mutual benefit; and a plea that they should indeed
actively work to help each other.
Moreover, Herder has compelling reasons for this insistence on
respecting national groupings: (1) The deep diversity of values
between nations entails that homogenization is only a fantasy:
non-existent and impracticable. (2) Such diversity also entails that,
to the extent that it is practicable, it cannot occur
voluntarily but only through external coercion. (3) In practice,
attempts to achieve it, for example, by European colonialism, are
moreover coercive from, and subserve, ulterior motives of domination
and exploitation. (4) Furthermore, real national variety is positively
valuable, both as affording individuals a vital sense of local
belonging and in itself.
Indeed, Herder’s pluralist cosmopolitanism is an important and
attractive alternative to the homogenizing forms of cosmopolitanism,
based on delusions concerning either the fact or the prospect of
universally shared values, that have predominated since the
Enlightenment and are still popular today, both among philosophers
(especially in the Anglophone world) and in international political
organizations such as the United Nations.
Another important part of Herder’s political philosophy, which
bears on both domestic and international politics, is his striking
preference for an ideal of humanity over his age’s
ideal of human rights. (For further details, see Section 5 of
the
 Supplementary Discussion.)
Now that we have surveyed the various political ideals that make up
Herder’s political position, one final issue still needs to be
addressed. It might still be objected that all of this does not yet
really amount to a political theory—such as other
philosophers have provided, including some of Herder’s
contemporaries in Germany. In a sense that is true, but
philosophically defensible; in another sense it is false.
It is true in the following sense. There is indeed no grand
metaphysical theory underpinning Herder’s position—no
Platonic theory of forms, no correlation of political institutions
with “moments” in a Hegelian Logic, no
“deduction” of political institutions from the nature of
the self or the will à la Fichte or Hegel, or whatnot. But that
is quite deliberate, given Herder’s skepticism about such
metaphysics. And is this not indeed philosophically a good thing?
Nor does Herder have any account purporting to justify the moral
intuitions at work in his political position as a sort of theoretical
insight (in the manner of Kant’s theory of the
“categorical imperative” or Rawls’s theory of the
“original position”, for example). But that is again quite
deliberate, given his sentimentalism in ethics, and his rejection of
such theories as both false and harmful. And is he not again right
about this, and the absence of such an account therefore again a good
thing?
Nor is Herder sympathetic with such tired staples of political theory
as natural rights, the state of nature, the social contract, the
general will, and utopias for the future. But again, he has good
specific reasons for skepticism about these notions. So this again
seems like a good thing.
This, then, is the sense in which the objection is correct; Herder
does indeed lack a “political theory” of these
sorts. But he lacks it on principle, and is arguably quite
right to do so.
On the other hand, in another sense it is false to say that he lacks a
“political theory”. For he does have a
“political theory” of a different, and arguably far more
valuable, sort. First, consistently with his general empiricism, his
position in political philosophy is deeply empirically informed. For
instance, as can be seen from the Dissertation on the Reciprocal
Influence of Government and the Sciences (1780), his thesis
concerning the importance of freedom of thought and expression, and
the competition between views that it makes possible, for producing
intellectual progress is largely based on the historical example of
ancient Greece, and in particular Athens, as contrasted with later
societies, such as Rome, that lacked the freedom and competition in
question. And in the 1792 draft of the Letters for the
Advancement he even describes the French Revolution and its
attempts to establish a modern democracy as a sort of
“experiment” from which we can learn (for example, learn
whether democracy can be successfully extended to nations that are
much larger than ancient Athens).
Second, in conformity with his general sentimentalism in ethics, he is
acutely aware that his political position ultimately rests on moral
sentiments—his own and, for its success, other people’s as
well. For example, in the 10th Collection of the
Letters for the Advancement he emphasizes that people’s
moral “dispositions” or “feelings” play a
fundamental role as essential supports for his political
position’s realization. This standpoint absolves him of the need
to do certain sorts of theorizing—not only precluding any need
for cognitivist groundings of the moral intuitions in question, but
also promising short, effective solutions to various problems that
might look like real brain-teasers to a cognitivist. However, it also
leads him to engage in theorizing of another sort, namely, theorizing
about the ways in which, and the causal means by which, people’s
moral sentiments should be molded in order to realize the ideals of
his political position. His discussion of moral
“dispositions” in the 10th Collection is an example of
such theorizing—concerning the ways in which, rather
than the causal means by which. Some of his extensive
theorizing about causal means (education, exemplary individuals, laws,
literature, and so on) has already been discussed earlier in this
article.
These two sorts of political theorizing—empirical
theorizing and theorizing about moral sentiments—are
deeply developed in Herder. And they arguably have much more point
than the sorts that are not.
In short, to the extent that Herder’s political philosophy
really is theoretically superficial, it is, to borrow a phrase of
Nietzsche’s, “superficial—out of
profundity” (whereas more familiar forms of political
philosophy are profound—out of superficiality). And in another,
more important, sense it is not theoretically superficial at all.
In Herder’s day German philosophy was still deeply committed to
a sort of game of trying to reconcile the insights of the
Enlightenment, especially those of modern natural science, with
religion, and indeed more specifically with Christianity. Leibniz,
Kant, Hegel, Schleiermacher, and many others played this
game—each proposing some new reconciliation or other. Herder was
part of this game as well. This was not a good game for philosophers
to be playing. But it was not until the nineteenth century that German
philosophy found the courage to cut the Gordian knot and turn from
apologetics for religion and Christianity to thoroughgoing criticism
of them (the prime examples being Marx and Nietzsche). This situation
imposes certain limits on the value of Herder’s philosophy of
religion (as on that of the other reconciling philosophers just
mentioned).
Also, it should be noted that while Herder’s philosophy of
religion was generally very enlightened and progressive in both his
early and his late periods, there was a spell in the middle, the years
1771–6 in Bückeburg, during which he fell into the sort of
religious irrationalism (an approach that rejects reason and instead
bases religious views on belief alone) that is more characteristic of
his friend Hamann. This happened as the result of what would today be
classified as a mild nervous breakdown (documentable from his
correspondence at the time), and should basically be discounted.
Notwithstanding these qualifications, Herder did make important
contributions to the philosophy of religion—that is, important
in terms of their intrinsic value, their influence, or both.
One of these contributions (important mainly for its influence) lies
in his neo-Spinozism. Herder’s sympathetic engagement with
Spinoza’s work goes back at least as far as 1769. But its main
expression occurs in God: Some Conversations from 1787.
Herder published this work in the wake of Jacobi’s Letters
on the Doctrine of Spinoza (1785), in which Jacobi had revealed
that the highly respected philosopher, critic, and dramatist
Lessing—who was much admired by Herder in particular—had
confessed to him shortly before his death that he had abandoned
orthodox religious conceptions in favor of Spinozism. Jacobi had
himself argued, sharply to the contrary, that Spinozism, and indeed
all fundamental reliance on reason, implies atheism and fatalism, and
should therefore be rejected in favor of a leap of faith to a
conventional Christian theism. Jacobi’s work, along with a reply
by Moses Mendelssohn that disputed the attribution of Spinozism to
Lessing though not the perniciousness of such a position, caused a
public furor. In God: Some Conversations Herder intervened.
In this work he supports Lessing as Jacobi had characterized him by
developing a version of “Spinozism” that modifies the
original in some significant respects, largely with a view to defusing
Jacobi’s objections.
Herder shares with Spinoza the basic thesis of monism, and
like Spinoza equates the single, all-encompassing principle in
question with God (which of course already calls into question
Jacobi’s charge of atheism). But whereas Spinoza had
characterized this single, all-encompassing principle as
substance, Herder instead characterizes it as force,
or primal force. This fundamental modification involves
several further ones that Herder also finds attractive, including the
following: (1) Whereas Spinoza had tended to conceive the principle in
question as an inactive thing, Herder’s revision rather
turns it into an activity. (2) Spinoza’s theory had
attributed thought to the principle in question, but had
rejected conceptions that it had intentions or was a
mind. By contrast, Herder claims that it does have
intentions. And since his general philosophy of mind identifies the
mind with force, his identification of the principle in question with
force also carries an implication that it is a mind (he does
not yet quite say this in God: Some Conversations, but a few
years later in On the Spirit of Christianity of 1798 he
explicitly describes God as a Geist, a mind). In these ways,
Herder in effect re-mentalizes Spinoza’s God (thereby further
undermining Jacobi’s charge of atheism). (3) Whereas Spinoza had
conceived nature mechanistically, in keeping with his Cartesian
intellectual heritage (and had thereby invited Jacobi’s charge
of fatalism), Herder (though officially still agnostic about what
force is) rather tends to conceive the forces at work in nature as
living, or organic (a conception of them that he mainly owes
to Leibniz). (4) Herder believes that Spinoza’s original theory
contained an objectionable residue of dualism (again inherited from
Descartes) in its conception of the relation between God’s two
known attributes, thought and extension (and similarly, in its
conception of the relation between finite minds and bodies).
By contrast, Herder’s own conception of God as a force (and of
finite minds as likewise forces) is designed to overcome this alleged
residual dualism. For forces are of their very nature expressed in the
behavior of extended bodies. (5) Herder also sketches a more detailed
account of nature as a system of living forces based in the primal
force, God—an account that in particular ascribes an important
role in this system to the sort of opposition between forces that is
exemplified by the magnet, and characterizes the system as a
self-development toward higher and higher forms of articulation.
During the last quarter or so of the eighteenth century and then well
into the nineteenth century a wave of neo-Spinozism swept through
German philosophy and literature: in addition to Lessing and Herder,
further neo-Spinozists included Goethe, Schelling, Hegel,
Schleiermacher, Hölderlin, Novalis, and Friedrich Schlegel. This
wave was largely a result of Herder’s embrace of neo-Spinozism
in God: Some Conversations (and in Goethe’s case, of
Herder’s sympathy with Spinozism even before that work).
Accordingly, it for the most part took over Herder’s
modifications of Spinoza’s position.
However, Herder’s most intrinsically valuable
contribution to the philosophy of religion concerns the interpretation
of the Bible. In this connection, as has already been mentioned, he
champions a strict secularism. This was already his position
in the 1760s. At that period he argued firmly, in the spirit of
Galileo, for disallowing revelation any jurisdiction over natural
science—though he did so not in an anti-religious spirit but in
the hope and expectation that an autonomous natural science would
confirm religion. And he made a parallel case for the autonomy of
interpretation: Religious assumptions and means have no
business interfering in the interpretation of texts either, even when
the texts are sacred ones. Instead, even the Bible must be interpreted
as the work of human beings, and by means of the same sorts of
rigorous hermeneutic methods that are employed for interpreting other
ancient texts—any religious enlightenment coming as a
result of such interpretation, not entering into the process
itself. This whole position remained Herder’s considered
position in his later period as well.
The general principle that the Bible should be interpreted in the same
way as other texts was not the commonplace in Herder’s day that
it has become since, but nor was it entirely new with him. In adopting
it he was self-consciously following the lead of several recent Bible
scholars—in particular, Ernesti, Michaelis, and Semler. However,
his secularism is more consistent and radical than theirs, in
particular because it foreswears not only any reliance on a divine
inspiration of the interpreter but also any assumption that the Bible,
as the word of God, must be true and consistent throughout. (For
further details, see Section 6 of the
 Supplementary Discussion.)
 
Another important interpretive principle of Herder’s, closely
related to his strict secularism, is an insistence that interpreters
of the Bible must resist the temptation to read the Bible as
allegory (except in those relatively few cases—such as
the parables of the New Testament—where there is clear textual
evidence that a biblical author intended to convey an allegorical
meaning). In On God’s Son, the World’s Savior
(1797) Herder gives a perceptive general diagnosis of how the
temptation to allegorical interpretation arises: over the course of
history people’s beliefs and values change, leading to
discrepancies between the claims made by their traditional texts and
their own beliefs and values; but they expect and want to find their
traditional texts to be correct; and so they try to effect a
reconciliation of them with their own beliefs and values by means of
allegorical readings.
Herder’s theoretical commitment to strict secularism and to
non-allegorical readings in biblical interpretation led him to
interpretive discoveries concerning the Bible that were themselves of
great importance. For example, concerning the Old Testament, his
commitment to applying normal interpretive methods enabled him to
distinguish and define the different genres of poetry in the Old
Testament in a way that was superior to anything that had been
achieved before. The same commitment, and his consequent readiness to
find falsehood and even inconsistency in the Bible, allowed him to
make such important interpretive observations as that the ancient
Hebrews’ conceptions about death, the afterlife, the mind, and
the body had changed dramatically over time. (For both of these
achievements, see especially On the Spirit of Hebrew Poetry.)
And his rejection of unwarranted allegorical interpretations allowed
him to substitute for the prevailing interpretation of the Song of
Solomon as religious allegory an interpretation of it as simple
erotic love poetry that is today generally accepted as correct.
Similarly concerning the New Testament, Herder’s commitment to
applying normal interpretive methods, including his readiness to
discover falsehood and inconsistency, enabled him to treat the authors
of the four gospels as individual human authors rather than as mere
mouthpieces of the deity, to perceive inconsistencies between their
accounts, to establish the relative dates of the gospels correctly for
the first time (Mark first, Matthew and Luke in the middle, John last
and late), and to give a broadly correct account of their genesis in
oral sermon and of their likely relations to each other (achievements
that he attained above all in two late works from 1796–7, On
the Savior of Mankind and On God’s Son, the
World’s Savior).
Herder’s strict secularism and resistance to allegory in
interpretation would shortly afterwards be adopted by Schleiermacher,
who similarly embraced the principle that the interpretation of sacred
texts must treat them as the works of human authors and apply exactly
the same interpretive methods to them as are applied to profane texts,
and who similarly followed through on this commitment, in particular
finding not only falsehoods but also inconsistencies in the Bible.
Herder’s great achievements in this whole area also have
something of the character of the early acts of an inexorable personal
tragedy, however. As was mentioned, he did not by any means intend his
championing of the cause of intellectual conscience in insisting on
the autonomy of natural science and interpretation to undermine
religion in general or Christianity in particular; on the contrary,
his hope and expectation was that both sorts of autonomy would in the
end support religion and Christianity. However, this hope has been
sorely disappointed. Autonomous natural science has increasingly made
religion generally and Christianity in particular look
problematic. And Herder’s policy of reading the Bible with the
aid of normal interpretive means as a collection of human texts, with
all of the foibles of human texts, has increasingly led to an
undermining of the Bible’s claims to intellectual authority (a
landmark here was the publication of David Friedrich
Strauss’s The Life of Jesus (1835–6)). Much of
what Herder has ultimately achieved in this area would therefore be
deeply unwelcome to him.
Now that we have surveyed Herder’s main achievements as a
philosopher, we are in a better position to see not only their
intrinsic value but also their enormous intellectual influence, as
adumbrated at the start of this article—an influence that
occurred both within philosophy and beyond it, and that extended even
to the founding of whole new disciplines. (For further details, see
Section 7 of the
 Supplementary Discussion.)
Adler and Koepke 2009 (an excellent collection of articles covering a
wide range of topics); Beiser 1987 (ch. 5 covers several subject
helpfully, including Herder’s philosophies of language, mind,
and religion); Berlin 1976 (concise and excellent); Clark 1955
(detailed and useful, though unimaginative); Forster forthcoming
(covers the subjects treated in this article in more detail); Gillies
1945 (not philosophically sophisticated, but good on Herder’s
relation to literature and on his influence); Greif, Heinz, and
Clairmont 2016 (a useful reference work); Haym 1880 (a classic, detailed
intellectual biography; still by far the best general book on Herder available);
Heise 1998 (a good short introduction); Irmscher 2001 (an excellent short
introduction); Nisbet 1970 (a helpful general account of
Herder’s views about science); Sauder 1987 (contains helpful
contributions on a wide range of topics); Wiese 1939 (a helpful
overview). 
Adler 1968; Beiser 1987 (ch. 5); Berlin 1976; Clark 1955; Haym 1880.
Adler 2009; Berlin 1976; Clark 1955; Haym 1880; Zammito 2001 (an
excellent, thorough study).
Heinz 1994; Zammito 2001 (very good on this subject).
Aarsleff 1982; Coseriu 2015; Forster 2010, 2011a, 2013; Hacking 1988,
1994; Sapir 1907 (an excellent discussion of the Treatise on the
Origin by an important twentieth-century linguist); Taylor 1991,
1996, 2016.
Forster 2010 (especially chs. 1–5), 2011a (especially ch. 9),
2016; Gjesdal 2004, 2017; Irmscher 1973 (a very influential article
that attempts to assimilate Herder’s position to
Gadamer’s, an ambition that is both interpretively and
philosophically controversial); Willi 1971 (a helpful treatment of
Herder’s approach to interpreting the Old Testament).
Berman 1984; Forster 2010 (ch. 12); Huber 1968; Huyssen 1969; Kelletat
1984 (a helpful treatment of Herder’s interest in world
literature, and of his theory and practice of translation); Purdie
1965; Sauder 2009. 
Broce 1986; Coseriu 2015; Forster 2010 (ch. 6), 2011a (especially ch.
4); Gjesdal 2013; Mühlberg 1984; Pross 1987; Zammito 2001.
Beiser 1987 (ch. 5); Forster 2011c.
Forster 2010 (chs. 1, 3, and 5), 2011a (ch. 6), 2016; Gjesdal 2017;
Guyer 2007; Irmscher 1987; Mayo 1969; Norton 1991 (helpful both on
aspects of Herder’s aesthetic theory and on his general relation
to the Enlightenment); Wiora 1953.
Berlin 1976; Booher 2015; Crowe 2012; DeSouza 2012a, 2012b, 2014;
Forster 2017b and forthcoming; Sikka 2011.
Barnard 2003; Beiser 2003; Bollacher 1994; Forster 2011b, 2012a;
Gadamer 1942; Irmscher 1984, 2010; Lovejoy 1948 (helpful and concise);
Maurer 1987; Meinecke [1936] 1972 (ch. 9 on Herder is very helpful);
Otto and Zammito 2001; Staedelmann 1928; Wells 1960; Zammito 2009.
Barnard 1965 (chs. 3–5 cover Herder’s political thought
very well); Beiser 1992 (ch. 8 on Herder’s political philosophy
is excellent); Berlin 1976; Bernasconi 1995; Ergang 1931 (helpful on
Herder’s political thought and on his intellectual influence,
but marred by a false assimilation of Herder’s nationalism to
later German nationalism, and by an unduly warm assessment of such a
position); Forster 2010 (ch. 7), 2017a; Sikka 2011.
Bell 1984; Forster 2012b; Lindner 1960; Vollrath 1911; Willi 1971.
Ergang 1931; Forster 1998, 2010, 2011a, 2011b, 2011c, 2012a, 2012b,
2012c, 2016, 2017b; Gillies 1945; Harris 1972;
Heinz 1997; Jacoby 1911; Taylor 1975; Zammito 1992, 1997.