Johann Georg Hamann was born in Königsberg in 1730, the son of
a midwife and a barber-surgeon. He began study in philosophy and
theology at the age of 16, changed to law but mainly read literature,
philology, and rhetoric, but also mathematics and science. He left
university without completing his studies and became the governor to a
wealthy family on a Baltic estate. During this time he continued his
extraordinarily broad reading and private research. He took up a job in
the family firm of a friend from his Königsberg days, Christoph
Berens, and was sent on an obscure mission to London, in which he
evidently failed. He then led a high life until he ran out of friends,
money and support. In a garret, depressed and impoverished, he read the
Bible cover to cover and experienced a religious conversion.
He returned to the House of Berens in Riga, where they evidently
forgave him his failure. He fell in love with Christoph Berens' sister,
Katharina, but was refused permission to marry her by his friend, on
the grounds of his religious conversion; Berens was an enthusiastic
follower of the Enlightenment and was nauseated by the more pious
manifestations of Hamann's new-found religiosity. Smarting from this
blow and its motivations, Hamann returned to his father's house in
Königsberg, where he lived for the rest of his life until his
final months.
In Königsberg, he never held an official academic post, nor an
ecclesiastical one; this may in part have been due to his pronounced
speech impediment, which inhibited him from either lecturing or
preaching. Eventually, through the intercession of his acquaintance,
Immanuel Kant, he found employment as a low-level civil servant working
in the tax office of Frederick the Great; a ruler Hamann in fact
despised. Nevertheless his principal activity was as an editor and a
writer; he was considered one of the most widely-read scholars of his
time (greatly aided by his fluency in many languages), as well as a
notorious author. During this time, despite his committed Christianity,
he lived with a woman whom he never married but to whom he remained
devoted and faithful, having four children on whom he doted, and who
occasionally feature in his writings (principally as unruly
distractions to the author's scholarship).
At the end of his life he accepted an invitation to Münster
from one of his admirers, Princess Gallitzin. He died in Münster
in 1788.
Hamann had a profound influence on the German ‘Storm and
Stress’ movement, and on other contemporaries such as Herder and
Jacobi; he impressed Hegel and Goethe (who called him the brightest
head of his time) and was a major influence on Kierkegaard. His
influence continued on twentieth century German thinkers, particularly
those interested in language. His popularity has increased dramatically
in the last few decades amongst philosophers, theologians, and German
studies scholars around the world.
Hamann's writings are all short; he was not given to extensive
treatises. They are also usually motivated by something very specific:
someone else's publication, or particular circumstances and events.
When responding to these, he presupposes considerable knowledge on the
part of the reader; typically his responses to the work of others
involves adoption of their terminology and style, blending into mimicry
and parody as a rhetorical and argumentative device. Moreover, woven
into these writings is an extraordinary breadth and quantity of
citations and allusions; and by no means are these all clear and
obvious. Thus, when he chooses, his essays are a tapestry of
multicolored threads of the ideas, language, and imagery of thinkers,
be they ancient, biblical, or contemporary. These are woven across a
woof of a love of irony, which as ever adds a layer of interpretative
complexity.
Hamann's writings also frequently appear under the name of various
fanciful characters: Aristobolus, the Knight of the Rose-Cross, the
Sibyl, Adelgunde. It cannot be assumed that such characters faithfully
represent Hamann's own views; The opinions of Aristobolus, for example,
are a device to deconstruct and drive to absurdity a number of views
which Hamann opposes.
These factors combine to make Hamann's writings notoriously
difficult to understand and interpret. Goethe observed that when
reading Hamann, “one must completely rule out what one normally
means by understanding” [Goethe, 550]. Even if one has – or
painfully acquires, or borrows from other current scholars – the
breadth of reference to understand the source of an allusion or
citation, it is not always clear what the citation is doing there, and
what Hamann means to suggest by referring to it. He delighted in
sporting with his reader; preferring to present a balled fist and leave
it to the reader to unroll it into a flat hand (to borrow one of his
own images; cf. the end of the “Metacritique of the Purism of
Reason”, 1780).
This impenetrability has been taken by some to signify an incapacity
for clear expression on Hamann's part. Hegel remarked: “The French
have a saying: Le stile c'est l'homme meme (‘The style
is the man himself’); Hamann's writings do not have a
particular style but rather are style through and through”
[Hegel, 209]. Others, however, have pointed to the clarity and
concision of his letters, in contrast to the puzzling style he uses to
address the public. They suggest that Hamann's challenging style forms
are an important part of Hamann's hermeneutics and his understanding
of the relationship between the writer and reader: two halves of a
whole who must relate themselves to one another and unite for a common
goal (“Reader and Critic”, 1762). The reader cannot be
passive and must work to reconstruct Hamann's meaning. As Hamann
observed, “A writer who is in a hurry to be understood today or
tomorrow runs the danger of being misunderstood the day after
tomorrow.”
Consequently, Hamann is highly susceptible to misinterpretation. For
example, one can find in recent English-language treatments the
understanding of Hamann as an ‘irrationalist’, and one who
simply opposed the Enlightenment with all his might; this however is
not supported by the majority of Hamann scholars and is seen as a
failure to understand the complexity of his thinking.
His principal writings include: Biblische Betrachtungen
[Biblical Reflections], Gedanken über meinen Lebenslauf
[Thoughts on the Course of my Life], Brocken [Fragments],
Sokratische Denkwürdigkeiten [Socratic Memorabilia],
Wolken [Clouds], Kreuzzüge des Philologen
[Crusades of the Philologian], a collection of essays including
Aesthetica in Nuce, Versuch über eine akademische Frage
[Essay on an academic question], and Kleeblatt Hellenistischer
Briefe [Cloverleaf of Hellenistic Letters]; Schriftsteller und
Kunstrichter [Author and Critic], Leser und Kunstrichter
[Reader and Critic], Fünf Hirtenbriefe [Five Pastoral
Letters], Des Ritters von Rosencreuz letzte Willensmeynung
über den göttlichen und menschlichen Urprung der Sprache
[The Knight of the Rose-Cross' Last Will and Testament on the divine
and human origin of language], Philologische Einfälle und
Zweifel [Philological Ideas and Doubts], Hierophantische
Briefe [Hierophantic Letters], Versuch einer Sibylle über
die Ehe [Essay of a Sibyl on Marriage], Konxompax, Metakritik
über den Purismum der Vernunft [Metacritique of the Purism of
Reason], Golgotha und Scheblimini [Golgotha and Scheblimini],
Fliegender Brief [Flying Letter].
At the end of his life, Hamann chose to designate his authorship as
“Metacritique”, a word he coined for his engagement with
Kant's Critique of Pure Reason. Instead of creating a
systematic theology, or an epistemology, he seems to have seen his
work as one that examines the foundations and nature of philosophical
and theological critique itself. Rather like the late Wittgenstein,
his work was deconstructive; he belongs in the camp of philosophers
whom Richard Rorty has described as “edifying and
therapeutic” rather than “constructive and
systematic” (Rorty, 5–6). He brings to any issue in philosophy
not a constructive account, but an approach, a set of convictions,
something akin to ethical principles.  He anticipated Rorty's emphasis
on the curative aspects of this task; at the end of his life, he
wanted his collected works to be published under the title
“Curative Baths” (“Saalbadereyen”
— a reference to healing practices of the time and an allusion
to his father's profession.)  Each volume was to be called a
‘Tub’. This project was sadly never realized, not even
under a more conventional title.
One abiding characteristic of Hamann's many responses to the
philosophy of his time, therefore, is this ‘metacritical’
instinct: not to construct a rival account, but to go for the jugular;
not to set up a rival critique, but to insist that critique itself must
be subject to meta-critique, which concerns itself with the issues that
must be attended to in relation to the act of philosophical reflection
itself. It consists of attention to the fundamental stance or position
on issues or insights that must underlie any work on philosophy or
theology. According to Hamann, often “the difficulties lie in
womb of the concepts” (N III, 31, 21). Hamann's writing therefore
is not so much ‘unsystematic’ as is sometimes said, but
‘presystematic’. He addresses issues that must be
recognized in any self-critical reflection, matters that must be
presuppositions for any system. Thus one of the most salient features
of his “Metacritique of the Purism of Reason”, his
unpublished response to Kant's Critique of Pure Reason, was to
focus on the question of language. Through a tissue of imagery, he
suggests that a proper view of language implies that the alleged
‘purity’ of a priori reason is untenable.
These metacritical issues, for Hamann, principally include language,
knowledge, and the nature of the human person. Hamann also, most
urgently and most controversially (then as now), did not believe that
any of these issues can be answered outside a theological perspective;
that is, without reference to God as humanity's creator and dialogue
partner.
A second feature of Hamann's approach is a tendency which Goethe saw
as holism. This is perhaps not the best way to describe Hamann's
insight, as Hamann characteristically emphasised the brokenness of
human experience, and fragmentariness of human knowledge: “Gaps
and lacks … is the highest and deepest knowledge of human
nature, through which we must climb our way up to the ideal —
ideas and doubts — the summum bonum of our
reason” (ZH 3, 34:33–35). Hamann essentially disliked attempts
to isolate the phenomenon under consideration from other aspects with
which he felt it to be intimately connected; this precludes a deep and
true understanding of our existence. Taken as far as he did, this
means that philosophy of language must include a discussion of God,
and a discussion of God must make reference to sexuality and vice
versa.
Thus in “Essay of a Sibyl on Marriage”, which he takes
as an opportunity to write about sex, a proper understanding of human
sexuality and erotic enjoyment cannot be understood without seeing
humanity as the creature of God, made in God's image. He plays with the
Christian idea of God as a Trinity to depict a trinity of woman-man-God
in the moment of lovemaking; and reworks the account of the creation of
Adam in Genesis to describe the act of coitus itself. The woman on
perceiving her lover in his excitement sees ‘that rib’ and
cries out in enthusiastic appropriation, ‘That is bone of my bone
and flesh of my flesh!’ The man then ‘fills the hole of the
place with flesh’ (as Genesis describes God doing with Adam after
the creation of Eve). In doing so the lover also acknowledges that the
origin of a man is in woman's body: the ‘Sibyl’ describes
this moment of lovemaking as “he entered in whence he once came
forth.” Indeed, as Christ was born of a woman, the salvation of
humanity proceeds from a woman's sexual body; the vagina is also
described as the place that the Saviour came forth as the body's healer
(the German language permits Hamann here to pun on ‘healer’
and ‘saviour’). This inclination to combine topics more
often kept separate (such as ‘the concept of God’ and
‘having sex’) is salient throughout his work.
Hamann's tool for conceiving the interrelation of these dimensions
of human life increasingly was the Principle of the Union of Opposites.
He writes approvingly of this principle to his friends; particularly
after his encounter with Kant's new epistemology, claiming to value it
more than the principles of contradiction and of sufficient reason, and
indeed more than the whole Kantian Critique (ZH 5, 327:12ff; ZH 4,
462:7–8). Contradictions and apparent oppositions fill our
experience:
Far from being a pre-condition for truth, the absence of
contradiction is in Hamann's eyes a pre-condition for dogmatism.
Knowledge must not proceed on the basis of unanimity and the absence of
contradiction, but must proceed through the dialogue and relation of
these different voices. (Hamann does not think in terms of Hegel's
later dialectical synthesis.) When Hamann speaks of
‘opposition’ and contradictions, however, he does so in an
ironic tone; for it is clearly his conviction that there is a
fundamental unity in things, and the oppositions and contradictions
that we perceive are chiefly of our own making. He insists that his
perception is ‘without Manichaeism’ (ZH 5, 327:16–17). Body
and mind, senses and reason, reason and passion are not truly opposed.
These are contrasting elements of the same unified — unified but
not homogenous — reality. Hamann tries to steer a course between
Scylla and Charybdis: between the dogmatic, even tyrannical
extermination of opposition and contradiction; and the elimination of
contradiction through a false synthesis or fusion achieved by an
apparent acceptance of antithetical realities.
The Principle of the Union of Opposites as a tactical tool,
therefore, does not imply that Hamann sees the world in terms of
divisions and dualism. It is his strategy for coping with the schematic
antitheses abundant in Enlightenment philosophy.
Hamann used the notion of ‘Prosopopoeia’, or
personification, as an image of what can happen in philosophical
reflection. In a medieval morality or mystery play, the experience of
being chaste or being lustful is transformed from a way of acting or
feeling into a dramatic character who then speaks and acts as a
personification of that quality. So too in philosophy, Hamann suggests.
The philosopher distinguishes differing aspects in the phenomenon under
scrutiny and exaggerates their difference. These aspects are ennobled
into faculties, and through ‘prosopopoeia’ are hypostasized
into entities. Thus in the act of reflecting on something,
‘reasoning’ is distinguished from ‘feeling’,
and turned from a verb or gerund into a noun —
‘reason’—which is then named as a constituent of our
being. Reason then becomes a thing to which we can ascribe properties.
(This shows perhaps a streak bordering on nominalism in Hamann.)
The best example of this, and of Hamann's response, is his treatment
of the word ‘reason’. Since he handles it with a kind of
skepticism or even distaste, he is often called an
‘irrationalist’. It is clear however that Hamann puts a
high value on certain ways of being reasonable and of reasoning
activity. “Without language we would have no reason,
without reason no religion, and without these three essential aspects
of our nature, neither mind [Geist] nor bond of
society” (N III, 231, 10–12).
Hamann's treatment of reason instead is a deconstruction, both of
the prosopopoeic use of the word and the Enlightenment valuation of it.
There is no such thing as reason — there is only reasoning.
Reasoning, as something we do, is as fallible as we are, and as such is
subject to our position in history, or own personality, or the
circumstances of the moment. ‘It’ is therefore not a
universal, healthy and infallible ‘faculty’ as Hamann's
Enlightenment contemporaries often maintained:
Hamann is sometimes portrayed simply as an opponent of “the
Enlightenment”. This presupposes of course that “the
Enlightenment” constitutes a unified stance on a number of
philosophical issues, an assumption which is questionable. The
majority of Hamann scholars today see his position in a more complex
way. Hamann opposed many of the popular convictions of his
time. However, Hamann fought his contemporaries on many fronts;
therefore there were often areas of considerable agreement with some
of his opponents. One example would be the way that he deployed Hume
as a weapon against Enlightenment rationalism, not least against Kant
(although Hamann was the one who introduced Kant to Hume's writings in
the first place). Although Hamann, as a Christian, had profound
disagreements with Hume's thought in its atheistic aspects,
nevertheless he used Humean skepticism in his own deconstructive
writings. Hume's doubts about the reliability and self-sufficiency of
reason were grist to Hamann's mill. Hume's insistence that
“belief” underlies much of our thinking and reasoning was
adopted and deployed by Hamann, often with a linguistic sleight of
hand. By using the word “Glaube” (which in German
includes both “belief” in an epistemic sense and
“faith” in a religious sense), Hamann could assert that
“faith”, not rational grounds, underlies his
contemporaries' high valuation of reason. Thus even the
enthusiastic advocates of impartiality and “reason”, who
are also skeptics about “blind faith”, have ultimately
only faith as the ground for their convictions.
Judging from letters late in his life, Hamann preferred to be seen as
a “metacritic” of the Enlightenment. His dissatisfactions
with what he viewed as a certain Enlightenment program began early,
following his conversion to Christianity; and his challenge could be
seen not as a blunt, unreasoning opposition to rationality, but as a
deeper (and more disruptive) challenge to what rationality and
Enlightenment actually consist in. Often these are seen in his
resonses to his friend Immanuel Kant. An early challenge came in his
first public essay, “Socratic Memorabilia” (1759), which
was dedicated to Kant and their mutual friend Christoph Berens. Kant
and Berens had sought to cast him as a campaigner on behalf of the
Enlightenment. In the essay he portrays Socrates, the hero of the
Enlightenment, as a Christ-figure rather than a champion of secular
reason. Hamann's abreaction to what he viewed as a misguided
deification and purification of reason reaches a climax in 1784, in
his unpublished response to Kant — “Metacritique of the
Purism of Reason” (1984) and in an inflamed private letter to
Christian Jacob Kraus in the same year. This letter takes issue with
Kant's famous essay “An Answer to the Question: What is
Enlightenment?” (1984). Here he argues that what Kant describes
as the intellectual “self-incurred minority” (minority in
the sense of being a minor, immaturity, tutelage) of the general
public, an (alleged) need to be told what to think, is not
self-imposed. Rather, it is imposed, Hamann suggests, on the one hand
by a politically authoritarian regime hostile to dissent and political
free-thinking, while encouraging religious free-thinking; and on the
other hand by professional experts: the “prattle and reasoning
of those emancipated immature ones, who set themselves up as
guardians”. “True enlightenment,” Hamann concludes
sarcastically, “consists in an emergence of the immature person
from a supremely self-incurred guardianship.” 
Language is one of Hamann's most abiding philosophical concerns.
From the beginning of his work, Hamann championed the priority which
expression and communication, passion and symbol possess over
abstraction, analysis and logic in matters of language. Neither logic
nor even representation (in Rorty's sense) possesses the rights of the
first-born. Representation is secondary and derivative rather than the
whole function of language. Symbolism, imagery, metaphor have primacy;
“Poetry is the mother-tongue of the human race” (N II,
197). To think that language is essentially a passive system of signs
for communicating thoughts is to deal a deathblow to true language.
For all Hamann's emphasis in his earlier writings on passion and
emotion, he does not equate language with emotional expression. This
became clear in his engagement with the writing of his younger friend
Herder on the origin of language. Language has a mediating relationship
between our reflection, one another, and our world; and as it is not
simply the cries of emotion of an animal, so too it is not a smothering
curtain between us and the rest of reality. Language also has a
mediating role between God and us. Hamann's answer to a debate of his
time, the origin of language — divine or human?—is that its
origin is found in the relationship between God and humanity. Typically
he has the ‘Knight of the Rose-Cross’ express this in the
form of a ‘myth’, rather than attempting to work out such a
claim logically and systematically. Rewriting the story of the Garden
of Eden, he describes this paradise as:
This makes the origin of language as easy and natural as child's
play.
By the end of his life, because of his engagement with Kant, the
most urgent question among the relationships that constitute language
is the relationship of language to thinking or ‘reason’. In
his view, the central question of Kant's first Critique, the
very possibility of a priori knowledge and of pure reason,
depends on the nature of language. In a passage full of subtle
allusions to Kantian passages and terms, he writes:
Language is forced to take part in the ‘purification of
philosophy’, as he describes it in his Metacritique of Kant: the
attempt to expunge experience and tradition from rational reflection.
Language itself is the final victim in this threefold
‘purification’. It is for this reason however that language
can constitute the cure for philosophy. Language is the embodiment of
experience and tradition; as long as the ability to think rests on
language, neither ‘reason’ nor ‘philosophy’ can
be pure of the empirical, of experience, and of the experience of the
others to whom we relate. It itself, for Hamann, embodies a relation:
it itself is a ‘union of opposites’, of the aesthetic and
the logical, the bodily and the intellectual; it unites the divisions
Kant's Critique creates.
For Hamann, in contrast to Kant, the question is therefore not so
much ‘what is reason?’ as ‘what is language?’,
as he writes in a letter. This is the ground of the paralogisms and
antinomies that Kant raises in his Critique. Sharing Hume's empiricism
and Berkeley's suspicion of universals and abstract terms, he
concludes: “Hence it happens that one takes words for
concepts, and concepts for the things
themselves” (ZH 5, 264:34–265:1).  Language then has a
fundamental role to play in unmasking the philosopher's tendency to
‘prosopopoeia’. The relation of language to reason he
certainly did not feel had solved, however, as he wrote to a
friend:
For Hamann, knowledge is inseparable from self-knowledge, and
self-knowledge inseparable from knowledge of the other. We are visible,
as in a mirror, in each other; “God and my neighbor are therefore
a part of my self-knowledge, my self-love” (N I, 302:16-23). He
writes in a letter: “Self knowledge begins with the neighbor, the
mirror, and just the same with true self-love; that goes from the
mirror to the matter” (ZH 6, 281:16–17). Sometimes this
exploration of self-knowledge through interpersonal intimacy takes a
sexual form, as in the Sibyl's Essay on Marriage (already
discussed).
All forms of knowledge, of learning and development even of the most
natural functions, require the help of another. (The ‘Knight of
the Rose Cross’, while jesting with Hume, tells us ironically
that even eating and drinking, and indeed excretion, are not
instinctual or innate but require teaching.) (N III, 28:26–28; N III,
29:7–10) This is conceived not only in such immediately interpersonal
ways, but also more widely in the context of the community. The
indispensability of ‘the other’ for knowledge is also the
reason that Hamann gives the importance he does to tradition in the
formation of knowledge. “Our reason arises, at the very least,
from this twofold lesson of sensuous revelations and human
testimonies” (N III 29:28–30). Years before Kant's first
Critique, Hamann attempts to relate the senses and the
understanding and their roles in knowledge, using a characteristically
concrete metaphor: the senses are like the stomach, the understanding
like blood vessels. Not only do the blood vessels need the stomach to
receive the nourishment that they distribute; the stomach also needs
the blood vessels to function. This insistence on the mutual dependency
and interrelation of sense experience and understanding (as opposed to
many Enlightenment views that plumped for either reason or the senses
as the dominant party) was refined in his engagement with Kant's
critique. Throughout his life, he was neither materialist, purely
empiricist or positivist, nor idealist, rationalist or intellectualist
in his epistemology. Rather, he is firmly against dividing knowledge or
ways of knowing into different kinds. “The philosophers have
always given truth a bill of divorce, by separating what nature has
joined together and vice versa” (N III, 40: 3–5). With Kant's
critique, the problem becomes still more urgent; Kant's treatment of
the issue is a “violent, unwarranted, obstinate divorce of what
nature has joined together”. Revising Kant's metaphor of
sensibility and understanding as two stems of human knowledge, he
suggests we see knowledge as a single stem with two roots. Thus he
rejects the division of what can be known a priori from what
can be known a posteriori, and many of the consequences of such a
stance. Here again he reaches for the ‘Principle of the Union of
Opposites’ in his deployment of imagery to suggest a different
approach. The relation of the senses and understanding is a
‘hypostatic union’, a ‘communicatio
idiomatum’ (phrases borrowed from Christian theological
discussion of how the two natures of divine and human are united in
Christ). This mysterious union can only be revealed and understood by
‘ordinary language’. (In suggesting that the problems in
philosophy can be cured by attending to ‘ordinary
language’, he clearly anticipates the late Wittgenstein).
In this engagement with Kant, Hamann returns and deepens the lesson
he had learnt much earlier in his reading of Hume: that belief or faith
is an essential precursor for knowledge. Everything is dependent or
grounded on faith; there is no privileged position for any kind or form
of knowledge (a priori, scientific, etc.) In Hamann's epistemology, the
hard division between ‘knowledge’ and ‘belief’
or ‘faith’ becomes eroded. Both knowledge and faith rest on
a foundation of trust; neither rest on a foundation of indubitability.
“Every philosophy consists of certain and uncertain knowledge, of
idealism and realism, of sensuousness and deductions. Why should only
the uncertain be called belief? What then are—rational
grounds?” (ZH 7, 165:33–37) ‘Sensuousness’
translates Sinnlichkeit (Kant's ‘sensibility’).
Belief and reason both need each other; idealism and realism are a
fantasized opposition, of which the authentic use of reason knows
nothing. The unity that lies in the nature of things should lie at the
foundation of all our concepts and reflection (ZH 7, 165:7–17).
From his ‘debut’ work, Socratic Memorabilia,
Hamann began to promulgate a particular view of what it means to
understand something. From the beginning of that essay he emphasized
the importance of passion and commitment in interpretation; undermining
the more conventional assumption that objectivity and detachment are
prerequisites of philosophical reflection and understanding. In
Aesthetica in Nuce, wearing the authorial mask of the
‘kabbalistic philologian’, he provocatively maintained that
initiation into orgies were necessary before the interpreter could
safely begin the hermeneutical act. The idea that one must rid oneself
of presuppositions, prejudices, and predilections in order to do
justice to the subject matter he characterizes as ‘monastic
rules’—i.e. an excessive asceticism and abstinence. He goes
so far as to compare such individuals to self-castrating eunuchs (N
II, 207:10–20).
Hamann's skepticism about neutrality and objectivity does not make
him a ‘subjectivist’, however. The stance and disposition
of the interpreter is integral, helpful, indeed, indispensable and must
be acknowledged; but limitless subjectivity arouses Hamann's scorn.
Those who ‘flood the text’ with glosses and marginalia,
“dreaming up one's own inspiration and interpretation,”
Hamann likens to the blind leading the blind (N II, 208:3ff).
The constraints which Hamann places on the interpreter's
subjectivity are not those usually advocated, therefore: an avoidance
of prejudice and pre-conceptions; an amnesia for one's own history,
tradition and culture; an obedience to exegetical rules. The first
restraint on subjective distortion is the interpreter's own common
sense; the last is the reaction of the text itself: “what are you
trying to make of me?” The interpreter's freedom is inextricable
from the interpreter's respect and responsibility, in Hamann's
view.
The responsible interpreter is conscious of standing within
something larger than oneself: a tradition. The wise interpreter is a
kabbalist, one who interprets an ancient text, and a
rhapsodist—the original meaning of the latter being one who
stitches something together from pre-existing materials. (In Ancient
Greece the ‘rhapsodist’ was one who recited poems cobbled
together from prior sources, usually bits of Homer.) In creating
interpretations, the interpreter enjoys the freedom to create anew, as
Hamann created his characteristic prose from pre-existing texts, while
creating a new meaningful piece. Hamann's use of this genre itself
makes the point: the demand that only one meaning may exist for a text
arises from an impoverished notion of meaning and creativity; one that
misunderstands the nature of composition and the nature of
interpretation alike.
Hamann's rejected both exegetical ‘materialism’ and
‘idealism’, as he called them — literalism and
excessive flights of fancy. In thus insisting on the integrity of
‘the letter and the spirit’, he means to preserve
the place of author, text and reader alike. Both meaning and
interpretation rest in a three-way relationship.
For Hamann, the depth and meaning of a text go beyond the author's
own contribution, and are the responsibility of the interpreter:
“Few authors understand themselves, and a proper reader must not
only understand his author but also be able to see beyond
him” (ZH 6, 22:10–12). And yet this recognition that the
author's opinions and intentions do not exhaust the possibilities of
the text does not annihilate the place of the author. At the very
least, the ‘beyond’ of the text includes a territory which,
if unknown to the author, is not unrelated: that is, the author's own
unconscious workings and meanings. It is not accidental that Hamann
observes not that few authors understand their own
text, but that few authors understand themselves.
This suggests a picture of creation in which more of the author is
expressed in a text and entrusted to the interpreter than the author's
conscious intentions and opinions. This in turn suggests a picture of
interpretation—of “understanding one's hero” as
Hamann put it when writing about Socrates—in which greater
sensitivity, insight, and fidelity is demanded of the interpreter than
would otherwise be the case. Above all, the interpreter must have the
courage to be a kabbalist; that is, to say more than the text does, not
to express oneself but to say what the author left unsaid. The fruits
of such faithful creativity may be impossible to ‘justify’
or ‘verify’ to the demands of the objectivist, however.
Fundamentally, for Hamann hermeneutics consists in perceiving the
underlying relationship beneath the phenomenon in question; at the
least, of course, the relationship between the author and the
interpreter which requires such fidelity. Given Hamann's religious
views, this at once introduces a theological dimension. Ultimately,
this means that for Hamann proper hermeneutics rests on one thing:
perceiving God revealed within the phenomenon, whether that be nature
or history (cf. Socratic Memorabilia and Aesthetica in
Nuce for examples). Even the interpretation of ourselves is a
revelation of God; a recognition of whose image solves all the most
complicated knots and riddles of our nature (N II, 206:32–207:2;
198:3–5).
The topics examined so far all have their anthropological
implications. Hamann's critique of the socio-political implications of
Kant's vision of ‘enlightenment’ rests on a conviction
about our social and political destiny. Hamann sees our socio-political
vocation as consisting firstly in ‘criticism’ (or
‘critique’)—recognizing and appropriating, or hating
and rejecting, the true vs. the false, good vs. evil, beautiful vs.
ugly; and secondly in ‘politics’, which is increasing or
reducing them. This is not the prerogative of the ruler; every one is
at once their own ‘king’, their own
‘legislator’; but also the ‘first-born of their
subjects’. It is our “republican privilege” to
contribute to this destiny, “the critical and magisterial office
of a political animal” (N III, 38–39).
The concepts of knowledge and language and their many facets also
imply a particular anthropology: the diversity yet integration of the
human being. For Hamann, the truest picture of humanity is of diversity
in unity; a number of different, often contrasting aspects and features
together composing the human person. Hamann consequently did not
confine his attention to epistemology and reason when considering what
human beings are, and passion, the thirst for vengeance, and sexual
ecstasy form a part of his picture as well. (In response to the
Enlightenment aesthetic of art as the imitation of ‘beautiful
nature’, Hamann's ironic observation was: “The thirst for
vengeance was the beautiful nature which Homer imitated” (ZH 2,
157:12).)
The theme of interdependence between human beings, which was
emphasized in his epistemology, also has its roots in his understanding
of what it is to be human. We are not self-sufficient; but for Hamann,
even our lacks and failings have a positive thrust, this signifier of
dependency making us all the more suited for the enjoyment of nature
and one another.
If there is a fundamental key to his thinking on humanity, it is the
idea that the human being is the image of God. This is admittedly more
theological than philosophical, but is essential for understanding
Hamann's philosophical anthropology. Hamann's treatment of this
perennial theme is hardly conventional in the history of Christian
thinking. While the experience of sinfulness and wickedness is a
powerful theme, particularly in his earlier, post-conversion writing,
the fundamental thrust of his thinking is the easy exchange between the
human and the divine. In this exchange, language is “the sign,
symbol and pledge of a new, mysterious, inexpressible but all the more
intimate union, participation and community of divine energies and
ideas” (N III, 32:21–24). Despite his reputation for being an
irrationalist, reasoning too relates us to God; God, nature and reason
are described as having the same relation as light, the eye and what we
see, or as author, text and reader (ZH 5, 272:14–16).
One must also remember that Hamann confessed that he could not
conceive of a Creative Spirit without genitalia; indeed, he was quite
happy to assert that the genitals are the unique bond between creature
and Creator. So sexuality in divine-human relations has two aspects.
First, as paradigm of creativity, it is the way in which our
God-likeness can most strikingly be seen. Secondly, as the point of the
most profound unity, it is the locus for our union both with another
human being and with the divine. Provocatively, Hamann sees original
sin and its rebellion as embodied not in sexuality, but in reason.
Overweening reason is our attempt to be like God; meanwhile, prudery is
the rejection of God's image, while trying to be like God in the wrong
sense (bodilessness). (See Essay of a Sibyl on Marriage and Konxompax.)
One should therefore distinguish ‘likeness to God’ from
‘being equal to God’. In the Sibyl's essay, the male
version of grasping at equality with God (cf. Phil. 2:6) is the attempt
to be self-sufficient, to be the God of monotheism: the sole ruler, who
possesses self-existence. Instead, the encounter with the opposite sex
should engender in the man an attitude of profound respect towards the
woman's body, as the source of his own existence, from his mother. As
the source of his own joy, lovemaking also is an acknowledgement of his
own dependence, his lack of self-sufficiency and autonomy. But this
dependence on another paradoxically is the Godlikeness of the Creator,
the father, the one who humbles himself in self-giving (a favourite
Hamannian theme in his discussion of God). Meanwhile, the woman's
temptation is to an artificial innocence; a secret envy of God's
incorporeality and impassibility. The defence of one's virginity is
another cryptic attempt at self-sufficiency. Instead, the woman must
brave the ‘tongues of fire’ in a ‘sacrifical offering
of innocence’, in order to realize her Godlikeness; which is not
to be found in bodilessness and the absence of passion, but in
passionate creativity; in the willingness to be incarnate. Thus, if
human beings are in the image of God, it is a trinitarian image of God,
a mutual relation of love of ‘Father’, ‘Son’
and ‘Spirit’; found in creating, in saving, and in tongues
of fire.