Details about the life of John Cook Wilson, or ‘Cook
Wilson’ as he is commonly called, may be found in a memoir
published in 1926 by his pupil A. S. L. Farquharson, in his edition of
Cook Wilson’s posthumous writings entitled Statement and Inference
with other Philosophical Papers, hereafter: SI (SI,
xii–lxiv). He was born in Nottingham on June 6, 1849, the son of
a Methodist minister. Educated at Derby Grammar School, he went up to
Balliol College in 1868, elected on an exhibition set up by Benjamin
Jowett for students from less privileged schools. At Balliol, Cook
Wilson read classics and mathematics but he also studied philosophy
with Jowett and T. H. Green, who steered him towards Kant and idealism
(SI, 880), along with other students from his generation, such as
Bernard Bosanquet, F. H. Bradley, Richard Lewis Nettleship, and
William Wallace. Cook Wilson even went to Göttingen in
1873–74 to attend lectures by H. R. Lotze (SI, xxvii), whose
portrait he kept in his study. However, he was to write late in his
life that “from the first I would not commit myself even to the
most attractive form of idealism, tho’ greatly attracted by it”
(SI, 815).  Nevertheless, according to Prichard, his move away from
idealism did not fully take place until the early 1900s (Prichard
1919, 307–310).  Friedrich Ueberweg’s System of Logic and
History of Logical Doctrines (Ueberweg 1871) also figures in Cook
Wilson’s intellectual background, according to Farquharson, as an
early ‘realist’ influence (SI, 880). Although Cook
Wilson’s mature philosophy is arguably a continuation of sorts of the
Scottish School of Hutcheson and Reid, there are hardly any references
to these authors in his writings (see sections 5 and 8, and (Marion
2009) for an overview of the 19th-century background to Cook
Wilson).
Cook Wilson
was first elected fellow of Oriel College in 1873 and, in 1889, he
succeeded Thomas Fowler as Wykeham Professor of Logic, New College.
Bernard Bosanquet, Thomas Case, and John Venn had been among his
rivals. He finally moved to New College in 1901, where he remained
until his death from pernicious anemia, on 11 August 1915. He lived
the uneventful life of an Oxford don. A Liberal in his convictions (SI,
xxix), he did not get involved into politics. His most cherished
extra-curricular activity appears to have been the development of
tactics for military bicycle units. In his lifetime, he received
numerous awards and honours, e.g., becoming fellow of the British
Academy in 1907. While in Germany, he had met Charlotte Schneider, who
was to become his wife in 1876. They had a son, who emigrated to South
Africa.
Cook Wilson published little. Setting apart publications on military
cycling and other incidental writings, the bulk of his publications
were in his chosen fields of study, classics and mathematics. In the
latter field, he published a strange treatise that arose out of his
failed attempt at proving the four-colour theorem, On the
Traversing of Geometrical Figures (TGF). It had virtually no
echo; Farquharson quoted the mathematician E. W. Hobson explaining
that Cook Wilson “hardly gave sufficient time and thought to the
subject to make himself really conversant with the modern aspects of
the underlying problems” (SI, xxxviii). Otherwise, his
mathematical endeavours were largely wasted on trying to prove the
inconsistency of non-Euclidean geometries, because of his claim that
he ‘knows’ or has ‘apprehended’ the truth of
Euclid’s axiom of the parallels (see section 4). Cook Wilson’s work on
probability was more significant. He published two short papers on
probability (IP, PBT), where he gave what amounts, according to Ysidro
Edgeworth (Edgeworth 1911, § 13, n.10), to a new proof of the
discrete Bayes’ formula, and his philosophical views on probability
(SI, §§322–6) were a fundamental influence on William
Kneale’s Probability and Induction (Kneale 1949).
In Ancient philosophy, Cook
Wilson contributed regularly to scholarly journals such as
Classical Review, Classical Quarterly,
Transactions of the Oxford Philological Society, and
Philologische Rundschau, and he published studies on the
structure of seventh book of Aristotle’s Nicomachean Ethics
(AS) and on Plato’s Timaeus (IPT). His main claim
concerning Nicomachean Ethics was that the seventh book
contained traces of three versions probably written by some
Peripatetic later than Eudemus —but in a postscript to the
revised version (1912), he claimed that the variants were probably
different drafts written by Aristotle himself—, while his
pamphlet on the Timaeus was mainly polemical, painstakingly
detailing R. D. Archer-Hind’s ‘obligations’, in his 1888
edition of the Timaeus, to earlier authors, J. G. Stallbaum more than any other. Cook
Wilson is mainly remembered today for two small contributions to Plato
scholarship: first, for his interpretation, in ‘On the Platonist
Doctrine of the assumbletoi arithmoi’ (OPD), of Plato’s
doctrine of ‘unaddible numbers’, presented
in Nicomachean Ethics I, vi and Metaphysics M, vi
which he interpreted as meaning that numbers are universals, e.g.,
that ‘3’ stands for ‘3-ness’ as apprehended in
any particular group of 3, and therefore not magnitudes that could be
added, so that arithmetic is only about particulars (OPD, 249–250; SI,
350). One should note Cook Wilson’s peculiar form of argument, as he
claims that the ordinary language locution ‘The number 3’
confirms his view. (See the next section for the role of ordinary
language in his philosophy.) This interpretation was, as was to be
expected, influential within Oxford. For example, see (Joseph 148, 33), but there was also a debate over his objections to
the intermediate entities of Metaphysics A, vi, 987b
(OPD, 258) in Ross 1924 (liii–lvii) and Hardie 1936 (chap. vi). Cook Wilson’s view
remains controversial, although it was praised more recently by
Reginald Allen as the ‘true view of Plato’s
arithmetic’(Allen 1983, 231-233). As will be discussed in
section 7, Cook Wilson also thought erroneously that he could use this
view to criticize modern definitions of numbers.
Secondly, Cook Wilson provided in ‘On the Geometrical Problem in
Plato’s Meno, 86e sqq.’ (GPP) a key addition to
S. H. Butcher’s clarification of the notoriously obscure geometrical
illustration of Meno 86e-87b, showing that Plato did not
intend to offer an actual solution to the problem of the inscription
of an area as a triangle within a circle, but rather, alluding to the
method of analysis, to determine the possibility of its solution. (See
(Wolfsdorf 2008, 164–169); a similar explanation of that passage
was provided at the time in (Heath 1921, 298–303) and (Farquharson
1923); the more recent and authoritative (Knorr 1986, 71–74) and
(Menn 2002, 209–214) defend this interpretation without mention
of Cook Wilson.) Finally, one can clearly discern Cook Wilson’s views
on knowledge (see section 4) in H. W. B. Joseph’s Knowledge and
the Good in Plato’s Republic (Joseph 1948) and R. C. Cross and
A. D. Woozley, Plato’s Republic. A Philosophical Commentary
(Cross & Woozley 1964, chap. 8). Apart from these, Cook Wilson’s
impact seems to have been limited to minor points of philology. (For
examples of these, see the references to his critical comments on
Apelt’s edition of De Melisso Xenophane Gorgia (APT) in
(Kerferd 1955), the references to his pamphlet on the Timaeus
in A. E. Taylor’s and F. M. Cornford’s own commentaries of that
dialogue, or the critical discussion of Cook Wilson’s views in Sir
David Ross’ edition of Aristotle’s Prior and Posterior
Analytics (Ross 1949, 496–497).)
Cook Wilson published very little else in philosophy: his inaugural
lecture On an Evolutionist Theory of the Axioms (ETA) and a
very short piece in Mind as part of a debate with Lewis
Carroll on the ‘Barber-Shop paradox’. This paradox, not to
be confused with the ‘Barber’s paradox’, is usually
attributed to Carroll, who first published about it (Carroll 1894),
but it should really be attributed to Cook Wilson. (See CLP for his
attempt at a solution, Moktefi 2007 for issues concerning
attribution, and Marion & Moktefi 2014 for a discussion of their
respective views on symbolic logic.) See also section 7 for Cook
Wilson’s reaction to Carroll’s paradox of inference (Carroll
1895).)
Cook Wilson’s
reluctance to publish was partly caused by the fact that he constantly
kept revising his views and reached a more or less stable viewpoint
only late in life. One of his better-known sayings is that “the
(printed) letter killeth, and it is extraordinary how it will prevent
the acutest from exercising their wonted clearness of vision”
(SI, 872)—see also Collingwood (2013, 19–20). His argument was
that authors that have committed to print their views on a given issue
would more often than not, should their views prove to be erroneous,
feel obliged to defend them and to engage in pointless rhetorical
exchanges instead of seeing immediately the validity of arguments
against them. As a result, Cook Wilson resorted throughout his career
to the printing for private circulation of pamphlets, known as
Dictata, which he began revising for publication shortly
before he died in 1915. Only 11 years later did the two volumes of
Statement and Inference appear, put together by Farquharson
from his lecture notes and Dictata along with some letters.
These volumes are subdivided in five parts and 582 sections. Their
structure betrays their origin in Cook Wilson’s lectures in logic and
in the theory of knowledge; also interspersed are texts that originate
from his study and lectures on Plato and Aristotle.
As the
chronological table of the various sections shows (SI, 888–9), the
texts thus assembled were written at different dates and, in light of
Cook Wilson’s frequent change of mind (including his move away
from idealism), they express views that are at times almost
contradictory. This makes any study of his philosophy particularly
difficult, and more often than not accounts of his views are influenced
by those, equally important, of his pupil H. A. Prichard.
Since he published
so little, it is therefore mainly through teaching and personal contact that
Cook Wilson made a significant impact on Oxford philosophy. He might
very well have been at the origin of the peculiar tutorials style to
which generations of Greats students were subjected. He also initiated
meetings that were to become the ‘Philosophers’ Teas’
under Prichard’s tutelage, the ‘Wee Teas’ under
Ryle’s, and the celebrated ‘Saturday Mornings’, under
Austin’s ; ‘ordinary language philosophy’ is said to
have emerged from the latter. In his obituary, H. W. B. Joseph
described Cook Wilson as being “by far the most influential
philosophical teacher in Oxford”, adding that no one “had
held a place so important” since T. H. Green (Joseph 1916b, 555).
R. G. Collingwood, who reverted to idealism later on, G.
Dawes Hicks, H. W. B. Joseph, H. A. Prichard, W. D. Ross and
C. C. J. Webb are among his better-known pupils at the turn of the
century. The volumes of Statement and Inference, which
appeared in 1926, and the teaching of Joseph and Prichard were to
influence further generations of philosophers in the 1920s and 1930s,
from G. Ryle and H. H. Price to J. L. Austin and J. O. Urmson.
Cook Wilson’s philosophy being largely forgotten for most of the
20th century, the secondary literature can be quickly
reviewed. There exist only one, rather dated, book-length commentary
of Statement and Inference, Richard Robinson’s The
Province of Logic (Robinson 1931), and, from the same period, a
handful of papers, not all of equal value, specifically discussing its
content, e.g., Foster (1931), Furlong (1941), Lloyd Beck (1931),
Robinson (1928a, 1928b). Of the more recent papers, Marion (2000)
gives an overview of Oxford Realism, Marion (2011) provides a contrast
with Austin’s and Wittgenstein’s critique of ‘sense data’,
and Kalderon & Travis (2013) provides a useful and thorough
discussion of the Oxford Realists on knowledge and perception in
relation both to Frege and to further developments in the
20th century (mainly with Austin, Hinton (1973) and
McDowell), while Beaney (2013) provides a critical review of
Collingwood’s objections to Cook Wilson and Oxford Realism in
general.
Cook Wilson believed that in philosophy, one must above all
“uncompromisingly […] to try to find out what a given
activity of thought presupposes as implicit or explicit in our
consciousness”, i.e., to “try to get at the facts of
consciousness and not let them be overlaid as is so commonly done with
preconceived theories” (SI, 328). By ‘preconceived
theories’, Cook Wilson meant the sort of systematic
philosophizing or ‘reflective thought’, as he called it,
which was prevalent in his days and that one finds in, say, the works
of Bradley and the British idealists, but also, earlier, the
empiricists. According to him, ‘reflective thought’ had two
major defects: it is based on principles that, for all we know, might
be false and, concomitantly, it is too abstract, because it is hardly
based on the consideration of particular concrete examples. Indeed, in
a passage where he criticized Bradley’s infamous infinite regress
argument against the reality of relations (Bradley 1897, 
28), Cook Wilson begins by pointing out that “throughout this
chapter there is not a single illustration, though it is of the last
importance that there should be” (SI, 692)—on the critique
of Bradley, see also Joseph (1916a, 37). As H. H. Price put it
later, for Cook Wilson and his epigones “to philosophize without
instances would be merely a waste of time” (Price 1947, 336).
This attitude was also found, on the Continent, in the
Brentano School and was to become characteristic of ‘ordinary language philosophy’.
Furthermore, Cook
Wilson thought that philosophers are most likely to introduce
distinctions of their own that do not correspond to the ‘facts of
consciousness’ and thus distort our understanding of them. He
therefore strove to uncover ‘facts of consciousness’
through an analysis of concrete examples which would be free of
philosophical jargon. This is strongly reminiscent of descriptive
psychology of the Brentano School. As a matter of fact, Gilbert Ryle,
who described himself as a “fidgetty Cook Wilsonian” (Ryle
1993, 106), but who was also one rare Oxonian who knew something
about phenomenology in the 1920s, believed Cook Wilson’s
descriptive analyses to be as good as any from Husserl (Ryle 1971, vol.
I, 176 & 203n.).
If philosophical
jargon is not to be trusted, ordinary language is a safer guide:
It is safer because distinctions found in ordinary language are
“more likely to be right than wrong” (SI,
874)—albeit not always, see, e.g., (SI, 35)—mainly because
“they are not the issue of any system, they were not invented by
any one” and they were developed “in what may be called
the natural course of thinking, under the influence of experience and
in the apprehension of particular truths” (SI,
874). Furthermore, “reflective thought tends to be too abstract,
while experience which has developed the popular distinctions recorded
in language is always in contact with the particular facts” (SI,
875). Cook Wilson, therefore, considered it “repugnant to create
a technical term out of all relation to ordinary language” (SI,
713), and he particularly disliked the tendency to unearth some
concept in Greek philosophy in order to introduce a new technical
term.
Thus, Cook Wilson
appealed to ordinary language almost every other page in Statement
and Inference. For example, he argued in support of his views on
universals (see section 6) that “ordinary language reflects
faithfully a true metaphysics of universals” (SI, 208). But he
did not merely appeal to ordinary language in order to undermine
philosophical distinctions, he did it also in a constructive way. For
example, when distinguishing between the activity of thinking and
‘what we think’, i.e., between ‘act’
and ‘content’ (SI, 63–64), he argued that this is
“likely to be right” because “it is the natural and
universal mode of expression in ordinary untechnical language, ancient
and modern” (SI, 67) and “it comes from the very way of
speaking which is natural and habitual with those who do not believe in
any form of idealism” (SI, 64).
These views were to
prove particularly influential in the case of J. L. Austin, who began
his studies at Oxford four years after the publication of Statement
and Inference. It is a common mistake to think of Wittgenstein as
having had some formative influence on Austin, as he was arguably the
least influenced by Wittgenstein of the Oxford philosophers (Hacker
1996, 172). The philosophy of G. E. Moore notwithstanding, it is
rather Cook Wilson and epigones such as Prichard that are the source of
the peculiar brand of ‘analytical philosophy’ that was to
take root in Oxford in the 1930s, known as ‘Oxford
philosophy’ or ‘ordinary language philosophy’. One
merely needs here to recall the following well-known passage from
Austin’s ‘A Plea for Excuses’, which is almost a
paraphrase of Cook Wilson:
The influence of Cook Wilson on Austin extends much further,
including on the analysis of knowledge (see section 4).
Since Cook Wilson’s philosophy was largely defined in
opposition to British Idealism, it is worth beginning with some point
of explicit disagreement. Roughly put, under the idealist view
knowledge is constituted by a coherent set of mutually supporting
beliefs, none of which are basic, while others would be derivative.
Cook Wilson did not argue directly against the coherence theory, as
Russell was famously to do (Russell 1910, 131–146), but took
instead the opposite, foundationalist stance. Surprisingly, when H. H.
Joachim published The Nature of Truth (1906), one of
Cook Wilson’s criticisms was that he was relying on a discredited
‘correspondence’ theory (SI, 809–810). His
foundationalism has this interesting particularity that he rejected the
underlying thesis that knowledge is to be defined in terms of belief,
together with one or more additional properties such as
‘justified’ and ‘true’ (see section 4). He
reasoned that, if one believes on evidence, the latter may itself be
belief, but this chain of justification ought to come to an end, and
that this end point is some non-derivative knowledge, which he called
after 1906 ‘apprehension’ (SI, 816). As he put it:
“it becomes evident that there must be apprehensions not got by
inference or reasoning” (LL, § 18).
Unfortunately, Cook Wilson did not define his key notion of
‘apprehension’ (SL, 78 n.), which appears to be at the
same time close to Aristotle’s ‘noesis’ and to
Russell’s ‘acquaintance’. Cook Wilson obviously took
his lead from Posterior Analytics but his comments are also
reminiscent of Thomas Reid, who argues in his Essays on the
Intellectual Powers of Man (Bk. II, chap. v) that perception
involves some conception of the object and the conviction of its
existence, this conviction being immediate, non-inferential, and,
following Posterior Analytics (Book II, § 19), not open
to doubt. Cook Wilson was not exactly faithful to Aristotle and Reid,
however, since he argued that apprehensions can be both perceptual and
non-perceptual (SI, 79), and that some are obtained by inference
while some are not, the latter being the material of inference (SI,
84–85). Furthermore, he argued that perceptual apprehensions should not
be confused with sensations, as the mere having of a sensation is not
yet to know what the sensation is. For this, one needs an
“originative act of consciousness” that goes beyond mere
passivity and compares it in order to apprehend its definite character.
As Cook Wilson put it: “we are really comparing but we do not
recognize that we are” (SI, 46).
In one of his
polemics against idealism, Cook Wilson’s main target was the
traditional theory of judgement that one finds, for example, in
Bradley’s Principles of Logic (Bradley 1928), where the
topic is simply divided into ‘judgement’ and
‘inference’. Cook Wilson thought it misleading to base
logic on judgement instead of proposition or statement (SI, 94), as
one is misled, he argues, by the common verbal form: there is no common
form of thinking called ‘judgement’ which would include
non-inferred knowledge, opinion, and belief, but would exclude inferred
knowledge. (Cook Wilson often talks in this context of
‘activities of consciousness’, as opposed to ‘forms
of consciousness’ or ‘frames of mind’, but the view is perhaps better stated in the
contemporary terminology of ‘mental states’. Cook
Wilson’s language will be retained here.) He thus argued first
that inferring is one of the forms of judgement: “if we take
judging in its most natural sense, that is as decision on evidence
after deliberation, then inferring is just one of those form of
apprehending to which the words judging and judgement most properly
apply” (SI, 86). Some inferences are, however, immediately
apprehended, e.g., when one recognizes that it follows from ‘if
p, then q’ and ‘p’, that
‘q’.
Still working with
this ‘judicial’ definition of judgement, Cook Wilson
further criticized the idealists for also thinking that judgement is a
common form which includes knowledge, opinion, and belief (SI,
86–7). The notion of judgement one finds in logic books being thus a
fabricated one, Cook Wilson claimed instead to follow ‘ordinary
usage’ in stating that
Therefore, the presence of a prior indecision or doubt, as opposed
to confidence, is deemed an essential ingredient of judgement. However,
judgement does not fully put an end to doubt: as a judge may well be
mistaken, our ordinary judgements “form fallible opinions
only” (Joseph 1916a, 160). Now, if indecision and doubt are
involved prior to judgement, apprehension or knowledge (perceptual or
not) could not be not judgement, because, by definition, there is no
room for doubt.
Moreover, it is an
important characteristic of ‘believing’, setting it apart
from other ‘activities of consciousness’, that it is
accompanied with a feeling of confidence. For example, when I open the
door of my office, I confidently expect to find my desk, books, etc.
and not an empty room or just a whole in the floor, into which I plunge
accidentally. This characteristic sets belief apart from judgement:
Statements of opinion are said not to be the expression of a
decision, so they not judgement either, even though
‘opining’ is here conceived of as a form of decision:
Cook Wilson held
the view that knowledge, in the form of
‘apprehension’, was presupposed by other ‘activities
of thinking’ such as judging and opining. For example, opinion
involves knowledge, but goes beyond it:
The upshot of this set of remarks is that knowledge, belief, and
opinion are not species of the same genre, judgement. There is in fact
no highest common factor to these states of mind (see next section);
they are all sui generis and irreducible to each other.
Cook Wilson believed that “our experience of knowing then
being the presupposition of any inquiry we can undertake, we cannot
make knowing itself a subject of inquiry in the sense of asking what
knowing is” (SI, 39). This leads to his main thesis concerning
knowledge, namely that it is not definable in terms of something else.
In particular, it is not to be defined in terms of belief augmented by some
other property or properties, as in the traditional view of knowledge
as ‘justified true belief’. In particular, the difference
between, on the one hand, knowledge and, say, belief or opinion, on the
other, is not a difference of degree of something such as the feeling
of confidence, or the amount of supportive evidence:
J. L. Austin has a nice supporting example in Sense and
Sensibilia, using the fact that ‘seeing that’ is
factive: if no pig is in sight, I might accumulate evidence that one
lives in a given place: buckets of pig food, pig-like marks on the
ground, the smell, etc. But if the pig suddenly appears, “there
is no longer any question of collecting evidence; its coming into view
doesn’t provide me with more evidence that it’s a
pig, I can now just see that it is, the question is
settled” (Austin 1962, 115).
Belief is also to be distinguished from knowledge, since one is likely
to say ‘I believe p’ precisely when one
recognizes that one’s grounds for believing p—which may
be knowledge, in which case it is clear that knowing entails
believing—are insufficient for one’s knowledge of
p (Prichard 1950, 86f.). So, when one knows, one does not
believe: “Belief is not knowledge and the man who knows does not
believe at all what he knows; he knows it” (SI, 100). It
follows immediately from this that a ‘theory’ of knowledge
is impossible, a consequence first expressed in 1904 by Cook Wilson in
correspondence with Prichard, who was to put forth an analogous
argument in moral philosophy eight years later (see section 8):
At the turn of the last century, this view of the primacy of knowledge
or ‘knowledge first’ was also held by the neo-Kantian
philosopher Leonard Nelson (Nelson 1908 & 1949), and by members of
the Brentano school, such as Adolf Reinach, Max Scheler, and Edmund
Husserl. (See (Mulligan 2014) for a survey.) It was to become the
central plank of ‘Oxford Realism’, the movement it
inspired. For the Oxonians and the Brentanians one knows
that p only if one ‘apprehends’
that p. As Kevin Mulligan put it: “one knows
that p in the strict sense only if one has perceived
that p and such perceiving is not itself any sort of belief
or judging” (Mulligan 2014, 382). The primacy of knowledge is
still defended in Oxford today by Timothy Williamson, according to
whom knowledge is a mental state “being in which is
necessary and sufficient for knowing p”
(Williamson 2000, 21), and which “cannot be analysed into more
basic concepts” (Williamson 2000, 33). The only
difference—an important one—is that the concern now
resides solely with ‘knowledge that p’, not with
‘apprehending that p’.
The fact that there
is no highest common factor to knowledge and belief entails that Cook
Wilson had to reject ‘hybrid’ and ‘externalist’
accounts of knowledge. Any ‘hybrid’ account would factor
knowledge into an internal part, possibly a copy of the object known,
and a relation of that copy to the object itself (on the ‘copy
theory’, see section 5). A highest common factor would be a state
of mind that would, depending on one or more given factors, count as
knowing, but in absence of these factors, count as something else.
Since there is no such highest common factor, this view, integral to
‘externalist’ accounts of knowledge, must be rejected
(Travis 2005, 287).
Instead, Cook
Wilson argues that, given that knowledge is factive in the sense that
one knows p only if p, an externalist account would
have it that for someone to know or to be in error (while thinking that
one knows) would just be undistinguishable states, since it would
depend on some factors external to that person:
Therefore, the possibility of undetectable error would, he claims,
undermine the very possibility of “demonstrative knowledge”
(SI, 107–108). In other words, if knowledge is factive, then there
is no such thing as some condition under which one knows p
erroneously; if not-p, one just does not know p. And
the condition under which it might be discovered that one does not know
p cannot be somehow cognitively inaccessible. To put it
another way, Cook Wilson is suggesting that knowledge contains its
object: “what we apprehend […] is included in the
apprehension as a part of the activity or reality of
apprehending” (SI, 70).
A similar line of
argument has been used recently by McDowell against the
‘hybrid’ conception in ‘Criteria, Defeasibility and
Knowledge’ (McDowell 1998, 374). But Cook Wilson added here a
further thesis, an ‘accretion’ as Charles Travis puts it
(Travis 2005, 289f.), namely that one is always in a position to
know if one knows or if one merely believes:
This accretion, which was given further emphasis by Prichard
(Prichard 1950, 86, 88 & 96), amounts to an early statement of
the ‘knowing that one knows’ principle. It is related to
the problem of the equivalence between ‘i knows that
p’ and ‘i knows that i knows
that p’ or Kip and
KiKip in epistemic logic, first
discussed by Jaakko Hintikka in his seminal book, Knowledge and
Belief (Hintikka 1962, chap. 5). Hintikka pointed out, however,
that Cook Wilson and Prichard merely restricted their remarks to the
case where i is taken to be the first-person pronoun
‘I’ (Hintikka 1962, 110). The accretion is also related
to Timothy Williamson’s notion of ‘luminosity’: a
condition C is said to be ‘luminous’ if and only if for
every case a, if in a C obtains then in a
one is in a position to know that C obtains (Williamson 2000, 95).
However, for Williamson, one can know without being in a position to 
know that one knows, so knowing is not luminous. For Williamson’s
argument against luminosity, see (Williamson 2000, chap. 4).
A broadly similar conception of knowledge is also at work behind
rejoinders to the argument from illusion in J. L. Austin’s Sense
and Sensibilia (Austin 1962) and John McDowell’s ‘Knowledge
and the Internal’ (McDowell 1998, 395–413).  This is not
to say that their positions are identical, as there are notable
differences, e.g., when Austin rejects the accretion. (See Travis
(2005) and Kalderon & Travis (2013) for further discussion.)  In
‘Other Minds’ (Austin 1979, 76–116), Austin also
argues anew for the thesis that ‘If I know, I can’t be
wrong’ (Austin 1979, 79), by pointing out that the claim that
‘I know that p’ provides a form of warrant for
one’s claim. (See Urmson (1988) for a discussion, in relation to
Prichard.)
Cook Wilson still
needs to account from his internalist standpoint for ‘real
error’ as opposed to, say, ‘false opinion’. For that
purpose, he distinguished in some of his most interesting descriptive
analyses a further ‘form of consciousness’ which he called
‘being under the impression that’ (SI, 109–113). A
typical example would be when I see the back of Smith on the street and,
‘being under the impression that’ it is my friend Jones,
I tap him on the shoulder, only to realize my mistake when he turns
his head. As Cook Wilson argues, it won’t do to answer that I
thought I knew but really did not, because it is not true that I
thought I knew to begin with (SI, 109–110). This state
simulates knowledge because of the absence of doubt, while not being
the same as ‘being certain’. Prichard would later speak of
‘thinking without question’ or ‘taking for
granted’ (Prichard 1950, 96–7):
This notion played a significant role in the writings of the
‘Oxford Realists’, not just those of Prichard but also
those of William Kneale, H. H. Price and J. L. Austin—see, e.g.,
Kneale (1949, 5 & 18), Price (1935), and Austin (1962, 122). In
his book on Belief, H. H. Price presented this notion as an
important addition to the traditional ‘occurrence’
analysis of belief, as opposed to the then fashionable
‘dispositional’ analysis (Price 1966, 208–212). It
was not, however, without critics. For example, H. P.  Grice put forth
a common objection when he argued that Cook Wilson’s position leaves
“no room for the possibility of thinking that we know p
when in fact it is not the case that
p”, while the introduction of the state of ‘being
under the impression that’ does not solve the problem: “for
what enables us to deny that all of our so-called knowledge is really
only ‘taking for granted’?” (Grice 1989,
383–384).
Under Cook Wilson’s
conception, instances of ‘knowledge’ will turn out harder
to find, mathematics providing the only prima facie cases. As
Prichard was to put it: “In mathematics we have, without
real possibility of question, an instance of knowledge; we are certain,
we know” (Prichard 1919, 302). Joseph used the view
to argue against Mill’s empiricist account of mathematics, using
‘intuition’ where Cook Wilson would use
‘apprehension’ (Joseph 1916a, 543–553). Cook Wilson
offered as an example of his concept of knowledge the axiom of
parallels in Euclidean geometry. He held it to be “absolutely
self-evident” (SI, 561), and he believed consequently that the idea of a
non-Euclidean space is a “chimera” (SI, 456) and that
the various non-Euclidean geometries are “the mere illusion of
specialists” (SI, xxxix). He even tried to find a
contradiction in them in order to “convince the rank and file of
mathematicians” so that “they would at least not suppose
the philosophic criticism, by which I intended anyhow to attack,
somehow wrong” (SI, xcvi). This mistaken attitude greatly
undermined the credibility of his views about knowledge. If, for any
p, such as the axiom of parallels, some fail to
‘apprehend’ it, then Cook Wilson could only ask them to try
and “remove […] whatever confusions or prejudices
[…] prevent them from apprehending the truth of the disputed
proposition” (Furlong 1941, 128). Of course, this is no proper
answer to, say, David Hilbert, the author of Grundlagen der
Geometrie (Hilbert 1903).
Cook Wilson also argued against idealism that in apprehension it is
neither the case that the object exists only within the apprehending
consciousness, nor that it is constituted by it: it is just independent
of it. This independence he considered to be presupposed by the very
idea of knowledge. Arguing from analogy with the case of two bodies
colliding, Cook Wilson reasoned that
Under this view, the object apprehended may or may not be
‘mental’. This also means that the object apprehended must
not be some ‘copy’ of the real object:
Part of Cook Wilson’s rejection of ‘hybrid’ accounts of
knowledge (see previous section) precisely involved the rejection of
epistemological ‘intermediaries’, so that knowledge is not
of some representative or copy, but, in a sense, knowledge contains
its object. He considered all such
intermediaries—‘images’,
‘copies’, tertium quid, or
‘representatives’—as “not only useless in
philosophy but misleading as tending to obscure the solution of a
difficult problem” (SI, 772). (In this he stood in the tradition
of Thomas Reid; his arguments were as a matter of fact developed at
first against the Modern view of Locke and Berkeley, e.g., at (LL,
§ 10).) Of particular importance here is a long letter (SI,
764–800) to G. F. Stout, where Cook Wilson provided detailed
criticisms of the latter’s ‘Primary and Secondary
Qualities’ (Stout 1904), and in which he wrote:
    You begin an important section of your argument by assuming the idea
    of sensations being representative.
    They { represent—express—stand for } something other
    than themselves.
    Now, I venture to think that the idea of such
    representation in philosophy, or psychology rather, is very
    loose and treacherous and, if used at all, should be preceded by a
    ‘critique’ of such representative character, and
    an explanation of the exact sense in which the word representative is
    used. (SI, 769)
Against views of this kind, Cook Wilson developed three arguments in
his letter: first, he pointed out that it is impossible to know
anything about the relation between the representative and the object,
since one can never truly compare the former to the latter. 
Secondly, he claimed that representationalist theories are always in
danger of leading towards idealism, since one must then somehow
‘prove’ the existence of the object which is, so to speak,
‘behind’ its representatives—there might be none.
Finally, he claimed that all such theories are begging the question,
since the representative has to be apprehended in turn by the mind, and
not only this further ‘apprehension’ remains unexplained,
it would require that the mind be equipped with the very apparatus that
the representationalist theories were, to begin with, devised to
explain:
Cook Wilson also inveighed against Stout’s notion of
‘sensible extension’ pointing out inter alia that
it makes no sense to claim that these are extended without being in
space (SI, 783) and he tried to explain how a given object may
appear to have different shapes from different perspectives, without
making an appeal to any representative (SI, 790f.).
Although, he never cites Cook Wilson, Stout felt compelled to answer
his critique in print. (For a discussion, where Cook Wilson is
portrayed as an ‘old’ or ‘naïve’ realist,
see Nasim (2008, 30–40 & 94–98).) For example, Stout
argued that he was not holding a view akin to Locke’s
representationalism, claiming that the ‘representative
function’ of his ‘presentations’ is of a different
nature, more like a memory-image would represent what is remembered
(e.g., at (Stout 1911, 14f.)), but it is at first blush unclear what
he meant by this.  Against Cook Wilson’s first argument, he claimed
that in his conception presentations and presented objects form an
“inseparable unity” (Stout 1911, 22), this being, once
more, unclear. At all events, both Stout and Russell, in his theory of
‘sense-data’ as ‘objects of perception’
(Russell 1912), insisted that the physical object and the
representative are ‘real’ but this
‘objectification’ of ‘appearing’ as
‘appearance’, to use Cook Wilson’s language (SI, 796),
does not annul his diagnosis of the difficulties inherent in that
position. At least Russell was clearer about its implications,
requiring a ‘logical construction’ of physical objects as
functions of ‘sense-data’. One way to counter Cook Wilson
on the absurdity of the locution ‘sensible extensions’ is
to distinguish between ‘private’ and ‘public’
space, as Russell was to do in ‘The Relation of Sense-Data to
Physics’ (Russell 1917, 139–171); as it is well-known,
this postulation generates its own set of difficulties, e.g., the
discovery that space must have 6 dimensions (Russell 1917, 154).
Russell’s theory was to become a favourite target for Prichard’s
acerbic wit in, e.g., Prichard (1915 & 1928).
There was no
doctrinal unity among Cook Wilson’s epigones on this issue. H. H.
Price, who was at first close to Cook Wilson (Price 1924), incorporated
a sense-data theory while rejecting phenomenalism in
Perception (Price 1932); he became for that reason one of J.
L. Austin’s targets in Sense and Sensibilia (Austin
1962), which remains, for all its novelty (and the fact that it is
aimed at Moore’s peculiar brand of scepticism more than the
standard Cartesian variety), faithful to Cook Wilson’s orthodoxy
on knowledge. Prichard, who was probably the first to put Cook
Wilson’s views into print in ‘Appearances and
Reality’ (Prichard 1906), ended up arguing late in life that we
really see only colour expansions, which we systematically mistake for
or ‘take for granted’ as objects (Prichard 1950,
52–68). Nevertheless, a form of direct realism in the theory of
perception remains one of the characteristic features of Oxford Realism
and its heir, ‘ordinary language philosophy’. It is an
ancestor to contemporary variants such as the position argued for by
John McDowell in Mind and World (McDowell 1994).
Cook Wilson also argued against the neo-Kantian (not neo-Hegelian)
views of idealists such as T. H. Green, that apprehension has
no ‘synthetic’ character, i.e., he argued that any synthesis
apprehended is attributed to the object and not the result of an
activity of the ‘apprehending mind’. As he put it,
“in the judgement of knowledge and the act of knowledge in
general we do not combine our apprehensions, but apprehend a
combination” (SI, 279), and it is “the nature of the
elements themselves” which “determines which unity they
have or can have”; the ‘apprehending mind’ has
“no power whatever to make a complex idea out of simple
ones” (SI, 524). This view implies that universals and
connections between them are in rebus and to be apprehended as
such (Price 1947, 336). As was pointed out earlier (section 3),
‘apprehension’ is, according to Cook Wilson, not mere
‘sensation’, because in the former one recognizes the
definite character of a sensation, through comparison. So apprehension
is of the universal in the sensation, albeit not necessarily an
apprehension of it as universal. This conception implies that
the universal is “strictly objective” and “not a mere
thought of ours” (SI, 335). This view, Cook Wilson held as
being in accordance with ordinary language and common sense, if not
popular among philosophers (SI, 344–345).
The universal may
be a “real unity in objects” (SI, 344), but Cook Wilson
also believed that the reality of the universal cannot be separated
from its particulars—which he preferred to call
‘particularization of the universal’ (SI, 336)—,
because “the particular is not something that has the quality, it
is the particularized quality” (SI, 713). The view is,
therefore, that there is no possible apprehension of the universal
except as particularized:
Cook Wilson had already argued for a distinction between subject and
attribute on the one hand, and subject and predicate on the other;
there is a unique ‘logical subject’ but possibly many
‘subjects of attributes’ for a given statement (SI,
158–159). His argument was that ‘That building is
the Bodleian’ may be the answer to ‘What building is
that?’ or ‘Which building is the Bodleian?’ (SI,
117–120), and that in the statement ‘That building is
the Bodleian’, with the italics indicating that it is an answer
to the second question, ‘that building’ is a subject of
attributes but not the logical subject (SI, 158). He put this view
to use to shed doubt on the traditional form, ‘S is
P’ (SI, 114f.)—see also Joseph (1916a, 6 &
185). And he proposed that one avoids the misleading term
‘predicate’ by introducing ‘attributive’ (SI,
193). He also argued in these passages that the attribution holds
between particulars only, and inferred further that
(For further elaboration on this point, see the beginning of next
section.)
Thus, one could say that Cook Wilson held a moderate form of nominalism
about universals, which is actually rather close to the better-known
view of G. F. Stout (Stout 1930). Cook Wilson corresponded in
1903–1904 with Stout, who published his theory of universals
only in 1921, and there are reasons to believe that Stout took some of
his key ideas from Cook Wilson, e.g., when he reported with approval
Cook Wilson stating that “square shape is not squareness plus
shape; squareness itself is a special way of being a shape”
(Stout 1930, 398). Even the term ‘character’, that stands
for what are also known in the literature as ‘moments’ or
‘tropes’, was already Cook Wilson’s. The universal is not,
according to Cook Wilson, merely identical in all its particulars, but
something definite, an ‘intrinsic character’ (SI,
342n. & 351), for which Cook Wilson reluctantly introduced the
technical term ‘characteristic being of the universal’
(SI, 342). It is this ‘characteristic being’ which we are
said to apprehend, but “neither as universal nor as
particularized” (SI, 343). That Cook Wilson’s view prefigured
Stout’s is not generally known, simply because Cook Wilson’s has been
ignored.  (There are but a few notable exceptions, e.g., when
P. F. Strawson gives to non-relational ties between
particulars—e.g., between the particular Socrates and the
particular event of his death—the name ‘attributive
ties’ in memory of Cook Wilson (Strawson 1959, 168), or a
mention of Cook Wilson among early 20th century proponents
of tropes in the seminal paper ‘Truth-Makers’ by
K. Mulligan, P. Simons & B.  Smith (Mulligan, Simons & Smith
1984, 293n.).)
There are, however,
some notable differences with Stout. The ‘characteristic
being’ of an universal is not to be captured in terms of
similarity (SI, 344 & 347), but Cook Wilson did not go so far
as to introduce here, as Stout was to do, a fundamentum
relationis, i.e., the ‘distributive unity of a class’
(Stout 1930, 388). For he believed that this unity of the universal is
inexplicable, because the relation between particular and universal,
although fundamental and thus presupposed by any explanation (SI,
335 & 345), is—again—sui generis,
therefore not explicable: “The nature of the universal therefore
necessarily and perpetually eludes any attempt to explain itself”
(SI, 348). His argument was that one could not explain, say,
‘triangularity’ except by treating it as a particular,
i.e., putting it in the subject position of a phrase, therefore
assuming that we could apprehend it in abstraction from any particular,
which is, according to him, impossible.
Cook Wilson used his views on statements as attributing particulars
to particulars as a basis for an attack on mathematical logic, aiming in
particular at Russell. His argument appears to be this: when one says
that ‘a is a triangle’, one can be construed as
predicating of a substance a the universal
‘triangularity’. If, however, one reasons analogously,
stating that ‘triangularity is an universal’, one would
thus put the universal ‘triangularity’ in the subject
position—the ‘nominative case to the verb’ as he
quaintly puts it (SI, 349)—thereby treating it as if
it were a substance, while one would put ‘universal’ in the
predicate position, thereby implying that there is a ‘universal
of universals’ or ‘universalness’, of which
universals would be the particulars. But then
‘universalness’ would be a particular of itself, which is,
Cook Wilson claims, “obviously absurd” (SI, 350).
Therefore, one is bound to commit a fallacy with such locutions. Cook
Wilson thought that this line of reasoning shows that Russell’s
paradox of the class of all classes that do not contain themselves
(Russell 1903, chap. X) is a “mere fallacy of language”
(SI, cx). He argued at length (SI, §§ 422–32, 477–500
& 501–18) that there is no more ‘class of classes’ than
‘universalness’ can be said to be the ‘universal of
universals’ and that it is no more possible for a class to be a
member of itself than ‘universalness’ could be a particular
of itself. Cook Wilson had but contempt for what he called “the
puerilities of certain paradoxical authors” (SI, 348). He even
wrote to Bosanquet:
The problem with Cook Wilson’s argument is that it is based on an
elementary confusion between membership of a class and inclusion of
classes. Peter Geach called Cook Wilson “an execrably bad
logician” (Geach 1978, 123) for committing blunders such as
this. For a clear statement of this mistake, see SI (733–734).
Geach also points out another elementary blunder in the exchange of
letters with Lewis Carroll, when Cook Wilson claimed that it is not
possible to ‘know’ that ‘Some S
is P’ without knowing which S it is which
is P (Carroll 1977, 376).
Cook Wilson’s main reason for opposing Russell was simply that logical
inferences are exhausted by syllogistic, while “mathematical
inference as such is not syllogistic” (SI, xcvi), but
he also believed that his views about universals confirm Plato’s
doctrine of ‘unaddible numbers’, which he interpreted as
meaning that numbers are universals that could not be added and
counted (see section 1) implied that the logicist definition of
natural numbers in terms of classes of classes would not be
possible. As a matter fact, on this view… no account of numbers
is possible (SI, 342). For the same reasons, Cook Wilson also
criticized Richard Dedekind’s definition of continuity
in Stetigkeit und die irrationale Zahlen (Dedekind 1872),
which he called “a mere fantastic chimera” (SI, 352). (See
also (OPD, 250 n 1).)
Cook Wilson made no contribution to logic, but some of his remarks
pertaining rather to the philosophy of logic had a life of their own.
Cook Wilson believed that all statements are
‘categorical’, so he was obliged to explain away
‘hypothetical judgements’. He did so in claiming that
“in the hypothetical attitude”, we apprehend “a
relation between two problems” (SI, 542–543), in other
words that conditionals do not express judgements but connections
between questions. This view was elaborated by Ryle into his
controversial stance on indicative conditionals as
‘inference-tickets’ in ‘‘If’,
‘So’, and ‘Because’’ (Ryle 1971,
vol. II, 234–249). Ryle compared conditionals of the form
‘If
p, then q’, to “bills for statements
that statements could fill” (Ryle 1971, vol. II, 240) and he
rejected the form ‘If p then q,
but p, therefore q’, claiming that in some way
the p in the major premise cannot for that reason be the same
as p asserted by itself. This, of course, runs directly afoul
of Geach’s celebrated ‘Frege Point’ (Geach 1972). Cook
Wilson also clearly anticipated (SI, 443–444) Ryle’s well-known
response to Carroll’s paradox of inference, according to which a rule
of inference cannot be implicated as a premise in an inference drawn
according to it, on pains of an infinite regress (Ryle 1971, vol. II,
238). As a matter of fact, Cook Wilson essentially states the paradox
in this passage; given that it cannot be dated, one cannot tell who
has priority, Carroll or Cook Wilson. (For a discussion, see Marion
(forthcoming).)
Apart from these borrowings by Ryle, Cook Wilson might also be said to
be the source of P. F. Strawson’s distinctive use of
‘statement’ in Introduction to Logical Theory
(1952). Otherwise, only a few of Cook Wilson’s ideas were taken up :
A. N. Prior appealed to Cook Wilson’s defence of the traditional view
of the asymmetric nature of the relation between genus and differentia
(SI, 356–361), against W. E. Johnson (Prior 1949), and the
distinction between subject/attribute and logical subject/predicate
(see section 6) was put to use by Strawson against the possibility of
a strict ontological distinction between entities that can only be put
in the ‘subject’ place and those that can only be put in
the ‘predicate’ place (Strawson 1959, 144).
More importantly, however, this last distinction contains an important
insight, given that it might be said to be at the root of Austin’s
central idea that truth and falsity turn not only on what a sentence
means but also on “the circumstances in which it is
uttered” (Austin 1962, 111). (On this point, see the
explanations in section 1 of Kalderon & Travis (2013).) Cook
Wilson can also be taken here as implying that the meaning of a
statement is be determined by the question to which it is an answer,
as did R. G. Collingwood (Collingwood 1938, 265n.), who used the idea
as the basis for his ‘logic of questions and answers’
(Collingwood 2013, chap. 5; 1998, chaps. 3–4), the idea being
further developed since by the French linguist Oswald Ducrot (Ducrot
1980, 42f.). Collingwood, however, would have been reluctant to
recognize Cook Wilson’s idea as an inspiration, since he thought ill
of the idea of ‘apprehensions’ as a non-derivative basis
for knowledge, given that knowledge comes, according to him, from
asking questions first (Collingwood 2013, 25).
Cook Wilson hardly wrote on topics outside the theory of knowledge
and logic, but two remarks ought to be made concerning moral
philosophy. First, the last piece included in Statement and
Inference is composed of notes for an address to a discussion
society in 1897, that was announced as ‘The Ontological Proof for
God’s Existence’. In this text, which opens with a
discussion of Hutcheson and Butler, Cook Wilson argued that in the case
of “emotions as are proper to the moral consciousness”,
such as the feeling of gratitude:
He argued further, in what amounts to a form of moral realism, that
there must be a real experience, i.e., in the case of gratitude,
“Goodwill of a person, then, must here be a real
experience” (SI, 861), and that the feeling of
“reverence with its solemnity and awe” is in itself
“not fear, love, admiration, respect, but something quite sui
generis” (SI, 861). It is a feeling that, Cook Wilson
argued, “seems directed to one spirit and one alone, and only
possible for spirit conceived as God” (SI, 864). In other
words, the existence of the feeling of reverence presupposes that God
exists. This may not be the most convincing argument for the existence
of God, but Cook Wilson sketched within of a few pages a theory of
emotions which is echoed today in the moral realism that has been
developed, seemingly without knowledge of this previous theory, in the wake of
David Wiggins’ ‘Truth, Invention and the Meaning of
Life’ (Wiggins 1976) and a series of influential papers by John
McDowell—now collected in McDowell (2001).
Secondly, and more
importantly, Prichard is also responsible for an extension of Cook
Wilson’s philosophy to moral philosophy, with his paper
‘Does Moral Philosophy Rest on a Mistake?’ (Prichard 1912),
whose main argument is analogous to Cook Wilson’s argument for
the irreducibility of knowledge. In short, duty is sui generis
and not definable in terms of something else. The parallel is
mentioned at Prichard (1912, 21 & 35–36). That we ought to do
certain things, we are told, arises “in our unreflective
consciousness, being an activity of moral thinking occasioned by the
various situations in which we find ourselves”, and the demand
that it is proved that we ought to do these things is
“illegitimate” (Prichard 1912, 36). In order to find out
our duty, “the only remedy lies in actual getting into a
situation which occasions the obligation” and “then letting
our moral capacities of thinking to do their work” (Prichard
1912, 37). This paper became so influential that Prichard was
elected in 1928 to the White’s Chair of Moral Philosophy at
Corpus Christi, although his primary domain of competence had been the
theory of knowledge. His papers in moral philosophy were edited after
his death as Prichard (1949, now 2002). Prichard stands at
the origin of the school of ‘moral’ or ‘Oxford
intuitionism’, of which another pupil of Cook Wilson, the
Aristotle scholar Sir David Ross remains the foremost representative
(along with H. W. B. Joseph, E. F. Carritt, and J. Laird). Some of the
views expressed by Prichard and Ross (Ross 1930, 1939) have recently
gained new currency with the advent of ‘moral
particularism’, e.g., in the writings of Jonathan Dancy (Dancy
1993, 2004).
The legacy of Cook Wilson can be plotted through successive
generations of Oxford philosophers, from his pupils H. A. Prichard and
H. W. B. Joseph, to the post-World War I generation of the 1920s,
including Frank Hardie, W. C. Kneale, J. D. Mabbott, H. H. Price, R.
Robinson, and G. Ryle, and to the early analytic philosophers of the
1930s, J. L. Austin, I. Berlin, J. O. Urmson, and H. L. A. Hart, in
particular.  For example, see Isaiah Berlin’s description of Hart as
“an excellent solid Cook Wilsonian” in a letter to Price
(Berlin 2004, 509) or his own admission that he was at first an Oxford
Realist (Jahanbegloo 1992, 153). (See Marion (2000, 490–508) for
further details.) So ‘Oxford Realism’ first dislodged
‘British Idealism’ from its position of prominence at
Oxford and then morphed into ‘ordinary language
philosophy’. Through Prichard, Cook Wilson is also somehow
genetically related to the ‘moral intuitionism’ that
flourished at Oxford in the 1930s. The only Oxford philosopher of note
who opposed the ‘realists’ before World War II was
R. G. Collingwood, who felt increasingly alienated and ended up
reduced to invective: he described their theory of knowledge as
“based upon the grandest foundation a philosophy can have,
namely human stupidity” (Collingwood 1998, 34) and their
attitude towards moral philosophy as a “mental kind of
decaudation” (Collingwood 2013, 50). Collingwood had another
more telling complaint, when he criticized the Oxford Realists for
being only interested in assessing the truth or falsity of particular
philosophical theses, without paying attention to the fact that the
meaning of the concepts involved may evolve through history, as there
might simply be no ‘eternal problem’ (Collingwood 2013,
chap. 7). This lack of historical sensitivity is indeed another
feature of analytic philosophy that arguably originates in Cook Wilson
and Prichard. (For critical discussions of Collingwood’s critique of
Cook Wilson and Oxford Realism, see (Jacquette 2006) and (Beaney
2013).)
In the post-World
War II years, Cook Wilson’s name gradually faded away (e.g.,
there is no mention of him in (Woozley 1949), which nevertheless argues
for some of his views), while ‘ordinary language
philosophy’, which owed a lot to his constant reliance on
ordinary language against philosophical jargon, blossomed. The historical
importance of Cook Wilson’s influence cannot, therefore, be
underestimated. The ‘realist’ reaction against British
idealism at the turn of the 20th century was not confined to
the well-known rebellion of G. E. Moore and Bertrand Russell at
Cambridge. There were also ‘realisms’ sprouting in
Manchester (with Robert Adamson and Samuel Alexander), and in Oxford,
where Thomas Case had already argued for realism in Physical
Realism (Case 1888). (On Case, see Marion (2002b).) In Oxford, it
is Cook Wilson who turned the tide and, as one of the originators of
ordinary language philosophy, which is but one of the many strands
going under the name of ‘analytic philosophy’, he should be
counted among its ancestors.
There was, however,
a deleterious side to Cook Wilson’s influence, as his contempt
for mathematical logic explains why, although his criticisms of
Russell’s theory of classes utterly fail to convince, one had to
wait until after World War II for modern formal logic first to be
taught at Oxford, with the appointment of Hao Wang. In the 1930s, H. H.
Price was still teaching deductive logic from H. W. B. Joseph’s
An Introduction to Logic (Joseph 1916a) and inductive logic
from Mill’s System of Logic. Cook Wilson’s
reactionary attitude towards modern logic might also explain why he was
forgotten after World War II, and why many hesitate today to mention
his name.
As the tide of
‘ordinary language’ ebbed, however, Cook Wilson’s
views on knowledge showed more resilience, so to speak. In the
1960’s, Phillips Griffiths’ anthology, Knowledge and
Belief included excerpts from Cook Wilson (Phillips Griffiths
1967, 16–27) and John Passmore was able to write that “Cook
Wilson’s logic may have had few imitators; but his soul goes on
marching on in Oxford theories of knowledge” (Passmore 1968,
257). In the United States, Cook Wilson’s views on knowledge had
a formative influence on the thought of Wilfrid Sellars, who studied at
Oxford in the mid-1930s, and whose views are in turn of importance for
McDowell (McDowell 1994, 1998). In his ‘Autobiographical
Reflections’, Sellars wrote:
Cook Wilson himself had already spoken of an “insidious and
scarcely ‘conscious’ dialectic” that “has done
much mischief in modern metaphysics and theories of perception”
(SI, 797), one according to which “empiricism ends in the
Subjective Idealism it was intended to avoid” (LL, § 10).
As was shown in section 4, Cook Wilson’s views on knowledge remain
influential to this day: not only the idea that knowledge is factive
and indefinable was argued for anew by J. L. Austin, whose ideas have
been further developed recently, along different paths, by Peter
Hacker (Hacker 1988) and Charles Travis (Travis 1989, 2005), it was
taken up recently by philosophers as significantly different as John
McDowell (McDowell 1994, 1998) and Timothy Williamson (Williamson
2000, 2007), who is since 2000 Cook Wilson’s successor as Wykeham
Professor of Logic, New College. One has, therefore, what Charles
Travis once described as “an Oxford tradition despite
itself” (Travis 1989, xii)—on this last point, see also
Williamson (2007, 269–270n).