John Norris was born on January 2, 1657 in Collingbourne Kingston,
Wiltshire. His father was a minister, and Norris was the second of
four siblings. His early training was a Puritan one. In 1671, he began
a course of study at Winchester School, where he received a classical
education; the curriculum included Greek and Latin literature, and the
young Norris excelled at his studies. He matriculated at Exeter
College, at Oxford, spending the years from 1676 – 1680 studying
the Scholastic and ancient authors. In 1680, Norris was elected a
Fellow of All Souls College, a distinction he enjoyed for nine years
and would always recall fondly. He was ordained in 1684 and sometime
before 1688 he also discovered the works of Malebranche, who would
become one of his philosophical heroes.
It was during his stay at All Souls that Norris published several of
his most popular works. He published the first edition of A
Collection of Miscellanies in 1687, which would culminate in a
ninth edition printed in 1730. At this time he also published
“The Root of Liberty,” a sermon in which he defended human
freedom by an appeal to the Augustinian concept of attention. In these
publications, Norris' own thought is pronounced; they exhibit an
independence from the heavy influence Malebranchean doctrine would
exert upon Norris' subsequent works. The Theory and Regulation of
Love, a piece characterizing love as the summons of God, was
published in 1688, and the first text in which Norris clearly adopted
Malebranchean arguments. Norris appended to this text his
correspondence with Henry More, the Cambridge Platonist. Finally in
1689, he published Reason and Religion, which would be
reissued seven times until 1724.
He resigned the fellowship in 1689, married, and began a two-year
occupation as rector at Newton St. Loe in Somersetshire. There, he
published one of his most popular texts, Christian
Blessedness, in 1690. One year later, Locke appealed to the Earl
of Pembroke on Norris' behalf; consequently, Norris assumed the duties
of rector at Bemerton near Salisbury. In general, he preferred study
and meditation, and found his duties as rector to impinge upon his
scholarly activities. Nonetheless, he maintained various
correspondences. He engaged in correspondences with Elizabeth Thomas
(“Corinna”), Damaris Cudworth (Lady Masham), Mary Astell
and Locke, among others. In 1695, Norris published his correspondence
with Astell and entitled it, Letters concerning the Love of God,
between the Author of the Proposal to the Ladies and Mr. John
Norris. Moreover, he found the time to publish pamphlets and
treatises on a variety of topics including the Toleration Act,
Christian morality, the immortality of the soul, and the difference
between the Ideal Philosophy he endorsed and the enthusiasm of the
Quakers. Norris made clear these differences in an addendum to
Reflections upon the Conduct of Human Life in 1691. Richard
Vickris, the Quaker, replied irately to this addendum. This generated
a heated reply from Norris, in which he further elucidated the
differences between the “divine light” of his own
philosophy and that of the Quaker doctrines. This work was entitled
Two Treatises concerning the Divine Light and was issued in
1692. Locke and Norris shared the objective of debunking the Quakers'
claim to direct enlightenment from God. But their differences far
outweighed their similarities.
In 1690, Norris issued criticisms of Locke's An Essay concerning
Human Understanding¸ the first edition of which was
published in December 1689. Norris' review, entitled Cursory
Reflections upon a Book called An Essay concerning Human
Understanding, prompted Locke to modify the second edition of the
Essay at 2.10.2. Otherwise, Locke did not reply publicly to
Norris' criticisms. It was only after Locke and Norris quarreled that
Locke published his estimation of Norris' works. Lady Masham had
entrusted a letter for Locke to Norris, but news reached Locke that
Norris had opened the letter. Locke suspected Norris in spite of his
protests, and from that time forward, which was the end of 1692, they
were not on friendly terms (Cranston 1957, 364–365). Shortly thereafter
(1693), Locke wrote Remarks upon some of Mr. Norris' Books,
Wherein he asserts P. Malebranche's Opinion of seeing all Things in
God and  Examination of Malebranche. Charlotte Johnston has
argued that the impetus and target for Locke's critical evaluation of
Malebranche's thought was Norris, whom he viewed as reiterating
Malebranche's thought (1958). In the Cursory Reflections,
Norris stated that he would soon publish a treatise, in which he would
present his own philosophy at length.
But it was not until 1701 that Norris completed the first volume of
his magnum opus, An Essay Towards the Theory of the Ideal or
Intelligible World. The second volume was issued in
1704. (Hereafter, Theory I and Theory II,
respectively.)  Norris examines the divine nature in Theory I
and in Theory II he details the nature of creation,
specifically the nature of humanity and animals. These highly
theoretical works did not enjoy the popular success of his other
writings. One of these, An Account of Reason and Faith, in
Relation to the Mysteries of Christianity, was so well-read that
it was issued in a fourteenth edition as late as 1790. His last two
theoretical works concerned the nature of the soul: A
Philosophical Discourse concerning the Natural Immortality of the
Soul, published in 1708, and A Letter to Mr. Dodwell
concerning the Immortality of the Soul of Man, issued in 1709. It
would seem that his many duties as rector did not hinder him
completely from engaging in his beloved intellectual pursuits, as his
publication record demonstrates. His final publication within his own
lifetime, A Treatise concerning Christian Prudence, was
printed just a year before his death. He died in February of 1711,
aged fifty-six years, at Bemerton, and was interred there.
It is puzzling that a figure as popular and widely-read as Norris has
received such little recognition from intellectual historians of the
early modern period. Perhaps Norris has not been paid much attention
because his philosophical writings appear to contain an eclectic
mixture of many divergent, incompatible sources rather than a coherent
synthesis of those sources. Charles McCracken notes that Norris has
been dubbed in a variety of ways, but that the “English
Malebranche” seems most appropriate (179). Norris was heavily
influenced by Malebranche, and goes so far as advising his own
children that Malebranche's Search after Truth should
“always be read, studied, dwelt and fed upon till it be
digested, made your own, and converted as it were into the very
Substance of your Souls” (Spiritual Counsel
501). Norris was also a follower of Descartes, whom Norris viewed as
constructing “the only intelligible Frame of Natural Science
that has yet appear'd in the World, and the only intire System that
deserves the name of Philosophy” (500). Norris also
draws liberally from his Scholastic background, and frequently uses
theoretical tools borrowed from the canonical thinkers taught at the
universities, such as Aquinas, Augustine and Suarez. His heavy
reliance on diverse intellectual sources, especially Descartes and
Malebranche, is apparent in his writings. Nonetheless, his arguments
are tremendously valuable for understanding better the debates of his
time.  His rehearsal of Descartes' real distinction proof and his
evaluation of Locke's thinking matter hypothesis exposes some critical
Lockean assumptions, bringing into sharp relief the disagreements
between the rationalists and empiricists of that era. He also
influenced the views of other minor figures, most notably, Mary Astell
and Arthur Collier. Finally, Norris' adaptation and expansion
of Malebranche's twin doctrines of Vision in God and occasionalism are
also central to understanding the continuation of the Cartesian
project in late 17th and early 18th century
England.
The intelligible world is the realm of Platonic objects that
constitutes the source and grounds of human knowledge.  Malebranche's
account of the intelligible world is incomplete according to
Norris:
Norris considers his Theories I and II to be the
completion of Malebranche's project. In Theory I, Norris
discusses the nature of God, and in Theory II he discusses
how creation is related to God. The most substantial expansion upon
Malebranche's thought occurs in the first part of this treatise, where
Norris spends a great deal of time arguing that God is truth. The
intelligible world is the mind of God, a “kind of Terra
Incognita, a more Intellectual America” (3).
Norris first argues for the existence of an ideal counterpart to
nature. Since the world is created, “it must of necessity
receive its Being from some other Being that was when it self was
not” (18). He considers the nature of a being that is capable of
bringing existence from absolute privation, and concludes such a being
must be infinitely powerful. Relying upon the premise that all action
is guided by thought, and that God could not have thought about the
world because it did not exist at the time, Norris concludes the ideas
that guided God's thought in the creation of the world and its
inhabitants must be “their essential Reasons and Natures before
they had any in this, nay even from all Eternity…and that there
is an Intelligible as well as a Sensible World,
truly representative and exhibitive of this,” or “ a fair
intelligible Mirrour” (26). The intelligible world is the
pattern or model of nature, “since it could no more be its own
Exemplary or Formal, than Efficient
Cause” (30).
His second argument for the intelligible world is from the existence
of natural kinds. Norris asks “Why is not the Body of one Man as
big as the Globe of the Sun, while that of another is too small to be
seen without a Microscope?” and answers “'tis not
according to the Idea of that Creature that he should be
either so big, or so little” (39). This stance marks a
noteworthy departure from Malebranche, who claims God does not have
particular ideas of bodies in Elucidation 10 of the
Search. Norris' next argument begins with our understanding
of perfect, geometrical objects. Norris says when he views “a
globular Body I have naturally excited in me an Idea of a
perfect Globe or Sphere” (51). This implies the existence of an
ideal sphere because “the effect cannot have more perfection
than its Cause…because the Cause cannot give that to the effect
which it has not it self” (52). Norris concludes that human
thought of perfect circles proves an ideal circle exists as the cause
of thought because there are none in nature.
His fourth argument comes from the nature of truth. Norris considers
the skeptic's claim that there is no absolute truth and turns the
table on the skeptic. If the skeptic is right, then there is no truth,
which is itself an absolute truth. As such, the claim, ‘There is
no truth’, would be a necessary and eternal truth:
There are eternal truths, as even the skeptic must admit, so there are
also eternal relations of ideas because truth relates ideas. In
Norris' view, it is the divine ideas that are related. Truth is
grounded “upon this necessity of Union and Connexion of Ideas in
certain Propositions” (67). Norris adapts Suarez' view that all
relations are accidental, hence require a subject. Nonetheless, Norris
argues that the eternal truths “are Real, and have an
existence out of, and independent upon the understanding”
(70). The eternal truths derive their reality from the “Simple
Essences of things” and these are the eternal divine ideas,
which stand in Suarezian accidental relations to one another
(71). Norris' fifth argument for the existence of divine ideas is that
there are objective sciences concerning universals, such as
metaphysics and geometry. These disciplines concern necessary
knowledge, “to speak more conformably to the School-language, in
a knowledge acquired by Demonstration” (128–129). Since
all science concerns the necessary and unchanging, science cannot be
about contingent things, but about universals. These universals are
the intelligible objects, or the divine ideas.
Norris' final and sixth argument for the existence of the intelligible
world derives from the existence of God. Indeed, Norris views his own
work as the culmination of the project begun by Plato. A proper
reading of the Timaeus will reveal Plato meant “the
Exemplaria rerum in mente Divina to be the Original Forms or
Patterns of things in the divine Understanding” rather than the
standard interpretation, which is that the creator consult and not be
the locus of abstract objects (139). If God has the ideas, then the
intelligible world exists because God exists. God has the ideas in an
eminent manner (‘eminent’ is discussed further below), and
these ideas are the objects of His thought. Relying upon the principle
that all knowledge is knowledge of something, Norris concludes that
the divine ideas are real objects in the mind of God. These ideas are
“really Coessential with and indistinct from the Essence of
God” (155) so when God considers ideas, God considers
himself. God considers himself adequately and inadequately,
He concludes his arguments for the existence of the intelligible world
by stating that the ideal world is better known than the natural world
because it is necessary, eternal and immutable. As Descartes had
argued, the senses are part of the natural world and are designed to
assist in preserving the union of soul and body, or to keep one alive,
not for delivering knowledge. The nature and existence of the
intelligible world is discovered by intellectual activity; the highest
degree of intellectual activity is the clear and distinct
perception.
When one clearly and distinctly cognizes the nature of God, one
perceives God as simple, immaterial and infinite. In traditional
Christian doctrine, these attributes are of paramount importance. Any
philosophical theory compromising them must be rejected. Norris
explains:
Some critics, including Arnauld, had charged Malebranche with
Spinozism because he claimed God has the idea of intelligible
extension. Such critics reasoned that the only way for God to contain
extension is for God to be extended. Norris reconciles God's
possession of intelligible extension with the immateriality of God by
using the notion of eminent containment. There are two ways a thing
can be contained in another, formally or eminently. Norris notes
formal and eminent containment are usually discussed in the context of
causation. Generally, formal containment explains cause and effect
sequences amongst similar causes and effects. For example, the cause
of a child's fear might be the recollection of a frightening
image. The child's fear is formally contained in the
recollection. Eminent containment explains dissimilar causes and
effects. When an architect designs a building, and several months
later the architect's vision is realized in a physical structure, that
physical structure was eminently contained, or contained in a higher
manner, in the mind of the architect. All human actions, as long as
they are planned, are eminently contained in the human
mind. Analogously, Norris states God eminently contains extension as a
divine idea just as the architect eminently contains the
building. Intelligible extension, then, is a divine idea. Norris
believes that the ideal philosophy can settle the meaning of
‘eminent containment’, and thus settle the dispute about
intelligible extension. This view is found in “POSTSCRIPT,
Concerning the Distinction of Formaliter and Eminenter,
as applied to the manner of the Perfection of Things being in
God,” appended to Theory I.
Norris derives the “divine ideality,” or the divine ideas,
from the infinitude of God, and he derives God's infinity from the
divine ideas (Norris argues this is non-circular as we shall see
below):
One objection Norris raises concerns how the infinite can represent
the finite. His answer again relies upon the thought of Suarez, whom
Norris reread carefully before writing his Theories I and
II. Suarez had distinguished two ways of being finite. An
item can be finite according to its “esse
formale” or its “esse reale” (300). If
a thing is positively finite, it is limited in such a way that can
never be infinite. If a thing is negatively finite, it is finite
“though there be no repugnance in its having it [infinitude]
from elsewhere” (301–302, brackets added). A divine idea,
according to its esse formale is negatively finite whereas
according to its esse reale is infinite. Norris believes
“Ideas are really Identical with the Divine Nature, and so
partake of the same real Infinity and Incomprehensibility that
essentially belongs to it” (302). If each idea is identical to
God, then each idea is really infinite, and negatively finite. A
further consequence is that an idea can be called both infinite and
finite without contradiction. Norris also notes there is no
multiplication of infinities in God on his view. Here Norris diverges
from Malebranche's view as stated in the second dialogue of
Dialogues on Metaphysics and Religion that God is
“infinitely infinite,” which strikes the reader as
comparable to Spinoza's infinite attributes.
One might wonder how God's ideality could be proven from his infinity
and his infinity from his ideality because such an argument appears
circular. Norris explains why this need not concern us:
Indeed, Norris proves the existence of God from the nature of truth,
which is another divine attribute. (See A Metaphysical
Essay 193–207 in Miscellanies.) Norris also proves the
many attributes of God beginning with God's attribute of necessary
existence, revealed in His proclamation to Moses that He is “I
Am.” In Reason and Religion Norris interprets this
proclamation as Being. These various demonstrations proceed by proving
“the same by the same” since any and all attributes are
“really the same” with one another, the attributes are
identical to God.
These arguments preserve the divine attribute of simplicity. If God is
simple, then proofs utilizing different attributes must be proofs that
utilize the same subject. The diversity of the attributes are
explained as various ways of cognizing the same divine essence:
Norris proceeds to explain how an attribute such as omnipotence can be
accounted for because it is “displayed according to the
diversity of objects” and “Modes of operation”
(34). In the mode of creating, God is the omnipotent Creator. The
relevant object here is all of creation. In the mode of legislator,
God is the Supreme Lawgiver, and the relevant object is the moral
realm. The diverse ways of considering the natural world are also the
many ways we can conceive of God's attributes. In the end, humanity
has partial, imperfect views of God according to his operations. A
lesser being, such as a human, can also be known under many
operations. One might be a parent, spouse, writer and teacher. But
that person is defined in those roles because of the objects that
these titles refer to; in the case of the teacher, the person is a
teacher only with respect to the students taught. One is a parent only
with respect to the role played towards offspring, but the person is
“really one and the same.” Just as we might come to know
an individual better and better as we come to know more of the
person's roles, so we come to know God better by conceiving of his
many attributes. Norris believes that all attributes are one in God,
differently conceived according to the roles played and objects
considered.
Furthermore, Norris reduces the eternal truths, which are the
accidental relations amongst the divine ideas to the ideas themselves,
and then reduces the ideas to God:
So it is odd that, after laying out these arguments for the simplicity
of God, Norris states that the flaw in Descartes' account of
voluntarism is that Descartes had attributed to the divine will what
belongs to another attribute of God – the divine ideality. If
the attributes are all one, it is difficult to argue for a priority
amongst attributes. Nonetheless, Norris argues that Descartes was
correct to claim truth must depend on God alone, but incorrectly
believed God arbitrarily creates the eternal truth, for this renders
truth as mutable as any other creature. What Descartes missed,
according to Norris, was the distinction between God as
intelligible, or exhibitive, and God as intelligent,
or conceptive (Miscellanies 440, Theory I 357–358).
To understand God as conceptive is to understand God as a thinker, who
reflects upon his own ideas. To understand God as exhibitive is to
understand God qua divine ideas. The complexity arising from
including ideas in the divine mind is a further difficulty for divine
simplicity. In the end, if Norris is to be read as consistent, he must
claim that the divine ideality is another attribute of God. Norris
might have taken Malebranche's lead, who wrote, concerning divine
simplicity, “I long stopped worrying about problems that are
beyond me” (qtd. in Schmaltz 2000 62). But it is noteworthy that
Norris did not; concerning the topic of divine simplicity, Norris
advances the work of his predecessors, in particular the work of
Malebranche. In a passage reminiscent of Thomistic analogical
predication, Norris suggests that God as intelligent, or as
engaging in thought, must be radically different from our experiences
of cogitation:
The extent of humanity's knowledge of the essence of God is a problem
that has preoccupied many thinkers in the history of Western
philosophy. Unlike other areas of inquiry, questions concerning the
nature of God, even if they are unanswerable now, receive answers in
the next life. Although Norris believes that we can answer many
important questions about the divine essence, our view of the
intelligible world is dim indeed. He concedes that certain mysteries
are temporarily beyond our ken. Norris would agree with what Descartes
wrote in his First Replies:
Humanity does have some reliable knowledge about some subject-matter,
and Norris offers an account of this partial enlightenment. Norris
believes, for example, that we know enough to clearly and distinctly:
1. Accept Descartes' real distinction proof and 2. Refute Locke's
thinking matter hypothesis.
Questions about the form and content of human thought occupied the
philosophers of the early modern period. One helpful way to draw the
line between the empiricists and the rationalists of this time period
is along issues concerning human cognition. Norris believes the object
of thought is always God and the structure of thought facilitates
objective, indubitable knowledge. For these reasons, he belongs squarely
in the rationalist camp.
Norris espouses a Cartesian theory of human thought, which he
delineates in Theory II and Reason and Religion.
Norris says that all thought exhibits a certain structure –
formal thought, which is the act of thinking, and objective thought,
which is the object of the thinking. Like Descartes, Norris claims all
thought is about some thing. Formal thought is always the same,
whether we are perceiving or “willing, desiring, loving, hating,
hoping, fearing…even sensation it self”
(Theory II 109). Thoughts differ based upon content. Like
Malebranche and unlike Descartes, the object of thought is always God,
and “'tis the diversity of this Ideal Object that makes all the
diversity and distinction that is to be found in our Thought, whether
Natural or Moral” (113). God's omniform essence is always the
content of perception, intellection and passion. Indeed, all knowledge
is always of God qua divine ideas. When perceiving the ideas,
we are viewing “the very same Divine Nature it self, as
‘tis variously imitable or Participable ad extra,
according to such or such intelligible Degrees of Being or
Perfection” (Theory I 294). Hence, the sole object of
our perceptions, both intellectual and sensory, is God. When humans
think, we think and conduct proofs in mental propositions, but “
to Speak exactly ‘tis not the mental Proposition that it [our
thought] demonstrates, but ‘tis the mental Proposition
that demonstrates the real. The former belonging to the Act, as the
latter does to the Object of Science” (311,
brackets added). Our thoughts are always about the ideal propositions,
constituted by the divine ideas as they are related to one
another.
When we think in propositions, we usually think directly; direct
thinking is everyday cognition such as knowing to proceed at green
lights or knowing dentists' chairs are frightening. All humanity
thinks directly, or in these ordinary ways, but some persons engage in
reflexive thought, or about the mind itself and its contents. In
reflexive thought, there is a return of the mind onto itself, or an
attending to the contents of the mind; such reflexive thoughts are
more attentive perceptions of the divine ideas, and these thoughts are
contemplations of the eternal truths. Norris states along with Locke
(Essay 4.3.2) that knowledge is perceiving “those
Relations of agreement or disagreement that are between Ideas, which
whoever clearly and rightly perceives, is truly said to
know” (Theory II 147–148). Knowledge of the
eternal truths, of course, is the highest grade of knowledge, or
scientia. By engaging in reflexive thought, we can align our
mental propositions with the ideal ones. The ultimate intellectual
goal is this alignment of our thought with the eternal truths.
Norris adopts the Malebranchean doctrine of Vision in God, which
states that all intellectual and sensory perception is perception of
God. Norris significantly augments neither Malebranche's account nor
argument for Vision in God with respect to sensory perception.  Norris
limits himself to reproducing Malebranche's eliminative argument from
the Search after Truth for why our sensory perception must be
of ideas in God. The eliminative argument is found in chapters VII
through XI in Theory II. Yet Norris does offer a more
detailed account of abstract thought (which is an intellectual
perception of God) than does Malebranche. Norris meticulously conveys
how we come to have knowledge of the essences of created things. God
is revealed through degrees of being (i.e. divine ideas), such as the
degrees of being exhibited by bodies and minds, and we can come to
know their essences by attending carefully to our perceptions of
divine ideas. Careful attention requires thinking abstractly for
Norris, and Norris offers us a definition of abstraction:
Abstraction serves to make the intellect's “View of things more
clear and distinct. As Spectacles, tho' in him that uses them they
argue weakness of Sight, yet when used they do very much assist the
Act of Vision” (176–177).  Abstraction is the
key to understanding how we come to know about minds and bodies. When
considering the ideas of body, we understand that
This sort of abstraction Norris calls “modal abstraction.”
Since we cannot imagine a body without some shape and some dimensions,
shape and dimensions are determinables, or modes, of extension. Shape
is not an independently existing thing, but is always a modification
of an independently existing thing. Since Norris holds that our clear
and distinct mental propositions track ideal propositions, we can
conclude that shape and dimensions are not substances, but
modes. Modal abstraction turns out to underscore Norris' rehearsal of
real distinction. His account is noteworthy because it offers an
alternative understanding of the real distinction proof. When we are
certain that the two items under consideration are not distinct by
modal abstraction, we can be sure the two items are really
distinct.
Another question preoccupying the early moderns concerned the
constitution of the human being. Is the human being a union of an
immortal soul and a mortal body? Or is the human being a mere body
with mentality somehow added? Descartes, in connection with the
version of the real distinction proof in the Sixth
Meditation, argues that we can know clearly and distinctly that a
human being is a union of two really distinct substances, a soul and a
body. Locke, at 4.3.6 of the Essay, states we might be bodies
with thought superadded. Norris perceives Locke's hypothesis as
contradicting Cartesian real distinction, so he reestablishes real
distinction in his Theory II. His reconstruction of
Descartes' proof begins with the realization that the distinction
between the mind and body is not at all like the distinction between
the body and shape:
The fact that we can clearly and distinctly conceive of the body
existing without the mind and vice versa entails that the body is
really distinct from the mind. Ontological relationships are reflected
in human thought when we are thinking clearly and distinctly, and if a
modal abstraction is present, we can be certain that the items under
consideration are the modes of a substance. On the other hand, when
one thing can be thought while considering the other as not existing,
the things are not modes after all, but really distinct substances.
Otherwise, there is no criterion of intelligibility, and for Norris
“all Truth is intelligible” (30). If we
do not accept the standard of clarity and distinctness, no standard
for human judgment remains.
In Cursory Reflections, Norris presses Locke about the nature
of an idea. Locke's account of ideas as originating in sensation and
reflection found at 2.1 of the  Essay is met by Norris with:
“These indeed are pretty Smiling Sentences. But before
we go a step further I would willingly know of the Author what kind of
things these Ideas are which are thus let in at the Gate of the
Senses” (22). Norris infers that Lockean ideas must be either
mental substances or modifications, and then presents difficulties for
either option. For Norris, the foundation of intelligibility can never
have an empirical basis. The foundation must be the true nature of
ideas:
In addition to the defense of real distinction, Norris questions
Locke's suggestion that we might be thinking matter. Norris, along
with many of his contemporaries, questions the mechanisms by which
matter could be endowed with thought. Mary Astell, with whom Norris
corresponded, is as confounded when she wonders whether God “may
according to the good Pleasure of His Omnipotency, give it [a
triangle] a good speaking, a walking, or a
dancing Faculty, and make it able to Eat and Drink”
(Christian Religion 254–255, brackets added). Astell's
assumption here is shared by Norris; things are what they are
according to their essences, which are determined by God's
ideas. Extended bodies cannot reveal mental states through walking and
dancing, only minds are capable of initiating such acts. Norris
utilizes this assumption in one of his arguments against the thinking
matter hypothesis:
Since bodies are sometimes separately produced from minds, God does
not create them from the same idea. Body and mind are created from
different ideas; they have separate essences.
Whereas Locke argues that the human being might, for all we know, be
matter with thought superadded, Norris claims in no uncertain terms
that the human being is a substantial union. However, Norris can only
argue for his claim within his ideal philosophy, which Locke rejects.
But the grounds for rejection spring from the very view of
‘idea’ Locke espouses; an idea is generated and formed by
sensation and reflection. This debate concerns, fundamentally, the
ontological status of ideas, and how far ideas can guarantee a
correspondence to reality external to thought. In this debate, the
reader can fully appreciate one main difference between Cartesian
rationalism and Lockean empiricism in late 17th Century
England. For Locke, propositions about ideas are themselves mere
mental propositions. As such, their certainty does not guarantee
truth. For Norris, clear and distinct mental propositions reflect
ideal propositions. Certainty about mental propositions does guarantee
truth.
Norris offers an important insight into how the real distinction proof
depends on abstractive processes. However, like Malebranche, Norris
claims that we have no access to God's idea of the mind.  The mind's
existence is known only by inner consciousness, or sentiment. This
raises the same problems for Norris that Malebranche has defending the
proof. (See Nolan and Whipple 2005.) If humanity is ignorant about the
essence of the soul, then there can be no proof using the essence of
the soul as a premise; we cannot know if the proposition, ‘The
mind is a substance’, is true or false.  At best, it is
indeterminate. So, whether Norris can fully defend the proof is
questionable. Nonetheless, Norris argues for the immortality of the
soul in A Philosophical Discourse concerning the Natural
Immortality of the Soul in response to a work published by Henry
Dodwell. Dodwell held that all souls are material, and only a few
souls are granted immortality. Norris, relying upon the essence of the
soul as immaterial, draws a distinction between the indissolvible and
the imperishable (33–34). The soul is naturally indissolvible because
it is indivisible, but it is not imperishable. If God ceased his
constant creation, all things would immediately cease to exist.
Norris dedicates a chapter in Theory II to the topic of
animals. Descartes and Malebranche had held that animals are mere
machines. Norris agrees there are good reasons to believe that animals
are machines, but it is possible that they have souls because
“'tis easy to err in the Dark.” Norris discourages
“any practices of Cruelty, upon the Bodies of these Creatures,
which the Lord of Creation has…subjected to our Power.”
He advises us to treat animals “with as much tenderness and
pitiful regard, as if they had all that Sense and Perception, which is
commonly…attributed to them” (100).
A recurring theme in Norris' writings is the importance of solitude and
meditation. Christianity, for Norris, was a highly personal
relationship with one's God. Being a good Christian involves the
opening of one's mind to a comprehension of God. “For Passion is
the great Contrariety to Reason, and will draw a cloud over the
brightest Mind. The quiet and sedate Soul is most fit for the
Contemplation of Truth, as the calmest Weather is commonly the most
serene” (Two Treatises in Treatises upon Several
Subjects 353).
One truth the meditative Christian comes to understand is that God is
love. Norris believes love is a natural tendency of the soul, and
analogizes love to motion in The Theory and Regulation of
Love. There he writes: “So that upon the whole to speak
more explicitly the most general and Comprehensive Notion of
Love will be found to be, a motion of the Soul towards
God” (12). Regarding the objects of love, one can love the
general, universal good, viz. God, or particular goods, which reflect
the goodness of God, “For God having unfolded his Perfections in
the Creation with almost infinite Variety, and as it were drawn out
himself into a numerous issue of Secondary goods, our Love
becomes also Multiplied” (12). Regarding the act of love, one
can love with benevolence or with desire. Concupiscence, or loving
with desire, is a general tendency towards good. Benevolent love is
willing a specific good for a person. Benevolent love is further
divided into self-love and other-love, which Norris also calls the
“love of charity.” All concupiscence proceeds from
indigence so it is rooted in self-love, whereas love of charity does
not have to proceed from self-love. He explains why God is a
narcissistic God: “For as GOD is to himself his own good, his
own Center and Beatifick Object, so the Love of GOD can be no other
than Love of himself” (Letters 226). Since God wants
nothing, God cannot exhibit concupiscence, but only love of charity
for humanity. The correct object of our love is also God, especially
given the occasionalism thesis that God is the genuine cause of all
the secondary goods we might desire. It is only in God that one finds
full satisfaction of desire, “he is also the true final Cause of
the Will of Man; which I take to be nothing else but that continual
Impression whereby the Author of Nature moves him towards
himself” (227). It is important to keep in mind that God is
infinite love; echoing again the Thomistic theme running throughout
Norris' works, it is impossible to understand exactly how God
loves.
Contrary to this Thomistic theme, the Socinians believed all Christian
doctrine should be comprehensible. Socinianism was advanced in John
Toland's 1696 Christianity not Mysterious.  Socinianism
rejected inexplicable Christian doctrine, such as the divinity of
Christ as man. Norris believed Socinianism to be a dangerous view
because it leads to either deism or atheism. This threatening
entailment led him to respond to the doctrine in An Account of
Reason and Faith, which he published in 1697. In the piece,
Norris defines some truths as above reason, such as the existence of
the Trinity. Other claims are blatantly “Contrary to Reason when
we do positively comprehend that it cannot be” (117); these
claims should be rejected. However, there are many claims we should
not reject so quickly:
Neither option presents itself as true, but Norris proceeds to ask the
Socinian if he would accept it as an article of faith if God were to
reveal the correct option. Human ignorance does not entail falsity.
Moreover, human ignorance does not entail divine ignorance just as a
neophyte mathematician's inability to demonstrate “the
Diameter of a Square is incommensurable to the Side” does
not entail the lack of a demonstration (321). Norris concludes that
the Socinians improperly hold the human intellect to be the standard
for truth. Truth is understood and determined by God, who possesses an
infinite intellect. The fact that the Trinity is incomprehensible does
not warrant its rejection:
Reason is reliable, but limited. The Socinians have gone too far in
their support of reason. On the other hand, Norris believes that the
Quakers have gone too far in the other direction.
Norris was familiar with Roger Barclay and George Keith's expositions
of Quakerism, and argued against the view in Reflections upon the
Conduct of Human Life. The Quakers had an affinity for the ideal
philosophy because they believed the divine light that enlightens the
human mind supported their view. Norris delineates the many
differences between Quaker thought and his own, but perhaps the main
difference is: “The Quakers represent this light within as a
sort of Extraordinary Inspiration (whence they have the name
of Enthusiasts) whereas I suppose it to be a Man's
Natural and Ordinary way of Understanding”
(Two Treatises 365). Also, Norris identifies their
inspiration as limited to moral and spiritual truths. Norris also
concludes that the Quakers render the divine light a creature because
it cannot be God on the Quakers' view. God and creatures are the only
two possibilities for existing things, hence, the divine light of the
Quakers is a creature. Also, the divine light must be considered
material since it is described as a “Vehiculum
Dei” and it is “divisible into Measures and
Portions” (437). These attributes cannot be maintained;
divisibility and motion cannot “with any tolerable Congruity
agree to a Spiritual Substance, strictly so call'd” (438).
Finally, Norris argues that the Quakers' divine light is contingent
because it is a creature, so it cannot convey necessary and eternal
truths; only an infinite being can be the source of the eternal truths
(453–454). The proper way to live a good Christian life, morally and
intellectually, is to engage one's intellect, “the greatest
advantage of thinking is yet behind, that it improves our Morals as
well as our Intellectuals; and serves to make us Better, as well as
Wiser” (Miscellanies 151). The Quakers, by emphasizing
the passions, takes the Christian far from the intelligible world.
Norris also believed that the Quakers were guilty of the sin of
schism. Certain nonconformist Christian groups were exempted from
prosecution by the Toleration Act of 1689, and the Quakers were
amongst these. Norris firmly believed that schism from the Anglican
Church was a sin, and believed the Toleration Act merely removed the
earthly punishment. In The Charge of Schism Continued, Norris
cites Ephesians 4.3–6, and emphasizes St. Paul's words to the
Ephesians to preserve unity. God commands unity, and schism is a sin
where there is an established Church. Norris divides a law into a
preceptive and a punitive element. The basis of the punishment is the
rationale of a law, or the preceptive aspect of a law. The Toleration
Act merely removes the punitive aspect, leaving the rationale of the
law, which is God's commandment. Furthermore, the justification of all
human law lies in divine law, “If it be further askt, whence has
the Law-giver his Authority? I answer, if he be a Creature, he has it
from God, whom I suppose to be the sole Fountain of all Power. But if
the Law-giver be God, he has it Originally and Independently in
himself” (The Charge 312). Norris held the Toleration
Act to be a violation of divine law.
Other than his writings on toleration, his sole other published
political work is A Murnival of Knaves issued in 1683 against
the Parliamentarians. Norris was a Royalist, but he was not much
engaged in the volatile politics of his day. A poem in his
Miscellanies reveals his attitude towards politics:
The ruination of one's soul for the chance to achieve temporary
greatness runs against Norris' basic convictions, the foremost of
which was a life dedicated to the service of God focused upon the
afterlife. This dearth of political writings reveals a philosopher who
engaged in intellectual activity because it reveals an orderly
universe governed by the Christian God. Humility is also an important
virtue for the Christian, as Norris explains in A Practical
Treatise concerning Humility published in 1707. In Creation,
humanity has a humble role to play – to love and serve
God. Political and intellectual endeavors are tools to achieve that
end. All human thought and institutions should be utilized to serve
God's purposes. This theme is also reflected in Norris' 1705 The
Distinction between High Church and Low Church, distinctly considered
and fairly treated.
Norris integrates the thought of his predecessors—Descartes,
Malebranche, Suarez, Augustine, Aquinas and Plato—in a manner
centering on the Christian God. God is truth, love and the aim of all
religious and practical life. Norris' ambition of completing
Malebranche's project is reflected in his arguments to establish the
existence of the divine ideas and their locus in the mind of God, or
the intelligible world. His detailed discussion of the eternal truths
is a further expansion upon Malebranche's philosophy. The defense of
Descartes' real distinction proof is enlightening because it renders
transparent the assumption of abstractive knowledge that might have
aided contemporary readers' understanding of the proof. If Norris did
not venture further into the philosophical, political and scientific
debates of his own time, the explanation lies in his advice to never
study out of vanity. Worldly knowledge, such as knowledge of history
or languages, is a waste of one's time.  Norris was dedicated to the
cause of knowledge for Christianity's sake, and he saw his own work,
as well as his predecessors', as attempting to realize fully knowledge
of the Pauline Doctrine, stated at Acts 17:28, that in God
“we live, move and have our being.”