‘Scotus’ identifies Scotus as a Scot.  His family name was
Duns, which was also the name of the Scottish village in which he was
born, just a few miles from the English border.  We do not know the
precise date of his birth, but we do know that Scotus was ordained to
the priesthood in the Order of Friars Minor—the
Franciscans—at Saint Andrew’s Priory in Northampton, England, on
17 March 1291. The minimum age for ordination was twenty-five, so we
can conclude that Scotus was born before 17 March 1266. But how much
before? The conjecture, plausible but by no means certain, is that
Scotus would have been ordained as early as canonically permitted.
Since the Bishop of Lincoln (the diocese that included Oxford, where
Scotus was studying, as well as St Andrew’s Priory) had ordained
priests in Wycombe on 23 December 1290, we can place Scotus’s birth
between 23 December 1265 and 17 March 1266.
Scotus studied philosophy and then theology at Oxford beginning some
time in the 1280s. In the academic year 1298–99 he commented on
the first two books of the Sentences of Peter Lombard. Scotus
left Oxford for Paris, probably in 1302, and began lecturing on
the Sentences again (we think in the order Book I, Book IV,
Book II, Book III).  In June 1303 Scotus was expelled from France
along with eighty other friars for taking Pope Boniface VIII’s side in
a dispute with King Philip IV of France.  After Boniface died in
October 1303 the king allowed the exiled students and masters to
return, so Scotus could have returned in the late fall of 1303 to
resume his lectures on the Sentences.  Scotus became Doctor
of Theology in 1305 and was Franciscan regent master at Paris in
1306–07. He was transferred to the Franciscan studium
at Cologne, probably beginning his duties as lector in October
1307. He died there in 1308; the date of his death is traditionally
given as 8 November.
It is generally agreed that Scotus’s earliest works were his
commentaries on the Old Logic: questions on
Porphyry’s Isagoge and Aristotle’s Categories, two
sets of questions on Peri hermeneias, and De sophisticis
elenchis. These probably date to around 1295; the Quaestiones
super De anima is also very likely an early work (the editors
date it to the late 1280s or early 1290s). Scotus’s other Aristotelian
commentary, the Quaestiones super libros Metaphysicorum
Aristotelis, seems to have been started early; but Books VI
through IX are all late or were at least revised later in Scotus’s
career.  Scotus also wrote an Expositio on
Aristotle’s Metaphysics.  It had been unidentified for
centuries but was recently identified and edited by Giorgio Pini.
Things really get complicated when we come to Scotus’s commentaries on
the four books of Sentences of Peter Lombard, since he
commented on the Sentences more than once and revised his
lectures over a long period; the relations among the various versions
that have come down to us are not always clear. Certainly
the Lectura presents us with Scotus’s Oxford lectures on
Books I and II of the Sentences in 1298–99. There is an
Ordinatio (i.e., a version prepared for publication by the
author himself) of lectures at Oxford, based in part on the
Lectura and on material from his lectures in Paris. The
Ordinatio, which Scotus seems to have been revising up to his
death, is generally taken to be Scotus’s premier work; the critical
edition was at last completed in 2013. Finally, Scotus lectured on the
Sentences at Paris, and there are various
Reportationes of these lectures.  A critical edition is in
progress; at present we have a transcription of a reasonably reliable
manuscript of Book I.  Although the Paris lectures themselves were
later than the Oxford lectures, it seems probable that parts of
the Ordinatio—Book IV and perhaps also Book
III—are later than the corresponding parts of
the Reportatio.
In addition to these works, we have 46 short disputations called
Collationes dating from 1300–1305, a late work in natural
theology called De primo principio, and Quaestiones
Quodlibetales from Scotus’s days as regent master (either Advent
1306 or Lent 1307). Finally, there is a work called
Theoremata.  Though doubts have been raised about its
authenticity, the recent critical edition accepts it as a genuine work
of Scotus.
Natural theology is, roughly, the effort to establish the existence
and nature of God by arguments that in no way depend on the contents of
a purported revelation. But is it even possible for human
beings to come to know God apart from revelation? Scotus certainly
thinks so. Like any good Aristotelian, he thinks all our knowledge
begins in some way with our experience of sensible things. But he is
confident that even from such humble beginnings we can come to grasp
God.
Scotus agrees with Thomas Aquinas that all our knowledge of God
starts from creatures, and that as a result we can only prove the
existence and nature of God by what the medievals call an argument
quia (reasoning from effect to cause), not by an argument
propter quid (reasoning from essence to characteristic).
Aquinas and Scotus further agree that, for that same reason, we cannot
know the essence of God in this life. The main difference between the
two authors is that Scotus believes we can apply certain predicates
univocally—with exactly the same meaning—to God and creatures,
whereas Aquinas insists that this is impossible, and that we can only
use analogical predication, in which a word as applied to God has a
meaning different from, although related to, the meaning of that same
word as applied to creatures. (See
 medieval theories of analogy
 for
details.)
Scotus has a number of arguments for univocal predication and
against the doctrine of analogy (Ordinatio 1, d. 3, pars 1, q.
1–2, nn. 26–55). One of the most compelling uses Aquinas’s own view
against him. Aquinas had said that all our concepts come from
creatures. Scotus says, very well, where will that analogous concept
come from? It can’t come from anywhere. If all our concepts come from
creatures (and Scotus doesn’t deny this), then the concepts we apply to
God will also come from creatures. They won’t just be like the
concepts that come from creatures, as in analogous predication; they
will have to be the very same concepts that come from
creatures, as in univocal predication. Those are the only concepts we
can have—the only concepts we can possibly get. So if we can’t use
the concepts we get from creatures, we can’t use any concepts at all,
and so we can’t talk about God—which is false.
Another argument for univocal predication is based on an argument
from Anselm. Consider all predicates, Anselm says. Now get rid of the
ones that are merely relatives, since no relative expresses the nature
of a thing as it is in itself. (So we’re not talking about such
predicates as “supreme being” or “Creator,” since even though those
properly apply to God, they don’t tell us anything about what God is in
himself, only about how he is related to other things.) Now take the
predicates that are left. Here’s the test. Let F be our
predicate-variable. For any F, either
(a) It is in every respect better to be F than not
to be F. 


~or~

(b) It is in some respect better to be not-F than
F.
A predicate will fall into the second category if and only if it
implies some sort of limitation or deficiency. Anselm’s argument is
that we can (indeed must) predicate of God every predicate that falls
into the first category, and that we cannot predicate of God any
predicate that falls into the second (except metaphorically, perhaps).
Scotus agrees with Anselm on this point (as did Aquinas: see
SCG I.30). Scotus has his own terminology for whatever it is
in every respect better to be than not to be. He calls such things
“pure perfections” (perfectiones simpliciter). A pure
perfection is any predicate that does not imply limitation.
So Scotus claims that pure perfections can be predicated of God. But
he takes this a step further than Anselm. He says that they have to be
predicated univocally of God; otherwise the whole business of
pure perfections won’t make any sense. Here’s the argument. If we are
going to use Anselm’s test, we must first come up with our
concept—say, of good. Then we check out the concept to see
whether it is in every respect better to be good than not-good. We
realize that it is, and so we predicate ‘good’ of
God. That test obviously won’t work unless it’s the same concept that
we’re applying in both cases.
One can see this more clearly by considering the two possible ways
in which one might deny that the same concept is applied to both God
and creatures. One might say that the concept of the pure perfection
applies only to creatures, and the concept we apply to God has to be
something different; or one might try it the other way around and say
that the concept of the pure perfection applies only to God, and the
concept we apply to creatures has to be something different. Take the
first possibility. If we come up with the idea of a pure perfection
from creatures and don’t apply the same concept to God, we’re saying
that we can come up with something that is in every respect better to
be than not to be, but it doesn’t apply to God. Such a view would
destroy the idea that God is the greatest and most perfect being. So
then one might try the second possibility: the concept of the pure
perfection really applies only to God. Scotus points out that that
can’t be right either. For then the perfection we apply to creatures
won’t be the pure perfection any more, and so the creature wouldn’t be
better off for having this pseudo-perfection. But the whole way in
which we came up with the idea of the pure perfection in the first
place was by considering perfections in creatures—in other words, by
considering what features made creatures better in every respect. So
this possibility gets the test backwards: it says that we have to start
with knowing what features God has and thereby determining what is a
pure perfection, but in fact we first figure out what the pure
perfections are and thereby know what features God has.
Not only can we come up with concepts that apply univocally to God
and creatures, we can even come up with a proper (distinctive)
concept of God. Now in one sense we can’t have a proper concept of God
in this life, since we can’t know his essence as a particular thing. We
know God in the way that we know, say, a person we have heard about but
have never met. That is, we know him through general concepts that can
apply both to him and to other things. In another sense, though, we can
have a proper concept of God, that is, one that applies only to God. If
we take any of the pure perfections to the highest degree, they will be
predicable of God alone. Better yet, we can describe God more
completely by taking all the pure perfections in the highest degree and
attributing them all to him.
But these are all composite concepts; they all involve putting two
quite different notions together: ‘highest’ with
‘good’, ‘first’ with ‘cause’, and
so on. Scotus says that we can come up with a relatively
simple concept that is proper to God alone, the concept of
“infinite being.” Now that concept might seem to be every
bit as composite as “highest good” or “first
cause,” but it’s really not. For “infinite being” is
a concept of something essentially one: a being that has infinity
(unlimitedness) as its intrinsic way of existing. I will return to the
crucial role of the concept of infinite being in Scotus’s natural
theology after I examine his proof of the existence of God.
Scotus’s argument for the existence of God is rightly regarded as
one of the most outstanding contributions ever made to natural
theology. The argument is enormously complex, with several
sub-arguments for almost every important conclusion, and I can only
sketch it here. (Different versions of the proof are given at
Lectura 1, d. 2, q. 1, nn. 38–135; Ordinatio 1, d. 2,
q. 1, nn. 39–190; Reportatio 1, d. 2, q. 1; and De primo
principio.)
Scotus begins by arguing that there is a first agent (a being that
is first in efficient causality). Consider first the distinction
between essentially ordered causes and accidentally ordered causes. In
an accidentally ordered series, the fact that a given member of that
series is itself caused is accidental to that member’s own causal
activity. For example, Grandpa A generates a son, Dad B, who in turn
generates a son of his own, Grandson C. B’s generating C in no way
depends on A—A could be long dead by the time B starts having
children. The fact that B was caused by A is irrelevant to B’s own
causal activity. That’s how an accidentally ordered series of causes
works.
In an essentially ordered series, by contrast, the causal activity
of later members of the series depends essentially on the causal
activity of earlier members. For example, my shoulders move my arms,
which in turn move my golf club. My arms are capable of moving the golf
club only because they are being moved by my shoulders.
With that distinction in mind, we can examine Scotus’s argument for
the existence of a first efficient cause:
Scotus then goes on to argue that there is an ultimate goal of
activity (a being that is first in final causality), and a maximally
excellent being (a being that is first in what Scotus calls
“pre-eminence”).
Thus he has proved what he calls the “triple primacy”: there is a
being that is first in efficient causality, in final causality, and in
pre-eminence. Scotus next proves that the three primacies are
coextensive: that is, any being that is first in one of these three
ways will also be first in the other two ways. Scotus then argues that
a being enjoying the triple primacy is endowed with intellect and will,
and that any such being is infinite. Finally, he argues that there can
be only one such being.
In laying out Scotus’s proof of the existence of God, I passed
rather quickly over the claim that God is infinite. But the divine
infinity deserves more detailed treatment. As we have already seen, the
concept of “infinite being” has a privileged role in Scotus’s natural
theology. As a first approximation, we can say that divine infinity is
for Scotus what divine simplicity is for Aquinas. It’s the central
divine-attribute generator. But there are some important differences
between the role of simplicity in Aquinas and the role of infinity in
Scotus. The most important, I think, is that in Aquinas simplicity acts
as an ontological spoilsport for theological semantics. Simplicity is
in some sense the key thing about God, metaphysically speaking, but it
seriously complicates our language about God. God is supposed to be a
subsistent simple, but because our language is all derived from
creatures, which are all either subsistent but complex or simple but
non-subsistent, we don’t have any way to apply our language
straightforwardly to God. The divine nature systematically resists
being captured in language.
For Scotus, though, infinity is not only what’s ontologically
central about God; it’s the key component of our best available concept
of God and a guarantor of the success of theological language. That is,
our best ontology, far from fighting with our theological semantics,
both supports and is supported by our theological semantics. The
doctrine of univocity rests in part on the claim that “[t]he difference
between God and creatures, at least with regard to God’s possession of
the pure perfections, is ultimately one of degree” (Cross [1999], 39).
Remember one of Scotus’s arguments for univocity. If we are to follow
Anselm in ascribing to God every pure perfection, we have to affirm
that we are ascribing to God the very same thing that we
ascribe to creatures: God has it infinitely, creatures in a limited
way. One could hardly ask for a more harmonious cooperation between
ontology (what God is) and semantics (how we can think and talk about
him).
Scotus ascribes to Aquinas the following argument for the divine
infinity: If a form is limited by matter, it is finite. God, being
simple, is not limited by matter. Therefore, God is not finite. This,
as Scotus points out, is a fallacious argument. (It’s an instance of
denying the antecedent.) But even apart from the fallacy, simplicity
is not going to get us infinity. As Scotus puts it: “if an
entity is finite or infinite, it is so not by reason of something
accidental to itself, but because it has its own intrinsic degree of
finite or infinite perfection” (Ordinatio 1, d. 1, pars
1, q. 1–2, n.  142). So simplicity does not entail infinity,
because finitude is not the result of composition. To look at it
another way, Aquinas’s conception of infinity is negative
and relational.  The infinite is that which is not
bounded by something else.  But Scotus thinks we can have a
positive conception of infinity, according to which infinity is not a
negative, relational property, but instead a positive, intrinsic
property. It is an “intrinsic degree of perfection.”
How do we acquire that conception of positive, intrinsic infinity?
The story goes like this. We begin with “the potentially infinite in
quantity.” According to Aristotle, you can never have an actual
quantitative infinity, since no matter how great a quantity you have,
you can always have more. What you can have (and in fact do have,
Aristotle thinks) is a quantitative infinity by successive parts. The
next step is to imagine that all the parts of that quantitative
infinity remained in existence simultaneously. That is, we imagine an
actual quantitative infinity. Scotus then asks us to shift from
thinking about an actual quantitative infinity to thinking about an
actual qualitative infinity. Think of some quality (say,
goodness) as existing infinitely: so that there is, as it were, no more
goodness that you could add to that goodness to make it any greater.
That’s infinite goodness. But notice that you can’t think of infinite
goodness as in some way composed of little goodness-bits (just an
infinite number of them). If I say that an angel is better than a human
being, I can’t mean that a human being has a certain number of
goodness-bits while the angel has that many plus some extras. Rather,
the specific degree of goodness of a thing is just an intrinsic,
non-quantitative feature of that thing. Infinite being is just like
that. Scotus describes it as “a measure of intrinsic excellence that is
not finite.” This is why the concept of “infinite being” is the
simplest concept available to us for understanding God. Infinity is not
some sort of accidental addition to being, but an intrinsic mode of
being. Of course, if this is right, then the concepts of
‘infinite goodness’, ‘infinite power’, and so
forth, are every bit as simple as the concept of ‘infinite
being’. So why does Scotus make such a big deal about
‘infinite being’? Because ‘infinite being’
“virtually contains” all the other infinite perfections of God. That
is, we can deduce the other infinite perfections from infinite being.
So besides being the next best thing to a simple concept, it’s the most
theoretically fruitful concept we can have of God in this life.
Metaphysics, according to Scotus, is a “real theoretical science”:
it is real in that it treats things rather than concepts, theoretical
in that it is pursued for its own sake rather than as a guide for doing
or making things, and a science in that it proceeds from self-evident
principles to conclusions that follow deductively from them. The
various real theoretical sciences are distinguished by their subject
matter, and Scotus devotes considerable attention to determining what
the distinctive subject matter of metaphysics is. His conclusion is
that metaphysics concerns “being qua being” (ens inquantum
ens). That is, the metaphysician studies being simply as such,
rather than studying, say, material being as material.
The study of being qua being includes, first of all, the
study of the transcendentals, so called because they transcend the
division of being into finite and infinite, and the further division of
finite being into the ten Aristotelian categories. Being itself is a
transcendental, and so are the “proper attributes” of being—one,
true, and good—which are coextensive with being. Scotus also
identifies an indefinite number of disjunctions that are coextensive
with being and therefore count as transcendentals, such as
infinite-or-finite and necessary-or-contingent. Finally, all the pure
perfections (see above) are transcendentals, since they transcend the
division of being into finite and infinite. Unlike the proper
attributes of being and the disjunctive transcendentals, however, they
are not coextensive with being. For God is wise and Socrates is wise,
but earthworms—though they are certainly beings—are not wise.
The study of the Aristotelian categories also belongs to metaphysics
insofar as the categories, or the things falling under them, are
studied as beings. (If they are studied as concepts, they belong
instead to the logician.) There are exactly ten categories, Scotus
argues. The first and most important is the category of substance.
Substances are beings in the most robust sense, since they have an
independent existence: that is, they do not exist in something
else. Beings in any of the other nine categories, called accidents,
exist in substances. The nine categories of accidents are quantity,
quality, relation, action, passion, place, time, position, and state
(habitus).
Now imagine some particular substance, say, me. Suppose I go from
being pale to being tan. Now it is still I who exist both before and
after the sun has had its characteristic effect on me. This illustrates
an important feature of substances: they can successively have contrary
accidents and yet retain their numerical identity. This sort of change
is known, appropriately enough, as accidental change. In an accidental
change, a substance persists through the change, having first one
accident and then another. But clearly not all changes are accidental
changes. There was once a time when I did not exist, and then I came
into existence. We can’t analyze this change as an accidental change,
since there doesn’t seem to be any substance that persists through the
change. Instead, a substance is precisely what comes into being; this
is not an accidental but a substantial change. And yet there
must be something that persists even through substantial change, since
otherwise we wouldn’t have change at all; substances would come to
exist from nothing and disappear into nothing. Scotus follows Aristotle
in identifying matter as what persists through substantial
change and substantial form as what makes a given parcel of
matter the definite, unique, individual substance that it is. (There
are also accidental forms, which are a substance’s accidental
qualities.)
Thus far Scotus is simply repeating Aristotelian orthodoxy, and none
of his contemporaries or immediate predecessors would have found any of
this at all strange. But as Scotus elaborates his views on form and
matter, he espouses three important theses that mark him off from some
other philosophers of his day: he holds that matter can exist without any form whatsoever, that not all created substances are composites
of form and matter, and that one and the same substance can have more
than one substantial form. Let us examine each of these theses in
turn.
First, Scotus argues that God can create and conserve what was called “prime matter”: that is, matter that has no form whatsoever. (For an analysis of the arguments, see Ward 2014.) Matter and form are distinct things, as the case of substantial change makes clear: matter persists when forms come and go. Now that fact by itself might be taken to show only that matter can exist apart from any given form (and Scotus thinks that too), but Scotus takes the separability of matter and form even further. Divine omnipotence means that God can cause immediately (that is, without a secondary cause) whatever he ordinarily causes through a secondary cause. God ordinarily causes matter through form; but given divine omnipotence, he need not. He can create matter without any form. Moreover, given that matter is a thing distinct from form, God creates matter directly and immediately; and what God creates immediately, he can conserve immediately. So God can conserve matter without conserving any of the forms that characterize that matter.
Second, Scotus denies “universal hylomorphism,” the view that all
created substances are composites of form and matter (Lectura
2, d. 12, q. un., n. 55). Universal hylomorphism (from the Greek
hyle, meaning ‘matter’, and morphe,
meaning ‘form’) had been the predominant view among
Franciscans before Scotus. Saint Bonaventure, for example, had argued
that even angels could not be altogether immaterial; they must be
compounds of form and “spiritual matter.” For matter is potentiality
and form is actuality, so if the angels were altogether immaterial,
they would be pure actuality without any admixture of potentiality. But
only God is pure actuality. But as we have already seen in his
affirmation of the existence of prime matter, Scotus simply denies the
unqualified equation of matter with potentiality and form with
actuality. Prime matter, though entirely without form, could be actual; and a
purely immaterial being is not automatically bereft of
potentiality.
Third, Scotus holds that some substances have more than one
substantial form (Ordinatio 4, d. 11, q. 3, n. 54). This
doctrine of the plurality of substantial forms was commonly held among
the Franciscans but vigorously disputed by others. We can very easily
see the motivation for the view by recalling that a substantial form is
supposed to be what makes a given parcel of matter the definite,
unique, individual substance that it is. Now suppose, as many medieval
thinkers (including Aquinas) did, that the soul is the one and only
substantial form of the human being. It would then follow that when a
human being dies, and the soul ceases to inform that parcel of matter,
what is left is not the same body that existed just before death; there is an entirely new substance, with entirely new accidents (for accidents depend for their being on the substance in which they inhere). For
what made it that very body was its substantial form, which (ex
hypothesi) is no longer there.
To Scotus and many of his fellow Franciscans it therefore seemed obvious that we need to posit a plurality of substantial forms to avoid these metaphysical incongruities. One standard form of such pluralism postulated a “form of the body”
(forma corporeitatis) that makes a given parcel of matter to
be a definite, unique, individual organism, and the “animating form”
or soul, which makes that body alive. At death, the animating
soul ceases to vivify the body, but numerically the same body remains,
and the form of the body keeps the matter organized, at least for a
while. Since the form of the body is too weak on its own to keep the
body in existence indefinitely, however, it gradually decomposes.
Scotus’s view is more complicated still, for he treats each organ of a living body as a substance (a composite of matter and substantial form). Whether Scotus also acknowledges a forma corporeitatis over and above the forms of the bodily organs is disputed (see Ward 2014, 90–93). If he does not, he must accept the unpalatable conclusion that a corpse is not the same body as the body of the organism. He can, however, avoid the conclusion that no accidents of that body remain: any accidents that inhere in the organs can remain, because the organs are substances and continue to exist (for a while, anyway) when the body of which they were parts ceases to exist.
Note that the general tendency of Scotus’s theories of form and
matter is to allow a high degree of independence to form and matter. In
positing the existence of prime matter, Scotus envisions matter as
existing without any form; in denying universal hylomorphism, he
envisions form as existing without any matter. And the doctrine of the
plurality of substantial forms strongly suggests that the human soul is
an identifiable individual in its own right. So everything Scotus says
in this connection seems to make room for the possibility that
the soul survives the death of the body and continues to exist as an
immaterial substance in its own right. But Scotus canvases a number of philosophical arguments for the claim that this possibility is in fact realized, and he finds none of them compelling. That the human soul survives the death of the body is something we can know only through faith.
The problem of universals may be thought of as the question of what,
if anything, is the metaphysical basis of our using the same predicate
for more than one distinct individual. Socrates is human and Plato is
human. Does this mean that there must be some one universal
reality—humanity—that is somehow repeatable, in which Socrates and
Plato both share? Or is there nothing metaphysically common to them at
all? Those who think there is some actual universal existing outside
the mind are called realists; those who deny extra-mental universals
are called nominalists. Scotus was a realist about universals, and like
all realists he had to give an account of what exactly those universals
are: what their status is, what sort of existence they have outside the
mind. So, in the case of Socrates and Plato, the question is “What sort
of item is this humanity that both Socrates and Plato exemplify?” A
related question that realists have to face is the problem of
individuation. Given that there is some extra-mental reality common to
Socrates and Plato, we also need to know what it is in each of them
that makes them distinct exemplifications of that extra-mental
reality.
Scotus calls the extra-mental universal the “common nature”
(natura communis) and the principle of individuation the
“haecceity” (haecceitas). The common nature is common in that
it is “indifferent” to existing in any number of individuals. But it
has extra-mental existence only in the particular things in
which it exists, and in them it is always “contracted” by the
haecceity. So the common nature humanity exists in both
Socrates and Plato, although in Socrates it is made individual by
Socrates’s haecceitas and in Plato by Plato’s
haecceitas. The humanity-of-Socrates is individual and
non-repeatable, as is the humanity-of-Plato; yet humanity itself is
common and repeatable, and it is ontologically prior to any particular
exemplification of it (Ordinatio 2, d. 3, pars 1, qq. 1–6,
translated in Spade [1994], 57–113).
Scotus adopts the standard medieval Aristotelian view that human
beings, alone among the animals, have two different sorts of cognitive
powers: senses and intellect. The senses differ from the intellect in
that they have physical organs; the intellect is immaterial. In order
for the intellect to make use of sensory information, therefore, it
must somehow take the raw material provided by the senses in the form
of material images and make them into suitable objects for
understanding. This process is known as abstraction, from the Latin
abstrahere, which is literally “to drag out.” The intellect
pulls out the universal, as it were, from the material singular in
which it is embedded. This activity is performed by the active or agent
intellect, which takes the “phantasms” derived from sense experience
and turns them into “intelligible species.” Those species are
actualized in the possible or receptive intellect, whose function is to
receive and then store the intelligible species provided by the active
intellect. Scotus denies that the active and passive intellect are
really distinct. Rather, there is one intellect that has these two
distinct functions or powers.
Phantasms do not, however, become irrelevant once the intelligible
species has been abstracted. Scotus holds (just as Aquinas had held)
that the human intellect never understands anything without turning
towards phantasms (Lectura 2, d. 3, pars 2, q. 1, n. 255).
That is, in order to deploy a concept that has already been acquired,
one must make some use of sensory data—although the phantasms
employed in using a concept already acquired need not be anything like
the phantasms from which that concept was abstracted in the first
place. I acquired the intelligible species of dog from phantasms of
dogs, but I can make use of that concept now not only by calling up an
image of a dog but also by (say) imagining the sound of the Latin word
for dog. Scotus’s point is simply that there must be some sensory
context for any act of intellectual cognition.
And even that point is not quite as general as my unqualified
statement suggests. For one thing, Scotus believes that our intellect’s
need for phantasms is a temporary state. It is only in this present
life that the intellect must turn to phantasms; in the next life we
will be able to do without them. For another thing, Scotus argues in his later works that even in this life we enjoy a kind of intellectual
cognition that bypasses phantasms. He called it “intuitive
cognition.”
Scotus understands intuitive cognition by way of contrast with
abstractive cognition. The latter, as we have seen, involves the
universal; and a universal as such need not be exemplified. That is, my
intelligible species of dog only tells me what it is to be a dog; it
doesn’t tell me whether any particular dog actually exists. Intuitive
cognition, by contrast, “yields information about how things are right
now” (Pasnau [2002]). Sensory cognition, as Scotus explicitly
acknowledges, counts as intuitive cognition on this account. It is,
after all, quite uncontroversial that my seeing or hearing a dog gives
me information about some particular dog as it exists when I see or
hear it. Scotus’s much bolder claim concerns intellectual
intuitive cognition, by which the intellect cognizes a particular thing
as existing at that very moment. Intellectual intuitive cognition does
not require phantasms; nor does it involve intelligible species (which, like phantasms, are abstractive).
Intellectual intuitive cognition has two different kinds of objects:
extramental sensible objects and the soul’s own acts. (Scotus comes
around to affirming the possibility of such cognition of extramental
objects in his later works, having denied it earlier in his career; he
is consistent about the possibility of intuitive cognition of the
soul’s acts. See Cross 2014, 43–64, on whom I draw thoughout
this section.) We must have intuitive cognition of extramental objects
because we can cognize them intellectually as existing; we
can form propositions about them and use such propositions in
syllogisms. So, for example, if I form the proposition “This
flower is red,” the contents of that proposition must be in the
intellect, not merely in the sense. This is intellectual
cognition because it is conceptual; it is intuitive cognition
because it concerns something as existing. The information
contained in the sensible species—the shape and color of the
flower—is "promoted" by the agent intellect from material
existence in an organ to immaterial existence in the non-organic
intellect, so that it is available for intellectual cognition. The
role of sensible species in intuitive intellectual cognition explains
why Scotus denies that we can have such cognition of non-sensible
objects, such as angels, in this life.
We also have intuitive cognition of our mental acts. (As I discuss in the next section, Scotus attaches considerable importance to our intuitive self-knowledge). Abstractive cognition could provide me with an abstract concept of thinking about
Scotus, for example, but I need intuitive cognition to know that I am in fact
exemplifying that concept right this minute. This kind of intuitive cognition clearly dispenses even with sensible species, since the intellect’s acts, like the intellect itself, are immaterial and therefore not the sorts of things that can be sensed.
Scotus argues that the human intellect is capable of achieving
certainty in its knowledge of the truth simply by the exercise of its
own natural powers, with no special divine help. He therefore opposes
both skepticism, which denies the possibility of certain knowledge, and
illuminationism, which insists that we need special divine illumination
in order to attain certainty. He works out his attack on both doctrines
in the course of a reply to Henry of Ghent in Ordinatio 1, d.
3, pars 1, q. 4. (For a translation, see van den Bercken [2016],
114–143.)
According to Henry, truth involves a relation to an “exemplar.” (We
can think of this relation as akin to the relation of correspondence
appealed to by certain theories of truth, and the exemplar itself as
the mental item that is one of the relata of the
correspondence-relation. The other relatum, of course, is “the way
things really are.”) Now there are two exemplars: the created exemplar,
which is the species of the universal caused by the thing known, and
the uncreated exemplar, which is an idea in the divine mind. Henry
argues that the created exemplar cannot provide us with certain and
infallible knowledge of a thing. For, first, the object from which the
exemplar is abstracted is itself mutable and therefore cannot be the
cause of something immutable. And how can there be certain knowledge
apart from some immutable basis for that knowledge? Second, the soul
itself is mutable and subject to error, and it can be preserved from
error only by something less mutable than itself. But the created
exemplar is even more mutable than the soul. Third, the created
exemplar by itself does not allow us to distinguish between reality and
dreaming, since the content of the exemplar is the same in either case.
Henry therefore concludes that if we are to have certainty, we must
look to the uncreated exemplar. And since we cannot look to the
uncreated exemplar by our natural powers, certainty is impossible apart
from some special divine illumination.
Scotus argues that if Henry is right about the limitations of our
natural powers, even divine illumination is not enough to save us from
pervasive uncertainty. To Henry’s first argument he replies that there
is no certainty to be had by knowing a mutable object as immutable. To
the second he replies that anything in the soul—including the
very act of understanding that Henry thinks is achieved through
illumination—is mutable. So by Henry’s argument it would be
impossible for anything whatever to preserve the soul from error. And
to the third argument he replies that if the created exemplar is such
as to preclude certainty, adding extra exemplars will not solve the
problem: “When something incompatible with certainty concurs,
certainty cannot be attained” (Ordinatio 1, d. 3, pars
1, q. 4, n. 221).
So Henry’s arguments, far from showing that certainty is possible
through divine illumination, actually lead to a pervasive skepticism.
Scotus counters that we can show that skepticism is false. We can in
fact attain certainty, and we can do so by the unaided exercise of our
natural intellectual powers. There are four types of knowledge in which
infallible certainty is possible. First, knowledge of first principles
is certain because the intellect has only to form such judgments to see
that they are true. (And since the validity of proper syllogistic
inference can be known in just this way, it follows that anything that
is seen to be properly derived from first principles by syllogistic
inference is also known with certainty.) Second, we have certainty with
respect to quite a lot of causal judgments derived from experience.
Third, Scotus says that many of our own acts are as certain as first
principles. It is no objection to point out that our acts are
contingent, since some contingent propositions must be known
immediately (that is, without needing to be derived from some other
proposition). For otherwise, either some contingent proposition would
follow from a necessary proposition (which is impossible), or there
would be an infinite regress in contingent propositions (in which case
no contingent proposition would ever be known). Fourth, certain
propositions about present sense experience are also known with
certainty if they are properly vetted by the intellect in light of the
causal judgments derived from experience.
For Scotus the natural law in the strict sense contains only those
moral propositions that are per se notae ex terminis along
with whatever propositions can be derived from them deductively
(Ordinatio 3, d. 37, q. un.). Per se notae means that
they are self-evident; ex terminis adds that they are
self-evident in virtue of being analytically true. Now one important
fact about propositions that are self-evident and analytically true is
that God himself can’t make them false. They are necessary truths. So
the natural law in the strict sense does not depend on God’s will. This
means that even if (as I believe) Scotus is some sort of divine-command
theorist, he is not whole-hog in his divine command theory. Some moral
truths are necessary truths, and even God can’t change those. They
would be true no matter what God willed.
Which ones are those? Scotus’s basic answer is that they are the
commandments of the first tablet of the Decalogue (Ten Commandments).
The Decalogue has often been thought of as involving two tablets. The
first covers our obligations to God and consists of the first three
commandments: You shall have no other gods before me, You
shall not take the name of the Lord your God in vain, and
Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy. (Note that many
Protestants divide them up differently.) The second tablet spells out
our obligations toward others: Honor your father and mother,
You shall not kill, You shall not commit adultery,
You shall not steal, You shall not bear false witness
against your neighbor, and two commandments against coveting. The
commandments of the first tablet are part of the natural law in the
strict sense because they have to do with God himself, and with the way
in which God is to be treated. For Scotus says that the following
proposition is per se nota ex terminis: “If God exists, then
he is to be loved as God, and nothing else is to be worshiped as God,
and no irreverence is to be done to him.” Given the very definition of
God, it follows that if there is such a being, he is to be loved and
worshiped, and no irreverence should be shown to him. Because these
commandments are self-evident and analytic, they are necessary truths.
Not even God himself could make them false.
But even the first three commandments, once we start looking at
them, are not obviously part of the natural law in the strict sense. In
particular, the third commandment, the one about the Sabbath day, is a
little tricky. Obviously, the proposition “God is to be worshiped on
Saturday” is not self-evident or analytic. In fact, Scotus says it’s
not even true any more, since Christians are to worship on Sunday, not
Saturday. So, Scotus asks, what about the proposition “God is to be
worshiped at some time or other”? Even that is not self-evident or
analytic. The best one can do is “God is not to be hated.” Now that’s
self-evident and analytic, since by definition God is the being most
worthy of love and there is nothing in him worthy of hate. But
obviously that’s far weaker than any positive commandment about whether
and when we should worship God.
So by the time Scotus completes his analysis, we are left with
nothing in the natural law in the strict sense except for negative
propositions: God is not to be hated, no other gods are to be
worshiped, no irreverence is to be done to God. Everything else in the
Decalogue belongs to the natural law in a weaker or looser sense. These
are propositions that are not per se notae ex terminis and do
not follow from such propositions, but are “highly consonant” with such
propositions. Now the important point for Scotus is this: since these
propositions are contingent, they are completely up to God’s
discretion. Any contingent truth whatsoever depends on God’s will.
According to Scotus, God of course is aware of all contingent
propositions. Now God gets to assign the truth values to those
propositions. For example, “Unicorns exist” is a contingent
proposition. Therefore, it is up to God’s will whether that proposition
will be true or false. The same goes for contingent moral propositions.
Take any such proposition and call it L, and call the opposite
of L, not-L. Both L and not-L are
contingent propositions. God can make either of them true, but he can’t
make both of them true, since they are contradictories. Suppose that
God wills L. L is now part of the moral law. How do
we explain why God willed L rather than not-L? Scotus
says we can’t. God’s will with respect to contingent propositions is
unqualifiedly free. So while there might be some reasons why God chose
the laws he chose, there is no fully adequate reason, no total
explanation. If there were a total explanation other than God’s will
itself, those propositions wouldn’t be contingent at all. They would be
necessary. So at bottom there is simply the sheer fact that God willed
one law rather than another.
Scotus intends this claim to be exactly parallel to the way we think
about contingent beings. Why are there elephants but no unicorns? As
everyone would agree, it’s because God willed for there to be elephants
but no unicorns. And why did he will that? He just did. That’s part of
what we mean by saying that God was free in creating. There was nothing
constraining him or forcing him to create one thing rather than
another. The same is true about the moral law. Why is there an
obligation to honor one’s parents but no such obligation toward
cousins? Because God willed that there be an obligation to honor one’s
parents, and he did not will that there be any such obligation toward
one’s cousins. He could have willed both of these obligations, and he
could have willed neither. What explains the way that he did in fact
will? Nothing whatsoever except the sheer fact that he did will that
way.
(For recent criticisms of this strongly voluntaristic reading of Scotus’s account of the moral law, see Borland and Hillman 2017 and Ward 2019.)
Scotus quite self-consciously puts forward his understanding of
freedom as an alternative to Aquinas’s. According to Aquinas, freedom
comes in simply because the will is intellectual appetite rather than
mere sense appetite. Intellectual appetite is aimed at objects as
presented by the intellect and sense appetite at objects as presented
by the senses. Sense appetite is not free because the senses provide
only particulars as objects of appetite. But intellectual appetite is
free because the intellect deals with universals, not particulars.
Since universals by definition include many particulars, intellectual
appetite will have a variety of objects. Consider goodness as an
example. The will is not aimed at this good thing or that good thing,
but at goodness in general. Since that universal, goodness, contains
many different particular things, intellectual appetite has many
different options.
But Scotus insists that mere intellectual appetite is not enough to
guarantee freedom in the sense needed for morality. The basic
difference comes down to this. When Aquinas argues that intellectual
appetite has different options, he seems to be thinking of this over a
span of time. Right now the intellect presents x as good, so I
will x; but later on the intellect presents y as
good, so then I will y. But Scotus thinks of freedom as
involving multiple options at the very moment of choice. It’s not
enough to say that now I will x, but later I can will
y. We have to say that at the very moment at which I will
x, I also am able to will y. Aquinas’s arguments
don’t show that intellectual appetite is free in this stronger sense.
So as far as Scotus is concerned, Aquinas hasn’t made room for the
right kind of freedom.
This is where Scotus brings in his well-known doctrine of the two
affections of the will (see especially Ordinatio 2, d. 6, q.
2; 2, d. 39, q. 2; 3, d. 17, q. un.; and 3, d. 26, q. un.). The two
affections are fundamental inclinations in the will: the affectio
commodi, or affection for the advantageous, and the affectio
iustitiae, or affection for justice. Scotus identifies the
affectio commodi with intellectual appetite. Notice how
important that is. For Aquinas intellectual appetite is the same thing
as will, whereas for Scotus intellectual appetite is only part of what
the will is. Intellectual appetite is just one of the two fundamental
inclinations in the will. Why does Scotus make this crucial change? For
the reason we’ve already discussed. He doesn’t see how intellectual
appetite could be genuinely free. Now he can’t deny that the will
involves intellectual appetite. Intellectual appetite is aimed at
happiness, and surely happiness does have some role to play in our
moral psychology. But the will has to include something more than
intellectual appetite if it’s going to be free. That something more is
the affectio iustitiae. But one can’t fully understand what
the affectio iustitiae is until Aquinas and Scotus are
compared on a further point.
For Aquinas the norms of morality are defined in terms of their
relationship to human happiness. We have a natural inclination toward
our good, which is happiness, and it is that good that determines the
content of morality. So like Aristotle, Aquinas holds a eudaimonistic
theory of ethics: the point of the moral life is happiness. That’s why
Aquinas can understand the will as an intellectual appetite for
happiness. All of our choosing is aimed at the human good (or at
least, it’s aimed at the human good as we conceive it). And choices
are good—and, indeed, fully intelligible—only when they
are aimed at the ultimate end, which is happiness. So Aquinas just
defines the will as the capacity to choose in accordance with a
conception of the human good—in other words, as intellectual
appetite.
When Scotus rejects the idea that will is merely intellectual
appetite, he is saying that there is something fundamentally wrong with
eudaimonistic ethics. Morality is not tied to human flourishing at all.
For it is Scotus’s fundamental conviction that morality is impossible
without libertarian freedom, and since he sees no way for there to be
libertarian freedom on Aquinas’s eudaimonistic understanding of ethics,
Aquinas’s understanding must be rejected. And just as Aquinas’s
conception of the will was tailor-made to suit his eudaimonistic
conception of morality, Scotus’s conception of the will is tailor-made
to suit his anti-eudaimonistic conception of morality. It’s not merely
that he thinks there can be no genuine freedom in mere intellectual
appetite. It’s also that he rejects the idea that moral norms are
intimately bound up with human nature and human happiness. The fact
that God creates human beings with a certain kind of nature does not
require God to command or forbid the actions that he in fact commanded
or forbade. The actions he commands are not necessary for our
happiness, and the actions he forbids are not incompatible with our
happiness. Now if the will were merely intellectual appetite—that
is, if it were aimed solely at happiness—we would not be able to
choose in accordance with the moral law, since the moral law itself is
not determined by any considerations about human happiness. So Scotus
relegates concerns about happiness to the affectio commodi and
assigns whatever is properly moral to the other affection, the
affectio iustitiae.