Joseph b. Abba Mari ibn Kaspi was born circa 1280 in Arles in Provence
(or in Argentière, in the Languedoc region). Recent studies
have shed light on a number of points in Kaspi’s life such as
his place of birth, the date of his death and the date of his
marriage.  He traveled to Egypt in 1314 for five months:
As we see, it did not meet his expectations—to delve into
Maimonidean thought, and to learn from Rabbi Abraham the
Nagid. However, his exegesis was enriched by the things he saw on the
journey.
We do not know of independent books by Kaspi from this period. He
wrote a supercommentary on Ibn Ezra’s commentary on the Bible,
and a commentary on Sefer HaRikma by Ibn Janah Kaspi’s
second Provencal period (1314–1330) took place in Arles and
Tarascon. During this period, Kaspi apparently married, and his two
children, David, the eldest and Shlomo (1320), were born. In the first
part of this period, Kaspi resided in Arles, in Provence. There Kaspi
completed his philosophical work Tirat Kesef (1317), which was
harshly criticized by the scholars of Salon, through Kalonymus
(1318). At the end of this period we find him in Tarascon.
The Spanish period in Kaspi’s life: 1330–1345.

In 1330 Kaspi moved from Tarascon to Spain. In subsequent years Kaspi
resided in Perpignan, Barcelona, Majorca, Valencia, Tudela. In 1336
Kaspi and his family were residents of Perpignan. Kaspi resided there
for several years. It is known to us that Kaspi died in 1345 in
Majorca. It is not known if he lived in Majorca, and if so, for how
long. It seems that he traveled there to be alone and write, though
this is uncertain.  In the Spanish period Kaspi wrote many books,
among them three books on logic and linguistics: Tzror
HaKesef—a brief work on logic; Retuqot
Kesef—applying the rules of logic to Hebrew and Hebrew
grammar; Sharshot Kesef—a Hebrew dictionary. These
three books are among the most original and important of Kaspi’s
work, and none of them have been printed.  Kaspi was well
educated. Besides Hebrew and Provençal, he was apparently also
proficient in Arabic and Latin. He was familiar with the classical
Hebrew religious literature, such as the Talmud and earlier Bible
commentaries. He was well versed in the works of Maimonides and his
translator Samuel ibn Tibbon, and probably also familiar with
Falaquera’s commentary on The Guide of the
Perplexed. By his own admission, however, his knowledge of
halakhic literature was limited. Among the philosophers he mentions,
besides Plato and Aristotle, are Averro‘s, Avicenna, Boethius,
Fārābi, and Galen.
Kaspi considered himself primarily as a commentator. He
distinguishes between a “commentary” (perush) and
an independent work (chibbur), declaring, “I do not
define a work as a ‘commentary’ unless it brings us to the
real intention of the author of the book” (Commentary on the Song
of Songs, p. 184). Nevertheless, he sometimes admits his inability to
prove that his interpretation represents the author’s real
meaning, particular when that “author” is the biblical
author, i.e., God Himself:
Understanding the author’s intention is thus seen as a kind of
prophecy (“whether I prophesy the intention…”).
Kaspi’s interpretative truth, he insists, is concerned not with
the author and his intention, but with the reader and his or her
understanding: The commentator can speak for himself alone. Such
exegesis is subjective, dependent on each of the work’s
innumerable readers. Nevertheless, Kaspi is sometimes fairly certain of
the author’s meaning:
Kaspi here outlines a rather pretentious doctrine, namely, that God
somehow informed him of the secret hidden in the text. The criterion of
his certainty is coherence. However, given Kaspi’s own theology
(see below), there is no need to assume that he was claiming to have
received a supernatural revelation.
Looking at Kaspi’s comments on the logic and its role, two definitions
emerge for the role of Logic:
Kaspi accused his predecessors of misunderstanding Scripture because
they had not used logic:
He himself wrote a brief treatise on logic (Tseror
ha-Kesef), in which he summarized what he believed were important
principles for a correct interpretation of Scripture. His own exegesis
applies a variety of techniques: categorizing genera and species,
distinguishing between essential and non-essential qualities, asserting
the symmetry of relation, understanding the law of contradiction,
recognizing valid and invalid syllogisms, as well as logical fallacies.
For example, he criticizes commentators who conclude from the truth of
a proposition that its individual parts are also true. To illustrate,
he cites the verse “There was no man to till the soil”
(Genesis 2:5): this verse does not imply that there were at the time no
human beings—a proposition at variance with the Aristotelian
thesis (to which Kaspi apparently subscribed) that the world has always
existed alongside God.
Another methodological discipline that Kaspi used was the philosophy
of language. While agreeing with Aristotle that languages are
conventional rather than natural, he places Hebrew on a higher level,
arguing that its combinations of letters into words are not
accidental.  A Hebrew word denotes the qualities of the object
designated, and there is a one-to-one relation between words and
their designata. 
According to Kaspi, Hebrew is the most ideal of languages because its
nouns attest to their characteristics, whether significant or
marginal. A man is called adam in Hebrew because he originates
[partly] in earth (Hebrew: adama), ish because he originates partly in
fire (Hebrew: esh) and enosh because of his worthless and expendable
nature (the Hebrew root a-n-sh, claims Kaspi, designates destruction
and loss).  Another significant principle derived from logic in
Kaspi’s conception of language is generalization. Logic rests
partly on the division between the general and the specific. Genus is
defined as the most general and comprehensive set of all; a species
constitutes a subset of a genus with a given characteristic and a
property is a specific definition. According to this principle, claims
Kaspi, a speaker is not obligated to reveal all particulars in his
choice of words. He thus blurred clear boundaries in both morphology
of language (such as differences in gender, number and time) and
syntax. Kaspi maintains that the grammatical means a speaker adopts to
express these differences constitute superfluous
information. Consequently, there is nothing peculiar about text that
uses male instead of female gender and so on. “It is not
obligatory to insist on gender consistency. A masculine name may well
be accompanied by a feminine adjective or verb and vice versa. We have
been fortunate to find textual gender consistency in a few places, but
we should not find it unusual if it is lacking in others”
(Retuqot Kesef, p. 15). In a similar vein, Kaspi writes about texts
that use the singular instead of the plural or the past tense instead
of the future, or texts that lack the concept of a sentence, or other
syntactic structures.
In
Kaspi’s view, all Hebrew words are distinct; Hebrew has no real
synonyms or homonyms. In support of this view he wrote a kind of
dictionary of the roots of biblical Hebrew (Sharshot Kesef.
The dictionary is based on two main assumptions:
Generally speaking, contemporary linguistics discerns two key types of
meaning differentiation: (a) Between word designata, with
each synonym designated differently
(quantitatively—rekhev vs. mekhonith (motor
vehicle vs. automobile); qualitatively—shikor
vs. mevusam (inebriated vs. tipsy); (b) among registers or
layers of language (layish vs. aryeh (lion).
Kaspi also insisted on an additional type of differentiation among
synonyms, maintaining that there is but one designatum and even the
designatees do not differ from one another. Differences among words
are embodied in the aspects of the designatum that they emphasize. For
example, Kaspi explains that the words ḥerev, sakkin,
maakheleth and shelaḥ (javelin) are not synonymous
because each designates a different aspect of the object. As far as
Kaspi is concerned, all these objects are cutting instruments,
knives. One is called ḥerev because it attests to the
destruction (ḥurban) of those struck by it;
a sakkin designates the stricken victim as subject to danger
and then severed from living creatures (according to Kaspi’s
interpretation of the root samekh-kaf-nun); the instructive
word maakhelet informs us that the stricken one is
slaughtered, consumed (neekhal), terminated and so on. The
words ḥerev, sakkin, maakhelet
and shelaḥ thus designate the same type of tool, a
cutting instrument. Different words indicate and describe different
phenomena concerning the designatum, but these are not synonyms.
Another significant difference between dictionaries produced up to
Kaspi’s time and Sharshoth Kesef is the order of
discussion of lexical forms. Both Ibn Janaḥ and Radaq, who
preceded Kaspi, begin by presenting the forms of the verbs derived
from a given Biblical root, to be followed by the noun forms. Unlike
earlier Hebrew and Arabic lexicographers, Kaspi composed a dictionary
in which the nouns derived from the root were described first and the
relevant verb form system was only shown thereafter. This change in
order is by no means coincidental. In Retuqot Kesef, Section
40, Kaspi analyzes the structure of the Hebrew language: First, its
founders agreed about the general meaning of each root. They then
coined an abstract name designating this meaning that is not connected
to any particular object or occurrence. Subsequently, they coined the
infinitive of the verb, thereby creating the reality to which the noun
refers: The infinitive is an abstract noun expressing an
occurrence. Thereafter, they formed adjectives, that are concretely
connected with specific objects. After completing the nouns, they
invented the system that addresses tangible activity and
occurrences. In other words, Kaspi maintains that the formation of
nouns and the various weights accorded them proceeds from the most
abstract to the most tangible. As the verb system is most tangible of
all, it was devised last.
Kaspi thus bases his biblical exegesis on the conventional
theological assumptions of the philosophy of his times: God is a
necessary existent, the Unmoved Mover, the intellect that
intellectually cognizes itself. Kaspi’s description of God as the
intellect borders on a certain conception of divine immanence, as he
makes the description symmetric: God is the intellect and the intellect
is in effect God:
Kaspi proposes another radical doctrine in connection with the
Aristotelian conception of God as both the intellect, intellectually
cognizer, and the intellectually cognized object: he compares this
conception with the Holy Trinity of Christian theology. He is even
willing to accept a moderate interpretation of the Trinity: “Some
individuals among them (the Christians) are similar to us (in
opinions)” (Gevia‘ ha-Kesef, p. 27).
Kaspi explains the relation between God and the world in as
naturalistic a manner as possible. He agrees with the position,
attributed to Aristotle and Plato, that the world was not created
ex nihilo at a certain point in time, arguing that this was
also Maimonides’ position. In that spirit Kaspi himself proposes
a systematic explanation of the creation as described in Genesis.
God’s continual providence of the world is also understood by
Kaspi in entirely naturalistic terms. He interprets the biblical
miracles as rare but natural phenomena—an idea not dissimilar to
Spinoza’s teachings. To say that a certain phenomenon is contrary
to natural law, Kaspi writes, is a subjective judgment, “for
there is no doubt that those ignorant of natural science believe many
natural things to be miraculous, not natural phenomena”
(Tirat Kesef, p. 12). This may be compared with Spinoza in his
Tractatus Theologico-Politicus (Chap. 6): “[S]ince
miracles were wrought according to the understanding of the masses, who
are wholly ignorant of the workings of nature,… we cannot doubt that
many things are narrated in Scripture as miracles of which the causes
could easily be explained by reference to ascertained workings of
nature.” Kaspi also holds that a wise prophet is capable of
performing miracles thanks to the possession of extensive knowledge.
Moses, the wisest of men, performed miracles in Egypt because “he
had acquired knowledge of the celestial body… as he had apprehended
the world of the [four sublunar] elements” (Menorat
Kesef, p. 93). This knowledge enabled him to inflict the plagues
upon the Egyptians: “Moses performed with the four [elements]
actions that would be impossible for any [other] wise man”
(Commentary on Proverbs B, p. 127).
Discussing the relationship between the prophet and the wise man,
Kaspi agrees with the Muslim thinker al-Batalyusi that a person with a
prophetic soul is superior in level and essence to the wise man who has
a philosophical soul. Nevertheless, prophecy is not a super-rational
phenomenon. A prophet’s knowledge of the future is based on
deductive inference, since he or she is well acquainted with the world
and with all details of natural causality.
The ability of God and the prophets to foresee the future, despite
the apparent contradiction with the principle of (free) choice, also
receives a rational explanation. Kaspi proposes an analogy between
their positive knowledge and the knowledge of wise men “with a
good sense of evaluation and estimation,” who are capable of
foreseeing the probable behavior of a person on the basis of their
knowledge of his or her character. Like most medieval theologians,
Kaspi accepts the simultaneous validity of an omniscient God and human
choice..
Not unrelated to this antinomy is the theological problem posed by
the human capacity for voluntary action: Maimonides stated the
difficulty as follows: “How is it possible that a person can do
whatever he pleases?… How can anything be done in the world without
the permission and will of its Creator?” (Hilkhot
Teshuvah 5:4). Maimonides’ own solution was to define human
choice as one expression of the divine will, which is the cause of
everything that takes place in the world; accordingly, God
“desired man to have his own free will” (ibid.).
Kaspi goes farther, however, suggesting the radical view that God is
“the remote mover,” even when a person chooses to realize
his free will by sinning and worshiping idols; it was in that sense
that the Bible described God as hardening Pharaoh’s heart
(Matsref la-Kesef, pp. 152–153).
In any case, Kaspi provides his readers with guidelines for a
virtuous life. As a rationalist through and through, he recommends that
a person acquire the best possible education. Every effort should be
made to accumulate the financial resources necessary to improve
one’s education, by purchasing books and hiring teachers. Every
man should set up a family: His wife will support him, and his children
will keep him in his old age, “so that he should have time to
acquire wisdom… Moreover, his sons, if they are good, will join him
in his studies, all the more so if his eyes have become dimmed with
age” (Commentary on Proverbs, pp. 59–60). This is a wholly
utilitarian and egoistical philosophy, recommending self-realization of
every human being. Kaspi enunciates these guidelines in the context of
his scriptural exegesis, relying primarily on the wisdom literature
written, according to Jewish tradition, by King Solomon, the wisest of
men; he also derives his rules from biblical stories, citing the
behavior of their heroes.
Kaspi’s elitist principles, which creates a disparity between
the wise and the masses, also implied a similarity between humans and
other creatures One application of this thesis may be found in his
commentary to Isaiah 41:14, referring to the phrase “worm of
Jacob”:
In this context Kaspi expressed compassion for animals, coupled with
a tendency toward vegetarianism, profound disapproval of sacrifices; he
even expresses disapproval of Abraham’s willingness to sacrifice
his son.
If medieval philosophy from Philo to Spinoza may indeed be
understood as philosophy at the service of biblical exegesis, Joseph
ibn Kaspi may certainly be viewed as one of its most successful
representatives. As already mentioned, in some contexts he also
anticipated some of Spinoza’s controversial ideas. In addition,
both Kaspi and Spinoza held that only man is capable of loving God,
whereas God does not love man (Kaspi, Commentary on Isaiah, p. 151;
Spinoza, Ethics, On the Ability of the Intellect,
Theorem 17).
Despite his brilliance and original thought, Kaspi has never been
considered one of the most important medieval Jewish thinkers or
commentators. Only in the 19th century were some of his works
published for the first time, and others have yet to see the light of
day. There are several possible explanations. Perhaps his
controversial ideas militated against his acceptance in the
surrounding society. Another explanation is implied by a comparison
between Kaspi and his more famous contemporary, Gersonides, also a
biblical exegete and philosopher; Gersonides, despite his by no means
conservative ideas, earned considerable fame among both Jewish and
non-Jewish thinkers.  This was largely thanks to his systematic,
profound, philosophical work Milchamot Hashem, which placed
him squarely in the realm of philosophy, while his Bible commentaries
were written in the spirit of plain interpretation. Kaspi, however,
was something of a philosopher among commentators and a commentator
among philosophers; perhaps that was why he never attained prominence
in either group. Kaspi’s writings on logic and Hebrew
linguistics were indeed highly creative and innovative, but he
appeared to have lacked good fortune insofar as publication is
concerned. 