Kant's account of aesthetics and teleology is ostensibly part of a
broader discussion of the faculty or power of judgment
[Urteilskraft], which is the faculty “for thinking the
particular under the universal” (Introduction IV,
5:179). Although the Critique of Pure Reason includes some
discussion of the faculty of judgment, defined as “the capacity
to subsume under rules, that is, to distinguish whether something
falls under a given rule” (krV A132/B171), it is not until
the Critique of Judgment that he treats judgment as a
full-fledged faculty in its own right, with its own a priori
principle, and, accordingly, requiring a “critique” to
determine its scope and limits.
 Judgment in the Critique of Judgment is described as
having two roles or aspects, “determining”
[bestimmend] and “reflecting”
[reflektierend] (Introduction IV, 5:179 and FI V,
20:211). Judgment in its determining role subsumes given particulars
under concepts or universals which are themselves already given. This
role coincides with the role assigned to the faculty of judgment in
the Critique of Pure Reason; it also appears to correspond to
the activity of imagination in its “schematism” of
concepts. Judgment in this role does not operate as an independent
faculty, but is instead governed by principles of the
understanding. The more distinctive role assigned to judgment in
the Critique of Judgment is the reflecting role, that of
“finding” the universal for the given particular
(Introduction IV, 5:179).  Kant's recognition of judgment as a faculty
in its own right, and hence of the need for a Critique not
just for theoretical and practical reason but also for judgment,
appears to be connected with his ascription to judgment of a
reflecting, in addition to a merely determining, role.
Judgment as reflecting, or reflective judgment [reflektierende
Urteilskraft], is assigned various different roles within Kant's
system. It is described as responsible for various cognitive tasks
associated with empirical scientific enquiry, in particular, the
classification of natural things into a hierarchical taxonomy of
genera and species, and the construction of systematic explanatory
scientific theories. Kant also suggests that it has a more fundamental
role to play in making cognition possible, in particular that it
enables us to regard nature as empirically lawlike (see especially
Introduction V, 5:184), and, even more fundamentally, that it is
responsible for the formation of all empirical concepts (see
especially FI V, 20:211–213).
 But reflective judgment is also described as responsible for two
specific kinds of judgments: aesthetic judgments (judgments about the
beautiful and the sublime) and teleological judgments (judgments which
ascribe ends or purposes to natural things, or which characterize them
in purposive or functional terms). These, along with associated
topics, are discussed respectively in Section I, the “Critique
of Aesthetic Judgment, ” and Section II, the “Critique of
Teleological Judgment. ” The discussion of the role of judgment
in empirical scientific enquiry is confined to a few sections of the
Introduction and First Introduction.
Although reflective judgment is exercised in both aesthetic and
teleological judgment, Kant assigns a special role to its exercise in
the aesthetic case, and specifically in judgments of beauty
(Introduction VIII, 193; FI XI, 243–244). More specifically, he says,
it is in judgments of beauty (as opposed to the sublime), and even
more specifically, judgments about the beauty of nature (as opposed to
art), that “judgment reveals itself as a faculty that has its
own special principle” (FI XI, 244). The especially close
connection between judgments of beauty and the faculty of judgment is
reflected in Kant's view that the feeling of pleasure in a beautiful
object is felt in virtue of an exercise of reflective judgment
(Introduction VII, FI VIII).
Much of Kant's aesthetics and theory of teleology is developed without
any explicit reference to the faculty of judgment, and the
“Critique of Aesthetic Judgment” makes no mention of the
role of reflective judgment in empirical scientific enquiry (in fact,
the term “reflective judgment” does not figure in the
“Critique of Aesthetic Judgment” at all).  The only
suggestion in the “Critique of Aesthetic Judgment” of an
important role for the faculty of judgment in Kant's aesthetics is in
the Deduction of Taste, where he describes the principle of taste as
the “subjective principle of judgment in general”
(§35, 286) and suggests that the relation of aesthetic judgment
specifically to the faculty of judgment in general is crucial for the
legitimacy of judgments of beauty (§38, 290).  But it is possible
on the face of it to make sense of Kant's analysis of judgments of
beauty, and of his argument for their legitimacy, without appeal to
the account of the faculty of judgment offered in the Introductions to
the Critique of Judgment.  Accordingly much of the secondary
literature on Kant's aesthetics has treated it in isolation from the
more general account of judgment in which it is embedded, and the same
is true, perhaps to an even greater extent, in the case of Kant's
teleology.  Conversely, discussions of Kant's “theory of
judgment” have typically taken little or no account of Kant's
treatment of judgment in the third Critique, suggesting
thereby that Kant's views on judgment are exhausted by his account of
cognitive (in particular non-aesthetic) judgments in the Critique
of Pure Reason and the Logic.  (The article
“Kant's Theory of
Judgment” in the present Encyclopedia (Hanna 2009) is one
recent example.)
However, recent interest in the systematic role of the Critique of
Judgment in Kant's philosophy overall has resulted in increased
attention to the notion of judgment in the third Critique,
and specifically to the question of its bearing on Kant's theory of
judgment in the Critique of Pure Reason and
the Logic.  Bell (1987) and Ginsborg (1990) both argue for
the centrality of the third Critique's notion of judgment in
Kant's theory of cognitive judgments in the first Critique.
The importance of the third Critique's notion of judgment for
Kant's account of cognition is also highlighted in Béatrice
Longuenesse's important 1998 study of the “capacity to
judge” in the first Critique.  Longuenesse maintains
that there is a close connection between the “capacity to
judge” [Vermögen zu urteilen] in that work and the
faculty of judgment in the Critique of Judgment, a connection
which she summarizes by describing the faculty of judgment as the
“actualization” of the capacity to judge in relation to
sensory perceptions (1998, 8).  According to Longuenesse, the activity
of reflective judgment corresponds to the “comparison,
reflection and abstraction” which Kant describes in
the Logic (§6, 9:94–95) as responsible for the
formation of empirical concepts, and which she understands as, in
turn, a necessary condition of the application of the pure concepts of
understanding to the manifold of sensible intuition (1998,
163–166 and 195–197).  Longuenesse's view on this point is
endorsed and elaborated in Allison (2001, ch. 1); for criticism, and
an alternative approach, see Ginsborg (2006).
In addition to its potential significance for Kant's theory of
cognition, the notion of judgment in the third Critique is
also important for addressing the interpretive problem of the unity of
the Critique of Judgment, in particular, the question of why
Kant addresses aesthetics and teleology together in a single work.
Many commentators have been skeptical that Kant draws any real
philosophical connection between the two areas; see for example
Schopenhauer (1969, vol. I, p. 531), Marc-Wogau (1938, p. 34n.), and
Beck (1969, 497).  But recently there have been increasing attempts to
understand Kant's views on aesthetics and his views on biological
teleology as aspects of a unified philosophical project.  Proposals
for connecting Kant's views on aesthetics with his views on natural
teleology can be found, for example, in Zumbach (1984, pp. 51–53),
Makkreel (1990, ch. 5), Aquila (1991), and Ginsborg (1997a).; by far
the most developed account is to be found in Zuckert (2007).  For more
on the question of the unity of the Critique of Judgment, see
under 3.1 and 3.2 below.
An aesthetic judgment, in Kant's usage, is a judgment which is based
on feeling, and in particular on the feeling of pleasure or
displeasure. According to Kant's official view there are three kinds
of aesthetic judgment: judgments of the agreeable, judgments of beauty
(or, equivalently, judgments of taste), and judgments of the
sublime. However, Kant often uses the expression “aesthetic
judgment” in a narrower sense which excludes judgments of the
agreeable, and it is with aesthetic judgments in this narrower sense
that the “Critique of Aesthetic Judgment” is primarily
concerned. Such judgments can either be, or fail to be,
“pure”; while Kant mostly focusses on the ones which are
pure, there are reasons to think that most judgments about art (as
opposed to nature) do not count as pure, so that it is important to
understand Kant's views on such judgments as well.
The “Critique of Aesthetic Judgment” is concerned not only
with judgments of the beautiful and the sublime, but also with the
production of objects about which such judgments are appropriately
made; this topic is discussed under the headings of “fine
art” or “beautiful art” [schöne Kunst]
and “genius.”
The most distinctive part of Kant's aesthetic theory, and the part
which has aroused most interest among commentators, is his account of
judgments of beauty, and, more specifically, pure judgments of
beauty. (Following Kant's usage, the expression “judgment of
beauty” without qualification will refer, in what follows, to
pure judgments of beauty.) The most important elements of this account
are sketched here in Sections 2.1 and 2.2, and which correspond
roughly to the “Analytic of the Beautiful” and the
“Deduction of Pure Aesthetic Judgments”
respectively. Sections 2.3 and 2.4 are concerned, respectively, with
interpretative issues that have arisen in connection with the account,
and with criticisms which have been made of it.
Other elements of Kant's theory are sketched in the remainder of the
section. Section 2.5 is concerned with judgments of beauty that are
not pure, in particular judgments of “adherent” as opposed
to “free” beauty; Section 2.6 with beautiful art and
genius; Section 2.7 with judgments of the sublime; Section 2.8 with
the relation between aesthetics and morality; and Section 2.9 with
other implications of Kant's aesthetic theory.
The first section of the “Critique of Aesthetic Judgment”,
the “Analytic of the Beautiful,” aims to analyse the
notion of a judgment of beauty or judgment of taste, describing the
features which distinguish judgments of beauty from judgments of other
kinds, notably cognitive judgments (which include judgments ascribing
goodness to things), and what he calls “judgments of the
agreeable.” Kant is not explicit about the pretheoretical
conception of judgments of beauty which is the subject of his
analysis, and there is room for controversy about what does and does
not count as a judgment of beauty in Kant's sense.  Not every
predicative use of the word “beautiful” signals the making
of a judgment of beauty, at least in the paradigmatic sense with which
Kant is concerned (for a useful discussion, see Savile 1993, ch. 1).
For example, at §8 Kant denies that the judgment that roses in
general are beautiful is a judgment of beauty or judgment of taste
proper: it is not an “aesthetic” but an
“aesthetically grounded logical judgment.” There is also
room for debate about whether the intuitive notion of a judgment of
beauty, for Kant, allows for negative judgments of beauty
(see 2.3.6 below).  However, at a first
approximation, we can say that it is the mental activity or content
typically expressed by, or manifested in, a sincere utterance of
“that's beautiful” in reference to a perceptually
presented object.
 Kant analyses the notion of a judgment of beauty by considering it
under four headings, or “moments,” as sketched below:
Judgments of beauty are based on feeling, in particular feelings of
pleasure (Kant also mentions displeasure, but this does not figure
prominently in his account; for more on this point,
see Section 2.3.6 below). The pleasure, however,
is of a distinctive kind: it is disinterested, which means that it
does not depend on the subject's having a desire for the object, nor
does it generate such a desire. The fact that judgments of beauty are
based on feeling rather than “objective sensation” (e.g.,
the sensation of a thing's colour) distinguishes them from cognitive
judgments based on perception (e.g., the judgment that a thing is
green). But the disinterested character of the feeling distinguishes
them from other judgments based on feeling. In particular, it
distinguishes them from (i) judgments of the agreeable, which are the
kind of judgment expressed by saying simply that one likes something
or finds it pleasing (for example, food or drink), and (ii) judgments
of the good, including judgments both about the moral goodness of
something and about its goodness for particular non-moral
purposes.
Judgments of beauty have, or make a claim to,
“universality” or “universal validity.” (Kant
also uses the expression “universal communicability”; this
can be taken as equivalent to “universal validity.”) That
is, in making a judgment of beauty about an object, one takes it that
everyone else who perceives the object ought also to judge it to be
beautiful, and, relatedly, to share one's pleasure in it. But the
universality is not “based on concepts.” That is, one's
claim to agreement does not rest on the subsumption of the object
under a concept (in the way, for example, that the claim to agreement
made by the judgment that something is green rests on the ascription
to the object of the property of being green, and hence its
subsumption under the concept green).  It follows from this
that judgments of beauty cannot, despite their universal validity, be
proved: there are no rules by which someone can be compelled to judge
that something is beautiful (Kant expands on this point in
§§32–33).  More strongly, judgments of beauty are not to be
understood as predicating the concept beauty of their
objects: as he puts it later, “beauty is not a concept of the
object” (§38, 290).  Still later, in the “Antinomy of
Taste,” Kant seems to go back on this strong claim by saying
that a judgment of beauty rests on an “indeterminate
concept” (§57, 341); however, by “concept” here
he diverges from the standard use of the term “concept” as
referring to a kind of representation which can figure in
cognition.
 The fact that judgments of beauty are universally valid
constitutes a further feature (in addition to the disinterestedness of
the pleasure on which they are based) distinguishing them from
judgments of agreeable. For in claiming simply that one likes
something, one does not claim that everyone else ought to like it
too. But the fact that their universal validity is not based on
concepts distinguishes judgments of beauty from non-evaluative
cognitive judgments and judgments of the good, both of which make a
claim to universal validity that is based on concepts.
Unlike judgments of the good, judgments of the beautiful do not
presuppose an end or purpose [Zweck] which the object is
taken to satisfy. (This is closely related to the point that their
universality is not based on concepts). However, they nonetheless
involve the representation of what Kant calls
“purposiveness” [Zweckmässigkeit]. Because
this representation of purposiveness does not involve the ascription
of an purpose, Kant calls the purposiveness which is represented
“merely formal purposiveness” or “the form of
purposiveness.” He describes it as perceived both in the object
itself and in the activity of imagination and understanding in their
engagement with the object.  (For more on this activity, see the
discussion of the “free play of the faculties”
in Section 2.2; for more on the notion of
purposiveness, see Section 3.1.)  The Third Moment,
in particular §14, is the main evidence for Kant's supposed
formalism in aesthetics; for more on Kant's formalism,
see Section 2.4.
Judgments of beauty involve reference to the idea of necessity, in the
following sense: in taking my judgment of taste to be universally
valid, I take it, not that everyone who perceives the
object will share my pleasure in it and (relatedly) agree
with my judgment, but that everyone ought to do so. I take
it, then, that my pleasure stands in a “necessary”
relation to the object which elicits it, where the necessity here can
be described (though Kant himself does not use the term) as
normative. But, as in the case of universal validity, the necessity is
not based on concepts or rules (at least, not concepts or rules that
are determinate, that is, of a kind which figure in cognition; as
noted earlier in this section, Kant describes it, in the Antinomy of
Taste, as resting on an “indeterminate concept”). Kant
characterizes the necessity more positively by saying that it is
“exemplary,” in the sense that one's judgment itself
serves as an example of how everyone ought to judge (§18, 237).
He also says that it is based on a “common sense,” defined
as a subjective principle which allows us to judge by feeling rather
than concepts (§20).
Running through Kant's various characterizations of judgments of
beauty is a basic dichotomy between two apparently opposed sets of
features. On the one hand, judgments of beauty are based on feeling,
they do not depend on subsuming the object under a concept (in
particular, the concept of a purpose which such an object is supposed
to satisfy), and they cannot be proved. This combination of features
seems to suggest that judgments of beauty should be assimilated to
judgments of the agreeable. On the other hand, however, judgments of
beauty are unlike judgments of the agreeable in not involving desire
for the object; more importantly and centrally, they make a normative
claim to everyone's agreement. These features seem to suggest that
they should be assimilated, instead, to objective cognitive
judgments.
In claiming that judgments of beauty have both sets of features, Kant
can be seen as reacting equally against the two main opposing
traditions in eighteenth-century aesthetics: the
“empiricist” tradition of aesthetics represented by Hume,
Hutcheson and Burke, on which a judgment of taste is an expression of
feeling without cognitive content, and the “rationalist”
tradition of aesthetics represented by Baumgarten and Meier, on which
a judgment of taste consists in the cognition of an object as having
an objective property. Kant's insistence that there is an alternative
to these two views, one on which judgments of beauty are both based on
feeling and make a claim to universal validity, is probably the most
distinctive aspect of his aesthetic theory. But this insistence
confronts him with the obvious problem of how the two features, or
sets of features, are to be reconciled. As Kant puts it: “how is
a judgment possible which, merely from one's own feeling of
pleasure in an object, independent of its concept, judges this
pleasure as attached to the representation of the same object in
every other subject, and does so a priori, i.e., without
having to wait for the assent of others?” (§36, 288)
The argument constituting Kant's official answer to this question (the
“Deduction of Taste”) is presented in the section entitled
“Deduction of Pure Aesthetic Judgments,” in particular in
sections §§31–39, with the core of the argument given at
§38.  It is also prefigured in the “Analytic of the
Beautiful,” in particular at §9 and §22, although the
argument of §22, which appeals to the notion of a “common
sense”, takes a somewhat different form from the presentation in
the “Deduction of Taste” proper.
 The argument in all of its appearances relies on the claim,
introduced in §9, that pleasure in the beautiful depends on the
“free play” or “free harmony” of the faculties
of imagination and understanding. In the Critique of Pure
Reason, imagination is described as “synthesizing the
manifold of intuition” under the governance of rules that are
prescribed by the understanding: the outcome of this is cognitive
perceptual experience of objects as having specific empirical
features. The rules prescribed by the understanding, are, or
correspond to, particular concepts which are applied to the
object. For example, when a manifold is synthesized in accordance with
the concepts green and square, the outcome is a
perceptual experience in which the object is perceived as green and
square. But now in the Critique of Judgment, Kant suggests
that imagination and understanding can stand in a different kind of
relationship, one in which imagination's activity harmonizes with the
understanding but without imagination's being constrained or governed
by understanding. In this relationship, imagination and understanding
in effect do what is ordinarily involved in the bringing of objects
under concepts, and hence in the perception of objects as having
empirical features: but they do this without bringing the object under
any concept in particular. So rather than perceiving the object as
green or square, the subject whose faculties are in free play responds
to it perceptually with a state of mind which is non-conceptual, and
specifically a feeling of disinterested pleasure. It is this kind of
pleasure which is the basis for a judgment of taste.
Kant appeals to this account of pleasure in the beautiful in order to
argue for its universal validity or universal communicability: to
argue, that is, that a subject who feels such a pleasure, and thus
judges the object to be beautiful, is entitled to demand that everyone
else feel a corresponding pleasure and thus agree with her judgment of
taste. For, he claims, the free play of the faculties manifests the
subjective condition of cognition in general (see for example §9,
218; §21, 238; §38, 290). We are entitled to claim that
everyone ought to agree with our cognitions: for example, if I
perceptually cognize an object as being green and square, I am
entitled to claim that everyone else ought to cognize it as green and
square. But in order for this demand for agreement to be possible, he
suggests, it must also be possible for me to demand universal
agreement for the subjective condition of such cognitions. If I can
take it that everyone ought to share my cognition of an object as
green or square, then I must also be entitled to take it that everyone
ought to share a perception of the object in which my faculties are in
free play, since the free play is no more than a manifestation of what
is in general required for an object's being cognized as green or
square in the first place.
The most serious objection to the argument can be put in the form of a
dilemma; see for example Guyer (1979, p. 297), Meerbote (1982,
pp. 81ff.) , Allison (2001, pp. 184–192), Rind (2002).  Either the
free play of the faculties is involved in all cognitive perceptual
experience, or it is not.  If it is, then it would seem,
counterintuitively, that every object should be perceived as
beautiful.  But if it is not, then the central inference does not seem
to go through. From the fact that I can demand agreement for the state
of my faculties in experiencing an object as, say, green or square, it
does not follow that I can demand agreement for a state in which my
faculties are in free play, since the possibility of experiencing the
free play would seem to require something over and above what is
required for cognition alone.
 Most defenders of the argument have grasped the second horn of the
dilemma.  One such defence, originally proposed by Ameriks in his 1982
(subsequently incorporated into Ameriks 2003), relies on an
understanding of judgments of taste as objective, and hence as making
a claim to universal agreement which is akin to that made by cognitive
judgments.  (For more on the objectivity of taste,
see Section 2.3.5).  Another, offered by Allison,
rejects the objection as presupposing an overly strong interpretation
of what the Deduction is intended to accomplish.  The objection tells
against the Deduction only if it is construed as entitling us to claim
universal agreement for particular judgments of taste; but, as Allison
reads it, the Deduction is intended only to establish that such claims
can, in general, be legitimate (Allison 2001, ch. 8; see especially
177–179).  A similar position is taken by Kalar (2006, 134).  However,
some commentators have taken this kind of defence to be inadequate,
holding that the argument must establish not only a general
entitlement to demand agreement for judgments of beauty, but an
entitlement in each particular case (Savile 1987, Chignell 2007).
Another option for defending the argument would be to grasp the first
horn, accepting that, on Kant's account, every object can legitimately
be judged to be beautiful.  Gracyk (1986) argues, independently of the
argument of the Deduction, that this is Kant's view, and it might also
be noted that, if judgments of beauty are not objective, there can be
no feature of an object which rules it out as a candidate for being
legitimately found beautiful.  However, approaches along these lines
have not figured prominently in the literature on the Deduction.
 A number of commentators have taken the dilemma, or considerations
related to it, to be fatal to Kant's view that judgments of beauty
make a legitimate claim to universal validity: see for example
Meerbote (1982, cited above) and Guyer (1979), pp. 319–324 (although
Guyer offers a more positive assessment in his (2003a), p. 60n15).
Others have argued that Kant's view can be saved by drawing on
considerations not mentioned in the official argument of the
Deduction. As noted below (Section 2.8), Kant draws
a close connection between our capacity for aesthetic judgment and our
nature as moral beings, and even though Kant himself does not appeal
to this connection in the deduction of taste, some commentators,
including Elliott (1968), Crawford (1974), Kemal (1986) and Savile
(1987), have taken moral considerations to constitute the ultimate
ground of the legitimacy of judgments of beauty.  Another strategy
drawing on considerations outside the Deduction itself is to appeal to
Kant's theory of aesthetic ideas (see Section 2.6),
which is ostensibly part of his theory of art, rather than his core
theory of taste.  This strategy is adopted in Savile (1987) and
Chignell (2007); Chignell's view differs from Savile's in that it does
not make any appeal to moral considerations.  Finally, some
commentators have held that while the argument of the official
Deduction at §38 is unsuccessful in avoiding the dilemma, the
version of the argument offered at §21, which appeals to the
notion of a “common sense,” is more effective; see in
particular Rind (2002) and Kalar (2006), ch. 5.
The assessment of the objection, and of Kant's Deduction of Taste more
generally, is complicated by a number of more fundamental interpretive
issues, which are discussed in the next section.
This section describes six issues which have arisen in connection with
Kant's account of pure judgments of taste, and which are relevant to
the assessment of his argument for the possibility of such judgments.
Although these issues are central to understanding the core of Kant's
view, readers seeking a more general survey of Kant's aesthetics can
omit this section.
What is the relation between the pleasure which is felt in an object
experienced as beautiful, and the judgment that the object is
beautiful, that is, the judgment of taste?  Kant describes the
judgment of taste as “based on” a feeling of pleasure, and
as claiming that everyone ought to share the subject's feeling of
pleasure, or, as he puts it, as claiming the “universal
communicability” of the pleasure. This seems to imply that the
pleasure is distinct from the act of judging, and more specifically
that the pleasure precedes the judging: we first feel pleasure, and
then claim, perhaps based on characteristics of the pleasure (such as
its disinterestedness), that the pleasure is universally valid and
hence that the object is beautiful.  But in the crucial section
§9 of the Critique of Judgment, Kant appears to reject
that implication: rather than the pleasure preceding the judging, he
says, the “merely subjective (aesthetic) judging of the
object” both “precedes” and “is the ground
of” the pleasure (218).  Since §9 is specifically addressed
to the issue “whether in a judgment of taste the feeling of
pleasure precedes the judging of the object or the judging precedes
the pleasure,” a problem whose answer is “the key to the
critique of taste and hence deserves full attention” (216),
commentators have taken very seriously the task of reconciling §9
with Kant's other characterizations of the judgment of taste.
One very influential approach is that of Donald Crawford, who
addresses this apparent paradox by distinguishing the
“judging” of the object which, according to §9,
precedes the pleasure in it, from the judgment of taste proper, which
is based on the pleasure (1974, pp. 69–74). An approach along these
lines is developed in detail by Paul Guyer, who draws on passages
elsewhere in the text to defend the view that a judgment of taste
results from two distinct acts of reflective judgment, the first
identifiable with the free play of the faculties and resulting in a
feeling of pleasure, the second an act of reflection on the pleasure
which results in the claim that the pleasure is universally
communicable. (See his (1979), especially pp. 110–119 and
pp. 151–160.)  A difficulty with that approach, however, recognized by
Guyer, is that it conflicts with another passage at §9, in which
Kant describes the pleasure as consequent on the universal
communicability of the subject's mental state in the given
representation (§9, 5:217).  This implies that the act of judging
which precedes the pleasure must be one in which the subject takes her
state of mind to be universally communicable, requiring us to identify
it with the judgment of taste proper rather than with an activity of
the faculty prior to that judgment.
 Most commentators read the relevant paragraphs of §9 as
requiring some kind of “two-acts” view, and, at the very
least, as distinguishing the free play of the faculties from the
judgment of taste proper.  This requires addressing the textual
difficulty just mentioned.  Guyer himself proposes disregarding the
problematic passage at 5:217, since he takes it to indicate the
intrusion of an earlier, incompatible theory (1979, 139–140; for a
detailed discussion, see Guyer 1982); Allison suggests instead that
the passage be amended so that the pleasure is understood as
consequent on a “universally communicable” mental state,
rather than on the state's universal communicability (2001,
p. 115).
 An alternative approach to §9, which attempts to accommodate
the problematic passage without emendation, is offered in Ginsborg (1991).  On this
“one-act” approach the act of judging something to be
beautiful is a single, self-referential act of judging which claims
its own universal validity with respect to the object and which is
phenomenologically manifested as a feeling of pleasure.  The free play
of the faculties on this approach is identical with the judging of the
object to be beautiful and in turn with the feeling of pleasure: the
pleasure does not precede the judging of the object to be beautiful,
and is “consequent” on it only in the sense that we feel
pleasure “in virtue” of the judgment. In its
identification of the pleasure and the judgment the view is like that
of Richard Aquila (1982, see especially 107) and, more recently,
Robert Wicks (2007, 43–45), although neither Aquila nor Wicks
explicitly endorses the apparent consequence, that the pleasure or
judgment must involve a claim to its own universal
communicability.  Longuenesse offers a view which is in partial
agreement with Ginsborg's in that it understands pleasure in the
beautiful proper as felt in virtue of the subject's awareness of the
universal communicability of her mental state in the presented object
(thus, like the one-act approach, requiring no emendation of §9).
However, rather than understand the pleasure as awareness of its own
universal communicability, Longuenesse takes it to be awareness of a
prior, and independent, feeling of pleasure elicited by the free play
of the faculties, so that there are two distinct feelings of pleasure
involved in judging an object to be beautiful (2003, 152–155; 2006,
pp. 203–208).
 Objections to the one-act approach have been raised by a number of
commentators, in particular Allison, who partly endorses Ginsborg's
criticisms of Guyer, but raises difficulties for her reading of
§9 (2001, 113–115) and, in particular, rejects the
self-referential understanding of judgments of beauty as
“inherently implausible” (2001, 115).  Allison objects
also that the one-act view fails to accommodate judgments of the ugly;
for more on Kant's views on the ugly, see Section 2.3.6.  Criticisms
of Ginsborg's one-act approach are also to be found in Pippin (1996),
Ameriks (1998), Palmer (2008), Vandenabeele (2008), Sweet (2009) and
Makkai (2010).  Zuckert (2007, §§1–2 of ch. 8) defends a
one-act approach, but rejects identification of the pleasure and the
judgment (see e.g. 2007, 313n46 and 336n26).
Kant's notion of the free play of the faculties (sometimes referred to
as the “harmony of the faculties”) is probably the most
central notion of his aesthetic theory.  But what is it for the
faculties of imagination and understanding to be in “free
play”? Kant describes the imagination and understanding in this
“free play” as freely harmonizing, without the
imagination's being constrained by the understanding as it is in
cognition.  Imagination in the free play, he says, conforms to the
general conditions for the application of concepts to objects that are
presented to our senses, yet without any particular concept being
applied, so that imagination conforms to the conditions of
understanding without the constraint of particular concepts.  Given
Kant's view that concepts are, or at least correspond to, rules by
which imagination “synthesizes” or organizes the data of
sense-perception, this amounts to saying that imagination functions in
a rule-governed way but without being governed by any rule in
particular. The free play thus manifests, in Kant's terms, “free
lawfulness” or ”lawfulness without a law.” But there
is an apparent paradox in these characterizations which is left
unaddressed by Kant's own, largely metaphorical, explanations. It is
left to commentators to try to explain how such an activity is
intelligible and why, if it is indeed intelligible, it should give
rise to, or be experienced as, a feeling of pleasure.
Some commentators try to make sense of the free play by appealing to
the phenomenology of aesthetic experience, for example to the kind of
experience involved in appreciating an abstract painting, where the
subject might imaginatively relate the various elements of the
painting to one another and perceive them as having an order and unity
which is non-conceptual; see for example Bell (1987, p. 237) and
Crowther (1989, p. 56).  Others try to find a place for it in the
context of Kant's theory of the imagination as presented in
the Critique of Pure Reason. Two contrasting accounts along
these lines are offered by Guyer, who identifies the free play with
the first two stages of the “three-fold synthesis”
described by Kant in the first edition Transcendental Deduction (Guyer
1979, pp. 85–86), and of Makkreel (1990, pp. 49–58), for whom the free
play is an activity of schematizing pure concepts without the
involvement of empirical concepts. Ginsborg (1997) criticizes previous
approaches and offers an alternative view of the free play derived
from her “one-act” reading of the judgment of taste
(see Section 2.3.1), on which what it is for the
imagination and understanding to be in free play just is for the
subject to be in a perceptual state of mind which involves a
nonconceptual claim to its own universal validity with respect to the
object perceived.  Zinkin (2006) explains the free play in terms of
the sensus communis invoked by Kant at §20, which she
understands as an intensive form of sensibility, in contrast to the
extensive forms of sensibility represented by space and time.
 As with the deduction of taste (see Section
2.2), a number of commentators have looked to Kant's doctrine of
aesthetic ideas (officially part of his account of fine art) to make
sense of the free play of the faculties; recent examples include
Rueger and Evren (2005), Kalar (2006), and Chignell (2007).  A
particularly detailed and thorough treatment of this approach is
offered in Rogerson (2008) (for an earlier and briefer treatment, see
Rogerson 2004).
 The question of how to understand the free play is complicated by
a more general interpretive issue concerning the status of Kant's
“transcendental psychology”: this issue affects not only
the interpretation of the free play in the third Critique, but also
the appeal to activities of imagination and understanding in Kant's
account of the conditions of cognition in the first Critique, in
particular in the Metaphysical Deduction and the Transcendental
Deduction.  Many commentators assume, whether tacitly or explicitly,
that the free play of imagination and understanding represents a
natural psychological process, taking place in time and thus subject
to natural causal laws.  But it is hard to reconcile this
understanding of the free play with Kant's appeal to it to justify the
legitimacy of judgments of beauty, and more generally his claim to be
offering a transcendental account of judgments of beauty, one which
shows such judgments to be founded on an a priori principle.
Guyer's approach to the free play, from his 1979 onwards, has been
thoroughly naturalistic; in his 2008 he offers a very explicit defence
of this approach, arguing that we should reject Kant's claim to
establish an a priori or transcendental principle justifying
judgments of beauty, and instead regard Kant's theory of aesthetics as
a contribution to the empirical psychology of taste.  While this kind
of view is rarely explicitly endorsed, many commentators do in fact
offer accounts of the free play which at least resemble empirical
psychological accounts, raising the question of how Guyer's conclusion
is to be avoided.
The views touched on in this section represent only a sampling of the
various accounts of the free play which have been offered.  A useful
survey is offered by Guyer (2006), who classifies various accounts
under three heads: “precognitive,” according to which the
play of the faculties is a preconceptual state, falling short of
cognition (for example his own 1979 account),;
“multicognitive,” in which the free play represents the
playful application of a multiplicity of concepts, and thus a kind of
cognitive excess (for example Allison 2001); and
“metacognitive,” in which the manifold is represented as
having a unity which goes beyond what is required for cognition;
Guyer's own (2006) view, in contrast to his (1979), favours the latter
approach.  A variety of still more recent approaches to the free play
are summarized and discussed in Guyer (2009).
Does the feeling of pleasure in a judgment of taste have intentional
content? According to Guyer, the answer is no (see especially 1979,
pp. 99–119). Although Kant sometimes describes pleasure as awareness
of the free play of the faculties, Guyer takes the relation between
the free play and the feeling of pleasure to be merely causal. The
pleasure is “opaque”: while one can come to recognize that
one's feeling of pleasure is due to the free play, this is not because
the pleasure makes one immediately aware of it, but rather because
reflection on the causal history of one's pleasure can lead one to
conclude that it was not sensory or due to the satisfaction of a
desire and hence (by elimination) must have been due to the free
play. While many commentors follow Guyer on this point, opposing views
have been taken by e.g., Aquila (1982), Ginsborg (1990, ch. 1, and
1991), Allison (2001, in particular pp. 53–54, p. 69 and pp. 122–123)
and Zuckert (2002; 2007, ch. 6).
What kind of claim to agreement is made by a judgment of taste? Kant
suggests that a judgment of taste demands agreement in the same way
that an objective cognitive judgment demands agreement (see e.g.,
Introduction VII, 191 and §6, 211): just as, in claiming that a
perceived object is green or square, I take it that everyone else
ought to share my judgment that the object is green or square, so, in
judging an object to be beautiful, I claim that all other perceivers
of the object should find it beautiful too.  But one might still raise
questions about the character of the demand, either because there are
in turn questions to be raised about what it is for a cognitive
judgment to claim agreement, or because it is not clear that the claim
can in fact be the same, given that in the aesthetic case one is
claiming that others share one's feeling, as opposed to
demanding that they apply the same concept to the object.  Guyer
(1979) argues that the claim should be understood as a rational
expectation or ideal prediction: someone who judges an object to be
beautiful is claiming that under ideal circumstances
everyone will share her pleasure (1979, pp. 139–147 and
pp. 162–164).  Savile (1987) and Chignell (2007) follow Guyer in
understanding the claim in this way.
Guyer's understanding of the claim has been criticized by a number of
commentators, including Rogerson (1982), Ginsborg (1990, ch. 2), Rind
(2002), and Kalar (2006, ch. 1); a basic difficulty is that it fails
to do justice to the normative language used by Kant to describe the
demand (for example that anyone who declares something to be beautiful
holds that everyone ought to [sollen] give his approval to
the object and likewise declare it beautiful [§19, 5: 237]).
Rogerson proposes instead that a judgment of beauty makes a moral
demand on others to appreciate the object's beauty, so that the
“ought” is to be understood as rational, and more
specifically moral, rather than merely predictive.  The other critics
mentioned take the “ought”, and the corresponding claim to
agreement to be non-moral, yet still genuinely normative as opposed to
predictive; a view of this kind is assumed, with varying degrees of
explicitness, by a number of other commentators, including Allison
(2001, see especially p. 159 and pp. 178–179; 2006, p. 132).
But this approach, which is perhaps closest to the letter of Kant's
text, raises a question: what kind of normativity is this, if not that
associated with morality or, more generally, practical rationality?
It is tempting to assimilate it to cognitive or epistemic normativity,
where this in turn might be understood as the normativity involved in
the putative principles that one ought to believe what is true, or,
alternatively, what is justified in light of the evidence.  However
this appears to conflict with Kant's commitment to the subjectivity
and (relatedly) nonconceptuality of judgments of taste.  To avoid the
conflict, while preserving the link Kant seems to assert between the
normativity of aesthetic judgment and that of cognitive judgment, we
need an understanding of the normativity such that it is a necessary
condition of cognition that we be able to make such normative demands
for agreement, yet without the normativity's simply being identified
with the cognitive or epistemic normativity associated with truth and
justification.  Ginsborg (2006) identifies it with what she
calls the “primitive” normativity required for empirical
conceptualization: our grasp of empirical concepts depends on the
possibility of making such primitively normative claims, but they do
not in turn presuppose cognition, which leaves open the possibility
that such a claim is implicit in aesthetic experience and
judgment.
Granted, pace Guyer, that the claim is normative without
being moral, further questions can be raised about its strength and
character.  Moran (2012) understands the demand as reflecting a sense
of obligation or requirement, distinct from moral obligation, but
stronger than that present in the case of empirical cognitive
judgment.  He reads Kant as drawn towards a view on which the
beautiful object itself makes an unconditional demand on the viewer's
attention (of a kind made vivid in the narrator's vow to the hawthorns
in Proust's In Search of Lost Time), although he also takes
Kant's denial of the objectivity of taste to debar him from endorsing
such a view.  A similar suggestion is made in Makkai (2010): she takes
Kant to hint at the idea that the beauitful object is found to
deserve, or call for, recognition as beautiful, where this implies a
claim on the viewer which goes beyond any claim implicit in an
objective judgment.  Roughly, on the view suggested by Moran and
Makkai, the claim implicit in a judgment of beauty is not merely the
conditional claim that others, if they perceive the object, ought to
judge it to be beautiful; it is the unconditional claim that others
ought to perceive it and, in so doing, judge it to be beautiful.
 The idea that Kant takes us to be subject to a demand to attend to
beautiful objects is also put forward in Kalar (2006), but Kalar
understands that demand as one of two distinct normative demands made
in the judgment of beauty: a non-moral demand to feel pleasure in the
given object, and a further moral demand to attend to the object
(2006, p.2).
Should judgments of beauty be regarded as objective? Ameriks has
argued (1982, 1983, 1998, 2000) that in spite of Kant's claim that
judgments of beauty are “subjectively grounded,” they are
nonetheless objective in the same sense that judgments of colour and
other secondary qualities are objective. Similar views are proposed by
Savile (1981) and Kulenkampff (1990); see also the references offered
by Ameriks at (2003, 307n.1). The claim is challenged by Ginsborg
(1998), who defends the subjectivity of taste on the grounds that Kant
does not allow that we can make judgments of beauty on the basis of
hearsay, but must “subject the object to our own eyes”
(§8, 5:215–216); a similar point is made in Hopkins (2001), and
there is further discussion of aesthetic testimony in Gorodeisky
(2009).  Ameriks responds to Ginsborg's challenge in his (1998); the
objectivity of taste is defended further in Makkai (2010).
 The question of whether Kant should be interpreted as committed to
the objectivity of taste is closely related to the question of whether
there can be erroneous judgments of taste; for some discussion see
Cohen (1982), pp. 222–226 and Allison (2001), pp. 107–108.
Kant's discussion of judgments of beauty focusses almost exclusively
on the positive judgment that an object is beautiful, and relatedly,
of the feeling of pleasure in a beautiful object. He has very little
to say about the judgment that an object is not beautiful, or about
the displeasure associated with judging an object to be ugly. (As
noted in Section 2.7 below, he does take the
appreciation of the sublime to involve a kind of displeasure, but this
seems to be a different kind from the displeasure that might be
involved in judging something to be ugly.) Does his treatment allow
for negative judgments of beauty, either that an object is not
beautiful or that it is ugly?  Shier (1998) argues that it does not,
but this has been challenged by Allison (2001), who takes it to be a
criterion for a satisfactory interpretation of Kant's theory of taste
that it allow for negative judgments of beauty (2001, p. 72; see also
pp. 184–186).  Others who have emphasized the need to consider the
role of the ugly in Kant's account of aesthetics include Hudson (1991)
and Wenzel (1999).
 It is useful, in considering this topic, to distinguish the
question of how we can judge that something is not beautiful, from
that of how we can judge it to be ugly.  The former question can be
seen an aspect of a more general problem about how we can make
judgments in which ascriptions of beauty figure in embedded contexts,
for example as the antecedents of conditionals; this is akin to what
is often referred to as the Frege-Geach problem for expressivism. The
second question is more specific and can be framed in terms of
aesthetic experience: can Kant allow for an experience of displeasure
in the ugly, and if he can, is it symmetrical with pleasure in the
beautiful?
 Some commentators, for example Ginsborg (2003, pp. 175–177) and
Guyer (2005a, ch. 6), have denied that there is such a thing, for
Kant, as pure displeasure in the ugly, or, correlatively a pure
judgment of ugliness. Guyer argues that while there is displeasure in
the ugly it always involves an interest; Ginsborg allows also for
disinterested judgments of ugliness, but denies that these involve a
characteristic feeling of displeasure; rather, we judge that something
is ugly if it lacks beauty in a context where beauty is expected.
More generally, on her view, aside from cases where the judgment is
based on perception of an object as harmful or disgusting, judgments
of the ugly depend on recognition of the context in which the object
is presented; Gracyk defends a similar point, using it to argue that
“ugly” objects are those which resist unification and are
thus less pleasurable to perceive than other objects (Gracyk 1986,
p. 55) .  Guyer's view is criticized in McConnell (2008), which offers
a useful survey of previous discussions of the issue, and (partly
drawing on Gracyk 1986) provides a defence of pure judgments of
ugliness which appeals to Kant's theory of aesthetic ideas.
As noted at the end of Section 2.2, Kant's account
of judgments of beauty has been criticized on the grounds that the
argument for their universal validity, that is the Deduction of Pure
Aesthetic Judgments, is unsuccessful. Criticisms have also been raised
against various aspects of Kant's characterization of judgments of
beauty in the Analytic of the Beautiful. Objections have been raised
in particular to Kant's view that judgments of beauty are
disinterested, and to his supposed commitment to aesthetic formalism
(the view that all that matters for aesthetic appreciation is the
abstract formal pattern manifested by the object, that is, the way in
which its elements are interrelated in space and/or time). For
discussion of the questions of disinterestedness and formalism, see
Guyer (1979, chs. 5 and 6), and Allison (2001, chs. 4 and 5); Zuckert
offers a sympathetic reading of Kant's formalism (2007, pp. 182–189).
Kant's formalism was particularly influential, via the influence of
Hanslick, in musical theory; for recent discussion see Kivy (2009),
ch. 2.
Typically objections to Kant's view of pleasure as disinterested
appeal to the apparently obvious fact that we do in fact take an
interest in the preservation of beautiful objects (see for example
Crawford 1974, p. 53). A different kind of objection, based on an
appeal to the cognitive role of aesthetic judging, is made in Pillow
(2006).
 Kant has also been criticized for a view that is taken to be a
consequence of the thesis that judgments of beauty are disinterested,
namely the view that aesthetic experience requires a special attitude
of “psychical distance” or “detachment” from
the object appreciated: this criticism is generally taken to be
implicit in Dickie's well-known (1964) discussion of the “myth
of the aesthetic attitude.” Zangwill (1992) argues that this
criticism is misplaced.
Kant's view that the pleasure in a beautiful object is non-conceptual
has been taken to commit him to the objectionable view that the
capacity to make conceptual distinctions can play no role in the
appreciation of beauty. This criticism is addressed in Janaway (1997).
Relatedly, it has been objected Kant does not allow room for
reason-giving, and more generally, criticism in aesthetics; that
objection is addressed in Crawford (1970) and (on lines suggested by
Crawford) in Wilson (2007).
This article so far has been concerned only with “pure”
judgments of beauty. But Kant also allows for judgments of beauty
which fall short of being pure. Judgments of beauty can fail to be
pure in two ways. (a) They can be influenced by the object's sensory
or emotional appeal, that is, they can involve “charm”
[Reiz] or emotion [Rührung] (§13). (b)
They can be contingent on a certain concept's applying to the object,
so that the object is judged, not as beautiful tout court,
but as beautiful qua belonging to this or that kind. The
second kind of impurity is discussed in §16 in connection with a
distinction between “free” [frei] beauty and
“adherent” or “dependent”
[anhängend] beauty.
One reason to think that the distinction is important is that Kant
seems to suggest that all judgments of beauty about representational
art are judgments of adherent rather than of free beauty, and hence
that they are all impure. While some art works can be “free
beauties,” the examples Kant gives are all of
non-representational art: “designs a la grecque, foliage for
borders or on wallpaper…fantasias in music,” and indeed,
Kant adds, all music without a text (§16, 229). It might be
supposed from this that Kant's core account of judgments of beauty is
only peripherally applicable to art, which would make it largely
irrelevant to the concerns of contemporary aesthetics. However, this
consequence is debatable. For example, Allison argues that judgments
of adherent beauty contain, as a component, a pure judgment of
beauty. The purity of this core judgment is not undermined by its
figuring in a more complex evaluation which takes into account the
object's falling under a concept (2001, pp. 140–141).
Kant's suggestion that representational art has “adherent”
rather than “free” beauty, and that judgments about such
art fail to be pure, might also invite the objection that Kant takes
nonrepresentational art to be superior to representational art, so
that, say, wallpaper designs are aesthetically more valuable than the
ceiling of the Sistine Chapel. This objection is challenged by Schaper
(1979, ch. 4, reprinted in Guyer 2003) and by Guyer (2005a, chs. 4 and
5).
 Further discussions of the distinction between free and adherent
beauty include Scarre (1981), Lorand (1989), Gammon (1999),
Kalar (2006), pp. 82–89, and Zuckert (2007), pp. 202–212.
While Kant attaches special importance to the beauty of nature (see
e.g., FI XI, 20:244), he also makes clear that judgments of beauty may
be made also about “fine” or “beautiful” art
[schöne Kunst]. In the course of his treatment of
beautiful art in §§43–54 he discusses fine art in relation
to the production of human artifacts more generally (§43),
compares fine art to the “arts” of entertaining (telling
jokes, decorating a table, providing background music) (§44), and
makes some remarks about the relation between the beauty of art and
that of nature, claiming in particular that fine art must “look
to us like nature” in that it must seem free and unstudied
(§45). Kant also offers a typology of the various fine arts
(§51) and a comparison of their respective aesthetic value
(§53), with poetry at the top and music — at least as far
as the “cultivation of the mind” is concerned — at
the bottom.  Kant's remarks about music in §§51–54 suggest
that music might not even qualify as beautiful, as opposed to merely
agreeable, art.  This is seemingly in tension with Kant's reference to
music without words as an example of “free beauty”
(§16, 5:229).
 Of particular interest, within Kant's account of fine art, is his
discussion of how beautiful art objects can be produced
(§§46–50). The artist cannot produce a beautiful work by
learning, and then applying, rules which determine when something is
beautiful; for no such rules can be specified (see the sketch of the
Second Moment in Section 2.1 above). But, Kant
makes clear, the artist's activity must still be rule-governed, since
“every art presupposes rules” (§46, 307) and the
objects of art must serve as models or examples, that is, they must
serve as a “standard or rule by which to judge” (§46,
308). Kant's solution to this apparent paradox is to postulate a
capacity, which he calls “genius,” by which “nature
gives the rule to art” (§46, 307). An artist endowed with
genius has a natural capacity to produce objects which are
appropriately judged as beautiful, and this capacity does not require
the artist him- or herself to consciously follow rules for the
production of such objects; in fact the artist himself does not know,
and so cannot explain, how he or she was able to bring them into
being. “Genius” here means something different from
brilliance of intellect. For example, Newton, for all his intellectual
power, does not qualify as having genius, because he was capable of
making clear, both to himself and others, the procedures through which
he arrived at his scientific discoveries (§47, 308–309).
A further point of interest in Kant's discussion of art is his claim
that beauty is the “exhibition” [Darstellung,
also translated “presentation”] (§49, 314) or
“expression” (§51, 319) of aesthetic ideas. Kant
describes an aesthetic idea as “a representation of the
imagination that occasions much thinking, though without it being
possible for any determinate thought, i.e., concept, to be adequate to
it” (§49, 314). Such ideas, he says, are a
“counterpart” to rational ideas, that is, representations
which cannot be exemplified in experience or by means of imagination
(ibid.). While part of Kant's point here is to contrast aesthetic and
rational ideas, it is clear that he sees the role of aesthetic ideas
as mediating between rational ideas on the one hand, and sensibility
and imagination on the other. A work of art expresses or exhibits an
aesthetic idea in so far as it succeeds in giving sensible form to a
rational idea. Thus aesthetic ideas “seek to approximate to an
exhibition” of rational ideas. For example, the poet
“ventures to make sensible rational ideas of invisible beings,
the realm of the blessed, the realm of hell, eternity, creation etc.,
as well as to make that of which there are examples in experience,
e.g., death, envy, and all sorts of vices, as well as love, fame,
etc., sensible beyond the limits of experience, with a completeness
which goes beyond anything of which there is an example in
nature” (ibid.).
 While aesthetic ideas are discussed only in the sections of
the Critique of Judgment which deal with artistic beauty, and
not in the “Analytic of the Beautiful,” which deals with
beauty more generally, Kant remarks parenthetically that natural as
well as artistic beauty is the expression of aesthetic ideas
(§51, 321). This claim has been thought by some commentators to
be problematic. Some commentators have also seen a tension between the
“expressionistic” doctrine of aesthetic ideas and the
supposedly “formalistic” view presented in the
“Analytic of the Beautiful”; for a response to this worry,
see Allison (2001, pp. 288–290).
A related question concerns the relative importance for Kant of
natural as opposed to artistic beauty. Guyer (1993, ch. 7) offers a
defence of the importance of natural beauty, and criticizes Kemal's
(1986) view that artistic beauty is the paradigm object of aesthetic
experience for Kant.
Kant's theory of aesthetic ideas has often been considered as
peripheral to his aesthetic theory, but a number of commentators have
argued that it is necessary in order to make sense of the core of
Kant's view of pure judgments of taste; see for example Savile (1987),
Rogerson (2004) and (2008), Rueger and Evren (2005), Kalar (2006), and
Chignell (2007).
 There has been some discussion of Kant's ranking of the fine arts,
and particularly of the low ranking he accords to music; on the latter
topic, see for example Weatherston (1996), Parret (1998a) and Kivy
(2009), ch. 2.
Kant distinguishes two notions of the sublime: the mathematically
sublime and the dynamically sublime. In the case of both notions, the
experience of the sublime consists in a feeling of the superiority of
our own power of reason, as a supersensible faculty, over nature
(§28, 261).
In the case of the mathematically sublime, the feeling of reason's
superiority over nature takes the form, more specifically, of a
feeling of reason's superiority to imagination, conceived of as the
natural capacity required for sensory apprehension, including the
apprehension of the magnitudes of empirically given things. We have
this feeling when we are confronted with something that is so large
that it overwhelms imagination's capacity to comprehend it. In such a
situation imagination strives to comprehend the object in accordance
with a demand of reason, but fails to do so. “Just because there
is in our imagination a striving to advance to the infinite, while in
our reason there lies a claim to absolute totality, as to a real idea,
the very inadequacy of our faculty for estimating the magnitude of the
things in the sensible world [viz., imagination] awakens the feeling
of a supersensible faculty in us” (§25, 250). The fact that
we are capable, through reason, of thinking infinity as a whole,
“indicates a faculty of the mind which surpasses every standard
of sense” (§26, 254). While Kant's discussion of the
mathematically sublime mentions the Pyramids in Egypt and St. Peter's
Basilica in Rome (§26, 252), it is not clear that these are
intended as examples of the sublime; and Kant claims explicitly that
the most appropriate examples are of things in nature. More
specifically, they must be natural things the concept of which does
not involve the idea of a purpose (§26, 252–253): this rules out
animals, the concept of which is connected with the idea of biological
function, but it apparently includes mountains and the sea (§26,
256).
In the case of the dynamically sublime, the feeling of reason's
superiority to nature is more direct than in the mathematical
case. Kant says that we consider nature as “dynamically
sublime” when we consider it as “a power that has no
dominion over us” (§28, 260). We have the feeling of the
dynamically sublime when we experience nature as fearful while knowing
ourselves to be in a position of safety and hence without in fact
being afraid. In this situation “the irresistibility of
[nature's] power certainly makes us, considered as natural beings,
recognize our physical powerlessness, but at the same time it reveals
a capacity for judging ourselves as independent of nature and a
superiority over nature…whereby the humanity in our person
remains undemeaned even though the human being must submit to that
dominion” (§28, 261–262). Kant's examples include
overhanging cliffs, thunder clouds, volcanoes and hurricanes
(§28, 261).
The feeling associated with the sublime is a feeling of pleasure in
the superiority of our reason over nature, but it also involves
displeasure. In the case of the mathematically sublime, the
displeasure comes from the awareness of the inadequacy of our
imagination; in the dynamical case it comes from the awareness of our
physical powerlessness in the face of nature's might. Kant is not
consistent in his descriptions of how the pleasure and the displeasure
are related, but one characterization describes them as alternating:
the “movement of the mind” in the representation of the
sublime “may be compared to a vibration, i.e., to a rapidly
alternating repulsion from and attraction to one and the same
object” (§27, 258). Kant also describes the feeling of the
sublime as a “pleasure which is possible only by means of a
displeasure” (§27, 260) and as a “negative
liking” (General Remark following §29, 269). He also
appears to identify it with the feeling of respect, which in his
practical philosophy is associated with recognition of the moral law
(§27, 257).
Judgments of the sublime are like judgments of beauty in being based
on feeling, more specifically on pleasure or liking. They are also
like judgments of beauty in claiming the universal validity of the
pleasure, where that claim is understood as involving necessity
(everyone who perceives the object ought to share the feeling)
(§29, 266). But as we have seen, the pleasure is different in
that it involves a negative element. The following differences should
also be noted:
The importance of the sublime within Kant's aesthetic theory is a
matter of dispute. In the Introductions to the Critique of
Judgment, Kant has a great deal to say about the beautiful, but
mentions the sublime only fleetingly (FI XII, 249–250) and in
the Analytic of the Sublime itself he notes that “the concept of
the sublime in nature is far from being as important and rich in
consequences as that of its beauty” and that the “theory
of the sublime is a mere appendix to the aesthetic judging of the
purposiveness of nature” (§23, 246). Kant's views about the
sublime also appear to be less historically distinctive than his views
about the beautiful, showing in particular the influence of Burke. On
the other hand, Kant's account of the sublime has been influential in
literary theory (see Section 2.9 below), and the
sublime also plays a significant role in Kant's account of the
connection between aesthetic judgment and morality
(see Section 2.5 below).
Another focus of debate concerns the question of whether sublimity,
according to Kant, is restricted to objects of nature, or whether
there can also be sublime art.
 A good overview of Kant's theory of the sublime and its connection
with Kant's aesthetic theory more generally is provided by Crowther
(1989); other useful expositions include Guyer (1993, ch. 7), Budd
(1998) and Allison (2001, ch. 13).  The question of the artistic
sublime in particular has been raised by Abaci (2008), who defends
Kant's restriction of sublimity to nature; Clewis (2010) defends the
opposite view.  A possible case study is offered by Myskja (2002), who
attempts to bring the notion of the sublime to bear on a specific work
of art, Samuel Beckett's Molloy.
The connection between aesthetic judgment and moral feeling is a
persistent theme in the Critique of Judgment. As noted
in Section 2.3.4 above, some commentators take
the demand for universal validity made by a judgment of beauty to
amount to a moral demand, so that Kant's argument for the universal
validity of such judgments depends on an appeal to morality. A more
common view, however, is to see judgments of beauty not as grounded in
morality, but rather, along with judgments of the sublime, as
contributing to an account of moral feeling, and hence of how morality
is possible for human beings (for a clear statement of the contrast
between these views, see the introduction to Guyer 1993).
The idea that aesthetic judgment plays a role in grounding the
possibility of morality for human beings is suggested at a very
general level in the Introduction to the Critique of
Judgment, where Kant describes the faculty of judgment as
bridging “the great gulf” betweeen the concept of nature
and that of freedom (IX, 195). While Kant says that the concept or
principle of judgment which mediates the transition between nature and
freedom is that of the “purposiveness of nature,” which
could simply be understood as referring to nature's scientific
comprehensibility (see Section 3.2 below), he also
associates judgment in this context with the feeling of pleasure and
displeasure, making clear that it is not only judgment in the context
of empirical scientific enquiry, but also aesthetic judgment, which
plays this bridging role.
The “Critique of Aesthetic Judgment” mentions a number of
more specific connections between aesthetics and morality, including
the following:
There is an influential discussion of beauty as the symbol of morality
in Cohen (1982). More recently, the connection between aesthetics and
morality, and in particular the role of aesthetics in supporting the
human moral vocation, has been emphasized by Guyer; see the
introduction to his (1993), and, more recently, (2003c).
Kant himself clearly takes his aesthetic theory to be of central
importance for the understanding of the so-called “faculty of
judgment” generally (see Section 1 above): this
implies that he takes it to be of importance for understanding
empirical scientific enquiry, and in particular for our understanding
of biological phenomena. As noted in Section 2.8
above, there are also significant connections between Kant's views on
aesthetics and his views on ethics. A number of commentators have, in
addition, laid special weight on the connection between Kant's
aesthetics and his views on empirical cognition. In particular, Bell
(1987) and Ginsborg (1990, 1997 and 2006) have argued that Kant's
account of empirical cognition depends on his account of the
experience of beauty.  The idea that a full understanding of Kant's
views on cognition depends on taking seriously his account of
aesthetics is becoming increasingly widely accepted; see the
introduction to Kukla (2006), a collection of essays exploring the
connection between aesthetics and cognition in Kant.  However, it is
by no means uncontroversial that Kant's aesthetics makes a substantive
contribution to his theory of cognition more generally.  Guyer
emphasizes the role played by the third Critique in supporting Kant's
moral theory, in explicit contrast to the suggestion that it was
intended to fill an “imaginary gap in his epistemology”
(2009, 215).
 Kant's view that judgments of beauty manifest the exercise of a
more general faculty of judgment have inspired a number of
philosophers to view aesthetic judgment as a model for judgment
generally in both the cognitive and the practical domain. Cavell
(1976, ch. 3) draws connections between judgments of beauty, as
described by Kant, and our intuitive judgments (typically associated
with “ordinary language philosophy,” but prevalent in
philosophy more generally) about correct use of language. Arendt
(1982) applies Kant's theory of aesthetic judgment within the sphere
of political philosophy; relatedly, Fleischacker (1999) sees
connections between aesthetic judgment for Kant and moral and
political judgment generally.  Ginsborg (2011) uses Kant's aesthetic
theory as the basis for a response to the skepticism about rules and
meaning which Kripke attributes to Wittgenstein.
Kant's aesthetic theory has also been extensively discussed within
literary theory, where there has been particular emphasis on Kant's
theory of the sublime. See for example Weiskel (1976) and Hertz
(1978), both of whom interpret Kant's account of the sublime in
psychoanalytic terms, as well as the discussions of the Kantian
sublime in de Man (1990) and Lyotard (1994). Kant's aesthetic theory
more generally is discussed in Derrida (1981, 1987); while the work of
Derrida and other deconstructionists has been largely ignored or
dismissed by commentators within the analytic tradition of philosophy,
it has been influential among literary theorists.
While Kant's ethical theory makes frequent reference to the ends or
purposes adopted by human beings, the “Critique of Teleological
Judgment” is concerned with the idea of ends or purposes in
nature. (The terms “end” and “purpose” in
translations of the Critique of Judgment both correspond to
the German term Zweck; the cognate German
term Zweckmässigkeit is generally translated as
“purposiveness,” although the term “finality”
has sometimes also been used.  “End” is the standard
translation of Zweck in the moral writings, but
“purpose” has more currency in the literature on
the Critique of Judgment, so I use it here.)  Among the most
striking elements of Kant's account of natural teleology are (i) his
claim, in the “Analytic of Teleological Judgment,” that
organisms must be regarded by human beings in teleological terms,
i.e., as “natural purposes,” and (ii) his attempt, in the
“Dialectic of Teleological Judgment,” to reconcile this
teleological conception of organisms with a mechanistic account of
nature. These are described here in Section 3.3 and 3.4,
respectively. Prior to this, Section 3.1 outlines Kant's notions of
purpose and purposiveness in general and Section 3.2 sketches nature's
“purposiveness for our cognitive faculties,” i.e., its
amenability to empirical scientific enquiry. The discussion of
biological teleology and its relation to mechanism in Sections 3.3 and
3.4 is followed by two sections dealing with further aspects of Kant's
teleology: Section 3.5 deals with Kant's view that nature as a whole
may be regarded as a system of purposes, and Section 3.6 with the
implications of this teleological view of nature for morality and
religion.  Section 3.7 returns to Kant's biological teleology,
considering briefly its implications for contemporary biological
thought.
The notions of purpose or end [Zweck] and of purposiveness
[Zweckmässigkeit] are defined by Kant in the
“Critique of Aesthetic Judgment,” in a section entitled
“On Purposiveness in General” (§10). A purpose is
“the object of a concept, in so far as the concept as seen as
the cause of the object,” and purposiveness is “the
causality of a concept with respect to its object” (§10,
220). But Kant often uses the terms “purpose” and
“purposive” in ways that are related to, but do not quite
fit, these definitions. In particular “purpose” is
sometimes used to apply to the concept rather than the corresponding
object (e.g., Introduction IV, 180), and “purposiveness”
is usually used to denote, not the causality of the concept, but the
property in virtue of which an object counts as a purpose (e.g., FI
IX, 234). Kant also characterizes “purposiveness” as the
“lawfulness of the contingent as such” (FI VI, 217; see
also FI VIII, 228, Introduction V, 184, and §76, 404).
Kant's initial definition at §10 suggests that the paradigm of a
purpose is a human artifact, since this typically comes into being as
a result of the artisan's having a concept of the object he or she
plans to produce, a concept which is thus causally efficacious in
producing its object. Such an object is the result of design. But Kant
goes on to claim that something can qualify as a purpose, or as
purposive, not only if it is in fact brought about as a result of
design, but if we can conceive its possibility only on the assumption
that it was produced according to design: “an object or a state
of mind or even an action... is called purposive merely because its
possibility can only be explained and conceived by us in so far as we
assume at its ground a causality in accordance with purposes”
(§10, 220). Kant thinks that this is the case in particular for
organisms, which are “natural purposes”
(see Section 3.3 below). But the notion of
purposiveness also applies more broadly, and Kant distinguishes
various different kinds of purposiveness applying not only to
organisms and artifacts, but also to beautiful objects, to nature as a
whole (both in so far as it is comprehensible to human beings, and in
so far as it is a system of purposes standing in purposive relations
to one another), to the functioning of our cognitive faculties in
aesthetic appreciation and empirical scientific enquiry, to
geometrical figures, and even to objects that are useful or agreeable
to human beings.
Because Kant's terminology is not always consistent, it is difficult
to provide a definitive characterization of the various types of
purposiveness. However, the following simplified scheme may serve as a
guide. The notion of purposiveness is divided in the first instance
into subjective and objective purposiveness. Both
kinds of purposiveness are in turn divided into formal
and material (or real). The most important kinds of
purposiveness for the concerns of the Critique of Judgment
are (i) subjective formal purposiveness and (ii) objective material
purposiveness. Subjective formal purposiveness corresponds both to the
“aesthetic” purposiveness displayed by beautiful objects
(or by the activity of our cognitive faculties in the perception of
them) and to the “logical” purposiveness displayed by
nature as a whole in so far as it is comprehensible to human beings
(see Section 3.2). Objective material purposiveness
corresponds to the purposiveness displayed both by organisms qua
“natural purposes” (see Section 3.3)
and by arrangements of natural things or processes which stand to one
another in means-end relations (see Section
3.5). But Kant also allows for subjective material purposiveness,
which is the kind of purposiveness exhibited by an agreeable object,
i.e., one which pleases our senses (FI VIII, 224); and for objective
formal purposiveness, which is exhibited by geometrical figures in
virtue of their fruitfulness for solving mathematical problems
(§62).
A further important distinction is that between objective material
purposiveness which is inner, and objective material
purposiveness which is merely outer or relative;
this distinguishes the kind of purposiveness possessed by organisms
from that in virtue of which one natural thing or process stands in a
means-end relation to another. Kant also claims in one passage (FI
XII, 249–250) that the distinction between inner and relative
purposiveness applies to subjective as well as objective
purposiveness, serving to separate the beautiful from the sublime.
The distinctions among these various kinds of purposiveness have been
treated in detail by Marc-Wogau (1938) and Tonelli (1958).
There has been disagreement among commentators about whether there is
any underlying philosophical unity to Kant's notion of purposiveness,
and, in particular, whether the notion of purposiveness which figures
in the aesthetic context is the same as that which figures in Kant's
account of organisms. Guyer takes Kant to be operating with two
different senses of “purposiveness,” one applying to
artifacts (and, presumably, organisms), the other applying to objects
of aesthetic appreciation. While purposiveness in the former sense
corresponds to Kant's account of purposiveness at §10 in terms of
the notion of design, the notion of purposiveness as it applies to
beautiful objects does not involve the idea of real or apparent
design, but simply that of the satisfaction of an aim or objective
(1979, pp. 213–218; see also 1993, p. 417n.39).
 An opposing view is defended in Ginsborg 1997a, which draws on
Kant's characterization of purposiveness as the “lawfulness of
the contingent as such” (FI VI, 20:217; see also FI VIII,
20:228; Introduction V, 5:184; and §76, 5:404) to argue for a
univocal conception on which purposiveness is understood as normative
lawfulness.  Zuckert also lays emphasis on Kant's identification of
purposiveness as the “lawfulness of the contingent” (2007,
pp. 5–7), but rejects Ginsborg's view that this in turn amounts to
normative lawfulness as such (2007, 84n28); on her view, the
lawfulness of the contingent is to be understood as “the unity
of the diverse” (2007, p. 5) or the “form of unity of
diversity as such” (2007, p. 15). The normative conception of
purposiveness is also criticized by Teufel (2011), who argues that
Kant held an etiological and non-teleological conception of
purposiveness: on Teufel's view, an ascription of purposiveness to an
object makes an ontological claim to the effect that the object is the
outcome of a rational, conceptually guided process.
Kant claims in the Introductions to the Critique of Judgment
that it is an a priori principle of reflecting judgment that
nature is “purposive for our cognitive faculties” or
“purposive for judgment.” This principle is, in the
terminology of the Critique of Pure Reason, regulative rather
than constitutive. We cannot assert that nature is, as a matter of
objective fact, purposive for our cognitive faculties, but it is a
condition of the exercise of reflecting judgment that we assume
nature's purposiveness for our cognitive faculties. The assumption
that nature is purposive for our cognitive faculties is not, strictly
speaking, part of teleology, since the purposiveness at issue is
subjective, and teleological judgments are concerned only with
objective purposiveness (see e.g., FI VII, 20:221). But it is
nonetheless relevant to Kant's teleology, since our entitlement to
ascribe objective purposiveness to natural things, in particular to
organisms, derives from our more fundamental entitlement to regard
nature as (subjectively) purposive for our cognitive faculties (FI VI,
20:218; Introduction VIII, 5:193–194).
Kant characterizes the principle of nature's purposiveness in a
variety of different ways which he seems to treat as interchangeable
even though they do not, on the face of it, come to the same
thing. The variety of characterizations stems in part from the variety
of different tasks he seems to ascribe to reflecting judgment
itself. In addition to being responsible for aesthetic judgments, and
to supplying the concept of purposiveness which is required for
teleological judgments, reflecting judgment seems to be ascribed the
following cognitive tasks: the classification of natural things into a
hierarchy of genera and species; the construction of explanatory
scientific theories in which more specific natural laws are
represented as falling under higher and more general laws; the
representation of nature as empirically
lawlike überhaupt; and the formation of empirical
concepts überhaupt. Because the principle of nature's
purposiveness is, in effect, the principle that nature is amenable to
the activity of reflecting judgment itself, it seems to allow of being
formulated in a corresponding variety of ways, that is, as a principle
of nature's taxonomic systematicity, of its explanatory systematicity,
of its empirical lawlikeness, and of its empirical
conceptualizability.
Kant's discussion of the principle of nature's purposiveness for our
cognitive faculties, and his related earlier discussion (in the
Appendix to the Transcendental Dialectic of the Critique of Pure
Reason) of the regulative principle of nature's systematicity,
have, together, been seen as very important for the understanding of
Kant's views on empirical science. Moreover, to the extent that the
principle is seen as required not only for the construction of
systematic scientific theories, but also for the recognition of
nature's empirical lawlikeness or (even more fundamentally) for the
possibility of any empirical concept-formation at all, it takes on
great importance for an understanding of Kant's views on empirical
cognition generally. However, Kant's discussion of the principle has
been thought to pose a number of serious interpretative and
philosophical difficulties, including the following:
(1) How are the various formulations of the principle related? Kant
seems to regard them as amounting to the same, and thus to be
committed to the view that if nature is empirically conceptualizable
at all, we must also recognize the empirical regularities it manifests
as lawlike, and the corresponding concepts and laws must fall under a
systematic hierarchy. But it is not clear how such a view is to be
justified. It seems quite conceivable that natural things could be
conceptualizable (say, under familiar concepts like dog
or granite) without those concepts in turn figuring in a
systematic hierarchy. Relatedly, it also seems conceivable that we
could apply such concepts to natural things without being able to
detect any lawlike connections among the corresponding properties, let
alone connections which in turn allow of being incorporated into an
overarching system of empirical laws.
(2) Regardless of how one understands the task of reflecting
judgment, and the content of the corresponding principle, why is it a
condition of the successful exercise of reflecting judgment that we
assume that nature is suitable for reflecting judgment? Why can't we
pursue our attempts, say, to arrive at a systematic hierarchy of
natural concepts and laws, without assuming in advance that nature
will favour our efforts?
(3) If the principle is indeed required, as Kant suggests it is, for
the empirical conceptualization of nature and for the recognition of
nature as empirically lawlike, then it would seem to be a condition of
the possibility of experience. But then why is it regulative rather
than constitutive? Relatedly, how are we to reconcile the respective
roles of the pure concepts of the understanding (in particular the
concept of causality) on the one hand, with the principle of nature's
purposiveness for our cognitive faculties on the other? If Kant has
already shown, in the Analytic of the Critique of Pure
Reason, that nature is subject to causal laws, then why is there
any need for a further principle to account for the recognition of
nature as empirically lawlike?
Much of the discussion of these and related questions was stimulated
by Buchdahl, who argues (1969, 1969a) that the principle of causality
in the Analytic of the Critique of Pure Reason is
insufficient to account for nature's subordination to particular
causal laws and that, in addition, a principle of systematicity is
required to account for nature's empirical lawlikeness.  A similar
view is developed by Philip Kitcher (1986); for a somewhat revised
view, see his (1994).  Guyer (1990a) follows McFarland (1970) in
ascribing less cognitive significance to the principle of nature's
purposiveness for our cognitive faculties, holding that it is required
only to provide us with rational motivation for attempts at
systematizing nature; see also Guyer (1990b), (1979, ch. 2) and
(2003b).  Floyd (1998) and Allison (2001, ch. 1) claim that the
principle represents Kant's answer to Hume's problem of induction;
Ginsborg (1990, ch. 4; 1990a) takes it to be a condition of empirical
conceptualization and hence of all empirical judgment, not just of
judgments based on inductive inference. An even stronger view is
suggested by Abela (2006), who takes it to be required as a condition
for empirical truth, which he sees as required in turn for the
possibility of any object-directed representation.  Geiger (2009) also
holds that the principle is required for all empirical cognition (see
also Geiger 2003), but argues that it is in the “Critique of
Teleological Judgment”, and not in the Introductions to
the Critique of Judgment (nor in the Appendix to the
Dialectic of the first Critique), that Kant offers his
fullest argument for its necessity.
 Other useful discussions of Kant's views on the systematicity of
nature are to be found in Horstmann (1989), Brandt (1989), Butts
(1990), Friedman (1991 and 1992, ch. 5), Patricia Kitcher (1990
ch. 8), Walker (1990), Brittan (1992).
 There has been considerable discussion of the relation between the
principle of nature's systematicity in Kant's theoretical philosophy
and the activity of reflecting judgment in aesthetic experience; see
for example Ginsborg (1990a), Pippin (1996), Allison (2001, ch. 2),
Guyer (2003a), Baz (2005), Caranti (2005) and Hughes (2006; 2007,
ch. 7).
In §§64–65 of the Analytic of Teleological Judgment, Kant
introduces the notion of a “natural purpose” or
“natural end” [Naturzweck] and argues both that
“organized beings,” that is, plants and animals,
instantiate the concept of a natural purpose and also that they are
the only beings in nature that do so (§65, 376). (Kant sometimes
says that they are natural purposes, and sometimes only that they must
be “regarded” or “considered” as natural
purposes.) Organized beings (or, to use the more modern term,
“organisms”) are, or must be considered as, purposes
because we can conceive of their possibility only on the assumption
that they were produced in accordance with design. They thus meet the
definition of “purpose” given at §10. (In the terms
introduced in Section 3.1, they display
“inner objective material purposiveness.”) But they are,
or must be considered, as products of nature rather than products of
conscious design.
What makes an organism qualify as a natural purpose is that it is
“both cause and effect of itself” (§64, 371). Kant
gives a preliminary explanation of this idea at §64 by calling
attention to three respects in which an organism, such as a tree,
stands in a causal relation to its own existence. First, in producing
offspring which resemble it, a tree “produces itself as far as
its species is concerned,” so that the species of the tree
maintains itself in existence. Second, a tree preserves itself as an
individual by taking in nourishment from outside and converting it
into the kind of organic substance of which it, itself, is
made. Third, and most important, the various parts of a tree mutually
maintain one another in existence and hence maintain the whole tree in
existence. For example, while the leaves are produced by the tree as a
whole and depend on it for their growth and maintenance, they are in
turn necessary for the growth and maintenance of the other parts of
the tree, for example the trunk and roots. Kant also mentions a number
of further phenomena illustrating the way in which an organism is
“cause and effect” of itself, in particular the capacity
of certain organisms to regenerate missing parts, and more generally
the capacity of organisms to repair damage to themselves.
Kant goes into more detail about the notion of a natural purpose in
§65, where he specifies two conditions something must meet in
order to be a natural purpose. The first, that the “parts are
possible…only through their relation to the whole”
(§65, 373), is a condition on something's being, not only a
natural purpose, but a purpose tout court. It thus applies
not only to living things but also to artifacts, such as watches, in
which each part is there for the sake of its relation to the whole,
and is thus in a sense there only on account of its relation to the
whole. The second condition, which applies only to purposes which are
natural, is that “the parts of the thing…are reciprocally
cause and effect of their form” (ibid.). (This corresponds to
the third of the features to which Kant drew our attention in the
example of the tree at §64.) This condition is not met by
artifacts, a point which Kant illustrates by appeal to the example of
a watch, whose parts, unlike the parts of a plant or animal, do not
produce one another or maintain one another in existence.
Kant is concerned, then, to emphasize both an analogy and a disanalogy
between organisms and artifacts. As in the case of artifacts, we can
make sense of organisms (that is, understand their structure and
workings) only by appeal to teleological notions. We make sense of an
organism by coming to understand what the functions of its various
parts are (e.g., by coming to understand that the function of the
heart is to pump blood round the body, or that the heart is there
“in order to” pump blood round the body) just as we make
sense of an artifact such as a watch by coming to understand the
functions of its parts (e.g., that a particular wheel is
there in order to turn the hour hand). But organisms are unlike
artifacts in that they are not produced or maintained by an external
cause, but instead have the self-producing and self-maintaining
character that is revealed in the kinds of vital properties
(reproduction of young, capacity to nourish themselves, reciprocal
dependence of parts, capacity for self-repair) which Kant illustrates
with the example of the tree.
The question of how the natural character of organisms can be
reconciled with their status as purposes, and hence of the very
coherence of the notion of a “natural purpose,” is
indirectly addressed by Kant in the Dialectic of Teleological Judgment
in the form of a question about how we are to reconcile the apparently
conflicting demands of mechanistic and teleological explanation with
regard to living things (see Section 3.4 below).
But it can also be raised in a more direct form.  How is it possible
to regard one and the same object both as a purpose (hence as
something which has been produced as a result of conscious design),
and as natural (hence — on the face of it — something
which has not been produced as a result of conscious design)?  To say
that we regard it only as if it were designed does not on its
own dispose of the question, for it is not clear what it is to regard
something that is not designed “as if” it were designed:
if we are not ascribing to organisms the property of being artifacts,
then in what respect can we can coherently regard them as similar to
artifacts?
Ginsborg (2001) attempts to resolve the problem of coherence by
appeal to a conception of purposiveness as normativity
(see Section 3.1 above), arguing that organisms can
be regarded as subject to normative standards without supposing that
they were designed to accord with those standards.  Alternative
solutions are offered by Kreines (2005), who agrees that the notion of
a purpose has normative content but denies that organisms for Kant are
in fact purposes, and by Beisbart (2009), who argues that the appeal
to normativity is unnecessary for making sense of organisms as natural
purposes, since we can conceive of a natural object as artefact-like
by conceiving of its parts as produced reciprocally by one another and
by the whole (in the way illustrated by Kant through the example of
the tree at §64).
While much discussion of Kant's biological teleology has focussed on
the Dialectic of Teleological Judgment, rather than the Analytic,
there is an excellent discussion of the Analytic of Teleological
Judgment in McLaughlin (1990, ch. 1), which sets Kant's view of
organisms in the context of eighteenth-century biology.  Other
discussions of the Analytic's treatment of organisms as natural
purposes include Zumbach (1984), Illetterati (2014),
Šustar (2014) and Goy (2014a).  Fricke (1990),
Guyer (2003a) and Steigerwald (2006) relate Kant's view of organisms
as natural purposes to his views about reflective judgment more
generally. Guyer
(2001) discusses the way in which Kant's notion of organisms as
purposes creates a problem for his conception of science as unified.
Breitenbach (2014) argues that the ascription of purposiveness
to organisms is a matter of our regarding organic natural processes as
analogous to reason's intentional activity.
The same considerations which lead Kant to claim, in the Analytic,
that we must regard organisms as purposes, lead him to claim, in the
Dialectic, that their production cannot be mechanically explained and
that they must instead be accounted for in terms which ultimately make
reference to teleology. In a well-known passage he declares that it is
“absurd for human beings…to hope that there may yet arise
a Newton who could make conceivable even so much as the production of
a blade of grass according to natural laws which no intention has
ordered” (§75, 400). The mechanical inexplicability of
organisms leads to an apparent conflict, which Kant refers to as an
“antinomy of judgment,” between two principles governing
empirical scientific enquiry. On the one hand, we must seek to explain
everything in nature in mechanical terms; on the other, some objects
in nature resist mechanical explanation and we need to appeal to
teleology in order to understand them (§70, 387).
The question of how Kant resolves the Antinomy is controversial. At
least part of Kant's solution consists in the claim that both
principles are merely “regulative” rather than
“constitutive,” that is, that they do not state how nature
really is, but only present principles which we must follow in
investigating nature. Kant develops this solution in detail by arguing
that both the need for mechanistic explanation for nature as a whole,
and the specific need to regard some products of nature (specifically,
organisms) in teleological terms, are due to peculiarities of our
human cognitive faculties. The core of this argument is given in
§77, where Kant differentiates two kinds of understanding, the
“discursive” understanding of human beings, and a
contrasting “intuitive” understanding which (although Kant
does not say so explicitly) might be ascribed to God. While a being
with a discursive understanding cannot understand how an organism
could come about in ways that do not involve teleological causation,
this does not mean this could not be understood by an intuitive
understanding, and hence that the production of organisms is
impossible without such causation.
This argument on its own is not sufficient to address the question of
how the principles are to be reconciled in scientific enquiry, that
is, how we are to seek a mechanical explanation of organisms (as
required by the first principle) while still acknowledging that we
cannot understand them except by appeal to purposes. Kant's ostensible
answer to this question is that we must “subordinate”
mechanism to teleology (§78, 414). Even in the case of organisms,
we must pursue the search for mechanical explanation as far as
possible, yet while still recognizing the need for an ultimate appeal
to purposes. The subordination of mechanism to teleology is clarified
in §§80–81, in the “Methodology of Teleological
Judgment,” where Kant connects his views to some of the
biological controversies of the day, regarding both the origin of the
various species of plants and animals, and the origin of individual
plants and animals belonging to already existing species. In the case
of the origin of species, Kant tentatively endorses a view which
allows the natural development of higher species out of lower ones,
but which denies the possibility that the lower species in turn could
develop out of unorganized matter as such. The view is
“mechanical” to the extent that it understands the
development of one species from another as a natural law-governed
process which does not require special appeal to an purpose in the
case of each new species; but the mechanism is “subordinated to
teleology” in the sense that the starting-point of the process,
namely matter which itself has organization and life, is intelligible
only by appeal to purposes (§80). In the case of the origin of
particular organisms, Kant endorses a view (epigenesis) on which the
emergence of an apparently new plant or animal is not just the
expansion or unfolding of one which already existed in miniature (as
on the preformationist view), but a natural process whereby a new
living thing comes into being. At the same time, he denies that a
living thing can come to be out of non-living matter: the matter from
which the embryo develops must already be teleologically
organized. The view is “mechanical” in the sense that it
denies that each living thing was produced, like an artifact, in
accordance with a specific intention, and allows instead that once
matter is endowed with life and organization it has the power to
produce other living things. But again, as in the case of the origin
of species, this “mechanism” depends on living matter,
whose possibility we can understand only in teleological terms.
It is difficult to understand the implications of Kant's discussion of
mechanism and teleology without knowing what he means by
“mechanism,” and unfortunately this is very hard to
determine from the text. Many commentators have taken the notion of
mechanism to be equivalent to the notion of causality in time which
figures in the Critique of Pure Reason, so that the principle
of mechanism is equivalent to the causal principle which Kant takes
himself to have proved in the Second Analogy. If the notion of
mechanism is understood in this way, then Kant's solution to the
antinomy of teleological judgment is radically at odds with his views
in the Critique of Pure Reason, since it involves the claim
that the principle of mechanism is merely regulative as opposed to
constitutive. McLaughlin (1989, 1990), and following him Allison
(1991), reject this reading, instead taking the notion of mechanism in
the relevant sense to correspond to a more specific type of causality,
namely the causality by which the parts of a thing determine the whole
rather than the whole's determining the parts; this view is also taken
by Zanetti (1993). Ginsborg (2001) offers a third proposal, on which a
thing can be explained “mechanically” if its existence can
be accounted for in terms of the intrinsic powers of the matter out of
which it comes to be.
A related interpretative issue concerns the grounds on which organisms
resist mechanical explanation, and hence need to be understood
teleologically.  Many commentators, including McLaughlin (1990),
Allison (1991) and Guyer (2001, 2003a), take organisms to be
mechanically inexplicable in virtue of the self-maintaining and
self-producing character which distinguishes them from artifacts
(see Section 3.3).  On this approach, organisms
have to be explained teleologically because, in contrast to machines,
their parts cannot exist independently of the whole to which they
belong.  Against this, Ginsborg (2004) argues that the
self-maintaining character of organisms is irrelevant to their
mechanical inexplicability in the relevant sense.  Kant's point in
emphasizing the contrast between organisms and machines is not to show
that organisms require teleological explanation (since machines such
as clocks are no less in need of such explanation), but on the
contrary to show that, as natural objects rather than artefacts, they
are not to be explained in terms of a designer's intentions.  The
disagreement is discussed further in Breitenbach (2006), Watkins
(2009) and McLaughlin (2014), all of which engage with the more
general issue of how the Antinomy is resolved.
 There is a very helpful overview of the Antinomy in chapter 4 of
Quarfood (2004) which includes many references to relevant secondary
literature.  More recent discussions of the Antinomy include, in
addition to the articles mentioned in the previous paragraph, Quarfood
(2006), Breitenbach (2008), Quarfood (2014),
Nuzzo (2009) and Huneman (2014): the latter two articles deal
specifically with Kant's distinction between discursive and intuitive
understanding in §§76–77.
Kant is concerned with the role of teleology in our understanding not
only of individual organisms, but also of other natural things and
processes, and of nature as a whole. Experience presents us with many
cases in which features of a living thing's environment, both organic
and inorganic, are beneficial or indeed necessary to it: for example
rivers are helpful to the growth of plants, and thus indirectly to
human beings, because they deposit soil and thus create fertile land
(§63, 367); grass is necessary for cattle and other herbivorous
animals, which in turn provide food for carnivores (§63,
368). Kant makes the negative point (a version of which he had earlier
argued at length in the Only Possible Argument for the Existence
of God of 1763) that we can understand these arrangements without
appeal to purposes. We can account for the origin of rivers
mechanically, and even though grass must be regarded as an purpose on
account of its internal organization, we do not need to appeal to its
usefulness to other living things in order to comprehend it. However,
he does hold that the natural objects figuring in these useful
arrangements have a type of purposiveness, namely outer or relative
purposiveness. They can be counted as purposive in this relative sense
as long as the thing to whose existence they contribute is a living
thing, and hence has inner purposiveness (this condition is stated
most clearly at §82, 425).
The idea of the outer or relative purposiveness of one natural thing
for another, which is made possible by the idea of a natural purpose,
in turn makes possible the idea of nature as a system of purposes,
where everything in nature is teleologically connected to everything
else through relations of outer purposiveness. Kant puts this by
saying that the concept of a natural purpose “necessarily leads
to the idea of all of nature as a system in accordance with the rule
of purposes” (§67, 379), but he also puts the point more
weakly by saying that the step from the idea of a natural purpose
to that of nature as a whole as a system of purposes is one which we
“may” [dürfen] make (§67, 380). This
does not mean that we are entitled, still less required, to ascribe an
intentional cause to purposive arrangements in nature, but it does
allow us to think of them as standing not only in a mechanical, but
also in a teleological order. The thought of such a teleological order
in turn leads to two further ideas: the idea of the ultimate
purpose [letzter Zweck] of nature, which is something
within nature for whose sake all other things within nature exist
(§82, 426ff), and the idea of the final purpose
[Endzweck] of nature, which is something outside of nature
for whose sake nature as a whole exists (§67, 378f.; §84,
434ff.). While experience does not allow us to identify either
nature's ultimate purpose or its final purpose, Kant argues on a
priori grounds that the final purpose of nature can only be man
considered as a moral subject, that is, considered as having the
supersensible ability to choose purposes freely (§84, 435). To
consider man in this way is to conceive him as noumenon, rather than
as part of nature. But human beings are capable of realizing their
noumenal freedom only in virtue of their capacity, as natural beings,
to set themselves purposes and to use nature to fulfil them. Kant
calls the development of this capacity “culture,” and
takes it to require the acquisition both of specific abilities
(“culture of skill”) and of the ability to make choices
without being influenced by the inclinations to enjoyment stemming
from our animal nature (“culture of discipline”). Culture
is the ultimate purpose of nature because it prepares man for what he
must do in order to be the final purpose of nature (§83,
431).
For Kant's views about the teleology of nature as a whole, see Guyer
(2001a and 2014) and Watkins (2014); the latter offers a
very helpful discussion of Kant's justification for the extension of
his views about teleology in individual organisms to nature as a
whole.  See also Cohen's (2006) discussion of the relation between
Kant's views on the generation of organisms and his conception of the
final purpose of nature.
Part of Kant's aim in the “Critique of Teleological
Judgment” is to clarify the relation of natural teleology to
religion, and to argue in particular against
“physicoteleology,” that is, the attempt to use natural
teleology to prove the existence of God. (The topic of physicotheology
was of concern to Kant throughout his career: Kant proposes a
“revised physicotheology” in the Only Possible
Argument for the Existence of God (1763), and offers a more
far-reaching criticism of physicotheology in the Critique of Pure
Reason, at A620/B648ff.) Appeal to natural teleology may justify
the assumption of an intelligent cause of nature, but it cannot
justify the assumption that this cause has wisdom, let alone that it
is infinite in every respect, and in particular supremely wise
(§85, 441). For this we need to appeal, not to natural, but to
moral, teleology, and in particular to the idea (itself belonging not
to natural, but to moral teleology) of man as final purpose of
nature. The idea of nature as purposively directed towards the
existence of rational beings under moral laws allows us to conceive of
an author of nature who is not merely intelligent, but also has the
other atttibutes associated with the traditional idea of God, for
example omniscience, omnipotence and wisdom (which includes
omnibenificence and justice) (§86, 444). We have to assume the
existence of a being with these attributes if we ourselves are to
adopt the purpose required by the moral law, a purpose which Kant
calls the “highest good” and which is discussed in his
moral writings.
Although natural teleology cannot prove the existence of God, it
nonetheless has a positive role to play with respect to religion and
morality, in that it leads us to ask what the final purpose of nature
is, and relatedly, to inquire into the attributes of God as author of
nature. Thus, as Kant puts it, it “drives us to seek a
theology” (§85, 440), and thus serves as a preparation or
“propadeutic” to theology (§85, 442). Kant also
claims that “if the cognition of natural purposes is connected
with that of the moral purpose” then “it is of great
significance for assisting the practical reality of the idea [of
God]” (§88, 456). The positive role of natural teleology in
establishing religion and morality has been emphasized by Guyer (see
especially 2000, 2001a, 2002), who takes the “Critique of
Teleological Judgment” to provide an important argument from
natural teleology to morality.
A different kind of connection between Kant's natural teleology and
his views about morality is suggested in Kain (2009), which interprets
Kant's biological theories as supporting his view that all members of
the human species (including infants and the severely disabled) have
moral status.
Kant's writings on natural teleology take for granted the
biological theories of his time, which were very different from those
of the present day.  While theorists at the time that Kant was writing
were prepared to consider the possibility that present-day species
evolved out of earlier and more primitive forms of life — and
even out of mere matter as such — they had no inkling of
Darwin's theory of natural selection, nor of Mendel's laws of
inheritance.  Moreover, it was widely assumed that living beings were
made of a different kind of matter from that found elsewhere in the
universe; and while some biological theorists rejected this
“vitalist” assumption there was, as yet, no experimental
evidence against it.  Kant himself follows Blumenbach in assuming a
distinctive kind of living matter which can be understood only in
teleological terms.  It might seem implausible, then, that Kant's
views could have any relevance to contemporary biological thought.
However, there are reasons to think that contemporary biological
theory is no less committed to teleology than its eighteenth-century
counterpart, in particular through biologists' use of functional
language in their characterizations of the parts and behaviour of
organisms.  Kant can thus be seen as addressing a problem which is
also of concern to present-day philosophers of biology: how to make
sense of the idea that biological entities and processes can have
purposes or functions without presupposing the existence of a divine
designer.  A number of interpreters have recently drawn on Kant to
propose a solution to the problem, although without necessarily
agreeing on what a Kantian solution amounts to.  Examples of
explicitly “Kantian” approaches to teleology include ch. 3
of Quarfood (2004), Walsh (2006), Cohen (2007), Breitenbach (2009) and
Ginsborg (2014).  McLaughlin's (2001) book on functional
explanation, while not explicitly proposing a Kantian approach, draws
on Kant at several points.  A different suggestion regarding the
relevance of Kant's views to contemporary biology is offered by Roth
(2014), who argues that Kant's anti-reductionism regarding
organisms — that they cannot be understood as composed out of
pre-existing parts — offers a model for contemporary molecular
biology.
 The view that Kant's theory is relevant to the contemporary debate
about biological functions is challenged forcefully by Zammito
(2006).