Hume and Kant operate with two somewhat different conceptions of
morality itself, which helps explain some of the differences
between their respective approaches to moral philosophy. The
most important difference is that Kant sees law, duty, and obligation
as the very heart of morality, while Hume does not. In this respect,
Kant’s conception of morality resembles what Bernard Williams
calls “the moral system”, which defines the domain of
morality primarily in terms of an unconditionally binding and
inescapable form of obligation (Williams 1985: 193–94). Kant
believes that our moral concerns are dominated by the question of what
duties are imposed on us by a law that commands with a uniquely moral
necessity. Like most eighteenth-century philosophers, he also believes
that our moral lives are preoccupied with the question of how to be
virtuous over the course of a life, but he defines virtue in terms of
the more fundamental concepts of law, obligation, and duty. By
contrast, these concepts certainly figure into morality as Hume
understands it, but they are far less central. For Hume, the broader
and somewhat looser notion of “personal merit” lies at the
heart of morality (EPM 9.1.1). Our moral concerns are dominated by the
question of which motives are virtuous, and we answer this question by
looking to the responses of our fellow human beings, who—when
viewing things properly—approve of those motives and character
traits that are useful or immediately agreeable (EPM 9.1.13). These
are the terms that characterize duty and obligation for Hume, rather
than the other way around.
Two other differences are worth noting for the purposes of this
article. First, Kant draws a bright line between moral and non-moral
phenomena, such as prudence, politics, or art. Morality’s
normative standards and the nature of its demands distinguish it
sharply from the non-moral. For Hume, the line between the moral and
non-moral is far blurrier. He frequently assimilates moral judgment to
“taste” or judgments about beauty and deformity (Gill
2007), and he explicitly argues against the strict separation of moral
virtues from other personal qualities such as a quick wit or even good
looks (T 3.3.4–5). According to Hume, the strict separation of
moral and non-moral virtues marks one way in which modern moral
thought is inferior to ancient ethics; he also seems to suspect that
it reflects an unhealthy fixation on responsibility and guilt
inherited from Christianity (Darwall 2013: 8–9). A second
important difference is closely related to the first. For Kant the
moral is distinguished from the non-moral not only by a special form
of obligation but also by its elevation above the rest of life.
Morality itself has a unique status or “dignity”, as does
the rational being from whose autonomous will the law springs (G
4:435). The proper response to both is a correspondingly unique form
of reverence or “respect”, which morality demands equally
from each of us. Kant believes that in the moral domain we take
ourselves—often only implicitly—to be
“persons”, elevated above mere “things” such
as machines or other animals. One of our chief moral concerns is to
protect this status, which requires respecting the rational autonomy
at its source and avoiding behavior or patterns of thought and desire
that dishonor or degrade persons by treating ourselves or others as
mere things. This concern looms large in Kant’s conception of
morality, and it has a profound influence on his approach to moral
philosophy (Anderson 2008). We see it, for example, in his discussions
of respect for persons and his characterization of ethical virtue as
“love of honor” (cf. Denis 2014). We see it also in the
priority given to duties to self (cf. Denis 2010a), as well as
Kant’s claim that a person throws herself away and makes herself
an object of “contempt” when she lies to herself or
grovels before others, for example (MM 6:420). Hume does not see things
this way. For Hume, the domain of morality is not particularly pure,
special, or elevated. It sometimes shows us at our most benevolent or
most magnanimous, but morality is continuous with the rest of life,
including politics and the pursuit of wealth and status in modern
commercial society. Moral virtue is undoubtedly pleasing to us,
sometimes powerfully so, but it does not command a unique
form of respect or reverence. Neither do the rules and ideals of
morality, which spring from the same propensities, ideas, and passions
that drive the rest of human behavior. Notions of honor and dignity
may figure into Hume’s view of morality but they are far from
central. Morality has us far more concerned with promoting pleasure
and utility.
Hume and Kant both believe that philosophy should dig beneath the
surface of morality and present a theory of its foundation. When it
comes to morality’s foundation, they seem to agree on two
things. First, morality’s foundation cannot be located in
religion. Second, it cannot be found in mind-independent facts about
the world. Yet they disagree about the rest of the story. Hume locates
the foundation of morality in human nature, primarily in our emotional
responses to the behavior of our fellow human beings. By contrast,
Kant locates the foundation of morality in the rational nature that we
share with all possible finite rational beings. He argues that
morality’s foundation lies in the “autonomy” of the
rational will. Kant’s notion of autonomy is one of the more
central, distinctive, and influential aspects of his ethics. He
defines autonomy as “the property of the will by which it is a
law to itself (independently of any property of the objects of
volition)” (G 4:440). According to Kant, the will of a moral
agent is autonomous in that it both gives itself the moral law (is
self-legislating) and can constrain or motivate itself to follow the
law (is self-constraining or self-motivating). The source of the moral
law is not in the agent’s feelings, natural impulses or
inclinations, but in her “pure” rational will, which Kant
identifies as the “proper self” (G 4:461). A heteronomous
will, on the other hand, is governed by something other than itself,
such as an external force or authority.
These rival conceptions of morality and its foundation correspond to
two very different approaches to moral philosophy. Hume’s
approach could be called naturalistic, empirical, or experimental. His
moral philosophy is part of his larger endeavor to provide a
naturalistic explanation of human nature as a whole. Hume’s
approach relies on and reflects his philosophy of mind, which is
empirical in its approach. He treats ethics, together with psychology,
history, aesthetics, and politics, as the subject of his “moral
science”. Hume often seems more interested in explaining
morality as a natural phenomenon than in setting out a normative
ethical theory, treating moral action as part of the same physical
world in which we explain things in terms of cause and effect (EHU
8.1.20–22). On this view, everything we do is open to empirical
investigation and explanation. In fact, Hume often compares humans
with other animals, tracing the bases of human morality to features of
the mind that human beings and other animals have in common (T
2.1.12).
In sharp contrast with Hume, Kant insists on the need for an a
priori investigation of morality’s foundation. His detailed
treatment of virtue and moral judgment draws heavily on observations
and ideas about human nature. But Kant makes explicit that morality
must be based on a supreme moral principle, which can only be
discovered a priori, through a method of pure moral
philosophy (G 4:387–92). By “pure” or a
priori moral philosophy, Kant has in mind a philosophy grounded
exclusively on principles that are inherent in and revealed through
the operations of reason. According to Kant, morality’s commands
are unconditional. We could never discover a principle that commands
all rational beings with such absolute authority through a method of
empirical moral philosophy. An empirical approach, he argues, can tell
us how people do act, but it cannot tell us how we ought to act.
Moreover, we must keep the pure and empirical parts of moral
philosophy clearly distinguished, since if we do not we could find
ourselves confusing conditional truths, such as what is prudentially
good for certain individuals or species, with unconditional truths
about fundamental moral requirements (G 4:389–90). Once one has
in hand the supreme principle of morality, however, one requires an
understanding of human beings in order to apply it to them (MM 6:217).
One can say little about what the supreme moral principle requires as
duties human agents have to themselves and to one another without
knowing such things as the sorts of ends people may be inclined to
adopt and the conditions under which human agency will
characteristically thrive or wither.
Hume’s treatment of causality exerted a profound influence on
Kant. He tells us that his “labor” in the Critique of
Pure Reason was fundamentally a response to “that Humean
skeptical teaching” (CPrR 5:32). The direct impact of
Hume’s moral philosophy is less clear. Early in his career Kant
endorsed an idiosyncratic form of sentimentalism. But he often
indicated that he saw Hutcheson as more significant to ethics than
Hume. He seems to have associated Hutcheson more with the positive
insights about the role of sensibility in ethics, whereas he seems to
have associated Hume more with skepticism about practical reason
(Kuehn 2001: 182). Sentimentalism’s positive influence on Kant
was strongest during the early part of his career. As his views
developed, he noted its inadequacies with increasing frequency,
eventually rejecting any version of sentimentalism as a theory of
morality’s foundation. Yet elements of the tradition continued
to influence Kant’s mature thinking about the nature and
importance of emotion in morality.
Kant’s early debt to sentimentalism is evident in two of his
published works from the 1760s. In Observations on the Feeling of
the Beautiful and Sublime (1764), which often reads like the work
of a mid-eighteenth century British thinker, Kant notes and analyzes
the various feelings of pleasure or displeasure, and attraction and
aversion, people feel to different traits and temperaments in
themselves and others (and to different types of literature, objects
in nature, kinds of relationships, and other things). His statements
about the foundation of morality and its principles convey a
commitment to some form of sentimentalism, however idiosyncratic. He
claims, for example, that the principles of morality are 
not speculative rules, but the consciousness of a feeling that lives
in every human breast and that extends much further than to the
special grounds of sympathy and complaisance. (OFBS 2.217) 
He describes this as “the feeling of the beauty and the dignity
of human nature”, proclaiming that one can “bring about
the noble attitude that is the beauty of virtue” only when a
person “subordinates” her particular inclinations
“to such an enlarged” feeling of the beauty and dignity of
human nature (OFBS 2.217). Kant expresses a similar line of thought in
another work from the period, Inquiry Concerning the Distinctness
of the Principles of Natural Theology and Morality (1763), where
he distinguishes between the faculty for representing truth and the
faculty for experiencing the good, identifying the latter with
feeling. “Just as there are unanalyzable concepts of
the true”, Kant argues, 
so too there is an unanalyzable feeling of the good… One of the
tasks of the understanding is to analyze and render distinct the
compound and confused concept of the good by showing how it arises
from simpler feelings of the good. (I 2:299)
Other indications of sentimentalism’s influence can be found in
Kant’s notes and lectures from that period. For example, in the
announcement of his lectures for the winter semester of
1765–1766, he explains one difference between ethics and
metaphysics by remarking that 
the distinction between good and evil in actions, and the judgment of
moral rightness, can be known, easily and accurately, by the human
heart through what is called sentiment, and that without elaborate
necessity of proofs. (WS 2:311) 
In the same announcement, he states his intention to develop and clarify
the attempts of Shaftesbury, Hutcheson and Hume, which, though
imperfect and defective, have nevertheless come farthest in the
discovery of the first principles of all morality. (WS 2:311) 
Similarly, in notes that appear to come from between 1764 and 1768,
Kant writes, “[t]he rules of morality proceed from a special,
eponymous feeling, upon which the understanding is
guided…” (NF 19:93 #6581).
If Kant was genuinely trying out a version of sentimentalism in the
1760s, this phase did not last long, nor was it a simple adoption of
the theories of Shaftesbury, Hutcheson, or Hume. His description of
their approach as “imperfect and defective” already
indicates some dissatisfaction with sentimentalism. By the late 1760s
it was a theme of Kant’s notes and lectures that it could not
provide an adequate account of moral obligation. Morality imposes
unconditional requirements, and he became increasingly convinced that
sentimentalism could not explain or justify such requirements.
Arguments for this conclusion appear in Kant’s later written
works and lectures. In a number of works, Kant creates taxonomies of
misguided, heteronomous ethical theories based on material determining
grounds—in contrast to his theory of autonomy, in which the
moral motive constitutes an objective, formal determining ground (see
Wood 2005b [Other Internet Resources]; Irwin 2009: chapters 68 and 71;
and Schneewind 2009). Kant distinguishes among these theories based on
their accounts of the basis of moral obligation or the fundamental
moral principle (G 4:441–44; CPrR 5:39–41; C 27:
252–54; M 29:621–25). Such theories may assume either
subjective (empirical) or objective (rational) determining grounds for
the moral principle; and within each of these categories, there are
theories that assume these determining grounds are external, and
others that assume they are internal. Objective, internal grounds
include perfection (e.g., Wolff and the Stoics). Objective, external
grounds include the will of God (e.g., Crusius). Subjective, external
grounds include education (e.g., Montaigne) or civil constitution
(e.g., Mandeville). Subjective, internal grounds can include physical
feeling, such as self-love (e.g., Epicurus) or self-interest (e.g.,
Hobbes), or moral feeling (e.g., Hutcheson) (CPrR 5:40; C 27:253).
Thus, Kant locates moral sense theories among those theories that
assume a subjective, empirical, internal determining ground of moral
feeling as the principle of morality (cf. M 29:621).
From the Groundwork on, Kant registers a number of complaints
against sentimentalism, all of which cluster around what he takes to
be the core insight into its inadequacy. No empirical principles can
ground moral laws, because moral laws bind all rational beings
universally, necessarily, and unconditionally; empirical principles
are contingent in various ways, for example, on aspects of human
nature (G 4:442–43). Variance in moral feelings makes them an
inadequate standard of good and evil (G 4:442). Moral feelings cannot
be the source of the supreme moral principle, because the supreme
moral principle holds for all rational beings, whereas feelings differ
from person to person (M 29:625). If duty were grounded in feeling, it
would seem that morality would bind some people (e.g., the
tender-hearted) more strongly than others, contrary to the universal,
equal nature of moral obligation. Even if people were in complete
agreement regarding their moral feelings, the universality of these
feelings would be a contingent matter, and thus an inadequate ground
for the unconditionally binding moral law. Indeed, if morality were
grounded in feeling, it would be arbitrary: God could have constituted
us so that we would get from vice the pleasurable, calm feelings of
approval that we now (allegedly) get from virtue (M 29:625). So for
Kant, the contingency of the ground of obligation offered by moral
sense theories renders those theories inadequate; only a
priori determining grounds will do.
As these criticisms indicate, Kant’s mature view is
fundamentally opposed to sentimentalism in a variety of ways. Yet the
influence of Shaftesbury, Hutcheson, and Hume lingered long after Kant
came to believe that morality’s true foundation lies in the
autonomy of the will, and he continued to find value in their
approach. In his notes Kant remarks that moral sense theories are
better understood as providing a hypothesis explaining why we in fact
feel approval and disapproval of various actions than as supplying a
principle that justifies approval or disapproval or that guides
actions (NF 19:117 #6626). He also suggests that even if one rejects
moral sense “as a principle for the judgment of moral
action” one might still accept it as a theory “of the
mind’s incentives to morality” (M 29:625). Quite
strikingly, Kant also continues to believe some version of his earlier
claim in Observations that some of our feelings indicate a
“susceptibility of the soul which… makes it fit for
virtuous impulses” (OFBS 2:208). We see this in the
Metaphysics of Morals, for instance, where Kant claims
that moral feeling, conscience, love of one’s neighbor, and
self-respect all “lie at the basis of morality, as
subjective conditions of receptiveness to the concept of
duty” (MM 6:399; see Guyer 2010). The lingering influence of
sentimentalism can also be seen in his emphasis on the obligation to
“sympathize actively” with others, and in the claim that
we have “an indirect duty to cultivate the compassionate natural
(aesthetic) feelings in us, and to make use of them as so many means
to sympathy based on moral principles and the feeling appropriate to
them… . For this [compassion] is still one of the impulses that
nature has implanted in us to do what the representation of duty alone
might not accomplish (MM 6:457).
Kant, as discussed above, underwent a decisive change of mind about
the views of Shaftesbury and Hutcheson. Early in his career, he
endorsed core aspects of their approach, but Kant’s mature work
is organized around the idea that reason, rather than feeling
or emotion, is the highest authority in the moral domain. In this
respect, many features of his moral philosophy are fundamentally
opposed to Hume’s. We can see this opposition at work in their
respective accounts of moral judgment and moral motivation. A careful
look at these topics, however, also highlights sentimentalism’s
residual influence on Kant.
According to Hume, moral judgments typically concern the character
traits and motives behind human actions. To make a moral judgment is
to detect, by means of a sentiment, the operation of a virtuous or
vicious quality of mind. The sentiment here is a
“peculiar” kind of feeling—namely, a feeling of
approval (love, pride) or disapproval (hatred, humility) (T 3.3.1.3).
We call the traits that elicit our approval “virtues”, and
those that elicit our disapproval “vices”. Sentiments of
approval and disapproval are passions, but they tend to be “soft
and gentle” and therefore easily mistaken for thoughts or ideas
(T 3.1.2.1). The real story is that “morality… is more
properly felt than judg’d of” (T 3.1.2.1). Reason and
experience are required for determining the likely effects of a given
motive or character trait, so reason does play an important role in
moral judgment. Yet reason’s role is subordinate. It is one
thing to say that a given trait tends to be useful or conducive to
pleasure and quite another to say that it is “good” or
“virtuous”. The moral value of a trait is conferred by the
sentiment of approval, which “gilding and staining all natural
objects with the colours, borrowed from internal sentiment, raises, in
a manner, a new creation” (EPM App. I.21). Hume argues, however,
that only those sentiments experienced from a “general point of
view” count as genuinely moral (T 3.1.2.4). For example, a
person might hate or envy the courage of her enemy but this is not
necessarily a moral response. The moral sentiment is
experienced when she considers her enemy’s courage from a
“general point of view” (T 3.1.2.4). When a person
considers things from this point of view, she looks upon them as a
“judicious spectator”, who is disinterested but not
emotionally unaffected by the scene she beholds (Cohon 2008:
126–58). On the contrary, rather than eliminating her
sentiments, the judicious spectator enlarges them by means of
sympathy, which enables her to resent the misery of others or rejoice
in their happiness. (Regarding the mechanism of sympathy, see Taylor
2015: 189–94.)
Kant offers a very different account of moral judgment. He focuses on
the first-person judgments an agent (not a spectator) must make about
how to behave. In his view, the primary question is whether a
particular mode of conduct is permissible, required, or forbidden in
light of the moral law, and sentiment or emotion has no authority in
this matter. Answering the question requires an operation of
reason by means of which the agent determines whether her
principle or “maxim” of conduct conflicts with the moral
law. Because she is an imperfect and finite rational being, the law
presents itself to her as a “categorical imperative” (CI).
It is an imperative because it commands and constrains us; it is
categorical because it commands and constrains us with ultimate
authority and without regard to our personal preferences or any
empirically contingent ends (G 4:413–20). The two best known
formulations of the CI are the formula of universal law (FUL), which
commands, “act only in accordance with that maxim through
which you can at the same time will that it become a universal
law” (G 4:421), and the formula of the end in itself (FEI),
which commands, “So act that you use humanity, whether in
your own person or in the person of any other, always at the same time
as an end, never merely as a means” (G 4:429). Scholars
disagree about the relationship between these two formulations of the
CI, as well as their relationship to the other formulations Kant
provides. There is also disagreement about whether FUL or FEI has
primacy in deliberation and moral judgment. Kant claims that FUL is
the standard everyone actually does employ in moral judgment (G 4:402;
CPrR 5:69), and some scholars defend its primacy (e.g., Engstrom
2009). Others argue in favor of FEI, emphasizing, in particular, its
role in the Metaphysics of Morals, where FEI seems to play
the fundamental role in guiding judgment about specific ethical duties
(e.g., Wood 1999).
Some passages from Kant’s work seem to suggest that moral
judgment requires no experience, no knowledge of human nature and
local custom, and no emotional sensitivity. A rational being equipped
with a purely formal procedure for testing maxims has all she needs.
Yet such passages are misleading when read in isolation. This is not
Kant’s view of how human beings do, or even should, make moral
judgments (Wood 2008: 56). First, application of the CI typically
requires auxiliary or subordinate “principles of
application”, which must be taken from our empirical knowledge
of human nature (MM 6:217). Second, Kant frequently emphasizes that no
formal procedure could specify all the principles for applying
higher-order principles. Principles of application help us apply
higher order principles to concrete circumstances, but there is no
substitute for experience and “judgment”, which is a knack
or uncodifiable talent (A138/B172). This is why the practice of
casuistry is “woven into ethics” (MM 6:411). Third,
experience and judgment are also required because the moral law
“cannot specify precisely in what way one is to act and how much
one is to do by the action for an end that is also a duty” (MM
6:390). The wider the duty, the more latitude for individual judgment
and experience (MM 6:390). Finally, it is clear that, on Kant’s
view, moral judgment requires emotional sensitivity and an
understanding of social convention. For example, without these, one
might unable to determine whether a particular act of beneficence is
more condescending than kind (MM 6:453) or to prevent friendly banter
from sliding into disrespectful mockery (MM 6:467). Proper moral
judgment in such circumstances requires attunement to the feelings of
others, but also facility with the social conventions that shape the
dynamics of personal interaction.
Kant and Hume are clearly opposed on the question of whether reason or
feeling has the final say in moral matters. Hume assigns reason to a
subordinate role, while Kant takes reason to be the highest normative
authority. However, it is important not to misunderstand the nature of
their opposition. Hume offers an empirical explanation of the moral
judgments made in “common life”, which he takes to be part
of his broader science of human nature. This is his main focus. By
contrast, Kant makes observations about the “common” use
of reason in morality (e.g., G 4:399), but this is not his main focus.
He says relatively little about what is going on in our heads or the
surrounding social environment when we actually make moral judgments.
As noted above, Kant at least entertained the possibility that
sentimentalism provides the correct empirical explanation of why human
beings tend to approve or disapprove of the actions and motives that
they do (NF 19:117 #6626). What Kant insists on is that such responses
can be justified only by pure reason, which is the only faculty
capable of understanding the unconditional necessity of the moral
law’s commands. Emotion or feeling plays an important role in
guiding our application of this law to particular maxims in concrete
circumstances, but feeling’s role is definitely subordinate to
reason’s.
A similar contrast between Hume and Kant can be found in their
respective accounts of moral motivation. Hume famously claims
that “Reason is, and ought only to be the slave of the passions,
and can never pretend to any other office than to serve and obey
them” (T 2.3.3.4). The claim is not that reason has no role in
human action, but rather that its role is subordinate to passion. Hume
offers three main arguments for this claim in A Treatise of Human
Nature. (There is debate among interpreters about whether Hume
changed his position on reason and motivation between the
Treatise and the second Enquiry, as well as
precisely what Hume’s understanding of the nature, extent, and
significance of reason’s contribution to action is (see, e.g.,
Milgram 1995; Radcliffe 1997; Cohon 2008: chapters 2 and 3; and Irwin
2008: chapter 26).)
According to the first argument, “reason alone can never be a
motive to any action of the will” (T 2.3.3.1). Abstract (or
demonstrative) reasoning, which involves a priori inferences
and judgments pertaining to relations of ideas, cannot influence the
will, but only assist us in our pursuit of an end we already have
(e.g., if mathematical calculations would facilitate our achievement
of our end). Probable (or causal) reasoning helps us discover cause
and effect relations among objects of experience conducive to the
realization of pre-selected ends, but such information about cause and
effect can never motivate action on its own: “It can never in
the least concern us to know, that such objects are causes, and such
others effects, if both causes and effects be indifferent to us”
(T 2.3.3.3). In order to be motivated to act, we must first anticipate
pleasure or pain from something. That anticipated pleasure or pain
gives rise to feelings of desire or aversion for the object in
question. Probable reasoning allows us to discern the causes of this
object; our positive or negative feelings about the object then spread
to the causes of it; and we are then motivated to pursue or to avoid
them. Simply believing that one thing causes another will not motivate
action (T 2.3.3.2).
A second argument, which builds on the first, aims to show that reason
“can never oppose passion in the direction of the will” (T
2.3.3.1). The only thing that can oppose an impulse to action
generated by one passion is a contrary impulse. Reason, then, could
counteract an impulse to action generated by a passion if and only if
reason could itself generate a contrary impulse. But from the first
argument, we know that that reason cannot generate such an impulse.
“Thus it appears, that the principle, which opposes any passion,
cannot be the same with reason, and is only called so in an improper
sense” (T 2.3.3.4). Hume goes on to say that whatever we feel in
us running contrary to an impulse to act that we mistake for reason
must be something else, such as a calm passion (e.g., a general
appetite for the good, benevolence, or aversion to evil; T
2.3.3.8).
The third argument claims that a passion is an “original
existence”, not an idea, or a mental copy of another object.
Contradiction to truth and reason “consists in the disagreement
of ideas, consider’d as copies, with those objects, which they
represent” (T 2.3.3.5). So a passion cannot be contrary to truth
and reason. Passions cannot, strictly speaking, be evaluated as
reasonable or unreasonable, despite our practice of calling passions
unreasonable or irrational when they depend in some way on poor
reasoning or false beliefs. Later in the Treatise, Hume
extends this argument to volitions and actions as well (T 3.1.1.9); we
might view Kant’s conflict in conception and contradiction in
will tests of the formula of universal law to constitute refutations
of the latter argument (G 4:421–24; see Guyer 2008: ch. 5).
These arguments convey the main components of Hume’s view of
motivation: passion plays the dominant role in motivating action,
reason a merely subsidiary role; reason cannot control or resist
passion’s motivational influence; and one cannot use the
standards of reason to praise or criticize passions. Hume draws some
further important, anti-rationalist moral conclusions from this line
of thought. One obvious implication is that reason cannot be the
motive to moral action; if reason cannot motivate any sort of action,
it cannot motivate moral action. A second further conclusion is that
morality (fundamental moral principles) cannot be grounded in reason;
this one follows both from his views about the “inertness”
of reason generally, and from his assumption that morality is capable
of motivating people: 
Morals excite passions, and produce or prevent actions. Reason of
itself is utterly impotent in this particular. The rules of morality,
therefore, are not conclusions of reason. (T 3.1.1.6)
Kant never directly addresses Hume’s arguments, but he clearly
rejects the idea that reason is motivationally “impotent”
or enslaved to the passions. It is a central feature of his moral
philosophy that pure reason can be “practical”—that
reason can “of itself, independently of anything empirical,
determine the will” (CPrR 5: 42). He says of right actions that
they “need no recommendation” from emotion or personal
inclination. Such actions 
present the will that practices them as the object of an immediate
respect, and nothing but reason is required to impose them
upon the will. (G 4:435) 
Moreover, in the first section of the Groundwork, Kant
repeatedly emphasizes the special form of “moral worth”
that attaches to right actions that are performed simply because they
are right—i.e., actions motivated from “from duty”
or “from respect for the law” (G 4:396–401; see
Timmermann 2009a).
Yet Kant also holds that emotion or feeling is involved somehow in
pure reason’s motivational influence on finite rational beings
(such as humans). In the Groundwork, he focuses on the
feeling of “respect” or reverence for the moral law. Early
in the Groundwork, Kant describes respect in a manner that
makes it sound like a felt aspect of the law itself: 
an action from duty is to put aside entirely the influence of
inclination, and with it every object of the will; hence there is left
for the will nothing that could determine it the except objectively
the law and subjectively pure respect for this
practical law. (G 4:400) 
But his subsequent development of respect makes it sound more like a
separate feeling, though one arising from reason:
But although respect is a feeling, it is not one received by means of
influence; it is, instead, a feeling self-wrought by a
rational concept and therefore specifically different from all
feelings of the first kind, which can be referred to inclination or
fear. What I cognize immediately as a law for me, I cognize with
respect, which signifies merely consciousness of the subordination of
my will to a law without the mediation of other influences on any
sense. Immediate determination of the will by means of the law and the
consciousness of this is called respect, so that this is
regarded as the effect of the law on the subject, and not as
the cause of the law. (G 4:401 n; also see 460)
Despite his emphasis on the motivational efficacy of pure reason,
Kant’s discussion of respect makes clear that feeling must be
somehow involved in human moral motivation (see Guyer 2008: ch. 5; and
Guyer 2010). In the Groundwork, Kant states: 
In order for a sensibly affected rational being to will that for which
reason alone prescribes the ‘ought,’ it is admittedly
required that his reason have the capacity to induce a feeling of
pleasure or of delight in the fulfillment of duty, and thus there
is required a causality of reason to determine sensibility in
conformity with its principles. (G 4:460) 
Even though we cannot know (or “make intelligible a
priori”) how a thought or judgment about the morality of an
action “can itself produce a sensation of pleasure or
pain”, Kant thinks that this somehow does happen; it must, if
moral considerations are to be motivating in beings like us. The
phenomenology of respect is unusual, as it involves both pain and
pleasure (or something like it). There is the humiliation an agent
feels when the moral law strikes down her self-conceit; but respect
also feels invigorating and ennobling, since the moral law comes from
the agent’s own reason and represents her higher self and
vocation (CPrR 5:73). However one interprets the phenomenology,
respect seems to function as an intermediary between reason and the
will. This raises questions about the consistency of Kant’s
view, since he argues repeatedly that pure reason can, and should,
determine the will “immediately”. For this and other
reasons, scholars are divided on how to interpret Kant’s
treatment of respect. According to an “intellectualist”
line of interpretation, respect is the effect of pure
reason’s motivational influence on the will. In other words, we
grasp the law by means of reason, are moved to act accordingly, and
feel respect as a result of being so moved. According to an
“affectivist” approach, however, respect is the proximate
cause of reason’s influence on the will. In other
words, our rational grasp of the law’s demand produces a feeling
of respect or reverence, which then moves the will (or higher faculty
of desire). Vexingly, both interpretations have a strong textual basis
and both have been defended with great skill and insight. (For an
excellent discussion of the issues, see Frierson 2014: ch. 4.)
In the Metaphysics of Morals, Kant also describes the
motivational role played by additional feelings. He lists moral
feeling, conscience, love of human beings, and respect (for oneself)
as special kinds of feelings of which we are made aware only though
consciousness of the moral law (MM 6:399). Kant describes these as
“moral endowments” that “lie at the basis of
morality” or the “subjective conditions of
receptivity to the concept of duty” (MM 6:399). Since our
compliance with duty presupposes our having these feelings, there is
no duty for us to have them. However, because of their
indispensability to human morality, there is a duty to cultivate them.
Additionally, Kant clearly sees moral value in some sensibly-grounded
(“pathological”) feelings (MM 6:456–57, 458; also M
29:626; NF 19:77 #6560). Speaking of sympathy, which is perhaps the
best example of this sort of feeling, Kant says, 
it is… an indirect duty to cultivate the natural…
feelings in us, and to make use of them as so many means to sympathy
based on moral principles and the feeling appropriate to them. (MM
6:457) 
Sympathy allows us better to understand others’ needs, helps us
to communicate our concern for them, and can act as an additional
incentive to facilitate our promotion of our happiness helping others.
Such sensibly-grounded feelings can work with rationally-grounded
feelings in order to motivate us to act morally. We may cultivate
sympathetic feelings from respect for the law, and then find these
feelings prompting us to act in certain ways. In this context, where
the focus is on virtue, Kant sounds closer to Hume than he is often
taken to be. Indeed, according to one prominent interpretation,
careful consideration of this and other relevant material highlights
at least a few “deep affinities” between Kant on Hume on
motivation and practical reason (Guyer 2008: 164).
Despite the above similarities, Kant and Hume are clearly opposed on
the basic question of whether pure reason, to use Kant’s
expression, can be motivationally efficacious. Kant thinks it can,
while Hume does not. However, one must interpret this opposition with
care. First, Kant’s account of respect makes clear that feeling
or emotion is involved even when pure reason motivates action. The
“affectivist” interpretation of respect, in particular,
suggests that Kant and Hume actually agree that reason cannot motivate
action without the intervention of feeling. The crucial difference
between them is that Kant believes pure reason capable of producing a
motivationally efficacious feeling (respect), while Hume believes
nothing of the sort. The opposition between them is even starker if
the “intellectualist” interpretation is correct. Second,
Kant’s account of virtue makes it clear that feelings such as
love and sympathy often play an important moral role in the motivation
of human action. Indeed, feelings appear to be indispensable for human
beings and should therefore be cultivated and strengthened through
deliberate practice. Third, one must keep track of the level at which
these two philosophers disagree. Consider, for example, the reason why
Hume would adamantly reject Kant’s attribution of a special form
of “moral worth” to actions done “from duty”.
According to Hume, 
no action can be virtuous, or morally good, unless there be in
human nature some motive to produce it, distinct from a sense of its
morality. (T 3.2.1.7) 
To avoid circularity, there must be a motive to virtuous action that
does not itself refer to the moral goodness of the act (T 3.2.1.4).
For Hume, the only time one would have to rely on one’s sense of
the goodness of an act to motivate oneself to do it is when one is
deficient in the natural feelings that ordinarily prompt people to act
morally (e.g., natural affection, generosity, gratitude). The two
philosophers do not necessarily disagree here on the
empirical question of what actually motivates people. Hume
seems to countenance the possibility of being motivated directly by
the sense of an action’s moral goodness. Kant, in fact, seems
comparatively skeptical; he expresses doubt that there have ever been
human actions motivated from duty alone (e.g., G 4:406–407).
They disagree sharply, however, on the normative question at
issue. Kant believes that the most morally admirable actions are
performed “from duty” alone. These are the only actions
that have true “moral worth”. By contrast, Hume believes
that such actions indicate a character flaw. Indeed, if a person finds
she is moved to act only by the sense that the action is good, she may
very well reproach herself for a lack of generosity or gratitude, for
example, and consequently form a desire to change her character.
Hume and Kant both treat the concepts of virtue and vice as central to
human morality. But they differ on the basic nature of virtue, and
they present different catalogues of particular virtues and vices.
Kant’s discussions reflect his consistent emphasis on freedom,
dignity, rationality, and purity of motive. Hume’s reflect his
emphasis on utility, pleasure, and the inherently social nature of the
human mind. Correspondingly, the notion of internal struggle is
central to Kant’s account, while Hume portrays the pursuit of
virtue in comparatively relaxed and genial terms. For this reason,
Hume seems far more comfortable with the bourgeois virtues integral to
successful participation in modern commercial and political society
(cf. EPM 9.1.2). By contrast, Kant seems warier of society’s
influence on the individual, more insistent on the need to resist the
power of what Rousseau calls amour-propre.
For Hume, the concepts of virtue and vice apply primarily to character
traits or “mental qualities”, and secondarily to occurrent
motives and actions. According to Hume, a character trait is a virtue
if, and only if, it “gives to a spectator the pleasing sentiment
of approbation” (EPM App. I.10). Vices, by contrast, are those
traits that generate a displeasing sentiment of disapproval.
Hume’s definition builds on his account of moral judgment, and
it makes virtue dependent on the responses of a
“judicious” spectator who contemplates things from a
general point of view. The trait of prudence, for example, is a virtue
because it tends to be pleasing to such a spectator. As Hume
puts it, the defining mark of a virtue is that it has the “power
of producing love or pride” when surveyed from the general point
of view (T 3.3.1.3). In other words, a trait is a virtue only insofar
as it tends to provoke the moral sentiment of approval in a properly
situated spectator. If it did not tend to provoke this response, it
would not be a virtue. This marks a significant departure from
Aristotelian conceptions of virtue (Cohon 2008: 161). According to the
latter, a character trait’s goodness is a function of the role
it plays in the agent’s own flourishing, which has nothing to do
with the responses of a spectator. Prudence, for example, is a virtue
whether or not it tends to provoke the pleasing sentiment of
approbation in an outside observer, however “judicious”
she may be.
Hume discusses a capacious catalogue of particular virtues and vices.
His account in the Treatise is organized around the
distinction between “natural” and “artificial”
virtues, which is easily misunderstood. The question is not whether
some virtues are fake or phony and others are authentic. The question
is whether some depend on social rules and conventions and others do
not. Organizing his catalogue by means of this distinction allows Hume
to steer a middle path between those who see morality as entirely
conventional (e.g., Bernard Mandeville) and those who believe it
springs directly from features of human nature that exist
independently of social convention (e.g., Francis Hutcheson).
According to Hume, some virtues do depend on social convention but
others do not (Cohon 2008: 162–163). In both cases, he seeks to
explain why people tend to develop such traits and why they tend to be
pleasing to judicious spectators. Hume drops the artificial-natural
distinction from the second Enquiry, but his investigations
there are motivated by the same questions and the resulting view also
steers a middle course between Mandeville and Hutcheson.
According to the Treatise, artificial virtues include
justice, fidelity to promises, allegiance to government, and chastity.
Hume devotes much discussion to justice, which he treats as a
paramount and paradigmatic artificial virtue. Hume understands justice
primarily as honesty with respect to property or conformity to
conventions of property (T 3.2.2.28). Establishing a system of
property allows us to avoid conflict and enjoy the possession and use
of various goods, so the social value of conventions involving
property seems obvious. Yet one reason that justice receives such
attention from Hume is that it poses a problem about moral motivation
and moral approval. Hume claims that there needs to be a natural
(non-moral) motive for morally good actions, for otherwise they could
only be done because they are morally good; and that would be
circular, since our judgment of acts as morally good reflects our
approval of the motives and traits that give rise to the acts in
question (T 3.2.1.7, 3.2.1.17). But this position makes it hard to see
how justice can be a virtue; for it is hard to find the requisite
natural, nonmoral motive for it. Self-interest is the natural motive
that justifies our establishing rules regarding property (T 3.2.2.24);
but self-interest is neither always satisfied by just acts, nor
approved in the way that traits we call virtues generally are (T
3.2.1.9–10). Neither public nor private benevolence would do,
since neither could motivate all just actions (T 3.2.1.12). Hume
himself says that “a sympathy with public interest
is the source of the moral approbation, which attends that
virtue” (T 3.2.2.24). But since sympathy with the public
interest itself seems neither nonmoral nor inherent in human nature,
this claim redescribes the problem rather than solves it. Hume must
ground sympathy for the public interest in more obviously natural
sentiments, and explain its development from them (e.g., as
self-interest, corrected or redirected through education or the
contrivances of politicians). Otherwise, Hume must abandon his claim
that all morally good actions—even those associated with
artificial virtues—have non-moral, natural motives. (See
Gauthier 1979; Mackie 1980: ch. 5; and Darwall 1995:
302–316.)
Among the natural virtues, Hume includes beneficence, prudence,
temperance, frugality, industry, assiduity, enterprise, dexterity,
generosity, and humanity (T 3.3.1.24). In the second Enquiry,
he distinguishes among virtues useful to others, virtues useful to
oneself, virtues immediately agreeable to oneself, and virtues
immediately agreeable to others. Among qualities useful to others are
justice, fidelity, honor, allegiance, chastity, along with the other
“social virtues” of humanity, generosity, charity,
affability, lenity, mercy, and moderation (EPM 5.2.44). Among
qualities useful to ourselves are discretion, caution, enterprise,
industry, assiduity, frugality, economy, good sense, prudence,
discernment (EPM 6.1.21). Among qualities contrary to our own
well-being are indolence, negligence, “want of order and
method”, obstinacy, fickleness, rashness, and credulity (EPM
6.1.1). Qualities immediately agreeable to oneself include
cheerfulness, tranquility, benevolence, and delicacy of taste.
Qualities immediately agreeable to others include good manners,
politeness, wit, ingenuity, decency, cleanliness, and a graceful or
genteel manner. What holds all these varied traits together as virtues
is their evoking the sentiment of approval in spectators, itself
grounded in sympathy.
Like Hume, Kant takes virtue to be central to human morality. But his
basic conception of virtue differs from Hume’s, as does his
catalogue of particular virtues and vices. According to Kant, virtue
is the form in which a being with an imperfect or non-holy will
expresses her supreme commitment to morality. Virtue is such a
being’s continually cultivated capacity to master her
inclinations so as to fulfill her duties; a capacity whose cultivation
and exercise is motivated by respect for the moral law (Denis 2006;
Baxley 2010). Several related claims are integral to Kant’s
view. First, virtue is a general disposition to do one’s duty
out of respect for the moral law (CPrR 5:128, 160; C 27:300). Second,
virtue is a kind of strength. More specifically, virtue is “a
moral strength of the will” (MM 6:405) or “moral strength
in adherence to one’s duty” (Ant 7:147). Third, virtue
presupposes opposition and entails internal struggle. Kant often seems
to identify our inclinations as the primary opponents of morality (G:
4:405; V 27:450, 492; C 27:450). His considered view, however, is that
inclinations are not the source of the problem. Virtue’s primary
opponent is “radical evil in human nature”—a
propensity to adopt maxims that prioritize self-love (and inclinations
generally) over the moral law (Rel 6:29, 35–37, 57 n., 58). It
is because of radical evil that virtue implies struggle and demands
strength. The fundamental task of the virtuous person is to achieve
the proper ordering of her incentives, giving the moral law undisputed
priority over self-love. Finally, virtue is moral self-constraint
“based on inner freedom” (MM 6:408), which is the capacity
to act on the autonomously chosen principles of morality, even in the
face of temptation (MM 6:394, 405). Virtue both expresses and promotes
inner freedom. The greater one’s moral self-constraint, the more
one acts based on reason, and the less one acts based on inclination
or impulse (MM 6:382 n).
Kant’s catalogue of virtues and vices is organized by his system
of duties. These duties are grounded in the moral law, the supreme
principle of morality, which impresses itself on imperfect, finite
rational beings like us as a categorical imperative. Whatever duties
we have must ultimately derive from this supreme moral principle. But
in the Metaphysics of Morals, Kant’s discussion of
particular duties of virtue is based more directly on what he calls
the “supreme principle of the doctrine of virtue”. This
principle enjoins us to “act in accordance with a maxim of
ends that it can be a universal law for everyone to
have” (MM 6:395). As Kant explains, 
In accordance with this principle a human being is an end for himself
as well as for others, and it is not enough that he is not authorized
to use either himself or others merely as a means (since he could then
still be indifferent to them); it is in itself his duty to make the
human being as such his end. (MM 6:395) 
Duties of virtue have fundamentally to do with the ends, principles,
and attitudes of agents; they aim to protect each agent’s inner
freedom; they can be compelled only by the agent herself. It is
because duties of virtue alone are subject only to internal compulsion
that Kant calls them “directly ethical duties”. Among
these duties are the perfect duties to oneself to avoid vices of
suicide, self-mutilation, gluttony, drunkenness, sexual
self-degradation (duties to oneself as an animal and moral being),
lying, avarice, and servility (duties to oneself as a moral being
only); the imperfect duties to oneself concerning the promotion of the
obligatory end of one’s own natural and moral perfection, along
with duties to foster self-knowledge, compassion for animals, and
appreciation of the beautiful in nature; the perfect duties to others
to avoid the vices of arrogance, defamation, and ridicule (duties of
respect), and the imperfect duties to promote the end of others
happiness by means of beneficence, sympathy, and gratitude, as well as
by avoiding malice, envy, and ingratitude (duties of love and vices
opposed to them). Kant does not claim to derive these duties from the
categorical imperative or the supreme principle of virtue alone.
Rather, in moving from general principles of morality to moral duties,
he draws on a variety of considerations regarding human nature and
other aspects of the natural world.
Hume and Kant share a number of influences, so we should not be
surprised to see areas of overlap. First, like most eighteenth century
philosophers, both regard the pursuit of virtue as central to human
morality. Second, Kant shares Hume’s rejection of both
Hobbes’s psychological egoism and Hutcheson’s reduction of
all virtues to the sentiment of benevolence. Third, Hume and Kant both
accept of versions of Grotius’s distinction between perfect and
imperfect duties, though they do not incorporate this distinction into
their theories in the same way (see Schneewind 1990). Fourth, their
respective conceptions of virtue are secular by historical standards.
Neither recognizes duties to God, for example, and neither counts
piety or hope among the virtues. Kant also seems to agree with, and
perhaps to have been influenced by, much of what Hume says about the
“monkish virtues”. He follows Hume in rejecting fasting,
self-flagellation, mortification of the flesh and other forms of
physical self-chastisement and self-abasement as false virtues. Kant
condemns such attempts at 
weakening and removing all the body’s sensuality, to renounce
everything that its sensuous enjoyment promotes, so that thereby the
animal nature of the body would be suppressed 
as contrary to proper care for the body; such care requires
discipline, but also 
involves trying to promote its vigor, activity, strength, and courage.
(C 27:379–80)
Yet there are striking and important differences between their views.
Hume defines virtue in terms of the moral sentiments of a properly
situated judicious spectator, and his definition makes virtue and vice
dependent on such responses. Kant, by contrast, defines virtue in
terms of duty, obligation, and law. Virtue is thought of as moral
strength, which is measured by an agent’s ability to defeat
those inclinations that oppose the demands of the moral law (MM
6:405–407). Hume’s theory of virtue has a place for duty
and law, but these are not the fundamental concepts in terms of which
everything else must be explained or justified. Moreover, Hume
certainly recognizes individual virtues such as strength of mind,
fortitude, and courage; but they are not central to his view of virtue
as such, and their status as virtues depends on the moral sentiments
of a judicious spectator, as well as the exigencies and social
conventions of a particular age (EPM “A
Dialogue”.40)—both of which Kant takes to be irrelevant.
Virtue for Kant is defined in terms of the law, and neither the
law’s normative status nor its psychological weight rests on
moral sentiments or social convention.
A few additional differences are worth noting. First, both
philosophers recognize and discuss a plurality of virtues and vices.
But, unlike Hume, Kant insists on the unitary nature of virtue:
“in its Idea (objectively) there is only one virtue (as
moral strength of one’s maxims)” (MM 6:447; cf. MM 6:395
and 406). Second, Hume casts a much wider net with regard to the
qualities that count as virtues. The concepts of virtue and vice can
apply to things outside our control, such as traits and motives that
spring involuntarily from our basic temperament. Kant, by contrast,
restricts the application of these concepts to traits, behaviors, and
attitudes that are voluntarily adopted and cultivated as a matter of
principle. For Kant each virtue and each vice has its own maxim (MM
6:404). This would be true even of wit or good memory, for example.
Wit and good memory are certainly things that an agent might cultivate
for the sake of her natural perfection. But for these traits to be
considered Kantian virtues would require at least an agent’s
morally grounded interest in and cultivation of them. But for Hume the
agent’s reasons and her degree of voluntary control are
irrelevant. Wit, good memory, and other “natural
abilities” are virtues because of their power to please a
properly situated spectator, even if they spring directly from a
natural temperament over which the agent has no control (T
3.3.4.1–5). A third important contrast concerns justice. Justice
is an immensely significant virtue for Hume, but is not treated by
Kant as a virtue at all. For Kant, justice has primarily to do with
one’s external treatment of others. As long as one does not
hinder their freedom in a way that violates universal law or
legitimate positive law, one complies with the demands of justice.
One’s motive or attitude is irrelevant from the standpoint of
justice. It is a matter not of justice itself, but of ethics, if one
respects the rights of others not from fear of punishment but from
respect for persons or law. The moral worth adhering to acting rightly
out of respect for right is not part of justice, but of ethics; it is
a matter of self-constraint or virtue. Hume’s treatment of
justice reflects his distinction between artificial and natural
virtues, but Kant would reject this distinction altogether. None of
the virtues is either “artificial” or
“natural” in Hume’s sense since none of them depends
on social convention and none of them springs directly from human
nature. Finally, their conceptions of moral vice are quite different.
For Hume a vice is a mental quality that provokes disapproval from a
judicious spectator. A person’s vices do not necessarily say
anything about the quality of her will as a whole or her fundamental
attitude toward the demands of morality. But Kant holds that vice is a
propensity to act contrary to the moral law (Rel 6:37), and it implies
a principled “contempt for moral laws” (C
27:463). As he puts it, “it is when an intentional transgression
has become a principle that it is properly called a
vice” (MM 6:390).
Hume and Kant both believe that freedom is essential to morality.
Moreover, both believe that a philosophical theory and vindication of
human morality requires reconciling freedom with universal causal
necessity (determinism). However, they offer different conceptions of
freedom, different ways of reconciling it with necessity, and
different ways of understanding why this reconciliation matters for
morality. Scholars agree that Hume is a “compatibilist”,
but there is no consensus on the correct label for Kant’s
position.
Hume defends compatibilism in section eight of Enquiry concerning
Human Understanding and Book Two of the Treatise
(2.3.1–2). In the Treatise, Hume distinguishes between
two conceptions of freedom or liberty: “liberty of
indifference” and “liberty of spontaneity”.
According to the idea of indifference, liberty implies “a
negation of necessity and causes” (T 2.3.2.1). For illustration,
consider the Anglican bishop John Bramhall’s claim that genuine
liberty is “a liberty from necessity, or rather from
necessitation, that is, a universal immunity from all inevitability
and determination” (1645 [1999: 1]). On this view, a person is
free when, and only when, her action is not necessitated by
any antecedent causes. Hume rejects this idea as
unintelligible (T 2.3.1.18) and destructive to morality and religion
(T 2.3.2.5). By contrast, he characterizes spontaneity as that idea of
liberty “which is oppos’d to violence” (T 2.3.2.1).
So the liberty of spontaneity is freedom from violence, but not
freedom from necessity per se. “Violence” here
refers to various forms of unwanted interference with the execution of
one’s will, as when a person is forced to sign a document or
locked in a cell from which she wants to escape. These are cases where
we lack the liberty of spontaneity. But a person has such liberty
whenever she is able to do what she wants to do. In such cases, her
actions are causally necessitated, just like any other event in
nature; but they are caused by motives that spring from her own
character. According to Hume, this is the form of liberty at issue in
religion, morality, law, and common life. Hence, spontaneity is the
only form of liberty “which it concerns us to preserve” (T
2.3.2.1).
The liberty of spontaneity, as just described, is perfectly compatible
with causal necessity. There are two main reasons people often believe
otherwise. First, we tend to conflate the two ideas of liberty. In
cases where we enjoy the liberty of spontaneity, our experience
suggests that we also enjoy something more. We recognize, of course,
that “we were influenc’d by particular views and
motives”, yet we find it difficult to “perswade ourselves
we govern’d by necessity, and that ’twas utterly
impossible for us to have acted otherwise” (T 2.3.2.1). This is
because “[w]e feel that our actions are subject to our will on
most occasions, and imagine we feel that the will itself is subject to
nothing” (T 2.3.2.2). Yet this is a mistake explained by the
blind spots of introspection. An outside observer, whether a friend or
a scientist, 
can commonly infer our actions from our motives and character; and
even where he cannot, he concludes in general, that he might, were he
perfectly acquainted with every circumstance of our situation and
temper. (T 2.3.2.2) 
The second source of resistance to compatibilism stems from confusion
about necessity. People are prone to think that necessity rules out
liberty because they conflate necessity with compulsion or force. They
believe that when A causes B, A compels or forces B. Hume holds that
this is a mistake, however. Causal necessity is nothing more than the
“constant conjunction” of similar objects and a customary
inference of the mind from the one to the other (EHU 8.1.5). For
example, experience shows that the vibration of a particular string is
constantly conjoined with a particular sound. As a result, the mind
develops the habit of immediately inferring the sound from the
vibration (EHU 7.2.29). We believe that the sound is causally
necessitated by the vibration, but the necessity is a product of the
imagination, which associates the idea of the sound with the
perception of the vibration. This feeling that there is a
necessary connection between them is the whole of the matter (EHU
7.2.28). So defined, causal necessity no longer poses an obvious
threat to liberty. It makes sense to follow Bramhall’s
definition of liberty as “liberty from necessity” if one
thinks that necessitation involves force or compulsion. But causes do
not force or compel their effects. If one can accept this point, then
a definition like Bramhall’s seems less tempting, and necessity
per se no longer poses a threat to liberty. The only real
threat is necessitation by external forces, as when a person is forced
to do something she does not want to do.
Broadly speaking, the scholarship offers two ways of interpreting
Hume’s compatibilism. According to the most common approach,
Hume’s arguments concern the logic of the concepts at issue. On
this reading, Hume analyzes the concepts of liberty and necessity in
order to show that, properly understood, they do not conflict. We can
be rationally justified in holding a person responsible for her action
even though all human actions are caused. The only question is whether
she, rather than some other person or external force, is the
cause of her action. According to Paul Russell’s naturalist
approach, however, Hume’s view is not primarily a piece of a
priori reasoning about the logic of our concepts or the rational
justification of attributions of moral responsibility. Above all it is
an empirical explanation for why we sometimes feel that people are
responsible for their conduct. Hume’s concern is with the
cognitive processes that cause such attributions (Russell 1995: ch.
4). He starts with the
occasions in common life when we hold people responsible for their
behavior, and then asks, what happens in the mind on such occasions?
On the standard reading, Hume’s treatment of liberty is a fairly
self-contained set of compatibilist arguments, easily detached from
his larger project. On the naturalist reading, it is deeply connected
to his theory of the passions and moral judgment, which makes it an
integral part of his “science of man”.
Hume claims that liberty, understood properly, is “essential to
morality” (EHU 8.31). The above interpretations provide two
different explanations for why this is the case. The standard approach
says that Hume’s compatibilism is about the logic of our
concepts and the justification of our judgments. Our judgments about
responsibility entail judgments about the causal antecedents of
action, and such judgments are consistent with determinism. On this
view, the liberty of spontaneity is essential to morality because
attributions of responsibility, which permeate morality (as well as
law and religion), are unjust and unreasonable without it. According
to the naturalist approach, liberty is essential for a different
reason. The naturalist reading emphasizes that, on Hume’s view,
attributions of responsibility are made via feelings of
approval and disapproval, not judgments (T 2.3.2.6; Russell 1995:
60–4). They are, in
his terminology, impressions or sentiments rather than ideas. These
sentiments are partially caused by beliefs about the source of the
behavior to which we are responding. We would not feel approval or
disapproval unless we had been led to think of the person as the cause
of the action. If we believed that her action was either compelled or
uncaused, we would neither approve nor disapprove of her. Our
responses or thoughts would be about something else. Hume’s
claim, on the naturalist reading, is that in approving or disapproving
of the agent—in feeling gratitude or resentment, for
example—we hold her responsible, and in holding her responsible
we believe that her conduct is free. Hume does not argue that the
latter justifies attributions of responsibility. His claim is that it
causally contributes to such attributions. They are made by means of
feelings of approval and disapproval, which are are a core feature of
human morality as we know it. Therefore, the idea of liberty, properly
reconciled with necessity, is essential to morality.
 Like Hume, Kant seeks to reconcile freedom with a commitment to
causal determinism. Yet the two philosophers operate with different
conceptions of causal necessity and very different ideas about the
nature of freedom. For present purposes, it is important to focus on
the main difference between their conceptions of freedom. Hume
concentrates on the liberty of spontaneity, the only idea of freedom
“which it concerns us to preserve”. His treatment looks
downstream from the will to its execution in action. A person has
liberty when her action is caused by her will, which Hume equates with
an occurrent motive or desire (T 2.3.1.2). The question of what
ultimately moves the will is irrelevant. Such causes are found in the
person’s character and circumstances, and they determine her
will with the same necessity that determines everything else in
nature. Kant, by contrast, looks upstream to what determines the will:
“It is here a question only of the determination of the will and
of the determining ground of its maxims as a free will, not of its
result” in bodily action (CPrR 5:45). One way of putting it is
to say that Hume’s account concerns the freedom of action, while
Kant’s concerns freedom of the will. Both are concerned with the
freedom of the person or agent, but Kant thinks the person is not
truly free unless her will is free. This is the first point about the
main difference between Kant and Hume.
The second point is that Kant, unlike Hume, believes that the will is
not free unless it can be determined by pure reason. This is why he
repeatedly insists that the main question concerning freedom is
whether pure reason “can be an immediate determining ground of
the will, that is, of the causality of a rational being with respect
to the reality of objects” (CPrR 5:44–45). Furthermore,
Kant holds that this is a question of whether the will can be
determined “independently of anything empirical” (CPrR
5:42). For when pure reason determines the will, the latter’s
“ground” must be found in “the intelligible order of
things” rather than in empirical order (CPrR 5:49). This is why
Kant thinks that “the concept of a being that has free
will” involves the concept of a “noumenal” cause
(CPrR 5:55). Note that this is not obviously equivalent to what Hume
calls the liberty of indifference, which implies a complete absence of
causes or necessitation. Free will, on Kant’s view, is not quite
what Bramhall calls “liberty from necessitation”. On the
contrary, Kant seems to think that the will is free if, and only if,
it is necessitated. But it must be necessitated by the right
sort of thing and in the right way: namely, by pure reason rather than
by an antecedent event whose causal impact on the will could be
described by an empirical law. That is, the will is free if and only
if can be determined by pure reason, which lies outside the realm
governed by empirical laws.
This conception of freedom has profound implications for the task of
reconciling freedom with causal determinism. Kant maintains that all
events, including human actions, are causally determined by antecedent
events in accordance with empirical laws. But he also seeks to show
that this does not rule out free will (A536–537/B564-565). On
the contrary, one and the same event can be both “a mere effect
of nature” but also an “effect of freedom”
(A543/B571). Kant demonstrates this possibility by distinguishing
between two different “worlds” and arguing that we belong
to both. On the one hand, we belong to the “phenomenal”
world, where all our actions can be explained in terms of antecedent
events (whether physical or psychological). On the other hand,
considered as a “thing in itself”, each of us belongs to
the “noumenal” world, which is not subject to “the
temporal order in accord with empirical laws” (A534/B562). We
cannot know whether we actually belong to the noumenal world,
but Kant’s theoretical philosophy secures room for this
possibility, and his moral philosophy tries to show that when we
become aware of morality’s categorical demands, we think of
ourselves as members of this noumenal or “intelligible
world” (G 4:457-58). With this line of thought, Kant seeks to
reconcile freedom and natural necessity by means of his transcendental
idealism. Indeed, the question of whether natural necessity rules out
freedom is a “transcendental problem” and only
transcendental philosophy can solve it (A535/B563, A557/B585). The
appeal to transcendental idealism is controversial, of course. Some
scholars of Kant’s ethics understand him to be making a
metaphysical (or ontological) claim when he distinguishes between
noumenal and phenomenal worlds (e.g. McCarty 2009). Others understand
Kant to be distinguishing between only different standpoints we take,
identifying the noumenal world with the practical standpoint that we
take when we think of ourselves as autonomous, responsible beings, and
the phenomenal world with the theoretical standpoint we take when we
think of ourselves as part of the natural, deterministic, empirical
world (see Beck 1960: 191–94; Korsgaard 1996a, esp. chs.
6–7). There are concerns about both. Many find the notion of two
worlds metaphysically cumbersome; but others question whether the two
standpoints approach is adequate for transcendental and practical
freedom. (See Irwin 1984, esp. 37–38; Allison 1990; Guyer 1992:
103–107; and Wood 2005a: 99–100.)
Kant has a number of reasons for thinking that freedom is essential to
morality. First, freedom is necessary for moral responsibility. When
we hold a person responsible for blameworthy conduct, for example, we
“impute” the ability to have refrained from such conduct
and blame the person for her failure to exercise this ability
properly. The judgment of “blame is grounded on the law of
reason, which regards reason as a cause that… could have and
ought to have determined the conduct of the person to be other than it
is” (A555/B583). Second, Kant holds that “what is
essential to any moral worth of actions is that the moral law
determine the will immediately” (CPrR 5:71). If a
person’s will were necessitated by her circumstances and
empirical character, as Hume maintains, it would be impossible to
respond properly to the moral law, which demands a kind of purity of
thought and motive that Hume would not countenance. Third, freedom is
essential to morality in that freedom is the ground of a special
status or “dignity” that morality commands us to respect
in ourselves and others. One important but unorthodox line of
interpretation suggests a fourth reason for thinking that freedom is
essential to morality. According to this view, Kant holds (in at least
some places) that freedom is our most fundamental value, the source
from which all other moral value derives. This is “the real
bedrock of Kant’s moral thought” (Guyer 2000: 203). On
this view, in fact, we are commanded to obey the moral law because it
“is the necessary means for the realization of human
freedom” (Guyer 2016: 38).
When comparing Hume and Kant, it is a mistake to ask simply which
philosopher has the best account of freedom or does the best job of
reconciling freedom and necessity. They disagree about both causal
necessity and the question of which idea of freedom “it concerns
us to preserve”. As a result, they focus on somewhat different
topics. Hume concentrates on what happens downstream from the will,
that is, on how motives determine action. But Kant’s attention
is focused on what happens upstream—on the question of what
determines the will. It seems fair to say that from Kant’s
perspective, Hume’s notion of liberty is thin gruel, no better
than “the freedom of a turnspit” (CPrR 5:97) or the
freedom exhibited by a self-moving clock (CPrR 5:96). It also seems
fair to say that from Hume’s perspective, Kant’s notion of
free will looks, at best, like a misguided fiction. One important
question is whether morality requires the sort of freedom Kant has in
mind. Hume would deny that it does, but this is partly because his
view of morality itself is so different from Kant’s. The issue
here is not just about free will. It is about which conception of
morality is most plausible. If Kant has convincing grounds for
insisting on the unique nature of moral obligation or judgments of
“moral worth”, this puts some pressure on Hume to take
Kant’s notion of free will more seriously. Another important
question is how to interpret Kant’s actual position, which is
the subject of controversy. Standard textbooks classify Kant as a
libertarian (incompatibilist) about free will, but those who study
Kant most intensively often disagree about the nature of his view.
Some argue that Kant offers a form of incompatibilism (e.g., Pereboom
2006; Allison 1990; Watkins 2005), while others maintain that he is some sort of
compatibilist, however unorthodox (e.g., Bennett 1984; Hudson 1994).
According to one very influential interpretation, Kant endorses
“not only the compatibility of freedom and determinism, but also
the compatibility of compatibilism and incompatibilism” (Wood
1984: 74). These scholarly debates bear on the question of how
Kant’s view compares to Hume’s, as does the question of
whether the naturalist or traditional interpretation best captures
Hume’s own position. Finally, when comparing Kant and Hume on
the question of freedom, one must recognize that there is a modest and
skeptical side to Kant’s view that Hume would applaud. For Kant,
free will is an “inscrutable faculty” (CPrR 5:47), whose
operations lie beyond the reach of human cognition. It is impossible
to know whether we actually have free will (CPrR 5:72; G
4:459). Indeed, Kant’s significant debt to Hume is evident in
his claim that “all human insight is at an end as soon as we
have arrived at basic powers or basic faculties” (CPrR
5:46).
Reflections on religion and concern with religious themes can be found
in the majority of Hume’s and Kant’s major works. Their
treatments of the subject differ significantly, but they have a few
important things in common, especially on the question of how religion
relates to morality. Above all, both philosophers advocate a
secularized approach to moral philosophy. That is, both argue for the
independence of morality from religion and the importance of keeping
the two distinct. They both express deep concern about the corrupting
influence of false religion, including “enthusiasm” and
“superstition”. And they both seek to undermine a good
deal of Christian theology, including traditional arguments for the
existence of God. There are also important areas of disagreement,
however. Generally speaking, Hume is far more alert to
religion’s potential costs, such as intolerance, violence, and
distraction from whatever happiness is available in this life. Kant,
by contrast, seems far more attuned to the benefits of religion,
especially its attempts to address the perhaps unavoidable need for
ultimate answers or consolation in the face of death and
suffering.
 On Hume’s view, the foundation of morality has nothing to do
with God. This is evident from his distinctive version of
sentimentalism. He argues that morality, much like our aesthetic
responses to beauty, is “founded entirely on the peculiar fabric
and constitution of the human species” (EPM 1.3). This claim is
made in the context of arguing against a form of moral rationalism
that locates the foundation of morality in immutable truths
discoverable by reason (Schneewind 2010). Against rationalists like
Samuel Clarke, Hume claims that morality is a distinctly and entirely
human phenomenon; there are no grounds for believing that human beings
exist in any kind of moral community with God or that God is
answerable to the moral norms that bind us (Schneewind 2010). For
present purposes, there are two additional points to
appreciate. First, Hume’s claim entails a rejection of the idea
that moral distinctions between good and evil are instituted by divine
command, as argued by voluntarists such as Pufendorf, Luther, or
Calvin. Second, Hume’s version of the above claim differs from
the version found in Hutcheson. On Hutcheson’s view, human
nature is essentially good and its goodness reflects the wisdom and
benevolence of God. When we behave virtuously, we further the purposes
for which we were created. Hume, by contrast, rejects
Hutcheson’s equation of the natural with the good (T 3.1.2.10),
and he rejects his predecessor’s underlying teleology (Gill
2006: 194–208).
Hume frequently draws attention to the moral and political costs of
religion. He never argues that religion is inherently destructive, but
he consistently claims that it tends to distort and corrupt morality.
Were it not for religion’s influence, Hume claims, we would
never approve of qualities such as “celibacy, fasting, penance,
mortification, self-denial, humility, silence, solitude, and the whole
train of monkish virtues” (EPM 9.1.3). The “delusive
glosses of superstition and false religion” can cause us to
approve of such qualities despite the fact that they are neither
useful nor agreeable (EPM 9.1.3). Similarly, Hume emphasizes the
difference between moral and religious sources of motivation. When a
person pays a debt or restores a loan, for example, 
his divinity is nowise beholden to him; because these acts of justice
are what he was bound to perform, and what many would have performed,
were there no god in the universe. But if he fast a day, or give
himself a sound whipping; this has a direct reference, in his opinion,
to the service of God. No other motive could engage him to such
austerities. (NHR 14.6) 
Hume often blames these distortions of morality on particular
forms of Christianity, such as Catholicism and sectarian
offshoots of Calvinism and Lutheranism. But in some places Hume comes
close to faulting any religion that represents
God as “infinitely superior to mankind” (NHR 10.2),
arguing that, “[t]he more tremendous the divinity is
represented, the more tame and submissive do men become to his
ministers” (NHR 14.8). He clearly believes that monotheistic
religions tend to focus human attention on the one God rather than on
the enjoyment of life on earth. Monotheism also tends to promote
intolerance, factionalism, and even violence.
Like Hume, Kant holds that the foundation of morality is independent
of religion. The main difference between them is that Hume locates
that foundation in human nature, while Kant —depending on the
interpretation—locates it in the structure of practical reason,
the nature of rational beings, or the supreme value of freedom. On
Kant’s view, morality is not only independent of religion; it is
also more fundamental. One way that he gives priority to morality is
by arguing that belief in God follows from a moral commitment, and
denying that recognition of the moral law follows from or must be
grounded in recognition of God’s authority. A second way in
which Kant treats morality as fundamental is by denying that we have
any duties to God. All that God commands us to do is what morality
requires: our duties to ourselves and others. A third point is that
Kant insists that children not be taught about religion until they are
familiar with basic moral concepts and principles; otherwise, they may
think, for example, that the reason one should act rightly is to hope
for God’s favor and to avoid God’s punishment. He argues
that Christianity is superior to other ecclesiastical faiths because
of the centrality of ethics within it from its inception (Rel 6:167).
But all ecclesiastical faiths are liable to corruption, and none is
the ideal form for religion to take. Ideally, we will dispense with
distinct ecclesiastical faiths, along with their revealed texts and
doctrinal statutes and observances, in favor of a universal, pure
religion of reason, dedicated to morality.
While Kant holds that morality’s foundation is independent of
religion, the two are more closely connected for him than they are for
Hume. Compared with Hume, Kant is far less antagonistic to religion,
and he consistently tries to preserve a place for religious belief
within the strictures of his moral philosophy. Indeed, this is an
important aspect of his approach to morality. Kant’s
“moral theism” is one of his most significant
contributions to the philosophy of religion and the question of
religion’s relation to morality. Moral theism is belief in God
founded on morality. By belief (or faith) [Glaube], Kant
means something different from knowledge [Wissen] (A 822/B
850; WOT 8:140–41). Believing and knowing both involve holding
something to be true. When one knows something, one holds it to be
true on grounds that are “subjectively and objectively”
sufficient, whereas when one believes something, one holds it to be
true on grounds that are subjectively but not objectively sufficient
(A 822/B 850). Here, Kant takes objective sufficiency to imply valid
theoretical grounds, such as evidence or theoretical argument; he
takes subjective sufficiency, by contrast, to imply valid practical
grounds. Thus, belief entails having valid practical reasons for
holding something to be true, while lacking valid theoretical reasons
for doing so. Indeed, when it comes to belief in God, Kant does not
think that knowledge is possible (CPJ 5:471–72).
Kant’s position contains a distinctly moral conception of God.
In addition to the attributes of omniscience, omnipresence, and
omnipotence, he ascribes to God the moral attributes of holiness,
benevolence, and justice (LPDR 28:1073–74). God is not only
author and executor of the moral law, but also as its
“personification” (C 27:322; V 27:530, 723; LPDR 28:1076,
1091). Kant says that all moral requirements can be seen as divine
commands (CPrR 5:129; Rel 6:153). God knows and cares about our virtue
and well-being. In particular, he cares about the realization of the
highest good, in which people attain maximal virtue and, consequently,
maximal happiness. This is a God who has created the world, has
incorporated morality into the world, and has a moral plan for the
world (CPrR 5:125; CPJ 5:450). Belief in God allows us to retain our
faith that some of our moral actions will produce the intended good
consequences, and that if we strive our best to promote the highest
good, God will complete the task (C 27:310, 321–22; CPJ
5:450–53; Rel 6:74–77, 192, 201–202).
The relation between God and the highest good is the basis of
Kant’s main argument for belief in God. (See Wood 1970.) The
argument, most clearly articulated in the Critique of Practical
Reason, goes like this (CPrR 5:110–14, 124–46). The
moral law issues categorical demands through each agent’s own
reason. If the moral law sets forth an end for us to promote, we must
promote it. For our promotion of this end to be rational, the end must
be one that we can rationally view as possible for us to promote
through our own agency. The moral law gives rise to the highest good
(i.e., virtue and conditioned, proportionate happiness), as practical
reason’s ultimate end. Thus, we must promote it. Yet it is not
clear that we are capable of effecting the highest good, given the
limitations of our agency and the conditions and workings of the
natural world. If the realization of the highest good is not possible,
however, then we cannot rationally promote it as an end; indeed, we
cannot even make sense of it as an end. But if we do not promote the
highest good, we flout the moral law. Now, suppose that there were a
supreme, eternal, all powerful, all knowing ruler of the universe
(i.e., God); he could bring to completion our imperfect strivings for
the highest good. Thus, if we postulate the existence of God, we can
view the highest good as possible, and can rationally follow
morality’s command to promote it. There is no reason not to
postulate God’s existence, since his non-existence cannot be
proven, and since belief in him does not conflict with any necessary
beliefs (CPrR 5:135–43). In addition, since belief in God is
necessary for seeing the highest good as possible, we must believe in
God (CPrR 5:125–26, 142–46). Thus, belief in God is
grounded in the necessity of seeing the highest good as possible, and
so for the rational compliance with morality. Thus, Kant says that
belief in God is morally necessary, and that morality leads
ineluctably to religion (CPrR 5:125). We do not, however, have a duty
to believe in God. Postulating God’s existence is a theoretical
exercise of reason, which cannot be morally commanded (CPrR 5:125,
144). Rather, our duty to promote the highest good gives rise to
“a need of reason” to assume the possibility of the
highest good. From this need emerges the necessity of postulating
God’s existence.
Kant’s practical argument differs profoundly from the
speculative arguments for God’s existence popular in
Kant’s day–i.e., ontological, cosmological, and
physiotheological proofs. His moral argument grounds the necessity of
believing in God in each person’s practical reason, required to
“orient ourselves in thinking” (WOT 8:136–37).
According to Kant, belief in God is “a postulate of pure
practical reason”: “a theoretical proposition which is not
as such demonstrable, but which is an inseparable corollary of an a
priori unconditionally valid practical law” (CPrR 5:122).
Although practical arguments cannot provide knowledge of God’s
existence, they can provide “moral certainty” of
God’s existence (A 828–30/B 856–58; CPrR 5:134, 143;
LPDR 28:1011–12). Such moral certainty is stronger than the sort
of confidence one could obtain from any theoretical argument.
Hume’s influence on Kant regarding the intersection of religion
and morality is evident, though difficult to measure. It is also hard
to tell how much of the influence came directly from Hume’s
writings. Hume is not often cited regarding religion in Kant’s
major works. Kant’s Lectures on the Philosophical Doctrine
of Religion, however, suggest familiarity with Hume’s
Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion, a work which Kant
could have read in its entirety in 1781 (Wood 1978: 14–15), and
perhaps in part when it first came out, since Hamann translated the
first and last parts of it for him (Kuehn 2001: 121). Kant explicitly
discusses Hume’s Dialogues in the section on the
physiotheological proof, which is what Kant calls the argument from
design (see LPDR 28:1063–4). Furthermore, in the Danzig
manuscript of these lectures, Kant cites Hume within his argument
against the cosmotheological proof (Ak 28:1266; Wood 1978: 83n31).
Kant was clearly also familiar with Hume’s The Natural
History of Religion. In “A History of Natural Theology,
according to Meiners’ Historia doctrinae de uno vero
Deo”, Kant refers briefly to Hume’s account of
polytheists as tolerant in section 9 of The Natural History of
Religion (LPDR 28:1125).
Finally, it is interesting to note that many philosophers and other
intellectuals in Königsberg in the late 1750s and early 1760s
seem to have attributed to Hume a view of religion that has something
significant in common with Kant’s mature view. Hamann and others
saw Hume’s skepticism as necessary for purging religion of its
poor arguments and traditional associations, and clearing the way for
true religion. One source for this view of Hume is the conclusion of
book I of the Treatise, which Hamann translated into German
(with some alterations and excisions to hide its origin) and published
anonymously in 1771 under the title “Night Thoughts of a
Sceptic” (Kuehn 2001: 198–201). Another source is the end
of the Dialogues, where Philo says, “To be a
philosophical skeptic is, in a man of letters, the first and most
essential step towards being a sound, believing Christian” (DR
89). This statement is out of line with Philo’s previous
assertions and arguments, and comes as a surprise at this point in the
the text. Some take Hume to be arguing here that once a person has
rid themselves of philosophically suspect rational justifications for
belief in God, he is free to embrace religion based simply on faith.
At least this seems to be how Hamann interprets Hume. Kant, of course is no
fideist, for he does not take a leap of faith based on revealed
religion to be the proper ground for belief in God. Still, Kant does
endorse the notion that when one clears away the fallacious or at
least inadequate metaphysical arguments for the existence of God found
in philosophical theology, one is able to see that morality itself
offers an argument for God’s existence which both allows for
(moral) certainty and addresses people in a moving, concrete way.