The first half of the Critique of Pure Reason argues that we
can only obtain substantive knowledge of the world via sensibility and
understanding. Very roughly, our capacities of sense experience and
concept formation cooperate so that we can form empirical judgments.
The next large section—the “Transcendental
Dialectic”—demolishes reason’s pretensions to offer
knowledge of a “transcendent” world, that is, a world
beyond that revealed by the senses. “Dialectic,” says
Kant, is “a logic of illusion” (A293): so in his
vocabulary, a dialectical idea is empty or false.
However, the Critique of Pure Reason should not be read as a
demolition of reason’s cognitive role. Kant certainly wants to delimit
the bounds of reason, but this is not the same as arguing that it has
no role in our knowledge. Three points are crucial: (§1.1) the
relation of reason to empirical truth; (§1.2) reason’s role in
scientific enquiry; and (§1.3) the positive gains that come from
appreciating reason’s
 limits.[1]
 In addition, sound philosophical reasoning requires that reason gain
knowledge of itself—a task that the first Critique
begins, but does not complete (§1.4).
The first thing to note is Kant’s bold claim that reason is the
arbiter of truth in all judgments—empirical as well as
metaphysical. Unfortunately, he barely develops this thought, and the
issue has attracted surprisingly little attention in the literature.
(But cf. Walker 1989: Ch. 4; Guyer and Walker 1990;
 Kant’s theory of judgment,
 §§1.3,
 1.4).[2]
 However, some basic points are clear from the text. We form judgments
about the world around us all the time, without a second thought. We
see a hand in front of us and judge it to exist; after a dream, we
judge ourselves to have been dreaming and the dream’s contents to be
illusory; we see the sun rise and assume that it orbits the earth.
Kant devotes great philosophical efforts to show that all these
judgments rely on categories, such as cause and effect, that must
order our sensory impressions. A belief that conforms to these
conditions meets the “formal” conditions of truth.
However, unless we are fundamentally confused about something, all our
beliefs meet these
 conditions.[3])
 So there is a further question: which of our beliefs are
“materially” true, and which erroneous?
Corresponding to the fundamental priority that he ascribes to
judgment, Kant begins with the observation that only once there is
judgment can there be error: “It is correctly said that the
senses do not err; yet not because they always judge correctly, but
because they do not judge at all” (A293). For example, there is
no error involved in the impressions of a dream, however confused or
fantastical they may be. But if someone were to get confused about her
dreamed experience, and suppose that it had really happened, then she
would be making a judgment—and a false one too. So Kant claims,
“error is only effected through the unnoticed influence of
sensibility on understanding, through which it happens that the
subjective grounds of the judgment join with the objective ones”
(A294). In the example, someone confuses a subjective ground of
judgment (“I had this dream”) with an objective
one (“these events took place”). As Kant puts it
in the Prolegomena: “The difference between truth and
dream… is not decided through the quality of the
representations that are referred to objects, for they are the same in
both, but through their connection according to rules that determine
the combination of representations in the concept of an object, and
how far they can or cannot stand together in one experience.”
(4:290)
How does reason enter the matter? In the famous “Refutation of
Idealism,” Kant says the following: “Whether this or that
putative experience is not mere imagination [or dream or delusion,
etc.] must be ascertained according to its particular determinations
and through its coherence with the criteria of all actual
experience” (B279). To see what Kant means, consider a simple
example. Suppose that our dreamer believes she has won a lottery, but
then starts to examine this belief. To decide its truth, she must ask
how far it connects up with her other judgments, and those of other
 people.[4]
 If it fails to connect up (she checks the winning numbers, say, and
sees no match with her actual ticket), she must conclude that the
belief was false. Otherwise, she would contradict a fundamental law of
possible experience, that it be capable of being unified. As Kant
summarizes his position: “ the law of reason to seek unity is
necessary, since without it we would have no reason, and without that,
no coherent use of the understanding, and, lacking that, no sufficient
mark of empirical truth…”
 (A651/B679).[5]
In sum, what separates material error from true cognition for Kant is
that true cognitions must find a definite place within a single,
unified experience of the world.  Since reason is an important source
of the unifying structure of experience, it proves essential as an
arbiter of empirical truth.
The same principle of reasoned unity also applies to judgments that
are not readily decided by everyday experience. Why are we sure that
the sun does not orbit the earth, despite all appearances? To answer
such questions, we need to consider reason’s role in scientific
knowledge. Kant claims that reason is “the origin of certain
concepts and principles” (A299/B355) independent from those of
sensibility and understanding.  Kant refers to these as
“transcendental ideas” (A311/B368) or “ideas of
[pure] reason” (A669/B697). And he now defines reason as a
“faculty of principles” (A299/B356) or the “faculty
of the unity of the rules of understanding under principles”
(A303/B358). The problem is how to justify these concepts and
principles. This problem is acute because Kant also argues that they
often lead us into error and contradiction.
Apart from ideas about objects that lie beyond sensory experience,
such as God or the soul, we also form transcendental ideas about
entities that are meant to form the ultimate basis of everything that
exists, such as the universe as a whole: Kant speaks of “world
wholes” or cosmological ideas. As discussed in a moment
(§1.3), claims to objective knowledge about these cosmological
ideas, such as the claim that the universe has a beginning in time or
the opposing claim that it does not, lead us into contradictions or
“antinomies.” 
Yet science assumes that the world forms a well-ordered, systematic
unity where all events can be subsumed under causal laws. As just
indicated, we rely on a basic version of this principle when we judge
that some impressions are illusions or dreams. It should also be clear
that, however coherent our experiences might be, they are bound to be
finite in extent. That is, we could never experience enough to justify
this apparently cosmological claim that every object and event
conforms to causal laws—let alone that these laws will continue
to hold in the
 future.[6]
 Nonetheless, Kant argues that reason is justified in adopting these
principles (among others), so long as it does not treat these as
knowledge claims. This is his distinction between the
“constitutive” and “regulative” use of ideas.
(See, e.g., Buchdahl 1992; Friedman 1992c;
 Kant’s theory of judgment,
 §4.2.)
For Kant, the “constitutive” use of our faculties helps to
constitute the objects of knowledge, by providing their form as
objects of possible experience. Constitutive principles thereby have a
strong objective standing—the paradigm case being the categories
of the understanding. Regulative principles, by contrast, govern our
theoretical activities but offer no (constitutive) guarantees about
the objects under investigation. As Kant puts it, activities must have
goals if they are not to degenerate into merely random groping (cf.
Bvii, A834/B862). Science aims to discover the greatest possible
completeness and systematicity (cf. Guyer 1989 & 2006, Abela 2006,
Mudd 2017), subsuming objects and events under the most
all-encompassing laws. When Kant speaks of the “unity of
reason” in the first Critique, he means that reason gives
“unity a priori through concepts to the understanding’s manifold
cognitions” (A302/B359; cf. A665/B693, A680/B780). 
As indicated, this unity must be a priori since it cannot be given
through any set of experiences. Nor can we know in advance how far
science will succeed, or that nature is wholly law-like. So the
principle of seeking unity forms (what Kant calls) a
“maxim” or regulative principle of reason
(A666/B694; see Mudd 2016 for recent discussion of this principle and
its practical nature). By contrast, the claim that such unity
does exist would represent a “constitutive
principle,” the sort of “cosmological” knowledge
claim that we cannot justify.
Our judgment that the earth orbits the sun (and not vice versa)
provides a simple illustration. The opposite claim seems more
compelling to common sense, and consistency in observations is
generally sufficient to confirm everyday knowledge. But scientific
knowledge aspires to law-like completeness. It is not just that
Galileo’s observations with the telescope suggest that everyday
appearances are misleading. For Kant, more important is how reason
unifies these observations through laws of gravity, momentum and so
forth. By compassing the motion of all heavenly objects, and not only
the movement of the sun relative to the earth, Newton provides the
proper confirmation of Copernicus’ heliocentric hypothesis (Bxxii n;
cf. §1.4 below). The extension and modification of Newton’s laws
by general relativity gives one indication of the open-ended,
“regulative” nature of this quest; so too does the as-yet
unsatisfied ambition to integrate general relativity with quantum
 mechanics.[7]
Kant’s account of science, and especially the role of
“teleological” or purposive judgment, is further developed
in the Critique of Judgment. See Guyer 1990, Freudiger 1996,
and Nuzzo 2005, as well as
 Kant’s aesthetics and teleology, §3.
 On Kant’s account of science more generally, see Wartenberg 1992,
Buchdahl 1992, Friedman 1992b & 2013, and Breitenbach
[forthcoming]. On reason and science, see Neiman 1994: Ch. 2 and Grier
2001: Ch. 8. The entry on
 Kant’s philosophy of science
 considers Kant’s view of the natural sciences, especially
physics.
The third point is the most well-known, and is considered in detail in
the entry on
 Kant’s critique of metaphysics.
 Kant demolishes a series of supposed proofs of the existence of God
(“The Ideal of Pure Reason”) and the soul (“The
Paralogisms”). He also demonstrates that it is equally possible
to prove some judgments about “world wholes” as it is to
prove their opposites, such as the claims that space must be unbounded
and that it must be bounded (“The Antinomies,”
including the idea of an absolutely first cause: the problem of
freedom as it is posed in the famous “Third Antinomy”).
These sections have always been regarded as among the most convincing
parts of the first Critique. Mendelssohn spoke for many of
Kant’s contemporaries in calling him the “all destroyer,”
for devastating reason’s pretenses to transcendent insight.
In establishing these limits on metaphysical knowledge, Kant’s
intentions are not merely destructive. Not only does the exercise
deliver self-knowledge of reason (§1.4); in addition, Kant sees
that the failures of metaphysics to establish secure
ground—as to what we can know—has been more
damaging than any critique. In the hands of theologians and
metaphysicians, reason has claimed knowledge that it cannot have,
leading to empty battles that invite outright skepticism. By contrast,
Kant’s critique aims to clear the ground for rational claims
that can be justified. These include both the claims discussed in
§1.1 and §1.2 above, and the practical claims of reason
discussed below in §2. (Gava & Willaschek [forthcoming]
usefully stress this aspect of the first Critique.)
At the beginning of the Doctrine of Method (the last, least-read part
of the first Critique) Kant alludes to the biblical story of
 Babel.[8]
 God punished the attempt to build “a tower that would reach the
heavens” (A707/B735) with a confusion of languages, leaving
people unable to understand one another and unable to cooperate in
such hubristic
 ventures.[9]
 Again and again, reason returns to some very simple ideas with
towering implications—the immortal soul, God, freedom; what is
more, it cooks
 up[10]
 more or less convincing proofs of these. Without the acid test of
experience of a common world, people are bound to come up with
conflicting versions of these ideas (unless, perhaps, they emptily ape
one another’s words without real understanding). Then they will either
talk past one another, or fall into conflict—or, one of Kant’s
abiding fears, be forced to submit to an unreasoned authority. In
metaphysics, Kant refers to “the ridiculous despotism of the
schools”
 (Bxxxv).[11]
 When we turn to the practical sphere, however, despotism is far from
ridiculous: it is the last, brutal resort for securing coexistence
among people who insist on conflicting doctrines. Thus Kant often
alludes to Hobbes, on whose theory order is only possible if an
unaccountable sovereign overawes all the members of
 society.[12]
 Saner 1967, O’Neill 1989, and Neiman 1994 all offer interpretations
that see Kantian reason as securing intersubjective order and
overcoming threats of Babel-like hubris, conflict and despotism.
One of the most famous lines of the first Critique occurs in
the second edition’s Preface, where Kant says, “I had to deny
knowledge in order to make room for faith”
(Bxxx). Knowledge of the world as a whole, or of entities that
transcend this world (the immortal soul or God) is not humanly
possible: it is not possible via experience, and reason has no power
to supply knowledge in its place. However, as indicated in §1.2,
Kant argues that science is entitled to rely on certain principles
that regulate its project, without being known as objects. In
the final section of the Critique, Kant argues that knowledge
is not the only or even the primary end of reason: in its practical
use, reason addresses our role within the world. So Kant
describes his conception of philosophy as ‘cosmic’ (ein
Weltbegriff, literally “world concept”) rather than
‘scholastic’ (A838/B866; cf. Ypi 2013 and Ferrarin 2015).
In line with this conception, Kant proposes three questions that
answer “all the interest of my reason”: “What can I
know?” “What must I do?” and “What may I
hope?” (A805/B833). We have seen his answer to the first
question: I can know this world as revealed through the senses, but I
cannot know the total sum of all that exists, nor a world beyond this
one (a supersensible world). Kant does not answer the second question
until the Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals, four years
later. (Arguably, he sees no need to answer the question in this form,
since he is confident that people have long known what their duties
consist
 in.[13])
 But the first Critique does include some observations on
hope—that is, faith in God and a future world. We certainly fall
into error if we think reason can know a world beyond the
senses. Indeed, Kant insists that such knowledge would corrupt
practical reasoning, by imposing an external incentive for moral
action—fear of eternal punishment and hope of heavenly reward,
what he will later call “heteronomy.” Nonetheless, human
reason still has an inescapable interest in belief in God,
immortality and freedom. Kant develops this claim more systematically
in the second Critique, as discussed below (§2.3).
Kant’s idea that reason has “interests,” or even
“needs,” may seem strange, and is discussed by Kleingeld
1998a and Ferrarin 2015: Ch. 1. For finite beings, reason is not
transparently or infallibly given to consciousness (as some
rationalist philosophers seemed to think), just as it cannot deliver
transcendent truths. Thus reason “needs to present itself to
itself in the process of gaining clarity about its own workings”
(Kleingeld 1998a: 97)—above all, the principles that it must
give to itself. As the next section discusses, this means that Kant
views reason as essentially self-reflexive.
The first Critique argues that there has hitherto been no
real progress in metaphysics. In the second edition Preface, Kant
proudly proclaims that his book has finally put metaphysics on
“the sure path of a science” (Bvii; cf. Axiii). What,
then, is the relation of metaphysics—or philosophical reasoning
more generally—to those areas of human enquiry that do seem to
generate certainty (geometry and mathematics) and the expansion of
knowledge (science in general)?
Kant had long insisted that mathematics could provide no model for
 philosophizing.[14]
 “Mathematics gives the most resplendent example of pure reason
happily expanding itself without assistance from experience”
(A712/B740). But metaphysics cannot follow its course. This is not
simply a rhetorical point, since many of Kant’s predecessors had tried
to do exactly this—Spinoza’s Ethics is one example,
Christian Wolff’s philosophy another (see Gava [forthcoming]). Kant’s
basic argument against such efforts is that mathematicians are
justified in constructing objects or axioms a priori, because
they can work with pure intuitions (albeit very abstract ones: a line
or the form of a triangle, say), rather than being restricted to
analysis of concepts alone. (See the entry on
 Kant’s philosophy of mathematics.)
 This sort of procedure is not available to philosophers, who have no
right to assume any a priori intuitions or axioms about metaphysical
entities. Attempts that rely on such claims have only produced
“so many houses of cards” (A727/B755).
But if mathematics does not provide a model for a genuinely scientific
metaphysics, the relation between metaphysics and the empirical
sciences is also unpromising. In the first place, Kant has argued that
experience cannot reveal metaphysical entities. We could never
know, for instance, that we are free: like everything else we
can know, human conduct is in principle open to fully determinate
causal explanation. Second, experience cannot generate the sort of
necessity Kant associates with metaphysical conclusions. (This is a
long-standing bone of contention between Humean and Kantian accounts
of knowledge—for instance, as regards causation. See the entry
on
 Kant and Hume on causality.)
 That is, our investigation of the world, no matter how systematic or
scientific, only reveals contingent facts: it cannot show
that such-and-such must be the case. To hold that scientific
laws have the quality of necessity—so that they really are
laws, and not mere generalizations or rules of thumb—is
a metaphysical rather than an empirical claim.
Neither point, however, deters Kant from using the imagery of science
and experiment to describe his own philosophical endeavors. Such
metaphors are especially prominent in the Preface to the second
edition of the Critique, where he writes:
In other words, reason, as “[self-]appointed judge,” does
not sit by and merely observe whatever comes along. It actively
proposes principled accounts of the phenomenon it
investigates—that is, law-like hypotheses. Then it
devises experiments to confirm or disprove these.
As a characterization of philosophical reasoning, this prompts Kant to
optimism, but it may puzzle his readers. Kant is optimistic, because
what philosophy has to investigate is not the infinite scope of the
empirical world, but rather “what reason brings forth entirely
out of itself… as soon as [its] common principle has been
discovered” (Axx). (One application of this idea is found in the
Transcendental Dialectic of the first Critique, where Kant
insists that there are only three transcendental ideas—the
thinking subject, the world as a whole, and a being of all
beings—so that it is possible to catalogue exhaustively the
illusions to which reason is subject.) But there is also much room for
puzzlement. Kant is suggesting that reason conduct an experiment upon
itself—an idea that comes close to paradox. He also suggests
that reason has a “common principle”—but nowhere in
the first Critique does he explain what this consists in.
How Kant’s “experiment” functions with regard to our
everyday knowledge is well-known. His Copernican hypothesis (Bxvi f)
is that experience is relative to the standpoint and capacities of the
observer. Only on this basis, Kant contends, can we find an
explanation for the a priori structure of that experience (for
example, its temporality or causal connectedness). The alternative,
that we take a “single standpoint” and do not distinguish
between objects of experience and those that are “merely
thought… beyond the bounds of experience” (i.e.,
things-in-themselves), fails because it results in “an
unavoidable conflict of reason with itself” (Bxviii n)—for
example, in the Antimonies mentioned above (§1.3), Kant argues
that the failure to separate appearances (everyday items of
experience) from things-in-themselves (metaphysical entities that lie
beyond experience) leads us to dramatically contradictory
conclusions.
However, this still leaves awkward questions about philosophical
knowledge, and reasoning more generally. Kant’s philosophical task is
not just a matter of “compelling” sensibility and
understanding to act as “witnesses”: reason stands before
its own tribunal, too, and must give account of itself. (This metaphor
is investigated by Stoddard 1988; Kant’s juridical and political
metaphors are given a central philosophical role by Saner 1967 and
O’Neill 1989.) When reason decides to act as judge and jury in its own
case, how can we expect the results to stand up to scrutiny?
Section 3 discusses the most thorough reply to this question in the
literature, that offered by Onora O’Neill. To anticipate briefly: The
general problem hinted at by Kant’s metaphors—of reason’s
experiment upon itself, or compelling itself to give
testimony—is that of reason’s self-knowledge (cf. Axi
f). Kant assumes that we have a capacity of reason; but “reason
grants [respect] only to that which has been able to withstand its
free and public examination” (Axi n). We cannot, therefore,
dogmatically assert the authority of this capacity:
“reason… has no dictatorial authority” (A738/B766).
This point is especially compelling given how fallible reason has
proven in metaphysics: “how little cause have we to place trust
in our reason if in one of the most important parts of our desire for
knowledge it does not merely forsake us but even entices us with
delusions and in the end betrays us!” (Bxv). Kant’s question,
then, is how we might defend reason from various doubts and
 worries[15]
 and how we might discipline it without begging
questions— for instance, by invoking claims or premises that
themselves are open to doubt (cf. O’Neill 1989: Ch. 1, 1992, 2004
& 2015). This is then the central task of critique (cf.
Bxxxv): reason’s self-reflexive examination of itself, which
establishes its limits and its “common principle,” and
vindicates its authority.
In the first Critique there are only hints as to the form
Kant’s moral theory would
 take.[16]
 The account of practical reason in the Groundwork of the
Metaphysics of Morals (1785) and Critique of Practical
Reason (1788) is radically new. Kant now claims to have
discovered the supreme principle of practical reason, which he calls
the Categorical Imperative. (More precisely, this principle is an
imperative for finite beings like us, who have needs and inclinations
and are not perfectly rational.) Notoriously, Kant offers several
different formulations of this principle, the first of which runs as
follows: “act only in accordance with that maxim through which
you can at the same time will that it become a universal law”
(4:421). (On the different versions of the Imperative, which Kant
claims are equivalent, see
 Kant’s moral philosophy, §§5-9.)
 Kant holds this principle to be implicit in common human reason: when
we make moral judgments, we rely on this criterion, although
invariably we do not articulate it as such.
The Categorical Imperative is not the only principle of practical
reason that Kant endorses. At nearly the same level of generality is
the principle underlying all “hypothetical imperatives.”
(See
 Kant’s moral philosophy, §4.)
 Imperatives of skill and prudence rely on the principle:
“Whoever wills the end also wills (insofar as reason has
decisive influence on his actions) the indispensable necessary means
to it that are within his power” (4:417f; cf.
 5:19f[17]).
 Following Hume, many philosophers hold that practical reasoning is
essentially instrumental. They therefore see all practical demands as
ultimately hypothetical, that is, conditional upon our having
particular ends or inclinations (cf.
 Kant and Hume on morality,
 §3). Kant, however, sees the principle of hypothetical
imperatives as subordinate to the Categorical Imperative (cf.
Korsgaard 1997). Reason can also be the source of unconditional
demands, that is, demands that do not presuppose any particular ends
or inclinations. Kant’s claim can be put even more strongly: reason is
the only source of unconditional demands that human beings
can ever have access to.
Alongside the derivation of his supreme moral principle, the most
difficult questions about Kant’s view of practical reason center on
its relation to freedom. Although the broad outlines are consistent,
Kant’s views on this topic seem to shift more than usual across his
critical writings. (See
 Kant’s moral philosophy,
 §10, for a brief sketch, and Allison 1990 for a masterful,
though not uncontroversial, account.) This and the following
sub-section focus on Kant’s central, radical claim that “freedom
and unconditional practical law [that is, for any finite being, the
Categorical Imperative] reciprocally imply each other” (5:29f).
On the one hand, freedom implies that practical reason can be pure
(non-instrumental, unconditional), and hence that we are subject to
the demands of the Categorical Imperative. On the other, our
subjection to morality implies that we must be free.
Kant’s argument from freedom to the Categorical Imperative is very
short indeed (see Critique of Practical Reason,
5:19–30). If I am free to step back from all inclinations, those
inclinations do not provide a compelling reason to act in any
particular way. All that is left to determine my way of acting (my
maxim, in Kant’s terminology) is “the mere form of
giving universal law” (5:27). By the “mere form of…
law” Kant means that there must be some principle, some overall
policy or structure, determining what I do—otherwise my actions
would be merely random, and hence unintelligible: no-one would be able
to follow them (not even me). More than this, no principle is truly
law-like unless it abstracts from an agent’s particular motivations
and situation, so as to be followable by all. Only then can it be
capable of “giving universal law.”
Although Kant sometimes writes as if it were difficult to see what
practical reason requires (for instance, in his comments about
practical wisdom: §3.2 below), he usually assumes that everyone
readily grasps the fundamental principles which all can follow. That
is, he is remarkably optimistic about people’s capacity for
independent moral insight. In the recent literature there is some
consensus that Kant failed to recognize the complexity and difficulty
of moral reasoning (cf. Herman 1993: Ch. 4 & 2007; O’Neill 1996).
But judging what the Categorical Imperative requires only poses
serious difficulties if Kant has adequately justified it. In
particular, his equation of mere law-likeness with principles that all
can follow may seem much too quick. To see what Kant means, it helps
to consider some other principles that may sound stable or law-like
but go beyond the “mere form of law”—and thereby
fail to be justifiable. 
To illustrate, take two of the six candidates he discusses in the
second Critique (5:39ff). One possibility would be a policy
of following my inclinations wherever they might lead (Kant identifies
this view with Epicurus). This is a policy of sorts, and indeed one
that a free agent could adopt. But it goes beyond the “form of
law” by taking substantive guidance from merely subjective
factors. In doing so, it abandons law-likeness and intersubjective
validity. Apart from the fact that my inclinations will surely change
and clash, it is not a policy that everyone can follow: if they did,
the results would be chaotic and defeat anyone’s attempts to satisfy
their inclinations. (That is, it is non-universalizable in the sense
that it leads to a “contradiction in the will.” While we
can conceive of a world of such agents, we cannot consistently
will such a world. See
 Kant’s moral philosophy,
 §5.) More abstractly, such a policy gives weight to the
particular conditions of one particular agent. But those conditions
can hardly claim the authority to guide others’ thought or action. So
Kant says:
A second possibility—in some respects, an inversion of the
previous one—would be to disregard my own inclinations and
submit to another’s dictates, or perhaps the laws and customs of my
community. Kant mentions Mandeville, but
 Hobbes’
 solution to the “state of nature” offers a more familiar
example. This requires everyone to submit to a single sovereign, and
not to judge for himself what he should do. There are many problems
with this solution, but for Kant the most fundamental one is that to
submit to another’s dictates is to give up the demand that those
dictates be justified in their turn. However “benevolent”
or “enlightened” the authority, its instructions would be
unjustified in the fundamental sense that reasons are no longer
relevant to those who submit. (Of course, one could submit insofar as
one finds an authority justified. This may be perfectly reasonable,
but it is not genuine submission. It is actually a sort of
cooperation, where we continue to use our own judgment about whom to
rely on. We often do this when we believe someone else is better able
to judge a particular issue—when we accept “doctor’s
orders,” for example.)
There is a common difficulty underlying all the untenable alternatives
Kant considers. They look for substantive guidance from outside of
reason itself—just as hypothetical imperatives only guide action
if some end is taken for granted. Kant calls this
heteronomy—that is, reasoning directed from the
outside, by an authority that is merely assumed or imposed. The
problem is to find ways of acting and thinking that are
authoritative—that is, are entitled to guide everyone’s
acting and thinking. To gain this entitlement, they must be
autonomous—that is, not dependent on an authority that
itself refuses justification.
Kant’s injunction to look to the mere form of law at first appears to
provide no guidance at all, and has often been reproached on this
basis. Defenders of Kant’s ethics argue that it represents a
substantial constraint: to avoid all those ways of thinking and acting
that cannot be followed by all. (For discussion see inter
alia O’Neill 1989: Ch. 5; Herman 1993; Allison 1990: Ch. 10
§II.) If so, the autonomy of reason can point to the positive
sense of freedom at the heart of Kant’s practical philosophy (cf.
Brandom 1979). This is the possibility of acting in ways that do
not rely on “contingent, subjective conditions that
distinguish one rational being from another” (5:21), and hence
do not fall foul of others’ demands for justification.
In addition to claiming that freedom implies subjection to the
Categorical Imperative, Kant also holds that moral obligation implies
freedom. Throughout the critical writings, Kant argues that
“nothing in appearances can be explained by the concept of
freedom” (5:30). So he frequently insists that morality
“exists in the sensible world [the world as known through the
senses and by science] but without infringing on its laws”
(5:43). Every action, considered as an event in the world of
appearances, must be considered as caused (whether we think of
explanations given by neuroscience or physics or perhaps even
psychology). Experience of the objective world therefore gives us no
warrant for assuming freedom. Instead it is to our consciousness or
subjectivity that Kant turns:
As Kant also says, “the moral law, and with it practical reason,
[have] come in and forced this concept [freedom] upon us”
(5:30). In the next section, Kant introduces this idea in notorious
terms, as a “fact of reason”: “Consciousness of this
fundamental law may be called a fact of reason because one cannot
reason it out from antecedent data of reason” (5:31; cf. 5: 6,
42f, 47, 55, 91, 104).
This “fact” has caused considerable controversy among
commentators. This is partly because Kant is not altogether clear
about what he takes this fact to demonstrate. It is also because he
has repeatedly argued that morality cannot be based on facts about
human beings, and must be revealed a priori, independently of
experience. (In this regard it is significant that Kant also uses the
Latin word factum, meaning deed. In other words, we
are dealing with an act of reason and its result, rather than
a merely given fact. See Kleingeld 2010.) Moreover, Kant speaks of
“cognizing the moral law,” when he is well aware that no
author before him has formulated this law as he has. A final source of
difficulty is that this “fact, as it were” does not
feature in his earlier treatise, the Groundwork, and does not
appear again.
One school of thought—which includes many influential Kant
scholars, and is sympathetically represented in Allison 1990 (Chs. 12
and 13)—sees a fundamental change in Kant’s thought here.
Whereas Part III of the Groundwork seems to give a
“deduction” (justification) of freedom, in the second
Critique Kant sees that this project is impossible on his own
premises. So he stops argument short by appealing to a supposedly
indubitable fact. Others emphasize the clear continuities between the
two works—in particular, Kant’s continued reliance on common
moral consciousness. For example, Łuków 1993 emphasizes
the parallel between the role played by Achtung
(“respect” or “reverence” for morality) and
the fact of reason. Kant refers to reverence in all his ethical
writings: it is the only “feeling self-wrought by a rational
concept [= the moral law]” (4:401n). As such, it clearly
parallels what he now calls “the sole fact of pure reason”
(5:31). (See also O’Neill 2002 and Timmermann 2010.)
There are serious difficulties at issue in this scholarly dispute. But
Kant’s line of thought in the long passage just quoted is relatively
clear: We all (most of us) recognize that there are situations where
we ought to do something, even though it will cost us something that
is very dear to us (i.e., we feel ourselves subject to an
unconditional moral imperative). So far as we really acknowledge this
“ought,” we commit ourselves to believing that it will be
possible for us to do this (i.e., that we are free). This reveals
something that we could hardly be certain of except on the basis of
this encounter with our own activity of moral reasoning (cf. Kleingeld
2010).
Clearly, this line of thought is not immune to criticism. Our feeling
of moral constraint might be explained in terms of a Freudian
super-ego, for instance. But it enables us to see why Kant thought
that moral awareness—unlike any other sort of
experience—gives us a practical certainty of our freedom, being
“a fact in which pure reason in us proves itself actually
practical” (5:42). (“Practical certainty” because it
is not knowledge of the same sort as empirical and scientific
knowledge.) At the same time, if Kant is right that only the
Categorical Imperative reveals those ways of acting that we can
justify to others, then we can see why he claims, “freedom and
unconditional practical law reciprocally imply each other”
(5:29f).
Kant does not give a complete account of the relation of practical
reason to theoretical reason in the Groundwork or any later
works. However, the second Critique does include an important
section that bears on this question: “On the primacy of pure
practical reason in its connection with speculative reason”
(5:119–121). (See Gardner 2006 and Willaschek 2010.) At the most
general level, Kant’s notion of autonomy already implied some sort of
primacy for pure practical reason. Against various stripes of
rationalism, Kant denies that theoretical reason can have any insight
into the supersensible. So reason has no possible access to a
transcendent authority that could issue commands for thought or
action. Against Hume, Kant denies normative authority to the
inclinations. These points rule out the only ways that theoretical or
instrumental reasoning could supply authoritative reasons to act. If
there are such reasons—as the “fact of reason”
pronounces —then only pure practical reason is left to
supply them. Now, however, Kant argues that pure practical reason has
“primacy” even on the home turf of theoretical reason.
That is, pure practical reason should guide some of our
beliefs, as well as our actions.
Kant defines primacy as “the prerogative of the interest of one
insofar as the interests of others is subordinated to it”
(5:119). He gives two reasons for thinking that practical reason has
this
 “prerogative.”[18]
 First, practical reason can be “pure” or independent from
“pathological conditions,” that is, our inclinations. So
it is not conditioned by anything else—for instance, by a desire
for happiness or subjective wishes. In other words, (pure) practical
reason is independent from our inclinations. By contrast, theoretical
reason falls into error if it claims independence from the
deliverances of sensibility and understanding—for example, in
attempting to prove the existence of God. Second, Kant argues that we
cannot leave the question of primacy undecided, because practical
reason would otherwise come into conflict with theoretical reason. The
interest of theoretical reason consists in expanding our knowledge and
avoiding error—which means suspending all claims to knowledge
beyond the bounds of experience. However, insofar as theoretical
reason has interests at all, this is itself a practical matter,
“since all interest is ultimately practical.” So Kant
writes:
Kant’s basic claim is not prima facie
implausible—“all interest is ultimately practical and even
that of speculative reason is only conditional and is complete in
practical use alone” (5:121). But what he means by this,
exactly, is a difficult matter of interpretation. (Cf. Neiman 1994:
Ch. 3; Guyer 1997; Rauscher 1998.) Moreover, the uses to which Kant
puts this argument are as controversial as any question in his
philosophy, since he here reinstates—as items of faith rather
than knowledge—the very ideas that the first Critique
had argued to lie beyond human insight. (See further the entry on
 Kant’s philosophy of religion.)
To this end, Kant introduces the idea of a “postulate,”
defined as “a theoretical proposition, though one not
demonstrable as such, insofar as it is attached inseparably to an a
priori unconditionally valid practical law” (5:122).
“These postulates are those of immortality, of freedom
considered positively (as the causality of a being insofar as it
belongs to the intelligible world), and of the existence of God”
 (5:132).[19]
 The law to which they “attach” is, of course, the moral
law. It enjoins us to act for the sake of duty, with no assurances
that anything will follow from this for our own happiness or that of
 others.[20]
 This creates a “dialectic” or conflict between happiness
and morality. While morality is, for Kant, the sole unconditional good
for human beings, he certainly does not deny that happiness is an
important good, and indeed the natural and necessary end of every
human being (cf. 4:415). This leads him to the concept of “the
highest
 good”:[21]
Kant’s argument is bold but dubious. He holds that we must think of
moral activity as really resulting in happiness. Yet human agency is
nowhere near adequate to this task: “I [or indeed we]
cannot hope to produce this [highest good] except by the harmony of my
will with that of a holy and beneficent author of the world”
(5:129). So, Kant argues, we must postulate God’s existence. We must
also postulate immortality, since this enables us to hope that we will
come closer to virtue so as to be worthy of happiness. (Reath 1988
argues that Kant sometimes also deploys a more defensible,
“secular” or this-worldly, notion of the highest good.
Further recent discussion includes Kleingeld 1995 and Guyer 2000a
& 2000b.)
We have seen one way in which Kant links theoretical and practical
reason. In answer to the question, “What may I hope?” Kant
invokes the primacy of practical reason, so that theoretical reason
may accept the postulates of God, freedom and immortality “as a
foreign possession handed over to it” (5:120). While Kant’s
argument for freedom may be more compelling, the other arguments find
little favor among contemporary authors, although they have been taken
up in some commentary on Kant’s account of teleology (both in the
Critique of Judgment (Guyer 1989, Freudiger 1996; see also
 Kant’s aesthetics and teleology,
 §3) and outside that work (Wood 1970, Kleingeld 1998b)). Jens
Timmermann, for example, emphasizes that Kant never doubted that
practical and theoretical reason represent the same faculty, and
trenchantly claims that “the principle that unifies the spheres
of theoretical and practical reason… is the assumption of a
wise and benevolent God who has created a teleological world that
coheres with morality” (2009: 197; cf. Kleingeld 1998b: 336).
Whatever Kant’s own beliefs, however, such a position lacks wider
philosophical resonance. Most contemporary philosophers assume that
the world does not “harmonize with” morality in this
way—or, at any rate, that to create such harmony is a human
task, and not a matter of divine agency. (Again, cf. Reath 1988, and
see also Guyer 2000b & 2006.)
The principal attempt to uncover the unity of Kantian reason and to
relate it to contemporary philosophical concerns is due to Onora
O’Neill (1989 and subsequent essays). This section will focus on her
central claim concerning the unifying role of the Categorical
Imperative, and the main bases for this claim in Kant’s texts.
Although O’Neill’s interpretation of Kantian reason enjoys
considerable respect among Kant scholars, it should be added that it
has not yet attracted a significant critical literature. (Among early
reviews, see Engstrom 1992 and Wood 1992; for recent endorsement and
restatement, see Korsgaard 2008: 12 and Westphal
 2011.)[22]
In the original Preface to the first Critique, Kant had
raised the idea of reason’s “common principle”:
“Nothing here can escape us, because what reason brings forth
entirely out of itself cannot be hidden, but is brought to light by
reason itself as soon as reason’s common principle
(gemeinschaftliches Prinzip) has been discovered”
(Axx). Unfortunately, neither edition of the Critique
considers what this principle might be.
This question is raised in the works on practical reason, but then
postponed and never clearly answered. In the Preface to the
Groundwork, Kant explains why the book is not entitled a
Critique of Pure Practical Reason:
In the second Critique, Kant compares the book’s structure
with the first Critique and comments: “such comparisons
[are] gratifying; for they rightly occasion the expectation of being
able some day to attain insight into the unity of the whole rational
faculty (theoretical as well as practical) and to derive everything
from one principle—the undeniable need of human reason, which
finds complete satisfaction only in a complete systematic unity of its
cognitions” (5:91). Kant’s tone is confident, but the fact is
that “insight into the unity of the whole rational
faculty” has once more been postponed. (Prauss 1981 argues that
Kant failed to achieve this insight, in part because he did not
appreciate how cognitive success is a fundamentally practical goal.
Förster 1992 discusses Kant’s reflections on this topic in his
final manuscript, the Opus Postumum.)
However, as Onora O’Neill points out in a celebrated essay (1989: Ch.
1), the claims Kant has now made about practical reason actually
commit him to a third claim concerning reason’s “common
principle.” Kant has argued that the Categorical Imperative is
the supreme principle of practical reason. He has also argued that
practical reason has primacy over theoretical reason. It follows,
therefore, that the Categorical Imperative is the supreme principle of
reason.—To be sure, Kant never states this conclusion
explicitly. But there are reasons for thinking that this ought to have
been his view, and in some places he comes very close to such a claim.
(Rescher 2000 (Ch. 9) similarly emphasizes the
“isomorphism” of theoretical and practical reason.
Rauscher 1998 notes that Kant’s own use of the “primacy”
of practical reason is more limited than O’Neill’s, while endorsing
O’Neill’s overall case.)
Direct textual evidence for O’Neill’s reading is slight. The clearest
passage is a footnote (!) to Kant’s essay “What is it to Orient
Oneself in Thinking?” (1786):
The parallel with the first formulation of the Categorical
Imperative—“act only in accordance with that maxim through
which you can at the same time will that it become a universal
law” (4:421)—hardly needs spelling out. Kant now says:
think only in accordance with that maxim that could be a
universal
 law.[23]
 Differently put: thinking is an activity, and if the Categorical
Imperative is indeed “categorical” then it applies to
all our activities.
Other strands of Kant’s thought also support this interpretation. The
two that have attracted the most attention are Kant’s “maxims of
common human understanding” and his well-known account of the
“public use of reason.”
Kant sets out three “maxims of common human understanding”
[= reason] which are closely related to the Categorical
Imperative. They appear twice in his published writings, in relation
to both acting and
 thinking.[24]
 The maxims are discussed by O’Neill 1989: Ch. 2 & 1992, and by
Neiman 1994: Ch. 5.
In his last published work, the Anthropology, Kant presents
the maxims in a practical context, as guidelines for
achieving some degree of wisdom:
The maxims also appear in the Critique of Judgment, where
they are closely related to the theoretical use of reason.
This occurs in a famous section on the sensus communis or
“community sense,” which Kant describes as:
That is, the maxims are precepts for judging in accordance with
“reason as a whole” and avoiding the distortions that can
arise from “subjective private conditions.”
To think for oneself Kant describes as the maxim of
unprejudiced thought; its opposite is passivity or heteronomy
in thought, leading to prejudice and
 superstition.[25]
 To think in the place of everyone else is the maxim of
enlarged or broad-minded thought. And always to
think in accord with oneself is the maxim of consistent
thought (5:294). Although the last maxim sounds more straightforward,
Kant is careful to emphasize its difficulty: it “can only be
achieved through the combination of the first two and after frequent
observance of them has made them automatic” (5:295). Consistency
does not just involve getting rid of obvious contradictions in our
explicit beliefs. It also requires consistency with regard to all the
implications of our beliefs—and these are often not apparent to
us. To achieve this sort of law-likeness in thought depends
both on the genuine attempt to judge for oneself and the determination
to expose one’s judgments to the scrutiny of others. In other words,
it involves regarding oneself, first, as the genuine author of one’s
judgments, and second, as accountable to others. As we might also say,
it represents a determination to take responsibility for
one’s judgments.
The maxims support the thesis that theoretical and practical reasoning
have a unified structure, and flesh out the implications of the
Categorical Imperative. As a matter of thought, to reason is to
discipline one’s judgments so that others can follow them. As a matter
of practical wisdom, it is to discipline one’s actions so that others
can adopt the same principles.
Kant’s famous essay, “What is Enlightenment?” (1784), has
been of particular importance to commentators concerned with Kantian
reason and politics. (See O’Neill 1989: Ch. 2, 1990 & 2015: Ch. 3;
Velkley 1989; Deligiorgi 2005; Patrone 2008.) Kant’s second maxim,
“to think into the place of others,” shows that he regards
communication as essential to making valid judgments and to acting
wisely and well. Thus Kant writes: “…how much and how
correctly would we think if we did not communicate with others to whom
we communicate our thoughts, and who communicate theirs with
 us!”[26]
 Kant also describes the first maxim as the way to achieve
“liberation from superstition,” which he equates with
“enlightenment” (5:294).
In “What is Enlightenment?” Kant articulates both these
thoughts in a political context, demanding that we “have the
courage to use our own reason”:
Here, Kant is not primarily concerned with enlightenment as the
activity or condition of an individual—rather, as something that
human beings must work towards together. For this, he says,
“nothing is required but… the least harmful…
freedom: namely, freedom to make public use of one’s reason
in all matters” (8:36). This is not the freedom to act
politically. Instead, it is what we now call freedom of the
pen—in Kant’s words, the use of reason “as a
scholar before the entire public of the world of
readers” (8:37).
Kant’s contrast is with the reasoning someone undertakes as an
employee: as a civil servant or military officer or cleric of an
established church. In each case, the employee is bound to fulfill the
dictates of a given leader or organization, at least so long as he can
“in conscience hold his office” (8:38). In doing so, he
uses his reason to decide the best way of achieving ends that have
been laid down by others. (There is a loose parallel with instrumental
reasoning, which decides the best means to achieve ends laid down by
inclination. In Kant’s terms, both are
heteronomous—“directed by another.”) Although this
sort of reasoning is often undertaken in what we now call
“public offices”—as a state employee, for
instance—Kant describes such uses of reason as
private—that is, deprived of freedom and
accountable only to a particular authority. By contrast, the public
use of reason is not bound to any given ends and is accountable to
all: a person speaks as a member of “the society of citizens of
the world” (8:37). Outside of his post, in a capacity he shares
with all other human beings, the civil servant or cleric may reason
freely, offering critical scrutiny of government policies or religious
teachings. Nonetheless, he must continue to enact these in his
employment, as a “passive member” (8:37) of the
commonwealth.
Some commentators find Kant’s emphasis on freedom of the pen elitist,
and regret his emphasis on the importance of obedience. (See also
 Kant’s social and political philosophy,
 §§4, 6.) Taken together, these two points imply a clear
gulf between the practical and the theoretical—or at any rate,
between what citizens do and what they believe ought to be done.
Nonetheless, the essay makes clear how Kant equates reason with the
aspiration to full publicity. “To use one’s own
reason” is to be engaged in the quest to address all
“citizens of the world.” Our judgments and principles are
only reasonable to the extent that they can be accepted by
all. Among other things, this means that they cannot assume the
authority of any particular organization or leader. In fact, Kant had
already said this, in a famous passage from the Critique of Pure
Reason:
In the term used by several contemporary Kantians (Herman 2007: Ch.
10, Korsgaard 2008, Reath 2013), this procedure constitutes
reason. It makes reason the only unconditional (that is,
non-heteronomous) form of authority for our thinking and acting. 
Kant’s discussions of theoretical reason are not obviously connected
to his account of practical reason. His accounts of truth, scientific
method and the limited insights of theoretical reason are complex, as
is his view of practical reason and morality. No one doubts that
knowledge and scientific enquiry, no less than action, are subject to
demands of rationality. However, if Kant’s account of reason is
based—as O’Neill above all has argued—in avoiding
principles of enquiry and of action that others cannot also adopt, it
would be possible to see the underlying unity of these demands. We
would understand, for example, why Kant so strenuously resists claims
to transcendent insight. To give authority to such claims—those
of revelation and religious authority, for example—would be
irrational insofar as they rest on principles of belief that cannot be
adopted by all.
Underlying the difficulty of synthesizing and interpreting Kant’s
account of reason is, of course, the enormous question of what reason
is. Many philosophers—both contemporary and historical
figures—proceed as if this were already clear. However, once
this question is raised—the question of reason’s self-knowledge,
as Kant puts it—it is difficult to see grounds for such
confidence. While the secondary literature discussing her proposal
remains limited, O’Neill’s interpretation of Kant represents an
ambitious and distinctive answer to this question. 
O’Neill (2000) situates the Kantian account of reason against three
alternatives, which she labels the instrumental, the communitarian,
and the perfectionist. The first remains very widespread: with Hume,
it regards instrumental reasoning as fundamental (cf.
 practical reason, §4;
 reasons for action: internal vs. external). 
 The second sees reason as embedded within complex
traditions: rationality is what a given tradition or community takes
it to consist in (cf. MacIntyre 1988;
 communitarianism).
 A third option, akin to the forms of rationalism that Kant opposed,
is to see reason as an individual capacity to discern or intuit
normative truths (cf.
 moral non-naturalism, §3).
 Arguably, all three accounts fail in providing reasoned justification
to some audiences. The instrumental reasoner is accountable to
no-one—in fact, to nothing apart from whatever desires or ends
he happens to have. Someone who takes her particular tradition to
define what beliefs and practices count as reasonable can have little
to say to those who stand outside it. And the person who believes he
can intuit what is good or true will be mute—or worse—in
the face of those with different
 intuitions.[27]
On the interpretations advanced by Saner, O’Neill, Neiman and others,
Kant was aware of all these options and rejected each. We saw above
(§1.4) that Kant characterizes reason in terms of a
self-reflexive procedure. Reason is autonomous and submits to no
external authority; it gains authority from submitting itself to
critique; and critique involves rejecting any mode of thinking or
acting that cannot be adopted by all. In less abstract terms, the
self-scrutiny of reason is scrutiny by all those who demand
justification for any particular mode of thought or action. Such a
view does not assume that we are necessarily bound to our interests
and inclinations (as the instrumental account does). It does not ask
us to rely on what others do accept (as the communitarian
account does). It does not involve the fantasy that we already know or
intuit what everyone should accept (as the perfectionist
account does). It proposes, instead, a vision of human beings who are
able to step back from their particular inclinations, habits and
intuitions, and who are willing to use this ability to seek terms that
all can accept—to construct an intersubjective order of
co-existence, communication and cooperation on terms that all can
accept. 
Such an account depends on a particular interpretation of Kant’s
texts, and is both ambitious and highly complex in its ramifications.
Nonetheless, if successful, it captures two powerful attractions of
Kant’s philosophizing: a universalism that transcends
self-centeredness and community boundaries, and a modesty that
respects the limits of human insight.