Kant's early pre-Critical publications (1746-1756) are devoted
primarily to solving a variety of broadly cosmological problems and to
developing an increasingly comprehensive metaphysics that would
account for the matter theory that is required by the solutions to
these problems. Kant's first publication, Thoughts on the True
Estimation of Living Forces (1746), explicitly attempts to solve
the vis viva controversy, which had been hotly contested ever
since Leibniz's attack on Descartes' laws of motion in the Acta
Eruditorum in 1686. While Kant attempts to occupy an intermediary
position between the Cartesian and Leibnizian positions by maintaining
that both mv and mv² could be conserved in
different contexts, what is of particular note is how his solution in
Parts II and III rests on the conception of force developed in Part
I. According to this conception, force is understood in terms of the
activity of substances, an activity that Kant then uses to explain how
the motions of bodies are generated, to solve the mind-body problem,
and to account for both the possibility of other, actually existing
worlds and the three-dimensionality of space.
 
His solution to the vis viva dispute is especially
interesting, because it presages his later approach to philosophical
controversy. Rather than offering a conclusive argument in favor of
one position, Kant seeks to mediate between the two parties,
Leibnizian and Cartesian. He argues that each measure of force is
correct, but in different contexts. Kant distinguishes two ways of
studying bodies, “mathematical” and “metaphysical,” and claims that
they presuppose distinct conceptions of body. According to
mathematical mechanics, a body cannot accelerate unless an external
cause acts on it; for that reason, Kant declares, the Cartesians'
quantity mv is the only one appropriate measure of force
in this context. “Natural bodies,” in contrast, have features that
mathematics brackets. One such feature is a capacity for
“vivification,” whereby a body increases by itself the force of motion
that an external cause merely “awakens.” In light of that, Kant
concludes, the Leibnizian quantity mv2 is the
correct measure of force in metaphysical considerations of “natural
bodies” (1:140f).
Kant develops his account of the nature of substance in greater detail
in A New Elucidation of the First Principles of
Metaphysical Cognition (1755). While the first two sections of
this work undertake revisions of Wolff's principles of
non-contradiction and sufficient reason, the third section argues for
two substantive principles that are alleged to follow from the
principle of sufficient (or rather, following Crusius, determining)
reason, namely the principles of succession and coexistence. The main
thrust of the principle of succession is directed against Leibnizian
pre-established harmony, arguing that only causal connections
between substances can bring about changes in their states.
Kant's position appears to be designed to account primarily for
changes of bodily states (with changes in mental states being
parasitic upon them, as was explicitly asserted in the True
Estimation). For he maintains that mutual changes of
state require mutual interaction, where it is clear that
changes in motion are precisely the kind of mutual change that he has
in mind (since one body cannot move closer to another without the
other body moving closer to it). The principle of coexistence then
argues that harmonious causal interaction between otherwise isolated,
independently existing substances is possible only by means of God's
coordination (just as Leibniz thought was required for harmonious
relations between the states of such substances).
Kant's Physical Monadology (1756) takes as its task the
reconciliation of the infinite divisibility of space, as maintained in
geometry, with the simplicity of substances, which Kant believes is
required in metaphysics. As was the case with his earlier works, the
essential feature of his reconciliation lies in the way in which his
matter theory is supported by his metaphysical views. Specifically,
Kant asserts that simple substances fill space not by means of their
mere existence, but rather in virtue of their spheres of activity. As
a result, any division of the relevant spheres of activity does not
compromise the simplicity of the substances themselves, since the
spatial properties of substances (including the infinite divisibility
of space) arise from the interaction between their activities rather
than from their intrinsic features. In the course of the Physical
Monadology, Kant also argues for the necessity of attractive and
repulsive forces and attributes a significant role to the force of
inertia. Kant's acceptance of such Newtonian principles represents an
important change of position over the True Estimation, where
Kant rejects the principle of inertia and pursues a dynamical theory
much more in line with Leibniz's views.
In addition to these works, which bridge the gap, as it were, between
physics and metaphysics, during this period Kant is interested in a
series of specific issues in cosmology and empirical physics. For
example, Kant writes several short exclusively scientific essays
between 1754 to 1757, including “Brief Outline of Certain Meditations
on Fire,” “Investigation of the question of whether the Earth has
suffered changes in its axial Rotation,” “The Question of the Aging of
the Earth, considered physically” as well as three papers on
earthquakes. Of much greater significance is his Universal Natural
History and Theory of the Heavens (1755), which represents an
important contribution to science as such. For in it Kant explains how
one can account for the formation of the solar system from an initial
state, in which matter is dispersed like a cloud, solely by means of
the interaction of attractive and repulsive forces. In 1796, Laplace,
unaware of Kant's argument, would develop a very similar derivation,
with the result that the view is now typically referred to as the
Kant-Laplace nebular hypothesis.
Some of Kant's youthful insights have yielded long-lasting
contributions to scientific knowledge. His intuition that tides slow
down the Earth's rotation over time is correct. In his New Remarks
toward an Elucidation of the theory of Winds, Kant correctly
explained that North-South winds in our hemisphere suffer a Coriolis
deflection due to the Earth's rotation. Moreover, broadly Kantian
accounts of planetary formation have been the dominant model since the
emergence of sophisticated nebular models in the 1970s (see, e.g.,
Safronov 1972 and Prentice 1978).
Later in his pre-Critical period (1763-1770), Kant attempts to build a
comprehensive metaphysical account on the basis of the framework that
he had established in his first works. Thus, in his The Only
Possible Basis for a Demonstration of the Existence of God (1763)
he attempts to extend his reasoning to fundamental issues in both
philosophical theology and teleology, presenting, for the first time,
his now famous criticisms of the three traditional arguments for the
existence of God, while developing a new theistic proof, based on the
idea that God is necessary as a real ground of the possibilities of
things. After reading Hume's Enquiry concerning Human
Understanding in German translation sometime after 1755, Kant
distinguishes between real and logical grounds/opposition in his
Attempt to Introduce the Concept of Negative Magnitudes into
Philosophy (1763) to avoid Hume's objection that there is no
logical contradiction in the existence of one thing not following the
existence of another. But in this work he is also interested in
exploring the notion of a real ground/opposition further by applying
it more widely, e.g., to bodies, mental states, etc. Also relevant is
Kant's Concerning the Ultimate Foundation of the Distinction of
the Directions in Space (1768) which modifies his earlier account
of space insofar as he seems to hold that certain spatial properties
— viz., chirality, or handedness — may not be able to be
explained entirely in terms of direct relations between material
substances. In his so-called Inaugural Dissertation (1770),
Kant continues to develop a more comprehensive philosophical system,
which would encompass the principles of both the sensible and the
intelligible world, and in so doing modifies his account of space and
time even further. Over the course of the next ten years, during which
he published almost nothing, Kant would revise his views more
systematically, with the publication of the Critique of Pure
Reason in 1781 representing the first major step in his
“critical turn.”
Adickes (1924), Harman (1982), Friedman (1992), Laywine (1993),
Schönfeld (2000), Kuehn (2001), Lefevre & Wunderlich (2000),
and Watkins (1997, 2001, 2003, 2006, 2013) have emphasized the
importance of scientific issues in the development of Kant's thought
during his pre-Critical period, as he reacted to Leibniz, Newton and
other, more immediate predecessors (such as Christian Wolff, Christian
August Crusius, Leonard Euler, Pierre Louis Moreau de Maupertuis, and
Martin Knutzen). Smith (2013) reconstructs Kant's picture of matter in
the Physical Monadology. 
Though Kant discusses issues relevant to physics in various works
throughout the Critical period (esp. the Critique of Pure
Reason), his views on this topic are developed most explicitly in
the Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Science (1786), which
consists of a preface and four chapters.
In the Preface to the Metaphysical Foundations Kant (i)
analyzes the concepts of nature and science so as to establish what
conditions must be met for a body of knowledge to constitute natural
science in the proper sense, (ii) explains why science so understood
requires “a pure part” (4:469) and what criteria would have to be
satisfied for such a pure part to exist, (iii) argues that chemistry
and psychology cannot at present meet these criteria, and (iv)
describes what procedure should be followed to satisfy these criteria
and thus to provide the “pure part” that science proper requires.
The feature of Kant's conception of natural science proper that is
most immediately striking is how restrictive it is. It requires that
cognition (i) be systematically ordered (ii) according to rational
principles and (iii) be known a priori with apodictic certainty, i.e.,
with “consciousness of their necessity” (4:468). Because
properly scientific cognition must satisfy these strict conditions, it
requires “a pure part on which the apodictic certainty that
reason seeks can be based” (4:469). But since Kant identifies
pure rational cognition that is generated from concepts with
metaphysics, it follows that science proper requires a metaphysics of
nature. He then specifies that such a metaphysics of nature could
consist in either a “transcendental part,” which discusses
the laws that make possible the concept of a nature in general —
“even without relation to any determinate object of
experience” (4:469) — or a “special
metaphysical” part, which concerns a “particular nature of
this or that kind of things” for which an empirical concept is
given.
Kant's very conception of natural science proper thus immediately
gives rise to several systematically important questions. First, if
the “transcendental part” of the metaphysics of nature can be
identified with the results of the Critique of Pure Reason,
then the Metaphysical Foundations is a work in special
metaphysics. But what exactly is a special metaphysics? In particular,
what particular natures or kinds of things could be its object? And
how precisely can an empirical concept of such things be given without
compromising the necessity required of the pure part of natural
science? Second, how is the special metaphysics provided by the
Metaphysical Foundations supposed to be related to the
transcendental part of the metaphysics of nature that was established
in the Critique of Pure Reason? Does the former presuppose
the principles of the latter or are they logically independent, but
still related to each other in some other way? Another question
concerns the method of special metaphysics. Is that method the
conceptual analysis (of the notion of matter), the transcendental
investigation of the presuppositions of the mathematical science of
nature, or something else entirely? 
First, Kant suggests that in special metaphysics the principles of the
transcendental part “are applied to the two species of objects of our
senses” (4:470). Thus, the particular kinds of things that could be
investigated in a special metaphysics are (i) the objects of outer
sense, i.e., matter, and (ii) the objects of inner sense, i.e.,
thinking beings, which would thus result in a doctrine of body and a
doctrine of soul. Kant then argues that because “the possibility of
determinate natural things cannot be cognized from their mere concepts
… it is still required that the intuition
corresponding to the concept be given a priori, that is, that
the concept be constructed” (4:470), which is a task that requires
mathematics. This is Kant's justification for his famous claim that
“in any special doctrine of nature there can be only as much
proper science as there is mathematics therein”
(4:470). This argument suggests that the necessity required of the
pure part of natural science derives from the necessity of the rules
by which the mathematical construction of determinate things must
proceed.
Kant then uses the claim that science proper requires the construction
of the concept of the object in a priori intuition to exclude the
possibility that chemistry and psychology, at least as they were
practiced at that time, could count as science proper. In the case of
chemistry, the problem is that “no law of the approach or withdrawal
of the parts of matter can be specified according to which …
their motions and all the consequences thereof can be made intuitive
and presented a priori in space (a demand that will only with
great difficulty ever be fulfilled)” (4:471). Since its principles are
“merely empirical,” it can, at best, be a “systematic art”
(ibid.). The case of psychology is more complex, since Kant provides
(at least) two separate reasons in the Preface for denying it the
status of natural science proper. First, Kant claims that mathematics
is inapplicable to the phenomena of inner sense and their laws, though
he grants that the law of continuity (discussed, e.g., at
A207–209/B253–255 and A228–229/B281 in the Critique of Pure
Reason) ought to apply to changes in our representations as
well. He downplays the significance of this application of the law of
continuity, however, by noting that time has only one dimension, which
does not provide enough material to extend our cognition
significantly. Second, Kant also complains that empirical psychology
cannot separate and recombine the phenomena of inner sense at will;
rather, our inner observations can be separated “only by mere division
in thought” (4:471). Kant's fuller views on chemistry and psychology
will be discussed further below.
Second, in explaining how mathematics can be applied to bodies Kant
asserts that “principles for the construction of the concepts
that belong to the possibility of matter in general must first be
introduced. Therefore a complete analysis of the concept of a matter
in general [must be provided in which it] makes use of no particular
experiences, but only that which it finds in the isolated (although
intrinsically empirical) concept itself, in relation to the pure
intuitions in space and time, and in accordance with laws that already
essentially attach to the concept of nature in general” (4:472). Kant
then explains that this means that the concept of matter must be
determined according to the Critique of Pure Reason's
categories of quantity, quality, relation, and modality (4:474–476).
Further, Kant holds that “a new determination” (4:476) must be added
to the concept of matter in each chapter of the Metaphysical
Foundations. This suggests not only that the principles argued
for in the Metaphysical Foundations are to be developed “in
accordance with” the principles defended in the Critique of Pure
Reason, but also that both the concept of matter and the
Metaphysical Foundations itself is structured according to
the Critique of Pure Reason's table of categories.
Unfortunately, these points of clarification do not resolve all of the
issues that are immediately raised by Kant's pronouncements about what
is required for natural science proper. One further issue that is
relevant here concerns the concept of matter that is at the heart of
the Metaphysical Foundations. Kant introduces it in the
Critique of Pure Reason (A847–848/B875–876) as the concept of
something that is impenetrable, extended, and inert. Yet, in the
beginning of the Preface of the Metaphysical Foundations, he
describes it as whatever is an object of outer sense, and later he
argues that the “basic determination of something that is to be an
object of the outer senses had to be motion, because only thereby can
these senses be affected” (4:476). Whatever weight one accords Kant's
justification of the connection between matter, outer sense, and
motion, one faces a dilemma. If the concept of matter, most
fundamentally, is simply the concept of any object of outer sense,
then how is it still empirical in any genuine sense (and what has
become of the structural difference Kant draws between the
Critique of Pure Reason and the Metaphysical
Foundations)? If, by contrast, impenetrability, extension, and
movability are deemed the basic traits of the concept of matter, then
how can one know a priori that any object we might encounter in outer
sense must behave in accordance with the laws that would govern matter
so defined?
Moreover, even if one can find an appropriately nuanced sense in which
the concept of matter is empirical while still allowing for an
appropriate kind of necessity, questions can still be posed about the
“new determinations” that are to be added to that concept in each
chapter of the Metaphysical Foundations. For example, what is
the justification for each specific determination that is added when
one thinks of matter as having a quantity, a quality, etc.? Also, what
is the relationship between each new determination of matter and the
various claims that Kant makes in each chapter of the Metaphysical
Foundations? In particular, when Kant explicitly invokes
principles for constructing concepts belonging to the possibility of
matter, is his idea that these principles are required insofar as they
make experience of the relevant “new determination” of matter possible
(so that Kant would be developing a transcendental argument in the
Metaphysical Foundations similar in many respects to the
Critique of Pure Reason)? Answers to these questions depend
on how one interprets the arguments Kant develops throughout the
Metaphysical Foundations.
The conception of science that Kant presents in the Preface has been
the focus of considerable attention over the past several decades. In
the German literature, the issues raised above have been discussed at
length by Plaass (1965), Schäfer (1966), Hoppe (1969), Gloy
(1976), and Cramer (1985). Pollok (2001) has recently produced a
detailed and comprehensive textual commentary on the Metaphysical
Foundations. Important work has also been done in the English
literature by Walker (1974), Brittan (1978), Buchdahl (1968, 1969, and
1986), Parsons (1984), Butts (1986), and Watkins (1998a). Friedman (1992, 2001,
2002 and 2013) has been especially influential on these issues as well.
The first chapter of the Metaphysical Foundations, the
Phoronomy, considers the quantity of motion of matter and how it is to
be constructed in intuition a priori (so as to produce the kind of
rules that are necessary for our experience of matter in
motion). Since extension and impenetrability are not directly relevant
to how different magnitudes (or degrees) of motion can be represented,
Kant restricts his discussion in this chapter to matter considered as
a point. Since the motion of a point in space can be represented
straightforwardly, the main issue is how to represent the composition
of two different motions. Kant's primary claim in this chapter is that
due to the relativity of space (i.e., the fact that every motion can
be viewed arbitrarily as either the motion of a body in a space at
rest, or as a body in a state of rest in a space which is in motion in
the opposite direction with the same velocity) “the composition
of two motions of one and the same point can only be thought in such a
way that one of them is represented in absolute space, and, instead of
the other, a motion of the relative space with the same speed
occurring in the opposite direction is represented as the same as the
latter” (4:490). The proof of this Theorem considers the three
possible cases for the composition of two motions: (i) The two motions
are in the same direction; (ii) the two motions are in opposite
directions; (iii) the two motions enclose an angle. Kant then shows
how one can construct a priori in intuition a single motion out of the
two motions described in cases (i)-(iii). The synthetic a priori
outcome of this constructive procedure is a composition theorem that
covers two fundamental results of classical physics: the parallelogram
rule for velocity addition, and the Galilean kinematic
transformations.  The theorem is needed for architectonic reasons too,
not just as a foundation for science. Kant uses the composition
theorem as a premise in his Dynamics, so as to infer a priori to
forces from the composite motions they cause (e.g., 4:497). And, he
invokes the theorem explicitly in his Mechanics, in the course of
“constructing the communication of motion,” i.e. deriving the laws of
impact (4:546).
Until recently, very little has been written directly on Kant's
Phoronomy. (By contrast, Kant's philosophy of mathematics has long
received considerable attention.) Palter (1972) first broached the
Phoronomy from the modern standpoint of coordinate transformations
between frames. Pollok (2001) is a historically rich
commentary. Friedman (2013) untangles the complex strands of thought
in Kant's chapter. His leading idea is that Kant's categories of
quantity (of the First Critique) guarantee that motion is a magnitude,
hence mathematics is applicable to the motions of bodies--as
kinematics.
The second chapter of the Metaphysical Foundations, the
Dynamics, considers how it is possible to experience matter as filling
a determinate region in space. Propositions 1–4 are devoted to
exhibiting the nature and necessity of repulsive forces. In
Proposition 1 Kant argues that repulsive force is required for matter
to fill space, since solidity, understood by “Lambert and others” as
the property matter would have by means of “its mere
existence” (4:497), cannot truly explain how one matter
resists another matter's attempt to penetrate it. Kant then specifies
several central features of repulsive forces in Propositions 2 and
3. Repulsive forces admit of degrees to infinity, since one must
always be able to think of a slightly greater or lesser force, and
although matter can be compressed to infinity, it can never be
penetrated, since that would require an infinite compressing force,
which is impossible.
In Proposition 4 Kant draws an important consequence from his
characterization of repulsive forces, namely that matter is infinitely
divisible (4:503). What is especially striking about this point is
that it represents a significant departure from his own earlier
Physical Monadology, where he had accepted attractive and
repulsive forces, but denied the infinite divisibility of what
ultimately constitutes matter, namely physical points or monads. It is
true that part of Kant's rationale for his change of position on this
point stems from the “critical turn” undertaken in
the Critique of Pure Reason (and in its Second Antinomy in
particular). For once one recognizes that both space and spatial
properties such as divisibility are not properties of things in
themselves but rather only appearances, one can reject the proposition
that seems to necessitate the acceptance of simple substances, namely
the idea that simple substances must precede the wholes they compose
(4:506). However, Kant's proof also seems to depend, in its details,
not merely on the idea that every space is filled by means of
some repulsive force or other, but on the stronger claim that
every space is divisible into smaller spaces that are filled by
different repulsive forces.
Propositions 5–8 are all devoted to attractive force. In Proposition 5
Kant argues that matter must have an attractive force in order to fill
space. Kant's argument is that if there were only repulsive forces,
then matter “would disperse itself to infinity” (4:508)
since neither space nor other matter could limit it. Proposition 6
argues that both attractive and repulsive forces must be considered
essential to matter. That is, attractive forces alone are not
sufficient to account for matter filling a space, since if matter
consisted solely of attractive forces, there would be no force to
counteract the attractive force being exercised and the universe would
collapse into a single point. Together, Propositions 5 and 6 make up a
‘balancing argument’, which Kant had already used in the
earlier Physical Monadology. (A balancing argument is an
existence proof for a type of force. Its premises are (1) an accepted
universal fact, viz.  that a certain stable configuration obtains; and
(2) a type of force independently known to exist. The argument seeks
to prove that the stability in question is impossible unless a second
kind of force exists to balance the first kind. In Kant's particular
version of the balancing argument, the universal fact is the constancy
of mass density in a control volume; and the given force is “original
repulsion,” whose existence he proves in Proposition 4.) Proposition 7
then specifies how attractive forces are to be understood, namely as
the immediate action of matter on other matter through empty space
(and therefore at a distance). Kant thus directly confronts the
metaphysical question of how to understand attraction that Newton
attempted to avoid by positing it merely mathematically. As Kant
interprets the situation, Newton “abstracts from all hypotheses
purporting to answer the question as to the cause of the universal
attraction of matter … [since] this question is physical or
metaphysical, but not mathematical” (4:515). In response to the
“most common objection to immediate action at a distance,”
namely “that a matter cannot act immediately where it is
not” (4:513), Kant argues that action at a distance is no
more problematic than action by contact (whether it be by collision or
pressure), since in both cases a body is simply acting outside
itself. Proposition 8 concludes by arguing that attractive forces act
immediately to infinity and by adding a “preliminary
suggestion” (4:518) as to how one might be able to construct the
concept of cohesion (which Kant understands as attraction that is
restricted to contact).
In the General Remark to Dynamics Kant addresses two main issues.
First, Kant considers how it is that the specific varieties of matter
(e.g., water as different from mercury) might be reduced, at least in
principle, to the fundamental forces of attraction and repulsion. The
second issue concerns the fundamental distinction between the
“mathematical-mechanical” and the
“metaphysical-dynamical mode of explanation”. The former
mode of explanation, which is associated with the postulation of atoms
and the void, employs nothing more than the shapes and motions of
fundamental particles and empty interstices interspersed among
them. It contrasts with the metaphysical-dynamical mode, which employs
fundamental moving forces (e.g., attraction and repulsion) in its
explanations. Kant grants that the mathematical-mechanical mode has an
advantage over the metaphysical-dynamical mode, since its fundamental
posits can be represented (indeed, “verified” (4:525))
mathematically, whereas he repeatedly admits that the possibility of
fundamental forces can never be comprehended, i.e., their possibility
can never be rendered certain.  However, Kant thinks that this
advantage is outweighed by two disadvantages. First, by presupposing
absolute impenetrability, the mathematical-mechanical mode of
explanation accepts an “empty concept” at its
foundation. Second, by giving up all forces that would be inherent in
matter, such a mode of explanation provides the imagination with more
freedom “than is truly consistent with the caution of
philosophy” (4:525).
Given that the bulk of Kant's matter theory is presented in the
Dynamics, it is unsurprising that it has received the greatest amount
of attention in the literature. Of particular note are discussions by
Buchdahl (1968, 1969), Brittan (1978), Kitcher (1983), Butts (1986),
Carrier (1990), Friedman (1990), Malzkorn (1998), Warren (2001, 2010),
Pollok (2002), Holden (2004), and Engelhard (2005). Friedman (2013) is
an extensive commentary, under the overarching theme that Kant in the
Dynamics aims to explain how certain features of body – density,
volume, static weight – become mathematizable, as Newton's
dynamics illustrates paradigmatically. 
The third chapter of Kant's Metaphysical Foundations, the
Mechanics, concerns how it is possible to experience matter as having
a moving force, that is, how one matter communicates its motion to
another by means of its moving force. Kant begins, in Proposition 1,
by clarifying how the quantity of matter is to be estimated before
stating, in Propositions 2–4, three Laws of Mechanics.
After first defining the quantity of matter and the quantity of motion
(or, in contemporary terms, impulse, i=mv), Kant
asserts that the quantity of matter, in comparison with every
other matter, can be estimated only by the quantity of motion at a
given speed (4:537). Kant's proof proceeds by way of elimination. The
quantity of matter, which is the aggregate of the movable in a
determinate space, cannot be estimated by counting the number of parts
it has, since, as was established in the Dynamics, every matter is
infinitely divisible.  Nor can one estimate the quantity of matter
merely by considering its volume, since different matters can have
different specific densities.  As a result, the only universally
applicable way of estimating the quantity of matter is to hold the
velocity of matter constant.
In Proposition 2, Kant states his First Law of Mechanics: the total
quantity of matter remains the same throughout all changes in matter
(4:541). His proof seems to rely (i) on the principle of the First
Analogy of Experience that no substance arises or perishes throughout
any change in nature and (ii) on the identification of what in matter
must be substantial. On this latter point, Kant quickly assumes that
the ultimate subject of all accidents inhering in matter must be the
movable in space, and that its quantity is the aggregate of the
movable in space. In his remark to this proposition, Kant explicitly
notes that there is a crucial difference between spatial and
non-spatial substances, since the latter, unlike the former, could
gradually fade away by degrees. (Kant cites the possibility of
consciousness as a concrete example.) Kant uses this difference to
argue that since the quantity of matter consists in a plurality of
real things external to each other that cannot fade away (as
consciousness might), the only way to decrease its quantity is by
division.
Kant's Second Law of Mechanics, stated in Proposition 3, is that every
change in matter has an external cause. (Immediately after this
principle, Kant adds in parentheses a version of the law of inertia
that is much closer to Newton's: “every body persists in its state of
rest or motion, in the same direction, and with the same speed, if it is
not compelled by an external cause to leave this state” (4:543). Since
Kant's Second Law of Mechanics is not identical to Newton's law of
inertia, it would require argument to show that, and by means of what
additional assumptions, the former entails the latter.) The proof of
the main principle depends on the Second Analogy of Experience (which
asserts that all changes occur in accordance with the law of cause and
effect and thus entails that every change in matter has a cause) as
well as on the further assumption that matter has no internal grounds
of determinations (such as thinking and desiring), but rather only
external relations in space. In his remark to this proposition, which
clarifies this “law of inertia,” Kant explains that inertia is to be
contrasted with life or the ability of a substance to determine itself
to act from an internal principle. Thus, a body's inertia
“does not mean a positive striving to conserve its state”
(4:544), but rather what it does not do, its
lifelessness.
Kant also asserts that the very possibility of natural science proper
depends on the law of inertia, since the rejection of it would be
hylozoism, “the death of all natural philosophy” (4:544). In a later
remark in the Mechanics, Kant explicitly objects that “the terminology
of inertial force (vis inertiae) must be entirely banished
from natural science, not only because it carries with it a
contradiction in terms, nor even because the law of inertia
(lifelessness) might thereby be easily confused with the law of
reaction in every communicated motion, but primarily because the
mistaken idea of those who are not properly acquainted with the
mechanical laws is thereby maintained and even strengthened” (4:550).
Kant goes on to point out that if inertia were to entail an active
force of resistance, then it would be possible that when one moving
body hits another, the moving body has to apply part of its motion
solely to overcome the inertia of the one at rest and might not have
any motion left over, as it were, to set the body at rest into motion,
which is contrary to experience (and Proposition 2).
Kant's Third Law of Mechanics, expressed in Proposition 4, asserts the
equality of action and reaction in the communication of motion.  Kant
formulates a version of the Third Analogy of Experience (according to
which all external action in the world is interaction) and suggests
that the main point at issue in mechanics is establishing that mutual
action is necessarily reaction. Kant's argument for this law
is based on the following line of thought: (i) if all changes of
matter are changes of motion; (ii) if all changes of motion are
reciprocal and equal (since one body cannot move closer to/farther
away from another body without the second body moving closer
to/farther away from the first body and by exactly the same amount);
and (iii) if every change of matter has an external cause (a
proposition that was established as the Second Law of Mechanics), then
the cause of the change of motion of the one body entails an equal and
opposite cause of a change of motion of the other body or, in short,
action must be equal to reaction.
In Remark 1, Kant then shows how his position differs from that of
other authors. Newton “by no means dared to prove this law a
priori, and therefore appealed rather to experience”
(4:449). Kepler likewise derived it from experience, though he went
further, conceiving of it in terms of a special force of inertia.
Certain unnamed “transfusionists” (presumably Locke and perhaps
Descartes or Rohault) attempted to deny the law altogether by
suggesting that motion could simply be transferred from one body to
another in the communication of motion, a view Kant rejects on the
grounds that explaining the communication of motion in terms of the
transfer of motion is no explanation at all and also amounts to
admitting that accidents could be literally transferred from one
substance to another.
Kant's Laws of Mechanics have been discussed widely in the secondary
literature. One can point to discussions by Palter (1972), Duncan
(1984), Friedman (1989, 1992, and 1995), Brittan (1995), Westphal
(1995), Carrier (2001), and Watkins (1997 and 1998b). Much of the
modern tradition of scholarship used to regard Kant's laws of
mechanics as derived from, or even identical with, Newton's three laws
in the Principia. Watkins (1997; 1998b) showed that Kant's
formulation and justification of his laws was strongly influenced by a
philosophy of nature stemming from Leibniz not Newton. Stan (2013)
further corroborated these findings. As a result, it is safe to say
that Kant's foundations of mechanics were significantly shaped by
post-Leibnizian rationalism too, not just Newton's mechanics. This
fact is now reflected in Friedman (2013), the most recent and detailed
account of Kant's interpretation of the conceptual foundations of
mechanics. Stan (2014) examines the conceptual link between Kant's
theory of matter and his laws of mechanics.
The final chapter of the Metaphysical Foundations, the
Phenomenology, focuses on how the motion of matter can be experienced
modally, that is, in terms of it being possibly, actually, or
necessarily in motion. Its three Propositions specify (in accordance,
Kant suggests, with the results of the three previous chapters) that
(i) rectilinear motion is a merely possible predicate of matter, (ii)
circular motion is an actual predicate of matter, and (iii) the equal
and opposite motion of one matter with respect to another is a
necessary motion of that matter. In the General Remark to the
Phenomenology, Kant discusses the status of absolute space, which had
been presupposed by the possible, actual, and necessary motions of
matter at issue in the three main propositions, and explains that
since it is not itself an object of experience, it must be represented
by means of an idea of reason (in Kant's technical sense of “idea”,
namely as a concept for which a corresponding object could never be
given to us in intuition). Though we can never know absolute space, it
nonetheless functions as a regulative principle that guides us in
our scientific practice by forcing us to look for further conditions
for the conditioned objects we meet with in experience. Kant's view
that ideas of reason can function as regulative principles is
developed in the Appendix to the Transcendental Dialectic in the
Critique of Pure Reason.
Friedman's interpretation (1992) of the Phenomenology deserves special
mention. According to him, in light of Kant's rejection of Newton's
absolute space and time, he must give an account of the concept of
true motion – as change of true place over time – presupposed by
classical mechanics. To this end, Kant “views the laws of motion as
definitive or constitutive of the spatio-temporal framework of
Newtonian theory,” hence these laws “count as a priori” for him
(p. 143). The reason Kant takes them as constitutive is the
following. In Kant's Phenomenology, the three Newtonian
laws define a concept of true motion: the true motions of
bodies just are those that obey the dynamical laws. Moreover,
the concept must be given “objective meaning in experience,”
viz. measured empirically. To do so, Kant views Newton's three laws as
holding primarily in a privileged system of reference, namely the
center-of-mass (CM) frame of the system of the world, which the
CM-frame of our Solar System approximates to a very good degree. Thus,
by measuring the motions of bodies relative to this frame, we produce
objective experience of these motions. However, this frame must first
be located. To do so, Kant thinks, we must likewise count the
law of universal gravitation as a priori, not empirical-inductive. If
we know a priori that all bodies in the Solar System necessarily
attract each other, from their observable, mutually-induced
accelerations we can infer their masses. In turn, knowing their masses
will enable us to locate the CM-frame of the system. (In a system of
bodies, the center of mass is the point relative to which the bodies'
distances are in inverse proportion to their masses.) With respect to
this distinguished frame, the motions of bodies count as their true
motions, Friedman claims. Hence, immediate and essential gravitation
“cannot be straightforwardly obtained from our experience of matter
and its motions – by some sort of inductive argument, say”
– because universal gravitation is “necessarily presupposed in
making an objective experience of matter and its motions possible in
the first place” (pp.  157–158). However, the CM-frame of the Solar
System is just approximately an inertial frame. Scientific inquiry
must ultimately look beyond it, to better and better approximations of
an inertial frame. And, Kant's absolute space is just the concept that
directs our search for such approximations. More recently, Friedman
updated and expanded his interpretation in (2013). In view of recent
scholarship, Friedman has now made a convincing case that it
is Kant's laws of mechanics – not Newton's three laws, as
claimed in (1992) – that define the privileged frame (Kantian
absolute space) relative to which bodies have true motions, in the
Phenomenology.  
Apart from Friedman's interpretation, there is relatively little
secondary literature that discusses Kant's Phenomenology. Palter
(1971) interprets Kant's doctrine of absolute space and motion in
terms of transformation groups for Galilean kinematics. Carrier (1992)
provides an alternative to Friedman's account of Kant on absolute
space. Stan (forthcoming) is an alternative to Friedman's reading of
Kant's doctrine of circular motion, and its relation to Newton's
dynamics. 
Kant's interest in physics continued after the publication of the
Metaphysical Foundations, in fact, until the very end of his
productive years. Though Kant never completed a manuscript that could
be put forward as a publication, the various notes, sketches, and
drafts on topics in physics that he was working on intensively during
this time (especially after 1796) were gathered together over a
century after his death and published as his so-called Opus
postumum.
Despite the fragmentary nature of the Opus postumum, Kant
makes it clear that it is designed to fill an important gap in his
system. Just as the Metaphysical Foundations had attempted to
connect the transcendental principles of the Critique of Pure
Reason and the principles that explain how matter is possible,
the Opus postumum undertakes the task of effecting a
transition from the special metaphysics of nature contained in the
Metaphysical Foundations to physics itself. However, Kant
does not clarify adequately what systematic principles would guide
this transition project, nor is it clear whether he takes the project
to yield substantive principles or heuristic guidelines. On the one
hand, in a note that stems from a period shortly after the publication
of the Metaphysical Foundations, Kant suggests that one could
“follow the clue given by the categories and bring into play the
moving forces of matter according to their quantity, quality,
relation, and modality” (21:311), a procedure that could be
similar to that of the
Metaphysical Foundations. On the other hand, if the
Metaphysical Foundations already presupposes an empirical
concept (namely matter), the transition to be carried out in the
Opus postumum cannot be understood as moving from something
non-empirical to something empirical. As Kant struggles with the
problems that result from trying to account for now much more specific
features of matter, it is unclear that (or how) the categories are
supposed to be of help in structuring Kant's argument.  Thus, the
precise argumentative structure of the Opus postumum (i.e.,
its relationship to Kant's other works and its fundamental
presuppositions) remains problematic. Equally problematic is the exact
nature of Kant's transition project. Given his stated aim to account
for
specific features of matter—e.g., particular
aggregation states, special forces—one would think that
such contingent features are a problem for empirical science
not philosophy, since Kant sees the latter as pursuing knowledge that
is, in various senses, necessary.
Whatever its form, the content of the Opus postumum includes
reflections on a series of important topics in physics. Three clusters
are particularly noteworthy. (1) Kant develops more detailed views
about a number of outstanding issues concerning matter theory that he
had discussed (often in a tentative way) in the Metaphysical
Foundations, such as fluidity, rigidity, cohesion, and the
quantity of matter. (2) Kant argues for the existence of an
all-encompassing ether. This might seem to be a natural development,
since the Metaphysical Foundations was non-committal on the
point, but what is surprising is that Kant thinks that the ether can
be established a priori (e.g., 21:222), which might seem to conflict
with Kant's project in the Critique of Pure Reason (or with
his description of his position as “formal idealism,” 4:337). (3) Kant
also explores the idea that the subject must posit itself in positing
the various forces in matter, a doctrine that has come to be known as
the Selbstsetzungslehre, and attempts to incorporate it into
his views on how man is situated in between the world of experience
and God, whose existence is a central requirement of morality.
The Opus postumum has long been a topic of interest
especially insofar as it offers the hope of clarification and
development of central issues in Kant's Critical philosophy. While
much of the original literature focussing on it was in German (Adickes
1920, Hoppe 1969, Tuschling 1971, and, more recently, Blasche, 1991
and Emundts, 2004), it has received increased attention of late in
English with discussions by Friedman (1992, chapter 5), Förster
(2000), Edwards (2000), Guyer (2001), and Hall (2006, 2009).
Kant was interested not only in the inanimate bodies studied by
physics, but also in living organisms, which he viewed as deserving of
additional philosophical scrutiny due to their special status, for two
reasons. First, the symmetries and regularities of their structure and
workings make them “in the highest degree contingent” (5:
360) and “mechanically inexplicable.” Second, organisms
come from their own kind; grow their own functional parts, or organs,
and repair them if they become damaged; and do in general exhibit
homeostasis. These facts about them prompt Kant to claim that an
organism is “cause and effect of itself” (5: 370). In a
sense, a living entity is self-caused, and indeed by a causality that
we can grasp solely “under the idea of purposes as a
principle” (5: 383). Organisms, in other words, are
“natural purposes,” or naturally occurring ensembles of
parts purposefully fitted and working in unity.
It is just these peculiarities that create philosophical challenges
not met with in physics and chemistry. Kant tackles them in the latter
half of his third magnum opus, the Critique of the Power of
Judgment (1790). In particular, he claims that attempting to
explain organisms creates an inevitable conflict within reflective
judgment, the faculty we employ in empirical concept formation,
taxonomic classification, and the explanatory unification of
particular laws. Kant describes that conflict in the Antinomy of
Teleological Judgment (CJ §§ 69–78; 5:
385–415). The Antinomy obtains between two regulative principles,
herein prefixed by an ‘R’ to distinguish them from two
similar
constitutive principles that Kant briefly discusses in the
same place:
R-thesis:
All generation of material things and their forms must
be judged as possible in accordance with merely mechanical
laws.
R-antithesis:Some products of material nature cannot be judged
as possible according to merely mechanical laws (judging them
requires an entirely different law of causality, namely that of final
causality) (5: 387).
A great deal of scholarship has aimed to elucidate this antinomy,
and in the last decade these interpretive efforts have gained new
momentum (see also the entry “Kant’s Aesthetics and
Teleology” in this encyclopedia). In particular, sustained
attention has been given to three questions: In what sense are
organisms inexplicable mechanically, for Kant? What exactly is the
contradiction that generates the Antinomy? And precisely how does Kant
solve it?
First, clarification is needed about Kant’s claim that
organisms cannot be explained ‘mechanically.’ In the
Enlightenment, ‘mechanical’ was used in at least two
senses: broadly, to denote explanation by physico-chemical laws of
efficient causation; and narrowly, restricted to the theory of
‘compound machines,’ or assemblies of movable parts used to
displace loads or transfer momentum, e.g. engines and watches.
McLaughlin (1990) takes Kant to mean ‘mechanical’ in this
latter sense. In artificial machines, parts precede the
whole temporally, and determine it: the machine’s
configuration results from summation over the parts; and its laws of
operation are the same as those governing the parts. But organisms are
different: the whole precedes its parts, or organs; and it has
functions and aim-directed behaviors not present in them. Hence,
organisms are mechanically inexplicable. Ginsborg (2004) construes
Kant’s claim along different lines, in two senses. According to
one, to explain something mechanically is to show that its production
results, or would result, from the “unaided powers of matter as
such,” i.e. Newtonian forces of attraction and repulsion, and
“crude unorganized matter,” or arbitrary initial conditions
such as masses, charges, configurations and motions. Organisms are
inexplicable in this sense because their arising would be “in the
highest degree contingent.” This is the notion operative in the
Antinomy of Teleological Judgment, Ginsborg contends. But, she has
argued, there is a second, stronger sense. Not only are organisms
inexplicable by reduction to the structure and powers of their
organs—rather, their symmetries and regularities and powers are
not explicable from the “moving forces” of their
inorganic particles either. Organism-level powers are not
vector sums or integrals of physico-chemical forces that accelerate or
reconfigure sub-visible particles. 
Second, interpreters have also scrutinized the exact nature of the
Antinomy. Insofar as the thesis and the antithesis are regulative
principles, they may be seen as research policies, and those can be
pursued separately, at different times, hence with no
contradiction. Then why are they antinomic? Watkins (2009, § 2.2)
explains that the two theses do not just recommend explanatory policies
but express commitments to judging in a determinate way about
biological phenomena. As such, they would be contradictory commitments:
to judge organisms purely mechanistically and to judge them
non-mechanistically. Teufel (2011) reads the two theses as hypothetical
imperatives, imposed upon reflective judgment by practical reason. The
Antinomy ensues, he contends, because they demand contradictory courses
of cognitive conduct: to judge that mechanistic laws suffice to explain
organisms and that they are insufficient for that
task. 
Moreover, for each antinomy in the Critique of Pure Reason,
Kant derives both thesis and antithesis by deductive argument from
alleged a priori premises. But, in the Antinomy of Teleological
Judgment, he does not take that route. This makes quite pressing the
question of his justification for the two R-claims above. As to the
R-thesis, one might think that it can be easily deduced from
Kant’s three Laws of Mechanics. However, we must remember that
those laws are constitutive principles, whereas the R-thesis is
regulative. A better interpretive avenue is that Kant’s three
laws constrain the spectrum of particular empirical laws, including
laws for biology, that scientists may seek. The constraint is that the
Laws of Mechanics are basic: no other laws of material nature explain
or ground them, while they must explain all other laws,
directly or indirectly. So, for biological regularities to be turned
into genuine laws, they must be integrable with the system of already
known mechanical laws, and ultimately explained by the three Laws of
Mechanics, the basis for all “interconnected experiential
cognition” (5: 386). Even less well understood is Kant’s
justification for the R-antithesis. Not only is there no official
proof, it is not easy to know what the proof must establish. The
R-thesis strongly implies that at issue is the origin of
organisms; in contrast, the R-antithesis is about judging their
possibility, which has to do with structure and functioning
not production (Ginsborg 2001, 236). These are different aspects of
organisms, and proving that they are mechanically inexplicable would
require different arguments.
Third, Kant’s solution to the Antinomy has received sustained
attention. In the first two Critiques, his general approach is to
argue, for each antinomy, that both thesis and antithesis presuppose
Transcendental Realism, insofar as they make claims about things in
themselves; and to adduce Transcendental Idealism as the vantage point
from which the initial contradiction is solved. However, that is not
Kant’s approach to the Antinomy of Teleological Judgment.
Accordingly, interpreters have sought to reconstruct a different
solution on Kant’s behalf. Quarfood (2004) and Förster
(2008) take the notion of an intuitive understanding (expounded at 5:
401–10) as the key to Kant’s answer. In particular, Förster
explains, intellects like ours are discursive: they grasp objects
through concepts as ‘parts’ assembled in
temporally-extended judgments, and so mechanistically, he alleges.
Hence, we need the concept ‘purpose’ to judge organisms
solely because we have discursive intellects. However, an intuitive
understanding could grasp organisms without purpose-concepts and
regulative principles about judging teleologically. Hence, for this
understanding, the R-thesis and R-antithesis need not be true, and so
no antinomy arises. Breitenbach (2008) contends that the Antinomy is
solved, or rather dissolved, if we note that thesis and antithesis are
not really contradictory but complementary. They govern (reflecting)
acts of judging in different contexts: the mechanistic R-thesis
regulates explanatory conduct in empirical biology, whereas the
R-antithesis governs ordinary judging about living nature as
experienced in everyday, pre-theoretical encounters with it. The two
principles epitomize “two different views on nature,” and
are compossible (466). They just appear to be in contradiction; in
fact, they complement each other, indispensably. McLaughlin (1990)
submits that the Antinomy does not arise simpliciter but only
under a special assumption, viz. that everything in nature is
objectively explainable by us (162). Reject the assumption, and the
contradiction vanishes, insofar as the R-thesis and the R-antithesis
can both be true, but for different domains: the former holds for
phenomena explainable by us, the latter for phenomena not so
explainable. McLaughlin does not offer a general criterion for
‘explicability by us’ attributable to Kant, however, apart
from mechanical explicability. Ginsborg (2008) focuses on how the
contradiction might be resolved in the context of scientific
investigation rather than in abstract, general philosophical terms.
Building on Kant’s remark about subordinating mechanism to
teleology (5: 414), Ginsborg contends that natural historians and
physiologists may well explain the origin and workings of organisms
‘mechanistically,’ purely by physico-chemical laws,
provided they apply them not to “crude” but to
“organized” matter, i.e. organic stuff already endowed with
a “formative drive,” a generic disposition to grow,
reproduce and self-maintain. In turn, this organized matter itself is
unintelligible without appeal to purpose and design terms. Thus,
biologists ‘subordinate’ mechanism to teleology, and so the
antinomic conflict between them is removed. 
While these interpretive proposals collectively advance our
understanding of how the Antinomy might be defused, each has its share
of philosophical difficulties, as spelled out in Watkins (2009).
Moreover, few of these construals heed close to Kant’s words,
which suggest strongly that his solution relies indispensably
on a “supersensible ground” (5: 413), or explanatory
principle located in the noumenal world. That ground could
unite both mechanism and teleology, by making both antinomic theses
jointly derivable or explainable from it. However, since humans can
have “no positive determinate” knowledge of any
supersensible entity, the Antinomy is solvable in principle rather than
solved in fact. Kant (at least in his official solution) does not seem
to provide the details for an actual account of how the conflict at the
heart of biological explanation is removed. The limitations that beset
our understanding of Kant’s philosophy of biology so far, some of
which we have expounded above, continue to drive interpretive efforts
to cast more light on that part of his doctrine, as exemplified in Goy
and Watkins (forthcoming).
In addition to the works mentioned above, Kant’s Antinomy of
Teleological Judgment has been usefully discussed in Allison (1991),
Cohen (2004), Ginsborg (2001), Kreines (2005), Steigerwald (2006),
Zanetti (1993) and Zumbach (1984); see also the entry
“Kant’s Aesthetics and Teleology” in this
encyclopedia.
In the Preface to the Metaphysical Foundations Kant claims
that chemistry, at least as he understood it in 1786, was not science
“proper”, but such a claim leaves open the possibility
that chemistry could be fully scientific in some other sense or that,
with time, it could develop into science proper. Up through 1787, Kant
accepted the fundamental tenets of Stahl's chemical theory, according
to which water and air are fundamental elements that function as
vehicles for change in both inflammable and “earthy”
substances, and he commented on particular issues in chemistry in his
various physics lectures. As a result, it is clear that Kant considers
chemistry to be a science in
some sense even during the Critical period. However,
beginning in the mid-1780s (and extending through the mid to late
1790s), Kant becomes aware of significant new developments in
chemistry (as evidenced in the Danziger Physik and documented
in Lichtenberg's revised, third edition of Erxleben's
Anfangsgründe der Naturlehre from which Kant lectured).
In particular, Kant comes to reject Stahl's theory, favoring
Lavoisier's anti-phlogistic account of combustion and calcination,
which relied on his doctrines of latent heat and the caloric theory of
the states of aggregation. While Kant never explicitly claims that
chemistry, so understood, can be considered science proper, Kant's
interest in these issues in the Opus postumum suggests that
he was optimistic about providing the kind of foundation that would be
required for it to attain this status.
Kant's views on chemistry have not been widely discussed in the
secondary literature. However, outstanding discussions of Kant's views
on the topic can be found in Carrier (1990, 2001) and Friedman (1992,
chapter 5, III). Lequan (2000) is a philosophical survey of Kant's
thought on chemistry throughout his development. McNulty (forthcoming)
explains why Kant takes chemistry to miss the threshold for proper
science – specifically, the sense in which chemistry is not
mathematizable, in Kant's view. 
Kant's views on psychology are intimately bound up with his more
general position in the philosophy of mind. (See the separate entry on
this topic.) Still, one can take note of the fact that Kant
distinguishes between rational and empirical psychology and, in the
Critique of Pure Reason's Paralogisms, denies that rational
psychology contains arguments that could justify any substantive
principles (especially concerning our immortality). Thus, only
empirical psychology, it seems, could be possible as a science.
However, if Kant continues to maintain that science requires a pure
part, and denies that rational psychology contains any substantive
knowledge that might constitute the pure part of psychology, then it
follows that empirical psychology cannot qualify as science proper
either.
At the same time, Kant's own project in the Critique of Pure
Reason requires what one might call transcendental psychology,
that is, the study of those faculties that are required for us to have
cognition. Transcendental psychology thus differs from rational
psychology insofar as the former presupposes that we have experience
(albeit of a very general sort), whereas the latter is restricted to
the mere concept “I think”. Thus, it would seem that many of Kant's
most important claims in the Critique of Pure Reason would
fall under the domain of transcendental psychology. As is well known,
Kant's Critique of Pure Reason came under attack immediately
after its publication (most notably by Johann Georg Hamann) for not
presenting an explicit account of how we obtain knowledge of our
transcendental faculties.
Just as Kant held that chemistry could either be scientific in less
than the strictest sense or perhaps become science proper (depending
on how it develops), the same could be said for psychology. For one,
Kant may simply be objecting to psychology as it was practiced in the
18th century, e.g., as based on introspection (a method that both
rules out the application of mathematics and gives rise to other
difficulties, 4:471). Further, in the Critique of Pure
Reason, Kant holds that although objects can never be given in
intuition that would correspond to ideas of reason, such ideas never
the less function as regulative principles that direct our
understanding with regard to what it should inquire into next. Thus,
our idea of the world as a totality is supposed to drive us to look
for smaller and smaller parts to bodies and objects in further regions
of space and at earlier moments of time.  But if we have an idea of
our soul, then it too should guide our scientific inquiry into our own
representations, which seems to imply that psychology is a legitimate
scientific practice (even if it does ultimately fall short of being
science proper).
Unsurprisingly, Kant influenced empirical theory in early 19th-century
Germany. (However, it was his transcendental psychology in
the Critique of Pure Reason, not his views on empirical
psychology, that proved to be most influential.) In particular, his
doctrine of space and time as forms of sensibility was given a
naturalistic construal in the physiology and psychology of
perception. Since for Kant an a priori form of intuition need not be
innate, it could unfold in the course of sensory experience. This led
J.G. Steinbuch (1811) and C. Th. Tourtual (1827) to investigate
empirically how spatial representation arises – specifically,
how particular subjects become able to see things as arrayed in space,
perceive objects as three-dimensional, and represent spatial
structures more generally. Hatfield (1990, Chapter 4) surveys these
post-Kantian developments in more detail.
Kitcher (1990) presents a detailed argument for the role of
transcendental psychology within Kant's Critique of Pure
Reason. Sturm (2001) argues that Kant's critical comments about
psychology are primarily directed against introspection-based
conceptions of psychology. Hatfield (1990) is an acute discussion of
the complexities of psychology as a science in Kant's view. 
Though Kant is sometimes quite strict about what qualifies as science
“proper,” we have seen that he clearly accepts that other
disciplines, such as chemistry and psychology, can be scientific in
some other sense. (Kant is also extremely interested in providing an
explanation of the nature and origin of organisms, which is central to
an account of biology. For a more detailed description of Kant's
stance on biology, see the entry on his views on aesthetics and
teleology.)  However, his explicit reflections about science (taken
broadly so as to encompass not only
“Wissenschaft” but any kind of
“Lehre” or “Kunde”) extend
even further so as to include bodies of cognition such as history,
physical geography, and anthropology. (Even in the Metaphysical
Foundations Kant leaves room for such “scientific
cognition” by dividing the doctrine of nature into natural
science — e.g., physics — and the historical doctrine of
nature, which is separated further into natural description and
natural history, 4:468). In the case of historical sciences, Kant
views its cognitions as related not by subordination (as is the case
in physics), but rather by coordination, since historical facts cannot
be derived from each other, but rather merely related to each other in
space (geographically) and time (chronologically). Kant views
anthropology as overlapping to some extent in subject matter with
empirical psychology.  What enables the coordination of facts in each
of these domains is not a theoretical, but rather a practical idea. In
the case of history, it is the idea of reason (or freedom) that
provides a guiding principle of coordination (cf. Kant's “Idea
for a Universal History from a Cosmopolitan Point of View”),
while anthropology is framed by the cosmopolitan moral ideal of the
world-best. Thus, it is clear that Kant's emphasis on physics
throughout his career did not blind him to the value of other
sciences, nor did it keep him from reflecting creatively on how best
to account for them from the perspective of his Critical
philosophy.
Kant's views on history are discussed by Yovel (1980) and, more
recently, Kleingeld (1995 and 1999). Kant's Physical
Geography has been discussed by Adickes (1911). Brandt (1999),
Wood (1999), and Makkreel (2001) have recently published important
discussions of Kant's anthropology. Sturm (2009) is a comprehensive
monograph on

Kant's philosophy of psychology and anthropology. 