In the context of interpreting Kant’s views concerning space and time,
a number of philosophical questions are relevant. Kant himself
provides a litany of these questions in his so-called Inaugural
Dissertation of 1770, a text in which he broke with his previous
broadly “Leibnizian” views from the pre-critical period
(Hatfield 2006, 72-6). He writes:
In this one pithy sentence, we find a list of many important early
modern questions concerning space. Is space “real,” or is
it “ideal” in some sense? Is it a substance in its own
right, a property of some substance, or perhaps neither? Is it somehow
dependent on the relations among objects, or independent of those
relations? What is the relationship between space and the mind? And
finally, how do these various issues intersect with one another?
The passage from the Inaugural Dissertation hints at five
distinct questions or issues concerning space and time. First, there
is the question of the ontology of space and time considered within
the framework of what Kant would regard as the dogmatic metaphysics of
the seventeenth century. This framework might suggest that if space
and time are to exist, or to characterize the physical world, they
must be considered either substances in their own right, or else
properties of some substance. Neither option seems particularly
attractive. Space and time seem distinct from substances because they
are causally inert, causally inaccessible—their aspects or
properties cannot be altered by interacting with any other
substance—and imperceptible. Since they are often regarded as
infinite, moreover, some thinkers have doubted that they could be
substances, as God is often thought of as the sole infinite substance
(Descartes may have conceived of space as “indefinite” for
this reason). However, it is also difficult to think of space and time
as properties of any substance, for then they would presumably be
dependent on that substance for their existence. If we regard them as
dependent on any contingent substance, it seems that we would be
committed to the idea that space and time could fail to exist, or
could disappear, depending on the happenings of that contingent
substance. One might think instead that space and time depend on the
one necessary substance, but this obviously raises a host of other
issues. To think of space and time as properties of God is potentially
to regard God as spatiotemporal, which is verboten from the
point of view of many seventeenth-century thinkers (Janiak 2008,
chapter five).
A second topic arises if we consider the ontology of space and time
independently from the substance-property metaphysical framework, viz.
by considering the relationship of space and time to physical objects.
Following Newton’s discussion in the first (1687) edition of the
Scholium in the Principia, the modern debate concerning
space’s ontology has been centered on two overarching conceptions:
absolutism (now sometimes called “substantivalism,”
although that label raises certain issues), the view that space and
time exist independently of all possible objects and object relations,
or perhaps the view that space-time points exist; and relationalism,
the view that space and time depend for their existence on possible
objects and relations, or perhaps the view that space-time points do
not exist (DiSalle 2006).
Leaving aside questions about ontology, there is a distinct—or
at least potentially distinct—issue regarding space and time:
what is the origin of our representation of space and of time? This
third issue arises from the sense in the early modern period that our
idea or representation of space and time must somehow be importantly
distinct from our idea or representation of ordinary physical objects.
Many believed that space and time are causally inert and therefore
imperceptible—how then are we are able to represent space and
time at all? Few are willing to deny that we have a representation,
not merely of spatial and of temporal objects, but also of space and
time themselves, so there is a genuine puzzle lurking here.
The fourth topic follows on the heels of the third: what is the
content of our idea or representation of space and time? From Kant’s
point of view, the content of a representation might provide us with a
guide as to its possible origin. Alternatively, we might be able to
consider the origin of a representation as providing us with a clue as
to what its content might be. In the case of space, there may be
reason to think that the content of our representation must somehow
reflect what we know about space from Euclidean geometry.
The fifth and final topic is closely connected with the third and
fourth, and indeed, connects all four previous topics with one
another: what is the relationship between space and time, on the one
hand, and the human mind, on the other? This question obviously cries
out for clarification. Part of what this question might mean can be
characterized by the third and fourth questions above: if we think of
the mind as representing space and time in a certain way, then perhaps
this is part of our understanding of the mind’s relationship with
space and time themselves. But within the context of Kant’s work,
there is, at least prima facie, another issue lurking here—are
space and time somehow dependent upon the mind for their existence? It
may be that some kind of dependence is suggested by the
origin—or by the content—of our representation of space
and time (or perhaps by these two jointly). But Kant also seems to
think that a view recognizing the dependence of space and time on the
mind might offer advantages in addressing the ontological problems
mentioned above.
Each of these five philosophical issues concerning space and time is
relevant for understanding Kant’s views. As we will see below, part of
the difficulty in interpreting Kant arises from the fact that he
evidently transforms various aspects of the early modern debates
concerning space and time through the perspective presented in the
first Critique (Allison 2004, 120-1). Within the context of
the first issue raised above, the view that space and time are
real may mean that space and time are substances in their own
right, rather than merely properties; yet within the context of the
absolutism-relationalism debate, if space and time are real,
they exist independently of all objects and relations. But Kant uses
the terms real and ideal to express views concerning
the relation between space and time and the mind, leaving aside any
views concerning objects and relations. This entry aims to clarify
matters by separating these various considerations.
There is no doubt that the debate between the Leibnizians and the
Newtonians concerning the status of space and time forms part of the
essential background to Kant’s views throughout his career. Although
Newton originally formulated his conception of space and time in
response to Descartes’s views in the Principles of Philosophy
(1644), by the turn of the eighteenth century, Newton and his
followers were embroiled in an extensive debate with Leibniz and his
supporters on the Continent. This reflected, in part, the famous
priority dispute regarding the calculus, but it also reflected some of
Leibniz’s fundamental criticisms of Newton’s views of space, time and
motion in Principia mathematica (1687, 1713—second
edition). Leibniz raised many of those criticisms in his
correspondence with Samuel Clarke, who defended Newton’s ideas. Kant
mentions this debate frequently throughout the Critique (see,
e.g., A23/B37, A39/B56, & A46/B64).
Many interpreters have thought that in the Critique of Pure
Reason, and particularly in its first section, the Transcendental
Aesthetic, Kant attempts to engage the Leibnizian
“relationalist” and the Newtonian “absolutist”
conceptions of space with transcendental
 idealism.[1]
 As Charles Parsons puts it, “the issue between what are now
called absolutist and relationalist conceptions of space and time,
represented paradigmatically by Newton and Leibniz” represents
“the background to all of [Kant’s] thinking” about space
and time (Parsons 1992, 67; cf. Torretti 1999, 105). In the beginning
of the Transcendental Aesthetic, Kant frames his view by contrasting
it with the failures of the Leibnizians and the Newtonians to conceive
of space appropriately:
The view that space and time are actual entities is meant to represent
the Newtonian position, and the view that they are determinations or
relations of things, the Leibnizian position (but cf. Hatfield 2006,
77-8). Later in the Transcendental Aesthetic, he refers to the
Newtonians as the “mathematical investigators” of nature,
who contend that space and time “subsist” on their own,
and to the Leibnizians as the “metaphysicians of nature,”
who think that space and time “inhere” in objects and
their relations (see A39-40/B56-57).
While Kant does clearly allude to this theoretical background, it is
noteworthy that views of the sort he articulates in the
Aesthetic—that space and time are transcendentally ideal, that
they are mere “forms” of intuition, that they depend upon
the “subjective constitution of the mind,” and so
on—do not obviously make contact with the Leibniz/Newton debate.
This raises questions about Kant’s use of the Leibniz-Newton
background. First, how does Kant understand the Leibnizian and the
Newtonian conceptions of space and time? Does he think of them solely
as views on what I have called the status of space vis-à-vis
objects and relations, or does he think that they contain, or perhaps
entail, views on other topics, such as the character of our
representations of space and time? Does Kant regard himself as needing
to undermine either, or both, of these prior conceptions in order to
support his conclusion that space and time are transcendentally ideal?
Does Kant’s rejection of both the Leibnizian and the
Newtonian conceptions as types of “transcendental realism”
illuminate what he means by transcendental idealism? And finally, is
Kant on secure ground in characterizing his predecessors’ views in
this way? These questions will help to guide the discussion below.
The fact that Kant focuses on the debate between the Leibnizians and
the Newtonians is perplexing given his evident lack of interest,
within the context of the Critique, in problems concerning
motion. One of Newton’s principal reasons for distinguishing between
an “absolute” (or “mathematical”) and a
“relative” (or “common”) conception of space
is to ground a distinction between true and merely relative motion.
Newton construes the true motion of an object, as opposed to its
merely “apparent” motion, not in terms of its change in
relations to other objects, as Descartes had done in his
Principles, but in terms of its change of absolute place
(Janiak 2008, chapter five). So the very idea of absolute or
mathematical space helps to express what true motion is. Discovering
the true, as opposed to the merely apparent, motions of objects, so
that one can then determine the forces that cause these true motions,
represents one of the principal goals of Newton’s
Principia.
Kant is perfectly well aware of these details from the Scholium to the
Principia, but he makes it clear in the Transcendental
Aesthetic that he wishes to bracket questions concerning the motion of
objects, because motion is an empirical concept, and the Aesthetic
aims to articulate a purely a priori conception of space (see
A 41/B 58; also MFNS, 4: 482). Instead, Kant tackles issues concerning
physical motion in the Metaphysical Foundations, where he
contends that one can distinguish true from relative motion by
determining the center of mass frame of the solar system (4: 482, 487,
555-6, 559-63), thereby avoiding the postulation of Newton’s
mathematical (absolute) space.
But what if we abstract away from questions of physical motion (Janiak
2009)? What if we consider motion within a much more abstract context:
for instance, can the motion of a mathematical point through
space be considered in the Aesthetic? Kant makes it clear that this
remains empirical because the concept of motion itself is empirical,
and so should still be deferred to the Metaphysical
Foundations. Indeed, the latter begins with a consideration of
motion in abstraction from various physical questions like the mass of
the objects and then slowly progresses by adding further physical (or
empirical) elements.
Kant does discuss the important notion of the “motion of the
subject” in a famous footnote in §26 of the Transcendental
Deduction. Is that kind of motion under discussion, perhaps
implicitly, in the context of the Aesthetic? Kant does not think that
the “motion of the subject,” for instance in drawing a
circle, is empirical, but he does think that it requires—indeed,
it apparently exemplifies—the unity of the manifold of intuition
imposed by the unity of consciousness. Whatever this doctrine may
mean, it seems clear that from Kant’s own perspective it cannot be
dealt with in the Aesthetic, for the latter text abstracts from all
contributions of understanding and therefore abstracts from any
consideration of the unity of the manifold imposed by the unity of
understanding. (This seems to be closely related to Kant’s point in
§26 that it is only from within the point of view of the
Transcendental Analytic that one is able to make a distinction between
what he calls space as a form of intuition and space as a
formal intuition.) So from Kant’s point of view, although
various kinds of motion are considered in the critical
philosophy—including the so-called motion of the subject in
describing a space, the motion of a mathematical point through space,
and the motion of a body through space—no kind of motion can be
considered within the context of the Aesthetic (see Pollok 2006).
This seems to suggest that Kant’s interest in the
absolutism-relationalism debate does not originate with his concern to
discuss motion in any sense of the term. In what follows,
then, one goal is to specify why Kant remains focused in the Aesthetic
on the views of Leibniz and Newton (and their respective followers).
It may be that Kant’s interest derives from his general interest in
the views of what he calls the “metaphysicians,” the
Leibnizians, and of what he calls the “mathematicians,”
the Newtonians. Throughout the pre-critical and critical periods, Kant
evinces considerable interest in various attempts to reconcile certain
aspects of Leibnizian metaphysics with the Newtonian view of nature
(Friedman 1992, 1-52). But there is also more to be said (below) about
Kant’s focus on the absolutism-relationalism debate.
In a famous passage in the first Critique, Kant indicates
what he takes a representation to be (A320/B376-77):
Figure 1.
Kant regards an intuition as a conscious, objective
representation—this is strictly distinct from sensation, which
he regards not as a representation of an object, property, event,
etc., but merely as a state of the subject. Whereas sensations do not
represent anything distinct from the sensing subject (including
perhaps the state of the subject’s body), intuitions are objective
 representations.[2]
 Recent scholarship emphasizes the importance of his distinction
between sensation and intuition (Allais 2015, 145-47, 154, 159-60)
Kant then distinguishes intuitions and concepts along the following
lines: whereas intuitions are singular, immediate representations,
concepts are general, mediate ones (Engstrom 2006). Each represents
properties, objects, or states of affairs, but they do so distinctly.
Unfortunately, there is no consensus on the right way to understand
this
 idea.[3]But
 roughly speaking, intuition represents some X—where
X might be an object, a property, or perhaps even an
event—as one represents X in perception. Thus it
represents X as, for instance, that
 there.[4]In
 contrast, a concept represents X—where, again,
X might be a property, an object, or perhaps even an
event—by placing X within one or more classes. Suppose
that I want to represent my desk, at which I am sitting right now. To
represent my desk in intuition is to represent it as something I point
to, as that there. This does not indicate, of course, that
this is a desk, my desk, a piece of furniture, made of wood, etc., but
it does pick out a particular. It does so immediately at
least in the sense that it makes use of no other representation. To
represent my desk with a concept is to represent it as a
desk, or as a piece of furniture, or as a wooden
thing, etc. From Kant’s point of view, this is to represent my
desk mediately at least in the sense that the concept,
<desk>, represents an object through other concepts, such as
 <furniture>.[5]
One of Kant’s surprising ideas is that each type of objective
representation, intuition and concept, can be either empirical or
a priori. The idea that some concepts are not empirical may
not be surprising, although Kant’s conception of the origin
of such concepts—outlined in what he calls the
“metaphysical deduction” (B159, B377)—contains
surprises (Longuenesse 1998). But it is surely surprising to hear that
intuition, which in some regards is akin to perception (Parsons 1992,
65-66; Allais 2015, 147ff), can also be empirical or a
priori in character. Here it helps to recall that Kant
distinguishes sensation from intuition. There remains a question,
however, of how we are to understand the very idea that we can have
pure—or a priori, i.e., non-empirical—intuition
at all. This idea comprises a central piece of Kant’s views on space
and time, for he famously contends that space and time are nothing but
forms of intuition, a view connected to the claim in the
Transcendental Aesthetic that we have pure intuitions of space and of
time. This means, as we have seen, that we have non-empirical,
singular, immediate representations of space and of time. One goal of
this entry is to clarify this idea. It is not a stretch to contend
that this idea represents one of Kant’s most distinctive contributions
to modern philosophy, although characteristically, it is profoundly
difficult to grasp.
What Kant calls the Metaphysical Exposition of the Concept of Space
presents the first arguments of the Transcendental Aesthetic. Kant
defines the “exposition” of a concept as follows:
“By an exposition (expositio) I understand the clear
(if it is not explicit) representation of what belongs to a concept;
it is metaphysical if it contains what the concept presents as a
priori given” (A23/B38). By a concept (Begriff) in
this context I take Kant simply to mean a
 representation.[6]
In the first argument of the Metaphysical Exposition, Kant suggests
that the representation of space cannot be empirical:
One might wonder what type of view is at issue here. One potential
target is a classic empiricist account of our idea of space, such as
that found in Locke. Acknowledging in the Essay that the idea
of space seems to be “remote” from our perception of
objects, Locke contends nonetheless that its origin lies in experience
(Essay, 2.13.2-4): perceivers observe objects in close
proximity to one another, including the distance between objects, and
then repeatedly add the ideas of these distances together, thereby
obtaining an idea of as large a single space as they please. According
to Locke’s view, a version of which was also defended by Hume
(Treatise, 1.2.3), we obtain a representation of
space—not of places, but of the one all-encompassing space,
which may be akin to geometric space—from the
perception of spatial relations.
Kant may be focusing attention on the starting place of Locke’s view.
It seems that for Locke, we begin with an idea of the distance between
any two bodies; this would presumably involve an idea of these two
bodies as being in different places. Kant may be contending that in
order to represent objects as in different places from one another, I
must represent them as in space. But if this were true, then I would
already have, as it were, the representation of space, and could not
obtain it in the way Locke outlines.
Daniel Warren clarifies this argument in an especially helpful way
(Warren 1998; cf. Allison 2004, 100-104). Certainly, it is not true in
general that in any order to represent any two entities, A and B, as
related in some way, I must represent them as falling into a larger
“space” of some relevant character. Warren gives a useful
example: in order to represent A as “brighter than” B, I
need not represent A and B as being part of a larger
“brightness” space. I could do so: I could
represent A and B via the “brightness” relation precisely
by representing A as lying at one end of a brightness spectrum, and B
as lying near its other end. But I need not do so: I could simply
represent A and B themselves, and represent A as brighter than B, as I
might do with two lights (Warren 1998, 200ff). The suggestion
is that in order to represent A and B as bearing a spatial
relation with one another—say, to represent them as being some
distance apart—I must represent A and B as in space. In
that sense, the representation of objects as spatially related may
presuppose the representation of space. The problem for Locke is that
he begins with my perception, or idea, of a distance between two
objects, and then proceeds to construct my idea of space from that
initial point. But if my representation of a distance relation between
any two objects already presupposes a representation of those objects
as in space, then the former cannot be the beginning point of a
process that issues in the latter.
Some commentators have thought that Kant’s second argument in the
Metaphysical Exposition is intended specifically to undermine
Leibniz’s relationalism (cf. Parsons 1992, 68-9):
Kant claims that although we can represent space as empty, we cannot
represent to ourselves the absence of space. This point would
undermine Leibnizian relationalism if the relationalist claim that
space is not independent of objects is, at least in part, founded on
the claim that the very idea of space existing independently of
objects is incoherent. If one held such a view, one could raise doubts
about relationalism by contending, as Kant does, that we can in fact
conceive of space to be devoid of objects.
The view that space cannot exist independently of objects at any given
instant does seem to entail that space cannot be utterly devoid of
objects. Leibniz thinks that space is the order of the actual and
possible relations among objects, so he has the resources to
say that space can contain empty sectors—see New
Essays, 127, and L 5: 43—but it seems he cannot claim that
space is altogether empty, for then object relations would be
absent. Yet this view seems perfectly compatible with the
idea that we can conceive of empty space. Leibniz himself
makes repeated and explicit use of the thought of such a situation
when attempting to undermine the Newtonian view that space is
absolute. Instead of arguing that the very idea that space could be
independent of objects is incoherent, Leibniz contends that it
violates the principle of sufficient reason (see L3: 5; L 5: 53), a
principle Clarke himself defends in a distinct version. The
“fiction” (L5: 29; cf. L5: 55) that space could exist
independently of objects violates the principle because the
homogeneity and uniformity of space prevent there from being any
reason for God to place the objects of the universe with one
particular orientation within absolute space rather than with any
other possible orientation. The idea that God could place objects
within a pre-existing absolute space with one orientation rather than
another is evidently not incoherent; rather, God would lack a
reason for doing this. Similarly, Leibniz contends that
absolutism violates the principle of the identity of indiscernibles
(L4: 16) and that it bears theological difficulties (L4: 10).
This is not to deny that Leibniz’s relationalism intersects with his
understanding of the representation of space. He thinks that we must
not be fooled by the fact that we can think of space as empty of
objects into concluding that space itself is something independent of
objects and their relations. As with all mere abstractions, we must
not reify
 space.[10]
One might read Kant’s second argument instead as straightforwardly
targeting the view that the representation of space is empirical. Kant
claims that we cannot represent the absence of space, but that we can
represent space as empty of objects. His point may be that empiricist
philosophers who contend that the representation of space is obtained
from the perception of objects must bear the burden of explaining how
it is possible for us to conceive of space as empty of such objects.
This consideration appears to be rather weak. But the further
contention that one cannot represent the absence of space may be more
difficult for an empiricist to accept. Prima facie, it is
difficult to see why, if our representation of space is indeed
empirical in origin, we should lack the ability to conceive of space’s
absence. But it is not clear that Kant’s very short second
argument can be read as presenting anything other than this prima
facie point against an empiricist view of the representation of
space.
In these first two arguments, Kant considers, perhaps among other
things, the origin of our representation of space, concluding that it
is not empirical. It seems, though, that these first two arguments
leave open the question of the content of our representation
of space in two important senses. First, Kant’s first two arguments do
not explicate what properties we represent space as having. Do we
represent it, for instance, as finite or infinite, as homogeneous or
not? And so on. Second, the first two arguments in the Transcendental
Aesthetic apparently leave it open that the content of our
representation of space could be conceptual. That is, they leave it
open that our representation of space could be a concept, rather than
an intuition—it could be either a general, mediate
representation, or a singular, immediate one. We simply know—if
Kant’s arguments are successful—that the representation is not
empirical. And Kant certainly thinks that a non-empirical
representation could be either a concept or an intuition; that is, he
thinks that we have both a priori concepts and pure
intuition. Since the idea of pure intuition is puzzling in a way that
the idea of an a priori concept may not be, one interpretive
goal is to clarify this idea in the course of understanding the second
two arguments of the Metaphysical Exposition.
In the third and fourth arguments, Kant contends that the
representation of space has a specifiable content that is incompatible
with it being a conceptual representation. That is, he argues that our
representation of space is not a concept, but is in fact an
intuition—it is a singular, immediate representation. As we have
seen, the distinction between sensation and intuition indicates that
this claim does not amount to the idea that we have a sensation of
space (an odd idea, it seems). Instead, it amounts to the claim that
we have an objective representation of space, but one that is singular
and immediate, rather than conceptual.
In order to understand the two arguments intended to establish the
conclusion that we have a singular, immediate representation of space,
it is helpful to recall Kant’s attitude toward concepts. From his
point of view, whereas to fall “under” a concept means to
be part of a concept’s extension, to fall “within” a
concept means to be part of its intension. Just as significantly, the
extension of a concept, in Kant’s way of thinking, is not the things
that instantiate the concept, or the set of things to which the
concept “applies”; rather, it is the class of concepts
that function as sub-groupings falling under this more general
heading. This idea requires clarification.
Consider the extension of
 <being>:[11]
Figure 2.
The extension of <being> is those concepts on the conceptual
tree that fall “under” <being>—those concepts
are species of the genus, <being>. Kant speaks of a series of
genus-species relations inhering between the members of the class of
concepts that serve as a given concept’s extension; whether a concept
serves as a genus or a species is relative. The concept
<created> is a genus with respect to its species
<material> and <immaterial>, but a species with respect to
the genus <being>. The intension of a concept consists
of those concepts that collectively constitute it. Hence the concept
<human> has this intension: “rational animate material
created being.” The concepts that collectively constitute a
given concept are often called “Merkmale” or
“Teilbegriffe,” or what might be called its conceptual
parts (“Vienna Logic,” Ak 24: 913). To construct the
concept <human>, one puts together the concepts
<rational>, <animate>, <material>,
<created>, and <being>. To formulate or to grasp the
concept <human> just is to grasp these
constituents.
With these distinctions in mind, we can consider Kant’s third argument
in the Metaphysical Exposition. In this argument, Kant concentrates on
the intension (in his sense) of a concept.
The suggestion here is roughly this: if the representation of space
were a concept rather than an intuition, one ought to be able to
construct it by placing its parts together. This seems to require that
it is possible to represent the parts independently of representing
the concept to be constructed. This is the case with other concepts:
it is possible to represent any of the parts of the intension of
<human>, such as <material being>, without ipso
facto representing the whole concept, <human>. Kant is
claiming that this will not work in the case of the representation of
space because we obtain the representation of places only by
delimiting some subsection of our representation of the one
all-encompassing space. To put the point in a way that highlights a
parallel with the first argument of the Metaphysical Exposition: the
representation of any place presupposes the representation of space.
Thus we cannot represent any of the “parts” of
space—any place—without ipso facto representing
space itself. The idea, then, is that the part-whole relation of the
representation of space is distinct from the part-whole relation that
obtains for concepts.
It is not clear that this argument is successful. It seems, e.g., to
conflate the following: (1) the relation between space and its parts;
and, (2) the relation between the representation of space and its
constituents. Without this conflation, it is not clear why we should
expect to construct our concept of space from our concept of place. It
would seem more sensible to construct our concept of space from other
concepts, such as that of infinity, perhaps the concept of a
magnitude, and so on, rather than from the concept of a place. The
claim of the conflation is predicated on the notion that Kant’s third
argument concerns the representation of space rather than space
itself. This notion, in turn, may conflict with the letter, although
perhaps not with the spirit, of the first sentence of the third
argument, which mentions that “Der Raum,” or space, is not a concept,
but rather is an intuition. If one follows the letter of the argument,
one can avoid this apparent conflation. But the price is somewhat
high: what does it mean to wonder whether space itself is a concept,
and who held something like that view? On the face of it, such a view
may seem rather odd to the contemporary reader. One way to make
progress in understanding this view is to re-read Leibniz. It is
possible to read Leibniz as arguing that space itself is a kind of
abstraction, rather than a real entity or substance, and perhaps it is
not a stretch to contend that space must be a conceptual abstraction,
like the entities of what Leibniz might call pure mathematics. That
is, space itself, on this view, is a kind of conceptual abstraction in
the way that an isosceles triangle is an abstraction, or a line is an
abstraction, rather than a real entity or substance. Of course, this
requires us to understand Leibniz’s position through a Kantian lens.
Even so, if the view in focus is that space itself is a kind of
concept, it remains unclear why one wouldn’t say that this concept is
dependent on other constitutive concepts, such as the concept of
infinity or that of homogeneity, which Kant himself tackles in the
next numbered argument. Perhaps the best answer here is to read Kant
as engaging specifically with Leibniz’s argument in his last (fifth)
exchange with Clarke, mentioned above. The idea is that Leibniz’s
argument might be understood as involving the claim that the concept
of place is constitutive of the concept of space, and that space
itself is really nothing but a kind of concept, which licenses the
exclusive focus on the concept of space. Then the claim would be that
the Leibnizian view that space itself is a conceptual abstraction
obtained through some process of perceiving objects occupying various
places is wrong on both counts. Just as Kant’s second argument
attempts to shore-up the idea, presented in the first argument, that
the representation of space is a priori, his fourth and final
argument attempts to shore-up the idea, presented in the third
argument, that the representation of space is not conceptual in
character. Here both the extension and the intension of concepts seem
to be at issue:
Kant claims that since we represent space as containing an infinite
number of places within it, our representation of space cannot be
conceptual. Why should that be? The idea is that although concepts can
have an infinite extension—a potentially infinite number of
subordinate concepts under them—they cannot have an
infinite intension, an infinite number of representations
within them. A concept that is infinite in the latter sense
could not be grasped by a finite
 mind.[12]
 For a concept to have an infinite extension would be for it to have
an infinite number of species, i.e. for it to be possible to
distinguish an infinite number of sub-types “under” it on
the conceptual tree. This does not harm our ability to grasp any
concept within the tree, for to grasp any arbitrarily chosen concept
within the tree, I merely need to grasp its constituents (those
concepts within it), and those would be “above”
it on the tree. But our ability to grasp concepts would be affected if
they could contain an infinite number of constituents within
themselves: if, say, <fish> contained an infinite number of
constituents—if there were an infinite number of higher-level
conceptual taxa “above” <fish> on the tree—it
could not be grasped, and might even lack determinate content. Or at
least, to specify its content would take an infinite number of steps.
According to Kant, however, we represent space as having an infinite
number of constituents, namely places. If our representation of space
were conceptual, we would be required to represent each of these
constituents in order to represent space itself, just as we
are required to represent metal in order to represent gold. Yet we
cannot represent every place within space in an effort to represent
space itself. If we can take it as settled that we represent space,
and as settled that we represent it as having an infinite number of
places within it, then our representation of space presumably cannot
be conceptual in Kant’s sense. The third argument in the Metaphysical
Exposition seems to imply, as we have seen, that the representation of
any place presupposes the representation of space itself. This fourth
argument makes a distinct point: if the representation of space itself
were to require the representation of each part that we represent
space as having, then we could not represent space at all. Since we do
represent space, and do represent it as having an infinite number of
places within it, our representation of space is not conceptual in
Kant’s sense. Of course, Kant’s readers may deny one of his apparent
assumptions here, viz., that we represent space as infinite. Readers
with broadly empiricist sympathies in particular may be skeptical of
this assumption.
Kant’s view that we have an intuition, rather than a concept, of space
can be seen to raise a difficult problem: space is not an object, and
yet intuition seems to provide us with something akin to a perception
of something. As one recent commentator puts it, intuition involves
“presence to consciousness of an object” (Allais 2015, 197ff),
and yet space is not an object. It is difficult to see why we should
think of ourselves as perceiving space at all. It is easy enough to
understand the idea that some ordinary thing, like a tomato, is an
object that is present to my consciousness, say when I look at the
tomato on a farm stand. There are, of course, many philosophical
theories of perception, and these theories will differ in their
discussions even of simple cases of perception such as this one. But
it seems uncontroversial to suppose that the tomato is present to my
consciousness as an object at least in the sense that the tomato is
one of the things that I’m looking at. And it also seems
uncontroversial to think that there are many other things, besides
tomatoes, that might be present to my consciousness in a similar way,
from clouds to fog to rainbows, even though they are not “objects” in
the simple sense in which a tomato is an object. However, it certainly
seems like a stretch to say that space itself might be one of those
things. That is not merely because space is not an object in any clear
sense; it is also because space itself, in this historical and
philosophical context, is not something that has a causal impact on
me. So it remains doubly difficult to see how I might conclude, with
Kant, that I have something akin to a perception of space. Kant
assures us, of course, that we have an a priori intuition of
space, so although he is discussing something akin to perception in
one sense, in another sense what he is discussing is supposed to be
quite distinct from ordinary perception. Whether that assurance helps
to clarify this issue for his readers is a matter of debate. What is
clear, however, is that this aspect of Kant’s conception of space
remains one of the most controversial, and most difficult, aspects of
his theoretical philosophy. 
Kant may have other reasons for thinking that our representation of
space is not a concept. If we recall Kant’s view that concepts are
general, mediate representations, and his view of how these facts are
reflected in his understanding of the conceptual trees discussed
above, then there is indeed at least a prima facie puzzle as
to how we could have a concept, in Kant’s sense, of space. Consider a
contrast class. Even if we think that <God> represents only a
single entity, that fact does not undermine Kant’s view that this
concept is a general, mediate representation (cf. Thompson 1972,
318-19, 328-29). For we represent God, in Kant’s view, by representing
it through other concepts: for instance, God is a necessary substance
(A678/B706), so <God> is a mediate representation. This is
distinct from the way in which an intuition represents something. And
the concept <substance>—which is of course one of the
categories (A80/B106)—is a representation that we can grasp
independently of grasping <God>. Hence <substance> is a
constituent of <God>, but not vice versa. Moreover,
<God> is a general representation because it places God
within another class, namely the class of substances. It will then be
a matter of some dispute whether the generality criterion and
the mediacy criterion amount to the same thing (cf. Parsons
1992, 63-6). But in any case, the key point here is this: the fact
that <God> picks out a single individual—and perhaps even,
can pick out only a single individual—does not entail
that this concept is not general or mediate. This suggests, in turn,
that Kant’s point in the Metaphysical Exposition cannot be that our
representation of space picks out a single individual and therefore
cannot be a concept. Rather, he presumably thinks that we do not
represent space either: (1) by representing its constituents, namely
places; or (2) by representing it through other concepts. We
have discussed (1) above; what about (2)?
Concerning (2), note that to represent space by representing it
through other concepts may require one to take a (usually
controversial) stand on the ontology of space in one of the senses
outlined above. For instance, if one wishes to place <space>
somewhere on the conceptual tree, one must presumably find a place for
it under some concept such as <substance> or <being>. But
there is no accepted view of space’s ontology: some regard it as a
substance (or a being), others as a network of relations, others as a
property of God, etc. Because of these long-standing, unresolved
disputes, it seems reasonable to regard an approach that depends on
their resolution as unpromising. Kant highlights the accepted fact
that we represent space as an infinite Euclidean magnitude—this
can be widely accepted, despite the dispute concerning space’s
ontology.
Another way to clarify Kant’s arguments regarding conceptuality is to
consider what opponent he has in mind for the second two arguments. It
seems unlikely that Locke’s views are at issue in these
arguments—instead, Kant probably had Leibniz in mind. Leibniz
held the view that the idea (or representation) of space hails from
the pure understanding, which he contrasts with the kind of Lockean
view noted above. He writes in the New Essays:
PHILALETHES: The ideas the perception of which comes to us “by
more than one sense, are of space, or extension, figure, motion and
rest.”
THEOPHILUS: These ideas, which are said to come from more than one
sense – like those of space, figure, motion – come rather
from the common sense, which is to say, from the mind itself; for they
are ideas of the pure understanding, though ones which relate to the
external world and which the senses make us perceive, and so they
admit of definitions and demonstrations. (New Essays, 128,
which corresponds to Leibniz 1840, 230)
Leibniz may have in mind the idea that our perceptions cannot give us
the idea of a continuum, and he certainly thinks of space as a
continuum. The senses, for instance, cannot give us the idea of
something that is infinitely divisible. Elsewhere in the New
Essays, Leibniz makes a related point by saying that space is
akin to the entities of “pure mathematics.”
One question here is whether Leibniz and Kant agree sufficiently in
their views of concepts for Kant’s arguments to have any bite against
the kind of view Leibniz expresses in the New Essays, a text
that Kant read sometime after it was first available in 1765
(Vaihinger 1922, 2: 133, 414 and 428-9). Leibniz, famously, has the
idea of a complete concept of a substance, and it seems that such as
concept would contain an infinite number of constituents—God
grasps the complete concept of a substance by grasping all its
constituents. Given this view, it may be that the considerations
adduced in Kant’s fourth argument in the Metaphysical Exposition are
unlikely to worry Leibniz, since he would simply accept the idea that
the representation of space, as with any concept, might have an
infinite number of constituents (Posy 2000). However, the third
argument may have more bite: if Kant is right in contending that the
representation of any place presupposes the representation of space
itself, then perhaps that representation lacks the ordinary part-whole
structure of a concept. Leibniz may in fact accept that general
conception of the part-whole structure of concepts. If so, this third
argument may present a problem for his view.
Yet the first and second arguments of the Exposition are not merely
opportunities to contend with empiricist views like those of Locke;
nor are the third and fourth arguments merely aimed at challenging
rationalist views like those of Leibniz. On the contrary, the claim
that the representation of space is neither empirical nor conceptual
is important in general for Kant’s transcendental idealism and, in
tandem, it is significant for understanding what he regards as the
philosophical mistakes embodied in transcendental realism, and in what
Kant will later call “dogmatic idealism,” both of which he
strongly opposes. These are discussed in the next section.
In the B (1787) edition of the Critique, §2 of the
Transcendental Aesthetic, the Metaphysical Exposition, is followed by
§3, the Transcendental Exposition. Whereas the Metaphysical
Exposition deals, as we have seen, with the origin and the content of
the representation of space, its transcendental cousin apparently
attempts to provide an explanation of what Kant takes to be the
synthetic a priori knowledge (or cognition) available to us in
geometry. This raises very difficult interpretive issues that arise
with Kant’s philosophy of mathematics—such issues are dealt with
in a separate entry in this Encyclopedia (see Lisa Shabel’s
entry on
 Kant’s philosophy of mathematics).
 However, Kant may also be raising a related point in this
section—consider the following passage, which is inserted within
the discussion of geometry (cf. section 2-b above):
We have seen in the Metaphysical Exposition that we have a pure (or
a priori) intuition of space, that is, a non-empirical,
singular, immediate representation of space. But how is such a
representation so much as possible? If we are considering an
empirical, singular, immediate representation, we can easily
understand that in cases of ordinary perception, we can (e.g.) see a
rose sitting in front of us. Hence our perception may include a
singular, immediate representation—that is, we may represent
that there. This empirical case is reasonably clear, but what
does it mean to contend that we have a non-empirical, singular,
immediate representation? This cannot really be akin to a case of
seeing an object directly in front of us, for one of Kant’s points in
the Metaphysical Exposition, as we have seen, is that the
representation of places, and of objects as bearing spatial relations,
presupposes the (non-empirical) representation of space. But
if our representation of space is not akin to seeing something
directly in front of us, then what makes it immediate and singular?
Kant’s suggestion in the passage above appears to be that intuition
must somehow have its seat in the subject—it must somehow be a
“form” of the mind, or more precisely, of what Kant calls
here “outer sense”. This obviously brings us very close to
the formulation of transcendental idealism—that view is stated
explicitly for the first time in the Critique in the very
next paragraph of the Transcendental Aesthetic. But the paragraph
quoted above, coupled with Kant’s discussion of what a Transcendental
Exposition is meant to be, suggests that part of Kant’s goal here is
to explain how a non-empirical, singular, immediate representation
of space is possible. (This is parallel to explaining how
synthetic a priori knowledge within geometry is
possible.)
Similarly, some commentators have noted that the
“conclusions” following the Transcendental Exposition (in
the very next paragraph following the one quoted above) are given no
additional argumentative support, and are therefore intended to follow
from the arguments within the Metaphysical Exposition and the
Transcendental Exposition. That is, the view that the representation
of space is an a priori intuition is supposed to entail the rather
robust conclusions about space that Kant reaches in the Transcendental
Aesthetic. His first such conclusion—labeled “a” and
followed by another conclusion labeled “b”—is rather
startling:
Among other things, Kant returns here to the debate concerning space
and time between the Leibnizians and the Newtonians he mentioned at
the outset of the Transcendental Aesthetic. It seems that Kant intends
his view to be contrasted with the Newtonian view of space, which
apparently tells us something about its “absolute”
determinations, and also with the Leibnizian view of space, which
apparently tells us something about its “relative”
determinations. Perhaps Kant is suggesting here that the Newtonian and
Leibnizian views of space and time, despite their evident differences
along various dimensions, each indicate that the representation of
space cannot be a non-empirical, singular, immediate representation,
or perhaps they tacitly suppose that it cannot be such a
representation. If he is suggesting that idea, one wonders why that
would be the case. I discuss this issue in the next section.
In the next few paragraphs of the Transcendental Aesthetic, Kant
reaches the famous conclusions that we can speak of space “only
from the human standpoint” (A26/B42) and that space has
“transcendental ideality” (A28/B44). This is the heart of
one of Kant’s main positions in the Critique of Pure Reason.
In order to clarify these ideas, I first follow Kant’s suggestion in
the passage above that he intends his position to be contrasted in
some respects with the positions of Leibniz and of Newton. This will
place us in a position to understand transcendental idealism in a bit
more depth.
Various confusions can plague one’s understanding of the modern debate
between absolutism and relationalism about space and time—some
of these confusions are especially pervasive in discussions of Kant’s
views. For instance, absolutism is sometimes conflated with realism,
and idealism with relationalism. One reason for the first conflation
may be historical in nature. In their celebrated correspondence, which
forms part of the essential background to Kant’s work on space and
time in the Critique, Clarke and Leibniz often consider the
proposition: space is real. By our lights, realism and
anti-realism concern the question of whether something is in some
sense dependent on the mind. We ask this question about tables and
chairs, numbers and sets, and all manner of other things. But when
Leibniz and Clarke discuss the “reality,” or the
“absolute reality,” of space, they are typically concerned
with the question of space’s status vis-à-vis objects. This is
clearly the case when Leibniz and Clarke consider one of the principal
questions of their correspondence, whether their common acceptance of
the principle of sufficient reason entails that one of them holds the
correct conception of space (cf. L3: 4 and C 3: 4-5). Leibniz
contends, while Clarke denies, that if space were independent of
objects, God would lack a sufficient reason for placing the objects of
the universe into space with one orientation rather than another.
Leibniz concludes from this that space lacks “reality” or
that it lacks “absolute reality” (see L5: 29 and L5: 36).
Based on precisely the same considerations, Leibniz denies
that space is “absolute” (L3: 2-3, L3: 5, L4: 16, L4:
9-10), or contends that it is “relative” (L3: 4). Hence in
this context, for space to be real is for space to exist
independently of objects and relations.
Likewise, Leibniz’s contention that space is ideal (L5: 33)
serves as his response to Clarke’s claim (C4: 7) that there can be
“extramundane” space, that is, space beyond the boundaries
of the object-universe. Here, too, the contention that space is
ideal—or that it lacks reality—amounts to the contention
that it cannot exist independently of objects. This is
evident in a passage from Leibniz’s last letter:
Note that by “real space out of the material universe”
Leibniz does not mean space independent of the mind, but
rather, space independent of objects.
This is not to say that there is no discussion of space’s status
relative to the mind in the correspondence. Leibniz asserts in his
last letter that relations are “ideal” because they are
neither substances nor accidents, and are therefore not elements of
reality (L5: 47). As he writes in the New Essays, in reality
there are only substances and properties of substances; the mind
“adds” relations (New Essays, 2.12; cf. also
2.30.4 and 2.25.1). Since space is the order of the possible relations
of objects, it is presumably ideal in the sense of being
mind-dependent. But Leibniz’s point here seems to be that just as
people reify relations, thinking they exist independently of objects,
they reify space, thinking it too exists independently of objects. So
even when Leibniz discusses the ideality of space, he does so to
indicate that we need not think of relations and of space as absolute
in order to account for the tendency toward reification.
The ideality and reality of space bear a different significance for
Kant than they do for Leibniz and Clarke. For Kant, asking whether
something is real or ideal concerns its status vis-à-vis the
mind. One of Kant’s most explicit discussions of realism and idealism
appears in the Fourth Paralogism (A368-380), where he is concerned
with the possible mind-dependent status of objects and with the status
of our knowledge of their existence. Although it is clear that Kant is
discussing the status of spatial objects vis-à-vis the mind,
in part by discussing the relation of space and time to the
mind, there is no treatment here of the status of space and time
vis-à-vis objects per se.
In light of these points, consider the following table:
A realist can be a relationalist if she thinks space is the order of
actual and possible relations among actual (and maybe possible)
objects and she thinks those relations are real. This
indicates, incidentally, that realists about space need not think of
it as a kind of object: it can be perfectly real and
the order of possible relations among objects. Indeed, Kant himself
may have held this view in his Physical Monadology of 1755:
he still accepted Leibinzian relationalism, but he rejected the
Leibnizian construal of relations, holding them to be aspects of
 reality.[13]
 Similarly, some contemporary defenders of relationalism seem to hold
the view that space is the order of actual and possible relations
among actual and possible objects, and those relations are perfectly
real, that is, they are not dependent on the mind in any sense.
Absolutism raises other difficulties. It is possible to think of space
as an instantaneous framework projected onto reality by the
 mind.[14]
 If space is such a mind-dependent framework, it could still be
thought of as independent of objects. At any rate, if absolutism
indicates that space is independent of all objects and relations, and
if that is held to entail that it must be independent of the mind as
well, we probably require some clarification of this entailment, for
it is not obvious (Ishiguro 1972, 109). In fact, Kant may have
defended an absolutist-idealist conception of space in the
Inaugural Dissertation of 1770 (Friedman 1992, 29-31).
Kant consistently writes in the Critique of ideality and
reality in the more familiar modern sense, where mind-dependence is at
issue. Kant’s usage serves to shift the philosophical discussion
concerning space from a focus on relationalism and absolutism to one
on idealism and realism. Hence when he reflects on the Newtonian and
Leibnizian conceptions of space and time in general terms in the
Transcendental Aesthetic, he eschews a discussion of the relative
merits of absolutism and relationalism in favor of discussing the
common mistake of his predecessors. For instance, after outlining his
conception of space and time, Kant claims: “Those, however, who
assert the absolute reality [absolute Realität] of space
and time, whether they take it to be subsisting or only inhering, must
themselves come into conflict with the principles
[Principien] of experience” (A39/B56). The former
group, also called “the mathematical investigators of
nature,” is clearly identified with the Newtonians, and the
latter, the “metaphysicians of nature,” with the
Leibnizians (cf. Shabel 2005, 31, 45-9). So transcendental idealism is
articulated as a kind of replacement for the Leibnizian and
Newtonian conceptions of space and time, but it is not their status as
relationalist and absolutist conceptions, respectively, that calls for
their replacement. Rather, it is their status as representatives of a
separate and overarching conception of space, a conception according
to which space (like time) is said to bear an “absolute
reality.” This occurrence of ‘absolute’ clearly
cannot have the meaning that Leibniz and Clarke intend.
This raises a difficult question. Kant contends that transcendental
idealism as a general conception of space is to be contrasted with
transcendental realism, a position he attributes both to Newton and to
Leibniz. Yet from Leibniz’s point of view, the only elements of
reality are substances and their properties. Relations, which are
neither substances nor properties, are not among such elements, if we
are speaking with metaphysical rigor. This is evident in a number of
texts; for instance, in response to his Lockean interlocutor, Leibniz
writes in the New Essays: “This division of the objects
of our thoughts into substances, modes, and relations is pretty much
to my liking. I believe that qualities are nothing but modifications
of substances and the understanding adds relations [l’entendement y
adjoute les relations].” He adds that relations are “the
work of the understanding” (New Essays, 145). Since
space for Leibniz is just the order of object relations, and relations
are ideal, space too is ideal in some sense (New Essays, 145;
cf. Cassirer 1902, 248). That is to say, there is a sense in which
spatiality does not characterize reality (Adams 1994, 254-5). These
views are to be found in the letters to Clarke and in the New
Essays, both of which Kant read, and Kant himself explicitly
mentions some of
 them.[15]
 The obvious obstacles to understanding Leibniz as a realist
complicate the interpretation of transcendental idealism, since Kant
clearly thinks it is an alternative to both Leibniz’s and Newton’s
(allegedly realist) views. This problem is tackled in the next
section.
Why might Kant characterize Leibniz as holding some version of the
“transcendental realist” perspective that he also
attributes to Newton? This characterization is puzzling, as we have
seen. If we return to the conceptual matrix above, it is not merely
that Leibniz considers space to be the order of the possible relations
among objects, and therefore to be dependent upon objects and their
relations; it is also the case that he explicitly adopts the common
early modern view that relations are ideal in the sense that
they are somehow dependent upon the
 mind.[16]
 So prima facie, if space is a relational order, or dependent
upon relations, and relations, in turn, are dependent upon the mind,
then it seems that space is itself dependent upon the mind. Thus
Leibniz appears to deny that space is real in a
Kantian sense. Denying that space is real can be equivalent
to denying that space is absolute; but Leibniz’s relationalism,
coupled with his familiar early modern view of relations (an
independent metaphysical thesis), seems to entail that space is
also not real in the sense that it is not independent of the
mind. In what sense, then, can Leibniz be called a transcendental
realist? Prima facie, it is unfair to interpret him in this way.
We might return to the first description in the Critique of
the Leibnizian position regarding space and time, which appears just
before Kant begins the Metaphysical Exposition of Space. He asks of
space and time: “Are they only determinations or also relations
of things, yet such as would belong to things even if they were not
intuited?”
 (A23/B38).[17]
 This may suggest what Kant has in mind when he contends that the
Leibnizians think of space and time as bearing an “absolute
reality.” Perhaps what he means is that for Leibniz, space has a
reality independent of intuition, or that space exists
independently of intuition per se, even though it may not be
independent of the mind per se. But then what might this idea
mean in more detail?
In his extensive discussion of Leibniz in the so-called Amphiboly,
Kant suggests that Leibniz’s transcendental realism might be expressed
in his view that space and time are phenomena bene
fundata:
Space is the order of the actual and possible relations of objects;
since objects reflect the order of substances (in some
very-difficult-to-specify sense), space itself reflects the order of
substances, albeit in a confused manner (see Langton 1998, 68-96).
Whereas a conceptual representation of this circumstance would provide
one with a representation of the monadic order, sensibility
misrepresents space as an independent entity. Hence space is
independent of intuition in that it is the order of relations, and
that order reflects or expresses the order of substances, which itself
is independent of
 intuition.[18]
 Hence space is viewed as “a certain order in the community of
substances,” a variant of which Kant himself defended in the
pre-critical period (see Friedman’s introduction to Metaphysical
Foundations, 174).
This indicates, in turn, how to interpret the idea that transcendental
realism can involve different portrayals of space’s relationship with
objects. One may think that space is independent of intuition by
claiming that it supervenes on the order of substances (which itself
is independent of intuition); or, one may think that space is
independent of intuition by claiming that space is an independently
existing entity. The former is the Leibnizian view, the latter the
Newtonian. Kant suggests as much in the Transcendental Aesthetic:
But how does Leibniz’s conception of the representation of space
square with Kant’s reading? In his latter letter to Clarke, Leibniz
attempts to show that we can form an idea of space without relying on
the notion that space is somehow independent of the relations of
objects (L 5: 47). Since he talks of people “observing”
various objects and their relations to one another, it can sound as if
he thinks that the idea of space is obtained through sensory
experience of object relations. But which idea of space does he have
in mind? In other words, what is the content of the idea of space that
he has in mind? He may mean that one can gain a rough and ready idea
of space—of a three-dimensional magnitude that is not itself a
property of any object or grouping of objects—in the way that he
describes. But surely one cannot gain the mathematical view of space
in this way, for several reasons that Leibniz expresses in the New
Essays (as noted above): (a) space and time are entities in pure
mathematics; (b) space is a continuum, and one certainly cannot obtain
that notion from the sense perception of object relations; (c) sense
perception will generate a confused idea, but to have a clear and
distinct idea of space, one indicating its properties as a
mathematical entity, requires something other than sense perception.
So it seems reasonable to distinguish between an ordinary, everyday
conception of space—one in which we need not consider whether it
is infinite or finite, infinitely divisible or finitely divisible,
whether the parallel postulate holds, etc.—and our geometric
conception of space. There can be little doubt that Kant has our
geometric conception of space in mind throughout the Transcendental
Aesthetic—this is clear in the third argument of the
metaphysical exposition and throughout the transcendental
exposition.
So for Leibniz, <space>confused arises from our
perceptual experience with objects, but <space>clear &
distinct could not possibly so arise. Kant himself emphasizes,
not only in the Amphiboly, but also in the Aesthetic itself, that the
Leibnizians are committed to the view that
<space>confused arises from our perceptual experience
of objects and their relations. In §7 of the Aesthetic (in the B
edition), he writes:
We might read Kant’s Leibniz as committed to the following claims:
We can then see the first two arguments in the Metaphysical Exposition
as attempting to undermine (1), and the second two arguments as
attempting to undermine (2). Thus Leibniz denies that we have an a
priori, singular, immediate representation of space. Instead, he
thinks we begin with an empirical representation of space, remove the
confused elements of that representation, and thereby obtain a clear
and distinct idea, i.e., a conceptual representation of an abstract
mathematical
 entity.[20]
This discussion is reminiscent of Kant’s fundamental disagreement with
the Leibnizians regarding what Kant calls “sensibility”
and “understanding.” In the General Remarks on the
Aesthetic, we read:
That, therefore, our entire sensibility is nothing but the confused
representation of things, which contains solely that which pertains to
them in themselves, but only under a heap of marks and partial
representations that we can never separate from one another
consciously, is a falsification of the concept of sensibility and of
appearance, which renders the entire theory of them useless and empty.
(A43/B60)
Kant wishes to oppose this Leibnizian attitude toward
sensibility—which he goes on to label an “entirely unjust
perspective” (A44/B62)—in a general but thoroughgoing way
in the Aesthetic and elsewhere in the Critique. In the
Amphiboly, for instance, he complains that Leibniz “left nothing
for the senses but the contemptible job of confusing and upsetting the
representations” of the understanding (A276/B332). Thus Kant
does not merely think that we have a non-empirical, singular,
immediate representation of space. He thinks—if we borrow
Leibnizian terminology—that our clear and distinct
representation of space is singular and immediate. For Kant, intuition
can be a genuine source of clear and distinct representations.
If we return to Kant’s fundamental conception of representation,
according to which sensation is a representation of the subject’s
state, and intuition is an “objective” representation, we
might characterize Kant’s critical attitude toward the Leibnizians as
follows: they conflate intuition with sensation, or construe intuition
as a kind of sensation. The Leibnizians fail to recognize that
intuition is a kind of objective representation, rather than a merely
confused representation, one that is confused because it actually
represents a state of the subject while purporting to represent
objects. According to Kant’s Leibniz, when I have a red book
in front of me, and then have a sensation of redness, my senses
represent the book as having a property that is similar to my
sensation, when in fact it bears a distinct property (say, a surface
texture of some kind). This may be the right view of the
sensation of secondary qualities—the Leibnizian error lies
instead in assimilating all cases of perception to this kind of case,
and thereby concluding that perception presents us only with confused
ideas. If we rigorously distinguish sensation from intuition à
la Kant, then we open the possibility of objective representations
that are akin to perceptions. We do not have a sensation of
an infinite Euclidean magnitude (!), but we do have a singular and
immediate representation of it. The Leibnizians lack room for this
option.
Kant focuses most of his critical gaze in the Aesthetic on Leibniz and
the Leibnizians. This may reflect the fact that Leibniz held, as we
have seen, well-developed views concerning space and time and their
representation. Newton did not hold extensive views about the
representation of space and time (although he had a minimal
perspective on such matters). It may also reflect the fact that Kant
held various broadly “Leibnizian” positions throughout the
pre-critical period, breaking rather substantively with Leibniz in the
Inaugural Dissertation of 1770. But this is not to say that Kant
focused exclusively on Leibniz and his followers in the Aesthetic. He
also presents two broad sorts of criticism of the Newtonian position.
First, he criticizes the Newtonians for holding a transcendental
realist position concerning space and time—his arguments against
transcendental realism presumably hold, if they are successful,
against both the Leibnizian “inherence” view and the
Newtonian “subsistence” view of space and time. Second, he
contends that their perspective, unlike Leibniz’s, is marred by a set
of serious metaphysical problems. When discussing the Newtonian
position, Kant often emphasizes those problems. In §7 of the
Aesthetic (in the B edition of 1787), Kant describes the
transcendental idealist conception of space and time, and then
characterizes the relevant contrast class:
Kant contends that the Newtonians conceive of space as a kind of
quasi-object. He seems to return here to the classical discussion of
the ontology of space mentioned at the outset of this entry. He
emphasizes that on the Newtonian view, space and time are akin to
substances—in that they are independent of all objects and
relations, on the one hand, and independent of the mind (and of
intuition), on the other—and yet lack causal relations. They are
also imperceptible, and certainly in the case of space, infinite. Thus
for Kant, the Newtonians regard space as an infinite substance-like
entity that is imperceptible and causally inert, a view that Kant
regards as absurd on general metaphysical grounds. Numerous
philosophers throughout the eighteenth century, from Leibniz to
Berkeley to Madame Du Châtelet, concurred. Kant adds that the
Newtonian view seems to conflict with what he calls “the
principles of experience” (see Shabel 2005, 46-7). Perhaps the
idea behind this second criticism can be discerned from Kant’s
comments elsewhere in the Critique and in the
Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Science—in those
texts, Kant notes that absolute space is not an object of possible
experience and that one cannot prove its existence by appealing to
 experience.[22]
 In this way, Kant’s criticisms of the Newtonian view seem to rest on
very general metaphysical and epistemic considerations—they seem
to be largely divorced from the sort of specific views of intuition
and of representation that played a substantial role in Kant’s
criticisms of Leibniz.
Transcendental idealism is obviously too complex to clarify simply by
discussing Kant’s views of space and time. A full discussion of it
would have to range over his critical writings in metaphysics,
aesthetics, teleology, and ethics. But as we have seen, Kant himself
indicates in the Transcendental Aesthetic that transcendental idealism
is closely related to his conception of space and time, and so some
clarity concerning Kant’s overarching philosophical position can be
achieved in the context of this entry. The modus operandi, as
above, will be to probe Kant’s own discussions of the views of space
and time articulated by his predecessors in order to clarify his own
position. In particular, Kant’s remarks concerning Berkeley are
especially helpful in this context, in addition to his remarks on
Leibniz and Newton.
We have seen above that from Kant’s point of view, both Leibniz and
Newton—and perhaps some of their followers—defend versions
of “transcendental realism.” This is due to their support
of the view—or perhaps commitment to the view (on other
grounds)—that space and time are independent of intuition in
some sense. They may also be adherents of this realist position on the
grounds that they do not articulate the view Kant defends in the
Metaphysical Exposition, viz. that we have a non-empirical, singular,
immediate representation of space and time. But what does it mean for
Kant to say that space and time are somehow dependent on intuition?
One way of achieving some clarity in this domain is to fill out what
Kant regards as the relevant conceptual landscape by looking to his
characterization of another idealist position, that of Berkeley (as he
understands him). So suppose that space is not a property of objects
independent of intuition in any sense—it does not even
supervene on properties of objects that are independent of
intuition (recall that for Leibniz, space supervenes on the monadic
order because objects and relations supervene on that order). On the
view I want to consider, space does not supervene on properties of
objects that are independent of intuition because there are no such
properties. Suppose that space is indeed dependent on intuition, but
on empirical intuition. I take this to represent one
possible construal of Berkeley’s phrase, esse est
percipii. This consideration suggests that, prima facie,
Kant should not interpret Berkeley as a transcendental realist. And if
that is right, what prevents Berkeley from being understood as a
transcendental idealist? Correlatively, what prevents one from
understanding transcendental idealism as some kind of Berkeleyan
idealism about space and time? These sorts of question can help to
clarify what Kant understands by transcendental idealism, for
Kant seems to view Berkeley as a fellow idealist, but one who does not
defend a transcendental variety of this position.
Ironically, the view that Kant is—perhaps despite his fervent
denials—an idealist of the Berkeleyan variety arose in one of
the first critical appraisals of the Critique, the so-called
Garve-Feder review of
 1782.[23]In
 the Prolegomena, written directly after the review, Kant is
concerned to distinguish his version of idealism from Berkeley’s; one
point he emphasizes hinges on their differing conceptions of space. In
considering the question of why his early critics Garve and Feder
interpreted him as a Berkeleyan idealist, he writes:
So from Kant’s point of view, Berkeley rejects transcendental
realism—he rejects the notion that space is a thing in itself,
or a property of things in
 themselves.[24]
 He presumably also rejects the idea that space and time are
independent of intuition. In the Transcendental Aesthetic, Kant admits
that one cannot “blame” Berkeley for falling into a
radical version of idealism in an attempt to avoid the
“absurdities” of transcendental realism, absurdities into
which Kant takes the Newtonians to have fallen (B70-1)—these are
the very absurdities discussed above in the section on Kant’s
criticisms of Newton. Kant seems to be suggesting with this remark
that Berkeley—who of course was a fierce critic of the Newtonian
idea of absolute or mathematical space—defended the view that
space and time are dependent on intuition, that they are not
“transcendentally real,” in order to evade the Newtonian
conception. And just before the Refutation of Idealism, Kant
emphasizes again that Berkeley avoids transcendental realism
(B274—see Wilson 1999, 276-93). From Kant’s point of view,
Berkeley correctly avoids transcendental realism, but does so by
falsely claiming that space is dependent on empirical
intuition. This is a mistake, as we have seen, because Kant thinks
that the representation of space cannot be empirical. It is precisely
this sort of view, in turn, that Kant cites when concluding that space
must be dependent on a priori intuition in some sense. So
perhaps transcendental idealism is transcendental—and
not merely idealist—because it contains the view that
our representation of space is non-empirical as an essential
component.
What, then, of Kant’s famous contention that endorsing transcendental
realism commits one to empirical idealism (A368-9)? It would seem,
prima facie, that Berkeley ought to be committed to empirical
idealism, and yet Kant interprets him as rejecting
transcendental realism. I take it that Berkeley avoids transcendental
realism, and therefore merely empirical idealism, by defending a more
radical dogmatic idealism (B274-5). According to that view,
there are no objects or properties that are independent of
 intuition.[25]
 In contrast, Kant interprets the Leibnizians as thinking both that
the order of substances is transcendentally real, i.e. independent of
intuition per se, and also as thinking that well-founded
phenomena and their relations are not real—the latter emerge
from our misrepresentation of the underlying non-relational monadic
reality. The phenomenal world of objects bearing spatial and causal
relations is merely ideal. It is perhaps in that sense that
the Leibnizians are committed to empirical
 idealism.[26]
The reading (provided above) of what makes transcendental idealism
transcendental hints at a further way of clarifying Kant’s
overarching position. His view is not just that space is not a
property of things independent of intuition per se, but that
space is not a property of things independent of a priori
intuition. That distinguishes Kant’s conception from the idealism of a
thinker like Berkeley, for Kant denies, as we have seen, the view that
space is somehow dependent upon empirical intuition. This
point, in turn, highlights a significant parallel between the first
and second arguments of the Metaphysical Exposition and its third and
fourth arguments. Just as the latter two arguments allow Kant to
distinguish his idealism from Leibniz’s based on the notion that the
representation of space is non-conceptual, the former two arguments
allow him to distinguish his idealism from Berkeley’s based on the
notion that the representation of space is non-empirical. Hence the
“dogmatic” idealism of Berkeley and the
“empirical” idealism of Leibniz are each ruled out by
considering the content and origin of the representation of space.
That, at least, would seem to form part of Kant’s intention in the
Transcendental Aesthetic, especially in the Metaphysical Exposition.
This indicates that Berkeleyan and Leibnizian idealist views can be
construed as conceptions of the relation between space and intuition.
Whereas Berkeley takes space to be dependent on empirical
intuition, Leibniz takes it to be independent of intuition per
se. This illuminates Kant’s concern in the Transcendental
Aesthetic with our representation of space: considering that
representation in particular allows Kant to tackle other conceptions
of the relation between space and intuition.
Finally, transcendental idealism, in so far as it concerns space and
time, has the following essential component: we have a non-empirical,
singular, immediate representation of space. Part of Kant’s innovation
is to introduce into the philosophical lexicon the very idea that we
can have non-empirical intuition. It is improbable that we can
interpret this idea correctly unless we remind ourselves that Kant
rigorously distinguishes between sensation and intuition. That
distinction, in turn, forms a crucial component in Kant’s extensive
rejection of the Leibnizian doctrine of perception. It is only with
the rejection of that doctrine that we can understand Kant’s break
with the Leibnizian view of space and time in the right light.