Kant’s political philosophy is a branch of practical philosophy,
one-half of one of the broadest divisions in Kant’s thought between
practical and theoretical philosophy. Political philosophy is also to
be distinguished within practical philosophy from both empirical
elements and from virtue proper. The separation from virtue is treated
later in this section. Regarding the empirical elements, it is worth
mentioning that practical philosophy, as a set of rules governing free
behavior of rational beings, covers all human action in both its pure
and applied (empirical, or “impure”) aspects. Pure
practical philosophy, the rational elements of practical philosophy in
abstraction from anything empirical, is called by Kant
“metaphysics of morals” (4:388). Kant so emphasized the
priority of the pure aspect of political philosophy that he wrote part
of his essay “On the Common Saying: That May be Correct in
Theory, but it is of No Use in Practice” in opposition to the
view he associates with Hobbes that the politician need not be
concerned with abstract right but only with pragmatic governance
(8:289–306). Yet Kant also included the more pragmatic, impure,
empirical study of human behavior as part of practical philosophy. For
ethics in general, Kant called the empirical study of human beings as
agents within particular cultures and with particular natural
capacities “anthropology”. Some of Kant’s social
philosophy fits into this rubric (see section 10). 
Political philosophy is not only a branch of Kant’s practical
philosophy, it strongly depends upon Kant’s core practical philosophy
for its basis. Kant’s practical philosophy and the categorical
imperative that governs it were intended to form the ground not only
for what is thought today to be ethics proper but also for everything
that broadly speaking had to do with deliberative human behavior. He
defined practical philosophy as that concerned with “rules of
behavior in regard to free choice”, as opposed to theoretical
philosophy that concerned “the rule of knowledge” (Kant
27: 243). Practical philosophy provided rules to govern human
deliberative action. The Groundwork for the Metaphysics of
Morals provided Kant’s main arguments that the categorical
imperative is the supreme rule for human deliberative action. In its
Preface, he notes that the Groundwork is to be a preparatory
book for a future Metaphysics of Morals. Twelve years later
he published that Metaphysics of Morals in two parts, the
“Doctrine of Right” and the “Doctrine of
Virtue”. Both are equally parts of Kant’s practical philosophy,
and both thus have the categorical imperative as their highest
principle.
The book Metaphysics of Morals has two distinct parts: the
“Doctrine of Right” and the “Doctrine of
Virtue”. Kant sought to separate political rights and duties
from what we might call morals in the narrow sense. He limits right by
stating three conditions (6:230) that have to be met for something to
be enforceable as right: first, right concerns only actions that have
influence on other persons, directly or indirectly, meaning duties to
the self are excluded, second right does not concern the wish but only
the choice of others, meaning that not mere desires but only decisions
which bring about actions are at stake, and third right does not
concern the matter of the other’s act but only the form, meaning no
particular desires or ends are assumed on the part of the agents. As
an example of the latter he considers trade, which for right must have
the form of being freely agreed by both parties but can have any
matter or purpose the agents want. These criteria appear to be less
rigid than Kant ultimately intends, for the term
“influence” is vague enough that it might include
far-reaching minor effects. They would also include under right
actions even those imperfect duties that “influence”
others by improving their lot, such as beneficent acts of charity.
John Stuart Mill’s “harm principle” does not face this
problem since it specifies that the influence to be subject to law is
always negative. While Kant must include consideration of beneficent
action as part of right, he does not conclude that beneficent actions
are required by right but only that most are permitted by right and
others violate right. His focus on free individual choice entails that
any beneficent action that interferes with or usurps the recipient’s
free choice is wrong (for example, improving the recipient’s property
without permission as opposed to merely donating money to a fund made
available to the recipient at the recipient’s discretion).
In addition to these three conditions for right, Kant also offers
direct contrasts between right and virtue. He thinks both relate to
freedom but in different ways: right concerns outer freedom and virtue
concerns inner freedom (being master of one’s own passions)
(6:406–07). Right concerns acts themselves independent of the
motive an agent may have for performing them, virtue concerns the
proper motive for dutiful actions (6:218–221). In another
formulation (6:380–81) he says that right concerns universality
as a formal condition of freedom while virtue concerns a necessary end
beyond the mere formality of universality, thus appearing to tie the
distinction to the first two formulas of the categorical imperative in
the Groundwork. In yet another he says that right concerns
narrow duties and virtue wide duties (6:390). In the Feyerabend
lectures, Kant notes that right is the subset of morally correct
actions that are also coercible (27:1327). These various alternative
formulations of the distinction would exclude imperfect duties not
because imperfect duties do not “influence” others (they
do) but because, as imperfect, they cannot be coerced in particular
instances, since imperfect duties always allow for the moderating role
of an individual’s inclinations. While these various formulations of
the distinction appear to be quite different, they can in general be
summarized by saying that right concerns outer action corresponding to
perfect duty that affects others regardless of the individual’s
internal motivations or goals.
“There is only one innate right,” says Kant,
“Freedom (independence from being constrained by another’s
choice), insofar as it can coexist with the freedom of every other in
accordance with a universal law” (6:237). Kant rejects any other
basis for the state, in particular arguing that the welfare of
citizens cannot be the basis of state power. He argues that a state
cannot legitimately impose any particular conception of happiness upon
its citizens (8:290–91). To do so would be for the ruler to
treat citizens as children, assuming that they are unable to
understand what is truly useful or harmful to themselves. 
This claim must be understood in light of Kant’s more general claim
that moral law cannot be based upon happiness or any other given
empirical good. In the Groundwork Kant contrasts an ethics of
autonomy, in which the will (Wille, or practical reason
itself) is the basis of its own law, from the ethics of heteronomy, in
which something independent of the will, such as happiness, is the
basis of moral law (4:440–41). In the Critique of Practical
Reason he argues that happiness (the agreeableness of life when
things go in accordance with one’s wishes and desires), although
universally sought by human beings, is not specific enough to entail
any particular universal desires in human beings. Further, even were
there any universal desires among human beings, those desires would,
as empirical, be merely contingent and thus unworthy of being the
basis of any pure moral law (5:25–26). No particular conception
of happiness can be the basis of the pure principle of the state, and
the general conception of happiness is too vague to serve as the basis
of a law. Hence, a “universal principle of right” cannot
be based upon happiness but only on something truly universal, such as
freedom. The “universal principle of right” Kant offers is
thus “Any action is right if it can coexist with everyone’s
freedom in accordance with a universal law, or if on its maxim the
freedom of choice of each can coexist with everyone’s freedom in
accordance with a universal law” (6:230). 
This explains why happiness is not universal, but not why freedom is
universal. By “freedom” in political philosophy, Kant is
not referring to the transcendental conception of freedom usually
associated with the problem of the freedom of the will amid
determinism in accordance with laws of nature, a solution to which is
provided in the Third Antinomy of the Critique of Pure
Reason. Rather, freedom in political philosophy is defined, as in
the claim above about the only innate right, as “independence
from being constrained by another’s choice”. His concern in
political philosophy is not with laws of nature determining a
human being’s choice but by other human beings determining a
human being’s choice, hence the kind of freedom Kant is concerned with
in political philosophy is individual freedom of action. Still, the
universality of political freedom is linked to transcendental freedom.
Kant assumes that a human being’s use of choice (at least when it is
properly guided by reason) is free in the transcendental sense. Since
every human being does enjoy transcendental freedom by virtue of being
rational, freedom of choice is a universal human attribute. And this
freedom of choice is to be respected and promoted, even when this
choice is not exercised in rational or virtuous activity. Presumably
respecting freedom of choice involves allowing it to be effective in
determining actions; this is why Kant calls political freedom, or
“independence from being constrained by another’s choice”,
the only innate right. One might still object that this freedom of
choice is incapable of being the basis of a pure principle of right
for the same reason that happiness was incapable of being its basis,
namely, that it is too vague in itself and that when specified by the
particular decisions individuals make with their free choice, it loses
its universality. Kant holds that this problem does not arise for
freedom, since freedom of choice can be understood both in terms of
its content (the particular decisions individuals make) and its form
(the free, unconstrained nature of choice of any possible particular
end) (6:230). Freedom is universal in the proper sense because, unlike
happiness, it can be understood in such a way that it is susceptible
to specification without losing its universality. Right will be based
on the form of free choice. 
The very existence of a state might seem to some as a limitation of
freedom, since a state possesses power to control the external freedom
of individual citizens through force. This is the basic claim of
anarchism. Kant holds in contrast that the state is not an impediment
to freedom but is the means for freedom. State action that is a
hindrance to freedom can, when properly directed, support and maintain
freedom if the state action is aimed at hindering actions that
themselves would hinder the freedom of others. Given a subject’s
action that would limit the freedom of another subject, the state may
hinder the first subject to defend the second by “hindering a
hindrance to freedom”. Such state coercion is compatible with
the maximal freedom demanded in the principle of right because it does
not reduce freedom but instead provides the necessary background
conditions needed to secure freedom. The amount of freedom lost by the
first subject through direct state coercion is equal to the amount
gained by the second subject through lifting the hindrance to actions.
State action sustains the maximal amount of freedom consistent with
identical freedom for all without reducing it. 
Freedom is not the only basis for principles underlying the state. In
“Theory and Practice” Kant makes freedom the first of
three principles (8:290):
Freedom as discussed in “Theory and Practice” stresses the
autonomous right of all individuals to conceive of happiness in their
own way. Interference with another’s freedom is understood as coercing
the other to be happy as the former sees fit. The direct link to
action comes when pursuing that autonomously chosen conception of
happiness. Each may pursue happiness as they see fit provided that
their pursuit does not infringe upon others’ similar pursuits.
Equality is not substantive but formal. Each member of the state is
equal to every other member of the state before the law. Each has
equal coercive right, that is, the right to invoke the power of the
state to enforce the laws on one’s behalf. (Kant exempts the head of
state from this equality, since the head of state cannot be coerced by
anyone else). This formal equality is perfectly compatible with the
inequality of members of the state in income, physical power, mental
ability, possessions, etc. Further, this equality supports an equality
of opportunity: every office or rank in the political structure must
be open to all subjects without regard for any hereditary or similar
restrictions. 
Independence concerns citizens as subject to laws they give
themselves, i.e. as co-legislators of the laws. While this principle
appears to require universal democratic decision making for particular
laws, Kant instead understands this principle on two levels, one of
which is not universal and the other of which is not for particular
laws. At one level, that of participation in determination of
particular laws, citizenship does not extend to all. Kant excludes
women and children, weakly claiming that their exclusion is natural,
as well as anyone who lacks economic self-sufficiency. Hence decision
making is not universal. While Kant thereby denies women and others
full citizenship in the ability to take part in legislation, he
stresses that he is not denying them the rights entailed by freedom
and equality as “passive” members of the state. At the
second level, he claims that all members of the state, as subjects of
the law, must be able to will the basic law that governs them. This
basic law is the “original contract” and will be discussed
in the next section. The basic law is willed by each subject in the
sense that the “will of all” or a “public
will”, or “general will” (Kant uses Rousseau’s term)
determines the basic law. Hence decision making at this level is not
for particular laws. Particular laws, in contrast, are to be
determined by a majority of the citizens with voting rights, as will
be discussed in section 4. 
Kant provides two distinct discussions of social contract. One
concerns property and will be treated in more detail in section 5
below. The second discussion of social contract comes in the essay
“Theory and Practice” in the context of an a priori
restriction on the legitimate policies the sovereign may pursue. The
sovereign must recognize the “original contract” as an
idea of reason that forces the sovereign to “give his laws in
such a way that they could have arisen from the united will of a whole
people and to regard each subject, insofar as he wants to be a
citizen, as if he has joined in voting for such a will” (8:297).
This original contract, Kant stresses, is only an idea of reason and
not a historical event. Any rights and duties stemming from an
original contract do so not because of any particular historical
provenance, but because of the rightful relations embodied in the
original contract. No empirical act, as a historical act would be,
could be the foundation of any rightful duties or rights. The idea of
an original contract limits the sovereign as legislator. No law may be
promulgated that “a whole people could not possibly give its
consent to” (8:297). The consent at issue, however, is also not
an empirical consent based upon any actual act. The set of actual
particular desires of citizens is not the basis of determining whether
they could possibly consent to a law. Rather, the kind of possibility
at issue is one of rational possible unanimity based upon fair
distributions of burdens and rights in abstraction from empirical
facts or desires. Kant’s two examples both exemplify this
consideration of possible rational unanimity. His first example is a
law that would provide hereditary privileges to members of a certain
class of subjects. This law would be unjust because it would be
irrational for those who would not be members of this class to agree
to accept fewer privileges than members of the class. One might say
that no possible empirical information could cause all individuals to
agree to this law. Kant’s second example concerns a war tax. If the
tax is administered fairly, it would not be unjust. Kant adds that
even if the actual citizens opposed the war, the war tax would be just
because it is possible that the war is being waged for legitimate
reasons that the state but not the citizens know about. Here possible
empirical information might cause all citizens to approve the law. In
both these examples, the conception of “possible consent”
abstracts from actual desires individual citizens have. The possible
consent is not based upon a hypothetical vote given actual preferences
but is based on a rational conception of agreement given any possible
empirical information.
Kant’s view is similar to the social contract theory of Hobbes in a
few important respects. The social contract is not a historical
document and does not involve a historical act. In fact it can be
dangerous to the stability of the state to even search history for
such empirical justification of state power (6:318). The current state
must be understood, regardless of its origin, to embody the social
contact. The social contract is a rational justification for state
power, not a result of actual deal-making among individuals or between
them and a government. Another link to Hobbes is that the social
contract is not voluntary. Individuals may be forced into the civil
condition against their consent (6:256). Social contract is not based
on any actual consent such as a voluntary choice to form a civil
society along with others. Since the social contract reflects reason,
each human being as a rational being already contains the basis for
rational agreement to the state. Are individuals then coerced to
recognize their subjection to state power against their will? Since
Kant defines “will” as “practical reason
itself” (Groundwork, 4:412), the answer for him is
“no.” If one defines “will” as arbitrary
choice, then the answer is “yes.” This is the same
dichotomy that arises with regard to Kant’s theory of punishment
(section 7). A substantial difference between Kant and Hobbes is that
Hobbes bases his argument on the individual benefit for each party to
the contract, whereas Kant bases his argument on Right itself,
understood as freedom for all persons in general, not just for the
individual benefit that the parties to the contract obtain in their
own particular freedom. To this extent Kant is influenced more by
Rousseau’s idea of the General Will. 
Kant was a central figure in the philosophy of the Enlightenment. One
of his popular essays, “An Answer to the Question: What is
Enlightenment?” discusses Enlightenment in terms of the use of
an individual’s own reason (8:35f). To be Enlightened is to emerge
from one’s self-incurred minority (juvenile) status to a mature
ability to think for oneself. In another essay, “What Does it
Mean to Orient Oneself in Thought?” Kant defines Enlightenment
as “the maxim of always thinking for oneself” (8:146).
“What is Enlightenment” distinguishes between the public
and private uses of reason. The private use of reason is, for
government officials, the use of reason they must utilize in their
official positions. For example, a member of the clergy (who in Kant’s
Prussia were employees of the state) is required to espouse the
official doctrine in sermons and teachings. The public use of reason
is the use an individual makes of reason as a scholar reaching the
public world of readers. For example, the same member of the clergy
could, as a scholar, present perceived shortcomings in that very same
doctrine. Similarly, military officers can, using public reason,
question the value or appropriateness of the orders they receive, but
in their functions as military officers, using private reason, they
are obliged to obey the same orders. Since the sovereign might err,
and individual citizens have the right to attempt to correct the error
under the assumption that the sovereign does not intend to err:
“a citizen must have, with the approval of the ruler himself,
the authorization to make known publicly his opinions about what it is
in the ruler’s arrangements that seems to him to be a wrong against
the commonwealth,” writes Kant in “Theory and
Practice”. This freedom of the pen is “the sole palladium” of
the rights of the people, for without this means the people would have
no way to make any claims to rights at all (8:304).
One might expect from this emphasis that Kant would insist that the
proper political system is one that not only allows individuals to
think for themselves about political issues, but also contains a
mechanism such as voting to translate those well reasoned opinions
into government policy. One would be wrong. Kant does not stress
self-government. In his discussion in “Perpetual Peace” of
the traditional division of the types of government Kant classifies
governments in two dimensions (8:352). The first is the “form of
sovereignty”, concerning who rules, and here Kant identifies the
traditional three forms: either rule by one person, rule by a small
group of people, or rule by all people. The second is the “form
of government” concerning how those people rule, and here Kant
offers a variation on the traditional good/bad dichotomy: either
republican or despotic. By “republican,” Kant means
“separation of the executive power (the government) from the
legislative power”. Despotism is their unity such that the same
ruler both gives and enforces laws, in essence making an individual
private will into the public will. Republics require representation in
order to ensure that the executive power only enforces the public will
by insisting that the executive enforce only laws that representatives
of the people, not the executive itself, make. But a republic is
compatible with a single individual acting as legislator provided that
others act as executives; for example, a monarch would issue laws in
the name of the people’s will but the monarch’s ministers would
enforce those laws. Kant’s claim that such a government is republican
(see also 27:1384) showcases his view that a republican government
need not require actual participation of the people in making the
laws, even through elected representatives, as long as the laws are
promulgated with the whole united will of the people in mind. Kant
does, nonetheless, think that an elected representative legislator is
the best form of a republic (8:353). Whether elected or unelected, the
moral person who holds legislative power is representative of the
people united as a whole, and is thus sovereign.
When Kant discusses voting for representatives, he adheres to many
prevailing prejudices of the time (8:295). The right to vote requires
“being one’s own master” and hence having property or some
skill that can support one independently. The reason given for this,
that those who must acquire something from another to make a living
alienate what belongs to them, is so vague that Kant himself admits in
a footnote “It is, I admit, somewhat difficult to determine what
is required in order to be able to claim the rank of a human being who
is his own master.” Kant also leaves women out of the voting
populations for what he calls “natural” reasons which are
left unspecified.
Kant’s state, then, does not require that actual decisions are made by
the people at large, even through elected representatives. He holds
that a single individual or small group can themselves adequately
represent the people at large simply by adopting the point of view of
the people. Insistence on a representative system (8:353) is not
insistence on an elected representative system. Nonetheless
it is clear that Kant holds that such an elective representative
system is ideal. Republican constitutions, he claims, are prone to
avoid war because, when the consent of the people is needed, they will
consider the costs they must endure in a war (fighting, taxes,
destruction of property, etc), whereas a non-republican ruler may be
insulated from such concerns. In the “Doctrine of Right”
he also notes that a republican system not only represents the people
but does so “by all the citizens united and acting through their
delegates” (6:342). 
The “Doctrine of Right” begins with a discussion of
property, showing the importance of this right for the implementation
of the innate right to freedom. Property is defined as that
“with which I am so connected that another’s use of it without
my consent would wrong me” (6:245). In one sense, if I am
holding an object such as an apple, and another snatches it from my
hand, I have been wronged because in taking the object from my
physical possession, the other harms me (Kant does not specify whether
this harm is because one’s current use of the apple is terminated or
because one’s body is affected, but the latter fits the argument
better). Kant calls this “physical” or
“sensible” possession. It is not a sufficient sense of
possession to count as rightful possession of an object. Rightful
possession must be possession of an object so that another’s use of
the object without my consent harms me even when I am not physically
affected and not currently using the object. If someone plucks an
apple from my tree, no matter where I am and no matter whether I am
even aware of the loss I am prevented from using that apple. Kant
calls this “intelligible possession”. 
His proof that there must be this intelligible possession and not
merely physical possession turns on the application of human choice
(6:246). An object of choice is one that some human has the capacity
to use as means for various ends or purposes. Rightful possession
would be the right to make use of such an object. Suppose that for
some particular object, no one has rightful possession. This would
mean that a usable object would be beyond possible use. Kant grants
that such a condition does not contradict the principle of right
because it is compatible with everyone’s freedom in accordance with
universal law. But putting an object beyond rightful use when humans
have the capacity to use it would “annihilate” the object
in a practical respect, treat it as nothing. Kant claims that this is
problematic because in a practical respect an object is considered
merely as an object of possible choice. This consideration of the mere
form alone, the object simply as an object of choice, cannot contain
any prohibition of use for an object, for any such prohibition would
be freedom limiting itself for no reason. Thus in a practical respect
an object cannot be treated as nothing, and so the object must be
considered as at least potentially in rightful possession of some
human being or other. So all objects within human capacity for use
must be subject to rightful or intelligible possession. 
Intelligible possession, then, is required by right in order for free
beings to be able to realize their freedom by using objects for their
freely chosen purposes. This conclusion entails the existence of
private property but not any particular distribution of private
property. All objects must be considered as potential property of some
human being or other. Now if one human being is to have intelligible
possession of a particular object, all other human beings must refrain
from using that object. Such a one-sided relation would violate the
universality of external right. Kant further worries that any
unilateral declaration by one person that an object belongs to that
person alone would infringe on the freedom of others. The only way
that intelligible possession is possible without violating the
principle of right is if there is an agreement that puts all under an
obligation to recognize each other’s intelligible possessions. Each
person must acknowledge an obligation to refrain from using objects
that belong to another. Since no individual will can rightfully make
and enforce such a law obligating everyone to respect others’
property, this mutual obligation is possible only in accordance with a
“collective general (common) and powerful will”, in other
words, only in a civil condition. The state itself obligates all
citizens to respect the property of other citizens. The state
functions as an objective, disinterested institution that resolves
disputes about individual property and enforces compliance with those
determinations. Without a state to enforce these property rights, they
are impossible.
This creation of a civil condition is Kant’s first manner of
discussing a social contract mentioned in section 3. Prior to a social
contract the only manner in which human beings can control things is
through empirical possession, actual occupation and use of land and
objects. In order to gain full property rights to land and objects,
individuals must all agree to respect the property rights of others in
a social contract. They are in fact required, as a duty, to enter into
a social condition in order to defend their own and everyone’s
property rights. Only in such a society can persons exercise their
freedom, that is their pursuit of ends, by legitimately using objects
for their own purposes without regard for others. Hence a social
contract is the rational justification of the state because state
power is necessary for each individual to be guaranteed access to some
property in order to realize their freedom. While the discussion in
“Theory and Practice” of a social contract as an idea of
reason constrains the sovereign in promulgating laws, it does not
explain why the state is necessary in the first place. The discussion
in “Doctrine of Right” of property as the basis of a
social contract explains why individuals are in fact rationally
required to enter into a social contract. 
A puzzle arises here with regard to property. If individuals are not
able to have any intelligible property prior to the existence of a
state, yet the state’s role is to enforce property rights, where does
the original assignment of property to individuals occur? John Locke
had famously avoided this problem in his theory of property by making
property a product of a single individual’s activity. By
“mixing” one’s labor with an object in the commons, one
comes to have property in the object. Kant objects to Locke’s theory
of property on the grounds that it makes property a relation between a
person and a thing rather than between the wills of several persons
(6:268–69). Since property is a relation of wills that can occur
only in a civil condition under a common sovereign power, Kant
suggests that prior to this civil condition property can be acquired
only in anticipation of and in conformity with a civil condition.
Provisional property is initial physical appropriation of objects with
the intention of making them rightful property in a state (6:264,
267). 
Property is of three types for Kant (6:247–48, 260). First is
the right to a thing, to corporeal objects in space. Examples of these
things include land, animals, and tools. The second is the right
against a person, the right to coerce that person to perform an
action. This is contract right. The third is the “right to a
person akin to a right to a thing”, the most controversial of
Kant’s categories in which he includes spouses, children, and
servants. Of these three types, the first has already been discussed
in relation to acquisition. The second of these, contract right,
involves the possession by one person of the “deed” of
another (6:274). One person is able to control the choice of another
in order to apply the other’s causal powers to some end. At first
glance this contract right appears to violate the second formula of
the categorical imperative which states that persons are to be treated
always as ends and never merely as means. A contract appears to be a
case in which an individual is used merely as a means. A homeowner,
for example, hires a repair specialist specifically as a means for
repairing a house. Kant turns the tables on this problem by showing
that a contract is “the united choice of two persons” and
thus treats both parties to the contract as ends. For example, he
notes that the repair specialist who is contracted to work on a house
has agreed to the exchange in order to obtain a personal end, namely,
money (27:1319). Each party to the contract is both means for the
other and an end. 
The third category, the right to a person akin to a thing, is Kant’s
own addition to the traditional understanding of property and
contract. Kant argues that some contracts or rightful obligations such
as the parent-child relation allow one party to the contract to
control not only the choice of the other, but also to possess some
power over the body of the other, such as the power to insist that the
other remain in the household. His discussion of marriage, which
focuses on this legal relation in abstraction from empirical
considerations such as love, treats marriage as reciprocal access to
the other’s sexual organs. While each partner in the marriage is using
the other as a means for enjoyment and thus as a thing, the marriage
contract’s reciprocity “restores” their personality as
ends in themselves (6:278). Kant describes this legal relation as
equal in these powers of possession and in the communal property. Both
men and women must have reciprocal relations of this kind; for
example, a wife may utilize state power to insist that a runaway
husband perform his family duties of child support; likewise, a man’s
use of a prostitute as a thing violates her dignity as an end in
herself (only the latter is Kant’s example). Despite this equality at
the level of a priori right, Kant holds that men have a natural
superiority in their capacity to promote the couple’s common interest,
and that laws codifying husbands’s rule over wives are not unjust.
Certainly Kant’s personal sexism plays a part in his views on
marriage, as it did in his exclusion of women from voting. Some of
Kant’s own contemporaries objected to his views on women, and an early
review of the “Doctrine of Right” rejecting Kant’s novel
category of property to persons akin to things prompted him to respond
in an Appendix to the book’s second edition. 
The very idea of a right to rebel against the government is
incoherent, Kant argued, because the embodiment of all right is the
actually existing state. By this he did not mean that any actually
existing state is always completely just, or that merely by virtue of
having power, the state could determine what justice is. He meant that
a rightful condition, the opposite of the state of nature, is possible
only when there is some means for individuals to be governed by the
“general legislative will” (6:320). Any state embodies the
general legislative will better than no state. While such reasoning
seems pragmatic, it is not. It is instead based upon the claims above
that a rightful condition requires the centralizing of coercive power
in a state as the only means of bringing about reciprocal coercion and
obligation. Kant also argues that a right to rebel would require that
a people be authorized to resist the state. This kind of authorization
for action, however, is an exercise of sovereign power, and to any
people who claimed such a right would be claiming it (the people)
rather than the state embodies sovereign power. It would thus
“make the people, as subject, by one and the same judgment
sovereign over him to whom it is subject” (6:320). This is a
contradiction. The nature of sovereignty is such that sovereign power
cannot be shared. Were it shared between the state and the people,
then when a dispute arose between them, who would judge whether the
state or the people are correct? There being no higher sovereign power
to make such a judgment, all other means for resolving the dispute
fall outside of rightful relations. This role of judgment relates to
the judgment that Kant discusses with regard to the social contract.
Under the idea of a social contract, the sovereign legislator may not
make a law that the people could not make for itself because it
possesses irrational, non-universal form. The state, not the people,
is the judge of when a law is rational (8:297). People who argue for a
right to revolution, Kant claims, misunderstand the nature of a social
contract. They claim that the social contract must have been an actual
historical occurrence from which the people could withdraw
(8:301–02). But since the social contact is only an idea of
reason which sets moral limits to the sovereign’s legislative acts,
and the sovereign’s judgment alone determines how these limits are to
be interpreted, there is no independent contractual agreement to which
the people could refer in its complaints. Citizens are still allowed
to voice their grievances through their use of public reason, but they
can do nothing more than attempt to persuade the sovereign to adopt or
repeal decisions. 
While the people cannot rebel against the state, Kant does not insist
that citizens always obey the state. He allows at least for passive
civil disobedience. This comes in two forms: in a republican
representative system such as England’s, there can be “a
negative resistance, that is, a refusal of the people (in parliament)
to accede to every demand the government puts forth as necessary for
administering the state” (6:322). In the context of this
discussion it is clear that Kant is referring to the use of the power
of the legislature to refuse funding, and therefore approval, of
actions of the executive. He clarifies that the legislature is not
allowed to dictate any positive action to the executive, its
legitimate resistance is only negative. A second form of acceptable
resistance applies to individuals. Kant mentions that citizens are
obligated to obey the sovereign “in whatever does not conflict
with inner morality” (6:371). He does not elaborate on the term
“inner morality”. 
Nor does Kant always reject the actions of revolutionaries. If a
revolution is successful, citizens have as much obligation to obey the
new regime as they had to obey the old one (6:323). Since the new
regime is in fact a state authority, it now possesses the right to
rule. Further, in his theory of history, Kant argues that progress in
the long run will come about in part through violent and unjust
actions such as wars. Kant even takes it as a sign of progress that
spectators of the French Revolution had greeted it with “a
wishful participation that borders closely on enthusiasm”
(7:85). Kant is not pointing to the revolution itself as a sign of
progress but to the reaction of people such as himself to news of the
revolution. The spectators endorse the revolution not because it is
legitimate but because it is aimed at the creation of a civil
constitution. Revolution, then, is wrong but still contributes to
progress. 
In fact, Kant did believe that the French Revolution was legitimate,
and a look at his argument illuminates some of his complex
terminology. The French king possessed sovereignty until he convened
the Estates General as representative of the people, at which time
sovereignty “passed to the people” even though the king
had intended for the assembly to resolve specific problems and then
return the reins of power to him (6:341–2). Further, the king
could not have any power to restrain the actions of the assembly as a
condition for it being given the sovereign power, for there can be no
restrictions on this sovereign power. This understanding of
sovereignty shows the difference between a rebellion against authority
and peaceful transfer of sovereign power such as an election. In an
election, sovereignty is passed back to the people, so there is
nothing wrong with the people replacing the entire government. Without
an election (or similar method of designating the return of
sovereignty to the people), any action aimed at replacing the
government is wrong.
Kant was long considered to be an exemplar of the retributivist theory
of punishment. While he does claim that the only proper justification
of punishment is guilt for a crime, he does not limit the usefulness
of punishment to retributivist matters. Punishment can have as its
justification only the guilt of the criminal. All other uses of
punishment, such as rehabilitation (the alleged good of the criminal)
or deterrence (alleged good to society) uses the criminal merely as a
means (6:331). Once this guilt is determined, however, Kant does not
deny that something useful can be drawn from the punishment. In the
Feyerabend lectures on Natural Right, Kant is clear that the sovereign
“must punish in order to obtain security”, and even while
using the law of retribution, “in such a way the best security
is obtained” (27:1390–91). The state is authorized to use
its coercive force to defend freedom against limitations to freedom;
more particularly, since right does not entail that citizens must
limit their own freedom but only that “freedom is limited”
by conditions of right, it is right for another, i.e. the state, to
actively limit citizens’ freedom in accord with right (6:231). The
state is authorized to use force to defend property rights (6:256).
Kant’s view, then, is that punishment of a particular individual may
serve deterrent functions even when the punishment may not be based
solely on deterrence as its justification.
Retributivist theory holds not only that criminal guilt is required
for punishment, but that the appropriate type and amount of punishment
is also determined by the crime itself. Traditionally this is the
heart of the ancient injunction “an eye for an eye”. Kant
supports this measurement for punishment because all other
measurements bring into consideration elements besides strict justice
(6:332), such as the psychological states of others that would measure
the effectiveness of various possible punishments on deterrence. As a
principle, retribution grounds but does not specify the exact
punishment. Kant recognizes that “like for like” is not
always possible to the letter, but believes that justice requires that
it be used as the principle for specific judgments of punishment.
The retributivist theory of punishment leads to Kant’s insistence on
capital punishment. He argues that the only punishment possibly
equivalent to death, the amount of inflicted harm, is death. Death is
qualitatively different from any kind of life, so no substitute could
be found that would equal death. Kant rejects the argument against
capital punishment offered earlier in his century by the Italian
reformer, the Marchese Cesare Beccaria, who argued that in a social
contract no one would willingly give to the state power over one’s own
life, for the preservation of that life is the fundamental reason one
enters a social contract at all. Kant objects to Beccaria’s claim by
distinguishing between the source of a social contract in “pure
reason in me” as opposed to the source of the crime, myself as
capable of criminal acts. The latter person wills the crime but not
the punishments, but the former person wills in the abstract that
anyone who is convicted of a capital crime will be punished by death.
Hence one and the same individual both commits the crime and endorses
the punishment of death. This solution mirrors the claim that
individuals can be coerced to join a civil condition: reason dictates
that entering the civil condition is mandatory even if one’s
particular arbitrary choice might be to remain outside it (see section
3).
In the “Doctrine of Right” Kant complains that the German
word used to describe international right,
“Völkerrecht”, is misleading, for it means literally
the right of nations or peoples. He distinguishes this kind of
relation among groups of individuals, which he discusses as
Cosmopolitan Right and will be covered in Section 9, from the
relations among the political entities, which would better be called
“Staatenrecht”, the right of states. Nonetheless Kant
still uses the phrase “right of nations” and also
discusses a “league of nations”, although it is clear that
he is referring not to nations as peoples but to states as
organizations. Kant is also inconsisistent in his use of other terms,
such as “federation”. For the sake of clarity, this entry
will maintain consistent termininology for the discussion of concepts
in international right, even where that requires departures from
Kant’s own usage. 
Given the lack of international institutions, Kant says, states must
be considered to be in a state of nature relative to one another. Like
individuals in the state of nature, then, they must be considered to
be in a state of war with each other. Like individuals, the states are
obligated to leave this state of nature to form some type of union
under a social contract. Before the creation of some such union (see
next paragraph), states do have a right to go to war against other
states if another state threatens it or actively aggresses against it
(6:346). But any declaration of war ought to be confirmed by the
people “as colegislating members of a state” (6:345).
Rulers who wage war without such consent are using their subjects as
property, as mere means, rather than treating them as ends in
themselves. This claim is one of Kant’s strongest statements that
actual voting by citizens is required: citizens “must therefore
give their free assent, through their representatives, not only to
waging war in general but also to each particular declaration of
war” (6:345–46). Once war has been declared, states are
obligated to conduct the war under principles that leave open the
possibility of an eventual league of states. Actions that undermine
future trust between states, such as the use of assassination, are
prohibited.
States are obligated to leave this state of nature among states and
enter into a union of states. He considers several models of this
worldwide political institution. The first is a single universal state
in which the entirety of humanity is ruled directly by the single
state or is subject to a single monarch. He rejects this model for
failing to fulfill the function of the international institution by in
effect dissolving the separateness of states rather than providing a
means for peaceful relations among states. The second model is a
league of states in which states voluntarily submit themselves to an
organization for resolving international disputes. The league would
not have coercive power to enforce its decisions, and states would be
free to leave the league if they chose. He sometimes refers to this
model as a “federation”, although he notes that it cannot
be an indissoluble union based upon a constitution, as in the
federalist structure of the United States (6:351), so it is best to
refer to this model as a “league”. The third model is a
state of states or a world republic of states in which each state
joins a federation of states with coercive power. In this model, a
state’s relation to the international federation is closely analogous
to an individual person’s relation to a state. Only these second and
third models receive Kant’s approval. He offers different reasons for
supporting each of the two models.
Kant holds out the third model as the ideal form for the correct
international institution. He calls the world republic an
“idea” (8:357), a term that Kant uses for concepts created
by the faculty of reason that cannot be met in experience but that can
serve as models or goals for actual human behavior. The ideal
international union is a federation of states that has coercive power
over member states but whose decisions arise from debate and
discussion among those member states. Kant is unclear regarding
whether that coercive force is to be realized by joint action of
member states, sanctioned by the federation, against a non-compliant
member or by a distinct international force controlled by the
federation itself. The precise status of states’ membership is also
not clearly stated: he generally says that states have a right to
withdraw from the federation, although he often states that the
federation is indissoluble and even indicates in the “Doctrine
of Right” that states may go to war to “establish a
condition more closely approaching a rightful condition”
(6:344), implying that states can be coerced into membership. Kant
recognizes that actual states will balk at this international
federation since rulers will object to such a surrender of their
sovereign power. Kant thus argues that the second model, a league of
states in which each state opts to negotiate with other nations
instead of waging war, must be adopted as a “negative
surrogate” (8:357). In a league of states, individual nations
are allowed to leave at will and the league itself has no coercive
powers over members. States voluntarily agree to settle disputes in a
way that avoids war and encourages further peaceful relations. Leagues
of states need not extend worldwide but should expand over time in
order to approximate a worldwide union of all states.
In the essay “Toward Perpetual Peace”, Kant offers a set
of six “preliminary articles” which aim to reduce the
likelihood of war, but cannot by themselves establish permanent peace
(8:343–47). These are a ban on making temporary peace treaties
while still planning for future wars, the prohibition of annexation of
one state by another, the abolition of standing armies, the refusal to
take on national debts for external affairs, a ban on interference by
one state in the internal affairs of another, and a set of limits on
the conduct of war that disallows acts that would breed mistrust and
make peace impossible. These six articles are negative laws that
prohibit states from engaging in certain kinds of conduct. They are
not sufficient by themselves to prevent states from lapsing back into
their old habits of warring on one another. To institute an
international order that can genuinely bring about perpetual peace,
Kant offers three “definitive articles”. The first of
these is that every state shall have a republican civil constitution
(8:348, discussed in section 4 above). In a republican constitution,
the people who decide whether there will be a war are the same people
who would pay the price for the war, both in monetary terms (taxes and
other financial burdens) and in flesh and blood. Republican states
will therefore be very hesitant to go to war and will readily accept
negotiations rather than resort to war. This consideration is Kant’s
most important contribution to the debate about securing peace. He
believes that when states are ruled in accordance with the wishes of
the people, their self-interest will provide a consistent basis for
pacific relations among states. The second definitive article is that
each state shall participate in a union of states (8:354, discussed in
the previous paragraph). The third definitive article advocates a
cosmopolitan right of universal hospitality (8:357, discussed in
section 9 below). 
Kant’s view of historical progress is tied to his view of
international relations. He actually presents several versions of his
argument for the progress of humanity toward the ideal condition in
which states, each governed by a republican civil constitution and
thus each providing maximal consistent freedom for its citizens, all
cooperate in a republican federation of states. In his essay
“Idea for a Universal History from a Cosmopolitan Point of
View” (8:15–31), he takes the basis of his claims for
historical progress to be the culmination of the human ability to
reason, which, as a natural property of human beings, must be worked
out to perfection in the species. He argues that incessant wars will
eventually lead rulers to recognize the benefits of peaceful
negotiation. They will gradually increase the freedoms of their
citizens, because freer citizens are economically more productive and
hence make the state stronger in its international dealings.
Importantly he claims that the creation of civil constitutions in
particular states is dependent upon the creation of an international
union of states, although he does not elaborate on this reasoning. In
“Toward Perpetual Peace” Kant reverses that order,
claiming that some particular state may, through “good
fortune”, become a republic and then act as a focal point for
other states to join in peaceful relations, and that gradually such
cooperation can spread to all states (8:356). These positions
certainly reveal that Kant considered world peace impossible without
both individual republican states and an international federation
among them.
Relations among the states of the world, covered above, are not the
same as relations among the peoples (nations, Volk) of the
world. Individuals can relate to states of which they are not members
and to other individuals who are members of other states. In this they
are considered “citizens of a universal state of human
beings” with corresponding “rights of citizens of the
world” (8:349, footnote). Despite these lofty sounding
pronouncements, Kant’s particular discussion of cosmopolitan right is
restricted to the right of hospitality. Since all peoples share a
limited amount of living space due to the spherical shape of the
earth, the totality of which they must be understood to have
originally shared in common, they must be understood to have a right
to possible interaction with one another. This cosmopolitan right is
limited to a right to offer to engage in commerce, not a right to
actual commerce itself, which must always be voluntary trade. A
citizen of one state may try to establish links with other peoples; no
state is allowed to deny foreign citizens a right to travel in its
land. 
Colonial rule and settlement is another matter entirely. In his
published writings in the 1790s, Kant is strongly critical of the
European colonization of other lands already inhabited by other
peoples. Settlement in these cases is allowed only by uncoerced
informed contract. Even land that appears empty might be used by
shepherds or hunters and cannot be appropriated without their consent
(6:354). These positions represent a change in Kant’s thought, for he
had previously indicated acceptance if not endorsement of the European
colonial practices of his time and the racial hierarchy behind them.
Kant himself produced a theory of human racial classifications and
origins and thought that non-Europeans were inferior in various ways.
Kant thought that the course of world progress involved the spread of
European culture and law throughout the world to what he considered to
be less advanced cultures and inferior races. By the mid-1790s,
however, Kant appears to have given up beliefs about racial
inferiority and no longer discusses it in his lectures. He publicly
criticized European colonial practices as violations of the rights of
indigenous peoples who are capable of governing themselves (8:358–60).
Cosmopolitan right is an important component of perpetual peace.
Interaction among the peoples of the world, Kant notes, has increased
in recent times. Now “a violation of right on one place of the
earth is felt in all” as peoples depend upon one another and
know about one another more and more (8:360). Violations of
cosmopolitan right would make more difficult the trust and cooperation
necessary for perpetual peace among states. 
“Social philosophy,” can be taken to mean the relationship
of persons to institutions, and to each other via these institutions,
that are not part of the state. Family is a clear example of a social
institution that transcends the individual but has at least some
elements that are not controlled by the state. Other examples would be
economic institutions such as businesses and markets, religious
institutions, social clubs and private associations created to advance
interests or for mere enjoyment, educational and university
institutions, social systems and classifications such as race and
gender, and endemic social problems like poverty. It is worth noting a
few particulars, if only as examples of the range of this topic. Kant
advocated the duty of citizens to support those in society who could
not support themselves, and even gave the state the power to arrange
for this help (6:326). He offered a biological explanation of race in
several essays and also, certainly into his “Critical”
period, held that other races were inferior to Europeans. He supported
a reform movement in education based on the principles presented by
Rousseau in “Emile”. I will not provide detailed
treatement of Kant’s views on these particular matters (some of which
are scant) but only focus on the nature of social philosophy for Kant.
Kant had no comprehensive social philosophy. One might be tempted to
claim that, in line with natural law theorists, Kant discusses natural
rights related to some social institutions. One might read the first
half of the “Doctrine of Right” as a social philosophy,
since this half on “Private Right” discusses the rights of
individuals relative to one another, in contrast to the second half on
“Public Right” that discusses the rights of individuals
relative to the state. Kant even offers an explanation of this
difference by claiming that the opposite of state of nature is not a
social but the civil condition, that is, a state (6:306). The state of
nature can include voluntary societies (Kant mentions domestic
relations in general) where there is no a priori obligation for
individuals to enter them. This claim of Kant’s, however, is subject
to some doubt, since he explicitly links all forms of property to the
obligation to enter the civil condition (see section 5 above), and his
discussion of marriage and family comes in the form of property
relations akin to contract relations. It is thus not obvious how there
can be any social institutions that can exist outside the civil
condition, to the extent that social institutions presuppose property
relations. 
Another approach to the issue of social philosophy in Kant is to view
it in terms of moral philosophy properly speaking, that is, the
obligations human beings have to act under the proper maxims, as
discussed in the “Doctrine of Virtue” (see section 1
above). In the “Doctrine of Virtue” Kant talks about the
obligation to develop friendships and to participate in social
intercourse (6:469–74). In the Religion within the
Boundaries of Mere Reason Kant discusses the development of an
“ethical commonwealth” in which human beings strengthen
one another’s moral resolve through their participation in the moral
community of a church. He also holds that educational institutions,
the subject of his book On Pedagogy, should be designed to
provide for the development of morality in human beings, who lack a
natural disposition for the moral good. In these cases Kant’s social
philosophy is treated as an arm of his theory of virtue, not as a
freestanding topic in its own right.
A third approach to social philosophy comes through Kant’s
Anthropology from a Pragmatic Point of View. Kant had
envisioned anthropology as an empirical application of ethics, akin to
empirical physics as a application of pure metaphysical principles of
nature. Knowledge of the general characteristics of human being as
well as particular characteristics of genders, races, nationalities,
etc, can aid in determining one’s precise duties toward particular
individuals. Further, this knowledge can aid moral agents in their own
task of motivating themselves to morality. These promises of
anthropology in its practical application are unfulfilled, however, in
the details of Kant’s text. He does little critical assessment of
social prejudices or practices to screen out stereotypes detrimental
to moral development. His own personal views, considered sexist and
racist universally today and even out of step with some of his more
progressive colleagues, pervade his direct discussions of these social
institutions.