Karl Theodor Jaspers was born on 23rd February 1883 in
the North German town of Oldenburg near the North Sea, where his
ancestors had lived for generations. He was the son of a banker and a
representative of the parliament (Landtagesabgeordneten), Carl Wilhelm
Jaspers (1850–1940) and Henriette Tantzen (1862–1941), who also came
from a family that was involved in local parliament. Jaspers’s family
milieu was strongly influenced by the political culture of North German
liberalism, and he often referred to the climate of early liberal
democratic thought as a formative aspect of his education. Moreover,
although he claimed not to have been influenced by any specifically
ecclesiastical faith, his thought was also formed by the spirit of
North German Protestantism, and his philosophical outlook can in many
respects be placed in the religiously inflected tradition of Kant and
Kierkegaard.
Jaspers was a pupil at the Altes Gymnasium in Oldenburg.
Since his early childhood, Jaspers suffered from chronic
bronchiectasis that impaired his physical capabilities and awareness
of his physical disabilities shaped his routine throughout his adult
life and formed his sensitivity to psychological issues, including
human suffering. Jaspers attributed his ability to conduct a
normative routine and to devote his life to his creative work to his
strict discipline regarding his health.
In 1910 he married Gertrud Mayer (1879–1974), who came from a
pious German-Jewish merchant family. At the time, she was working as
an assistant in the sanatorium of the neurologist and psychiatrist
Oskar Kohnstamms (1871–1917) and was the sister of his close
friends Gustav Mayer and the philosopher Ernest Mayer. Only thanks to
her marriage to the already known philosopher Karl Jaspers was Gertrud
Mayer able to stay in Germany during the Nazi period.
Jaspers received an extremely diverse and broad-ranging education. He
initially enrolled as a student of law at the University of Heidelberg
for three semesters. Despite his already vivid interest in philosophy,
his decision for medicine was based on his belief that it best
illuminated life itself and the challenges of human existence. Jaspers
then became a student of medicine at Heidelberg from
1902–1908. He graduated M.D. in 1909.  He was a research
assistant in the psychiatric clinic of the university of Heidelberg
from 1909–1915, where he worked with some of the most famous
psychiatrists in Germany, including Nissl, Wilmanned, Gruhle, and
Mayer-Gross. Due to his illness with bronchiectasis, he was incapable
of carrying out heavy duties in the clinic. The director of the
psychiatric clinic of the university of Heidelberg, Franz Nissl,
permitted him to spend the majority of his time at the library rather
than in the clinic and the laboratory. Indeed, his extraordinary
skills of critical thinking and abstract observation on human
situations were evident already then. From 1913 onward, Jaspers read
philosophy systematically. In 1913 he published his Allgemeine
Psychopathologie (General Psychopathology) which already
made apparent the viewpoints and methods that belong to the world of
the humanities and social studies that were regarded by him as
converging into psychopathology. In the same year, he obtained his
second doctorate (Habilitation) in psychology from the
Philosophy Faculty at the University of Heidelberg, supervised by
Wilhelm Windelband. He was a lecturer and later an Associate Professor
of Psychology (Privatdozent) from 1913 to 1921. During this
period, in 1919, he published his Psychologie der
Weltanschauungen (Psychology of World Views). This work
is considered as a transitional work, in which his psychological
method was clearly shaped by philosophical influences and objectives,
and was already evolving into a consistent philosophical doctrine and
acquiring some of the main issues that were to be explored later
within his philosophy of existence. Then, in 1922, he took over the
full professorial chair of philosophy in the University of Heidelberg
(after Heinrich Maier), a position from which he was dismissed in 1937
by the Nazis. To a large extent, the two first major publications were
works of psychology that contain many elements, albeit in inchoate
form, of his later philosophy.  Following his nomination as professor,
he wrote nothing for ten years, except for two small works—a
patholography Stirnberg and van Gogh in 1922 and Die Idee
der Universität (The Idea of the University) in 1923.
While he was working as a psychiatrist in Heidelberg, Jaspers came
into contact with Max Weber, and also with the other intellectuals who
were grouped around Weber, including Ernst Bloch, Emil Lask, Georg
Simmel, and Lukács. His intellectual formation was marked in a
number of ways by this intellectual milieu. At a political level, he
integrated aspects of Weber’s enthusiasm for heroic liberalism,
responsible nationalism and elite democracy into his own thought and
attitudes. At a more theoretical level, his ideas were determined by
the increasingly critical responses to neo-Kantian philosophy, which
dominated methodological discussions around Weber and Lukács,
and which subsequently coloured the intellectual horizon during World
War I and throughout the Weimar Republic. This period witnessed the
dethroning of neo-Kantianism as the philosophical orthodoxy in the
German academic establishment, and it was marked by a proliferation of
philosophical models which rejected Kantian formalism and sought to
integrate experiential, historical and even sociological elements into
philosophical discourse. The attempt to rescue Kantian philosophy from
the legalistic formalism of the South West German School of
neo-Kantian philosophy, centred around Heinrich Rickert and Wilhelm
Windelband, became one of the central features of Jaspers’s
work, and in many ways his entire philosophical evolution was
motivated by the desire to reconstruct Kantian thought, not as a
formalist doctrine of self-legislation, but as an account of
metaphysical experience, spontaneously decisive freedom, and authentic
inner life. His early career as professor of philosophy was also
deeply (and adversely) affected by neo-Kantian hostility to his
work. Indeed, both neo-Kantians and phenomenological philosophers
subjected his work to trenchant criticism in the early stages of his
philosophical trajectory, and members of both these camps, especially
Rickert and Edmund Husserl, accused him of importing anthropological
and experiential questions into philosophy and thus of contaminating
philosophical analysis with contents properly pertaining to other
disciplines.
If Weber was the first decisive personal influence and Kant was the
first decisive philosophical influence on Jaspers, in the early 1920s
he encountered a further figure who assumed a decisive role in his
formation: that is, Martin Heidegger. It cannot be claimed without
qualification that Heidegger directly determined the conceptual
structure or underlying preconditions of Jaspers’s work, nor that
Heidegger assimilated aspects of Jaspers’s thought into his own
philosophy. Throughout their theoretical trajectories, the differences
between Heidegger and Jaspers were in many ways greater than the
similarities. Indeed, the theoretical controversies between them
eventually culminated in an embittered personal and political
altercation, caused by Heidegger’s publicly declared sympathy for the
National Socialists in 1933. Jaspers felt himself personally
threatened by Heidegger’s infamous decision to support the Nazis, as
he was married to a Jewish woman, and he had previously attached
himself to eminent liberal politicians and philosophers, most notably
Weber, who were now vilified by Heidegger and other intellectuals
attached to the NSDAP. In 1933, Jaspers himself was briefly tempted
into making certain incautiously optimistic statements about the
Hitler regime. Indeed, these were remarks were not entirely out of
keeping with his other publications of the early 1930s. In the last
years of the Weimar Republic he published a controversial political
work, Die geistige Situation der Zeit (The Spiritual
Condition of the Age, 1931), which—to his later acute
embarrassment—contained a carefully worded critique of
parliamentary democracy. Throughout this period, he also stressed the
relevance of Weberian ideas of strong leadership for the preservation
of political order in Germany. The souring of his relations with
Heidegger, however, seems to have hardened his mind into a strict and
sustained opposition to National Socialism, and, unlike Heidegger, his
works of the 1930s avoided political themes and were largely
concentrated on elaborating the interior or religious aspects of his
philosophy. In 1932, he published his trilogy Philosophie,
consisting of three separate volumes, each based on its own object of
transcending: Weltorientierung (Orientation of the
World), Existenzerhellung (Illumination of Existence)
and Metaphysik (Metaphysics). This book is generally
considered as his magnum opus and he testified in retrospect
that is was the closest work to his heart. The choice not to grant the
book the expected title of “Existential Philosophy”,
despite the extensive use of the term
Existenzphilosophie, reflects his discontent about its
narrowing his guiding ideal of Philosophia Perennis. Later in his
Vernunft und Widervernunft in unserer Zeit (Reason and
Anti-Reason in Our Time), from 1950 he would express his preference for
the expression ‘philosophy of reason’.
Despite the at times envenomed relations between them, however,
Heidegger and Jaspers are usually associated with each other as the two
founding fathers of existential philosophy in Germany. This
interpretation of their philosophical status and relationship is at
least questionable. Heidegger resented being described as an
existentialist, and Jaspers, at least after 1933, resented being
identified with Heidegger. Even during their early friendship Heidegger
was very critical of Jaspers’s philosophy; he wrote a commentary on
Psychology of World Views, in which he claimed that Jaspers’s
methodological approach remained ensnared in the falsehoods of
subjectivist metaphysics and Cartesian ontology, and that it
illegitimately introduced the categories of Weberian sociology into
philosophical analysis. Similarly, throughout his life Jaspers kept a
book of critical notes on Heidegger, and he routinely described
Heidegger’s fundamental ontology in a tone of moral-humanistic
disapprobation. Nonetheless, there remains a residue of validity in the
common association of Heidegger and Jaspers, and, although it requires
qualification, this association is not in every respect misleading.
Existentialism was, and remains, a highly diffuse theoretical movement,
and it cannot be expected that two philosophers connected with this
movement should hold similar views in all respects. However,
existentialism had certain unifying features, and many of these were
common to both Jaspers and Heidegger. In the early stages of its
evolution, therefore, existentialism might be described as a
theoretical stance which: a) moved philosophical discourse away from
Kantian formalism and emphasized the belief that the content of thought
must reside in particular experiences and decisions; b) followed
Kierkegaard in defining philosophy as a passionate and deeply engaged
activity, in which the integrity and the authenticity of the human
being are decisively implicated; c) sought to overcome the antinomies
(reason/experience; theory/praxis; transcendence/immanence; pure
reason/practical reason) which determine the classical metaphysical
tradition by incorporating all aspects (cognitive, practical and
sensory) of human life in an encompassing account of rational and
experiential existence. If this definition of existentialism is
accepted, then the suggestion of a family connection between Jaspers
and Heidegger cannot be entirely repudiated, for both contributed to
the reorganization of philosophical questioning in the 1920s in a
manner which conforms to this definition. Ultimately, however,
relations between Heidegger and Jaspers degenerated to a terminal
impasse, and after World War II Jaspers refused to explain or exonerate
Heidegger’s political actions during the Nazi years and he even
recommended to a de-Nazification committee that Heidegger should be
suspended from his university teaching responsibilities.
During the Nazi period from 1933 onwards, Jaspers was excluded from
any co-operation in the administration of the university until he
was dismissed from his chair as a professor in 1937 and was subject to
a publication ban (Publikationsverbot). During the war, he
and his wife were in no physical danger. Yet he felt himself a marked
man until the end of World War II. Jaspers once heard indirectly that
there was a plan to deport him and his wife to a concentration camp in
the middle of April 1945. Fortunately, the American troops arrived in
Heidelberg two weeks earlier, on April 1st 1945. However,
after 1945, his fortunes changed dramatically, and he figured
prominently on the White List of the US-American occupying forces:
that is, on the list of politicians and intellectuals who were deemed
untarnished by any association with the NSDAP, and who were allowed to
play a public role in the process of German political
re-foundation. From this time on Jaspers defined himself primarily as
a popular philosopher and educator. In the first role, he contributed
extensive edifying commentaries on questions of political orientation
and civic morality—first, in the interim state of
1945–1949, and then, after 1949, in the early years of the
Federal Republic of Germany. In the second role, as one of the
professors responsible for reopening the University of Heidelberg, to
which he was appointed by the American Army of Occupation as a
contemporary rector, he wrote at length on the necessity of university
reforms, he emphasized the role of liberal humanistic education as a
means of disseminating democratic ideas throughout Germany, and he
took a firm line against the rehabilitation of professors with a
history of Nazi affiliation. In 1946, The Idea of the
University was published in an essentially different form from
the book with the same title from 1923. The later work presents the
university as a free community of scholars and students engaged in the
task of seeking truth. As such, the university and the scholars that
populate it can and should play a decisive role in rehabilitation of
Europe based on the noblest ideas of the enlightenment. At that time
and still, Jaspers is one of few who can justly speak for value and
the need for such a stance against the threats upon freedom and
humanity. The acknowledgment of Jaspers’s noble humanism in the first
years after the war is apparent in the numerous honors granted to him,
including the Goethe Prize in 1947, the Peace Prize of the German Book
Trade in 1958, the Erasmus Prize in 1959, and the Prize of the
Foundation of Oldenburg for Honorary Citizens.
Of his post-1945 publications, therefore, Jaspers’s political
contributions are perhaps the most significant. His contribution to
the promotion of a democratic civic culture in West Germany at this
time was of great importance, and his writings and radio broadcasts
shaped, in part, the gradually evolving democratic consensus of the
early Federal Republic. In Die Schuldfrage (The Question
of German Guilt, 1946), published at the time of the
Nürnberg trials, he argued that, although not all Germans could
be legitimately brought to trial for war crimes, all Germans should
accept an implicit complicity in the holocaust and only the critical
self-reflection of all Germans could lead to cultural and political
renewal. In the 1950s, he supported the main policies of the
liberal-conservative governments led by Konrad Adenauer
(1949–1963), and he particularly endorsed the formation of the
Western Alliance, which he saw as a means of protecting the cultural
resources of Western European culture from their colonization by the
Soviet Union. Throughout this time, however, the cautiously
conservative tenor of Jaspers’s political thought was
progressively modified by his frequent and at times intense
intellectual exchanges with Hannah Arendt, who might well be seen as
the fourth great influence on his work. Jaspers had been
Arendt’s tutor and supervisor before she emigrated from Germany
in the 1930s, but the period after 1945 saw something of a role
reversal in this relationship, which Jaspers seems to have accepted
quite graciously. Influenced by Arendt’s agonistic
republicanism, he gradually turned against the relatively complacent
spirit of political and intellectual restoration in the early Federal
Republic, and he finally devoted himself to elaborating models of
citizenship founded in constitutional rights and legally enshrined
identities. In this respect, he can be viewed as an important
precursor of Jürgen Habermas, and his works contain an early
conception of the doctrine later known as
constitutional patriotism. His views on German re-unification
were also particularly influential; he opposed the dominant outlooks of
the time by claiming that the demand for re-unification meant that
German politics remained infected with the damaging traces of old
geo-political ideas and ambitions, and it prevented the fundamental
redirection of German political life. Finally, then, in symbolic
demonstration of disgust at the persistence of pernicious political
attitudes in Germany he relinquished his German citizenship, and,
having earlier moved across the border to University of Basel in 1948,
he became a Swiss national. In his last works, he placed himself closer
to the political left, and he even argued that only a legal revolution
could ensure that the German state was organized on the basis of a
morally decisive constitution. He died of a stroke in Basel,
Switzerland on February 26 1969 at the age of 86. His wife, Gertrud
Jaspers, who served as his amanuensis throughout his entire life as a
scholar, died in Basel on May 25 1974 at the age of 95.
Less well-known, at least among the world of English-speaking
psychiatry, is Jaspers’s lasting contribution to the field of
psychiatry that preceded his philosophical work, and in retrospect
transpires as not wholly unrelated it, at least in its common
guiding spirit. During his distinguished career as a psychiatrist,
Jaspers achieved an outstanding contribution to psychiatric thinking,
later called ‘The Heidelberg School’ and led by Kurt Schneider. As a
young man, he authored a number of scientific articles on homesickness
and crime, on intelligence tests, on hallucinations – all
illustrated with detailed case histories. Also, Jaspers published
reports of the mental pathology of Van Gogh and Stirnberg. Among these,
of special importance are his outstanding article from 1910, in which
he introduced his method and fundamental principles regarding ‘mental
processes' and ‘personality development’, and an article on the
phenomenological method in psychiatry from 1912, which established his
pioneer status as a first commentator on the phenomenological study of
subjective experiences at the conscious level. At the age of barely
thirty, in 1913, while he was working as a physician in the psychiatric
hospital at Heidelberg, Jaspers published his
Allgemeine Psychopathologie: Ein Leitfaden für Studierenden,
Ärzte und Psychologen (General Psychopathology: A Guide for
Students, Physicians and Psychologists). The aims of this book were to
provide the framework of the scientific field of psychopathology and
its related facts and approaches, not only for practitioners in this
filed but also for interested intellectuals. This framework covers the
problems and methods that capture the body of knowledge of the field
rather than empirical evidence or a system based on a theory. Instead
of deciding between the different existing approaches of his time, he
stressed their peculiarity that entails the inherent justifications
and the way they might complement each other and together portray the
many sides of the psychopathological science. The hint of the spirit
of his existential philosophy, yet to become expressed, is apparent in
his declaration in the preface of the book, according to which
“in psychopathology it is dangerous merely to learn the matter,
our task is not to ‘learn psychopathology’ but to learn to
observe, ask questions, analyze, and think in psychopathological
terms”. However, despite the very impressive of the achievement
of the mentioned book, which within the German speaking world was
recognized by leading psychiatrists as a monumental achievement in the
field, it marked the culmination of Jaspers’s psychiatric
productivity. Just two years later, Jaspers moved away forever from
psychiatric practice and medicine in general, first towards psychology
and then philosophy. Interestingly, though, Jaspers saw fit to revise
and expand the text in a few of its several editions. The first
edition is the shortest. In the second and third editions, there were
minor changes. The most considerably revised and expanded edition is
the fourth, which appeared in 1942. To a large extent, the integration
of many ideas from his then already mature existential philosophy from
the thirties onwards, which more than doubled the scope of the text,
in fact amount to a new version of the book. Now, the subtitle that
appeared in the earlier versions was removed and in the preface
Jaspers indicates its high aim of satisfying the demand for knowledge,
not only for physicians but for all who make mankind their theme. In
this enlarged version of the book, the imprint of Husserl's
descriptive psychology is apparent in the attempt to address the inner
mental experiences of mentally ill people (mainly schizophrenic
patients) and regard them as indicative of the general phenomena of
human consciousness, i.e.: delusions, modes of ego-consciousness, and
modes of emotions. At the same time, the imprint of Wilhelm Dilthey
(1833–1911) was perceptible in the centrality given to the
distinction between ‘understanding psychology’
(Verstehende Psychologie), which relates to meaningful and
comprehensible connections that are inherent in one’s
personality and biography, and ‘explaining psychology’
(Erklärende Psychologie), which focuses on causal
connections that are mainly rooted in
  biology.1]

Jaspers’s declared conviction that the methodological principles
remain largely unaffected by the increased materials supported his
efforts to add entire sections to the new versions of the book –
sections that aptly reveal his philosophical view on the pertinent
considerations in curing mental illness. Notwithstanding this, Jaspers
opposed the attempts to address existentialist ideas for the sake of
understanding mental illness. For him it is not possible that a human
being as a whole falls ill or alternatively that illness of any kind
can cover one's entire being, rather there are always parts that
remain uninfected with illness or healthy.


It is worth noting that the appearance of the fourth edition of
General Psychopathology was enabled despite the publication
ban to which Jaspers was subject since 1938 for his outspoken and
uncompromising resistance to the Nazis regime and his persistent
loyalty to his Jewish wife. Probably the same title from 1913 and the
scientific character, which covered the fact of incorporation of the
of considerable sections which where imprinted with his philosophical
thinking, were helpful in this regard. Despite ceasing practicing
psychiatry, Jaspers retain his interest in psychopathology and was
fully aware of the developments in the field, in particular regarding
the neurological and somatic aspects of mental illness. However, after
the fourth edition appeared, five more were printed in the same format
as the fourth, the latest appearing in 1973. An English translation
exists for the seventh edition only and was published in 1963 by J.
Hoenig and Miriam Hamilton. For various reasons—starting from
not considering the ‘real causes’ of mental illness,
continuing with its loaded style of writing and argumentation, its
severe (though inconsistent) criticism of psychoanalysis, which at
that time was regarded as indispensable in any consideration of
psychopathology, and other reasons—the reception of General
Psychopathology in the English-speaking countries was far from
enthusiastic, except for the most respectful, and was sometimes even
hostile.
4. The Philosophical Writings


Jaspers’s first intervention in philosophical debate, Psychology
of World Views, constructed a typology of mental attitudes, which,
close to Weber's model of ideal types, was intended to provide an
interpretive account of basic psychological dispositions. The
underlying argument in this work is that the constitutive fact of human
mental life is the division between subject and object
(Subjekt-Objekt-Spaltung). Human psychological
forms—or world views—are positioned as antinomical moments
within this founding antinomy, and they give distinct paradigmatic
expression to the relation between human subjective inclinations and
freedoms and the objective phenomena which the subject encounters.
Unlike Weber, however, Jaspers argued that the construction of world
views is not a merely neutral process, to be judged in non-evaluative
manner. Instead, all world views contain an element of pathology; they
incorporate strategies of defensiveness, suppression and subterfuge,
and they are concentrated around false certainties or spuriously
objectivized modes of rationality, into which the human mind withdraws
in order to obtain security amongst the frighteningly limitless
possibilities of human existence. World views, in consequence, commonly
take the form of objectivized cages (Gehäuse), in which
existence hardens itself against contents and experiences which
threaten to transcend or unbalance the defensive restrictions which it
has placed upon its operations. Although some world views possess an
unconditioned component, most world views exist as the limits
of a formed mental apparatus. It is the task of psychological
intervention, Jaspers thus argued, to guide human existence beyond the
restricted antinomies around which it stabilizes itself, and to allow
it decisively to confront the more authentic possibilities, of
subjective and objective life, which it effaces through its normal
rational dispositions and attitudes.


In addition to this psychological typology, Jaspers’s analysis of world
views also contains a wider critique of human rationality. Most modes
of rationality, he suggested, are conveniently instrumental or
ideological forms, which serve distinct subjective and objective
functions, and they habitually stand in the way of genuine knowledge.
At the same time, however, he also claimed that rationality possesses
capacities of communicative integrity and phenomenological
self-overcoming, and, if authentically exercised, it is able to escape
its narrowly functional form, to expose itself to new contents beyond
its limits and antinomies, and to elaborate new and more cognitively
unified conceptual structures. He therefore indicated that
formal-epistemological concepts of rationality must be expanded to
recognize that experience and committed actions are formative of
authentic knowledge, and that reason cannot, in Cartesian manner, be
monadically dislocated from its historical, sensory, experiential and
voluntaristic foundations. From the outset, therefore, Jaspers's work,
although methodologically marked by Weber, was also indelibly stamped
by Hegel's philosophy, and it sought to integrate the preconditions of
Hegel's phenomenology into a systematic psychological
doctrine. Indeed, at this early stage in his development Jaspers’s
thought hinged on an existential—or
Kierkegaardian—alteration of Hegelian philosophy. In this, he
transposed the dialectical process through which Hegel accounted for
the overcoming of cognitive antinomies in the emergence of
self-consciousness into an analysis of cognitive formation which sees
the resolution of reason's antinomies as effected through vital
experiences, decisive acts of self-confrontation, or communicative
transcendence.


In this early work, Jaspers introduced several concepts which assumed
great importance for all his work. Most importantly, this work
contains a theory of the limit (Grenze). This term designates
both the habitual forms and attitudes of the human mental apparatus,
and the experiences of the mind as it recognizes these attitudes as
falsely objectivized moments within its antinomical structure, and as
it transcends these limits by disposing itself in new ways towards
itself and its objects. In his early philosophy Jaspers thus ascribed
central status to ‘limit situations’
(Grenzsituationen). Limit situations are moments, usually
accompanied by experiences of dread, guilt or acute anxiety, in which
the human mind confronts the restrictions and pathological narrowness
of its existing forms, and allows itself to abandon the securities of
its limitedness, and so to enter new realm of self-consciousness. In
conjunction with this, then, this work also contains a theory of the
unconditioned (das Unbedingte). In this theory,
Jaspers argued that limit situations are unconditioned moments of human
existence, in which reason is drawn by intense impulses or imperatives,
which impel it to expose itself to the limits of its consciousness and
to seek higher or more reflected modes of knowledge. The unconditioned,
a term transported from Kantian doctrines of synthetic regress, is thus
proposed by Jaspers as a vital impetus in reason, in which reason
encounters its form as conditioned or limited and desires to transcend
the limits of this form. In relation to this, then, Jaspers’s early
psychological work also introduced, albeit inchoately, the concept of
existential communication. In this, he argued that the freedom
of consciousness to overcome its limits and antinomies can only be
elaborated through speech: that is, as a process in which consciousness
is elevated beyond its limits through intensely engaged communication
with other persons, and in which committed communication helps to
suspend the prejudices and fixed attitudes of consciousness.
Existentially open consciousness is therefore always communicative, and
it is only where it abandons its monological structure that
consciousness can fully elaborate its existential possibilities. In
this early doctrine of communication, Jaspers helped to shape a wider
communicative and intersubjective shift in German philosophy; indeed,
the resonances of his existential hermeneutics remained palpable in the
much later works of Hans-Georg Gadamer and Paul Ricoeur. Less
obviously, however, in this doctrine he also guided early existential
thinking away from its original association with Kierkegaard and
Nietzsche and, although assimilating Kierkegaardian elements of
decisiveness and impassioned commitment, he claimed that Kierkegaard's
cult of interiority, centred in the speechlessness of inner life, was a
miscarried attempt to envision the conditions of human authenticity.
The decision for authentic self-overcoming and cognitive unity can only
occur, he argued, through shared participation in dialogue.


The major publication of Jaspers’s earlier period, and probably of
his entire career, is the three-volume work: Philosophy
(1932). In this work, he retained the partly Hegelian focus of his
earlier publications, and he followed the spirit of Hegelian
phenomenology in providing an account of the formation of human
consciousness, which grasps consciousness as proceeding from the level
of immediate knowledge and progressing through a sequence of antinomies
towards a level of truthfully unified reflection and self-knowledge. In
this, Jaspers again accentuated the claim that the antinomies which
reason encounters and resolves in its unfolding as truth are at once
both cognitive and experiential antinomies, and that the lived moments
of human existence are always of cognitively constitutive relevance for
the formation of consciousness. These ideas in fact remained central to
Jaspers’s philosophy throughout its subsequent evolution. In his later
philosophical works, especially Von der Wahrheit (Of
Truth, 1947), he continued to give prominence to cognitive models
derived from Hegelian phenomenology, and he proposed a concept of
the encompassing (das Umgreifende) to determine the
phenomenological gradations of thought and being. However, in addition
to its concern with Hegelian themes, Philosophy also contains
a fundamental reconstruction of Kantian themes, it has its foundation
in a critical reconstruction of Kant's doctrine of transcendental
ideas, and it is built around an endeavour to explain the elements of
Kantian idealism as a systematic doctrine of subjective-metaphysical
experience.


The three volumes of Philosophy bear the titles
Philosophical World Orientation (volume I), The
Illumination of Existence (volume II), and Metaphysics
(volume III). Each volume of this book thus describes a particular way
of being: orientation, existence and metaphysical
transcendence are the three essential existential modalities
of human life. At the same time, each volume also describes a
particular way of knowing, which is correlated with a way of being:
orientation is cognitively determined by objectively verifiable
knowledge or by positive or scientific proof-forms, existence is
determined by subjective/existential self-reflection, and transcendence
is determined by the symbolic interpretation of metaphysical contents.
Together, the three volumes of Philosophy are designed to show
how human existence and human knowledge necessarily progress from one
level of being and one level of knowledge to another, and how
consciousness gradually evolves, through confrontation with its own
antinomies, from an immediate and unformed state towards a condition of
unity and integral self-experience. The three volumes are consequently
bound together by the argument that at the level of immediate objective
knowledge—of orientation in the world—human consciousness
raises subjective-existential questions about itself and the grounds of
its truth which it cannot resolve at this level of consciousness, and
it encounters antinomies which call it to reflect existentially upon
itself and to elevate it to the level of existence or existentially
committed self-reflection. At this higher level of consciousness, then,
existence raises metaphysical questions about itself and its origin
which it cannot begin to answer without an awareness that existence is,
at an originary or authentic level, transcendent, and that its
truth is metaphysical.


Each level of being in Jaspers’s Philosophy corresponds to
one of the Kantian transcendental ideas, and the modes of thinking and
knowing defining each level of existence elucidate the intellectual
content of Kant's ideas. The level of orientation in the world
corresponds to the idea of the unity of the world; the level of
existence corresponds to the idea of the soul's immortality; the level
of transcendence corresponds to the idea of God's necessary existence.
However, whereas Kant saw transcendental ideas as the formal-regulative
ideas of reason, serving, at most, to confer systematic organization on
reason's immanent operations, Jaspers viewed transcendental ideas as
realms of lived knowledge, through which consciousness passes and by
whose experienced antinomies it is formed and guided to a knowledge of
itself as transcendent. Jaspers thus attributed to
transcendental ideas a substantial and experiential content. Ideas do
not, as for Kant, simply mark the formal limits of knowledge, marking
out the bounds of sense against speculative or metaphysical questions.
Instead, ideas provide a constant impulsion for reason to overcome its
limits, and to seek an ever more transcendent knowledge of itself, its
contents and its possibilities. In his mature philosophy, therefore,
Jaspers transformed the Kantian transcendental ideas into ideas of
transcendence, in which consciousness apprehends and elaborates
the possibility of substantial or metaphysical knowledge and
self-knowledge. Central to this adjustment to Kant's conception of
ideas was also an implied, yet quite fundamental critique of the key
Kantian distinction between the transcendent and the transcendental. In
contrast to contemporary neo-Kantian readings of Kant, which were
prepared to acknowledge the ideal element in Kantian idealism only, at
most, as a regulative framework, generated by reason's own autonomous
functions, Jaspers argued that Kantian philosophy always at once
contains and suppresses a vision of experienced transcendence, and that
the Kantian ideas should be viewed as challenges to reason to think
beyond the limits of its autonomy, towards new and more authentic
contents, self-experiences and freedoms.


In replacing the transcendental with the transcendent, however,
Jaspers did not argue that transcendent contents are obtainable as
positive elements of human knowledge. On the contrary, he argued that
consciousness only acquires knowledge of its transcendence by
contemplating the evanescent ciphers of transcendence, which
signify the absolute limits of human consciousness. These ciphers might
be encountered in nature, in art, in religious symbolism, or in
metaphysical philosophy. But it is characteristic of all ciphers that,
in alluding to transcendence, they also withhold transcendent knowledge
from consciousness, and that they can only act as indices of the
impossibility of such knowledge. The attitude of consciousness which
apprehends its limits and its possible transcendence can therefore only
be an attitude of foundering or failing (Scheitern), and
transcendence can intrude in human consciousness only as an experience
of the absolute insufficiency of this consciousness for interpreting
its originary or metaphysical character. At this level, then, although
opposing the formality and experiential vacuity of neo-Kantianism,
Jaspers also accepted the original Kantian prohibition on positive
transcendent or metaphysical knowledge. He argued that consciousness
always has a metaphysical orientation to be other than, or transcendent
to, its existing forms, but he also claimed that this orientation can
only factually culminate in a crisis of transcendence, or in a crisis
of metaphysics. Although reconsolidating the metaphysical aspects of
Kantian philosophy, therefore, Jaspers’s own metaphysics is always a
post-Kantian metaphysics: it is a negative metaphysics, which
resists all suggestion that human reason might give itself an account
of metaphysical essences, which defines the realm of human meaning as
formed by its difference against positive metaphysical knowledge, but
which nonetheless sees reason, in Kierkegaardian manner, as driven by a
despairing desire for metaphysical transcendence.


Jaspers’s metaphysical reconstruction of Kantian idealism has been
denounced by other philosophers, most notably those in the broad milieu
of the Frankfurt School, as a stage in a wider course of cognitive
degeneration, which falsely translates absolute metaphysical contents
into moments of human inner experience. Despite this, there are good
grounds for arguing that Jaspers’s metaphysics is an important critique
of the fully autonomist accounts of rationality proposed by
neo-Kantianism, and it even coincides with the critiques of Kantian
formalism which underpinned the philosophies widely associated with the
Frankfurt School. Jaspers intuited that Kantian transcendentalism
suppressed a deep-lying impulse for transcendence, and this aspect of
Kant's thought was badly neglected by interpreters who saw Kant's
philosophy as a doctrine of pure immanence or autonomy. Adorno's later
argument that Kant's transcendental idealism always contains a lament
over the closure of reason against transcendence was thus anticipated
by Jaspers, albeit in subjectivist terms, and Jaspers and
Adorno—for all their political differences—can be placed
close together as thinkers who endeavoured to revitalize the
metaphysical traces in idealism. In any case, Jaspers’s insistence,
contra Kant and the neo-Kantians, that reason itself is not
the sole source of knowledge, and that the task of reason is not
proscriptively to circumscribe the sphere of its validity against
transcendence, but to overcome its cognitive limits and to envision
contents which cannot be generated by its own autonomous functions,
deserves to be rehabilitated as an abidingly significant contribution
to modern debates on metaphysics and epistemology.
5. Philosophy and Religion


The influences of Weber, Kant, Hegel and Kierkegaard are not
difficult to discern in Jaspers’s work. Similarly, it is also not
difficult to identify the ways in which his work was influenced by
Nietzsche. Jaspers borrowed from Nietzsche a psychologistic approach to
philosophical perspectives, and, like Nietzsche, he tended to view
philosophical claims, not as formally verifiable postulates, but as
expressions of underlying mental dispositions. For this reason, he also
borrowed from Nietzsche a dismissive approach to absolutized claims to
truthful knowledge, and a resultant rejection of all rational purism.
Most especially, however, like Heidegger, he took from Nietzsche a
critical approach to the residues of metaphysics in European
philosophy, and he denied the existence of essences which are external
or indifferent to human experience. At the same time, however, Jaspers
also clearly positioned his philosophy against many elements of the
Nietzschean legacy. He was clearly opposed to the naturalistic vitalism
evolving from Nietzsche's work, and his emphasis on human subjectivity
as a locus of truthful transcendence meant that Kierkegaard, rather
than Nietzsche, was the existential prototype for his work.


One further important formative influence on Jaspers’s philosophy,
however, was Schelling. Although he was at times critical of the simple
mysticism and the metaphysics of natural process in Schelling's
religious works, his metaphysical reconstruction of Kantian idealism
rearticulated some elements of the positive philosophy of the later
Schelling, and it mirrored his attempt to account for truthful
knowledge as a cognitive experience in which reason is transfigured by
its encounter with contents other than its own form. In this respect,
Jaspers adopted from Schelling a non-identitarian model of cognitive
life, which views true (or truthful) knowledge as obtained through acts
of positive interpretation and revelation at the limits of rational
consciousness. Unlike Schelling, he always rejected claims to absolute
positive knowledge; to this extent, he remained—in the ultimate
analysis—a Kantian philosopher. However, he was clearly
sympathetic to Schelling's critique of formal epistemological
negativism. Indeed, through his hermeneutical transformation of
idealism into a metaphysics of symbolic interpretation, he might be
seen, like both Schelling and Johann Georg Hamann before him, as a
philosopher who was intent on re-invoking the truth of revelation, as
an absolute and non-identical content of knowledge, against the
rational evidences of epistemology, and so on elaborating an
interpretive methodology adapted to a conception of truth as disclosed
or revealed.


The discrete but important influence of Schelling on Jaspers’s
philosophy also provides a clue to understanding Jaspers’s
philosophy of religion. At one level, Jaspers was philosophically
committed to a sympathetic retrieval of religious contents. He was
insistent that truth can only be interpreted as an element of radical
alterity in reason, or as reason's experience of its own
limits. Similarly, he was insistent that the conditions of human
freedom are not generated by human reason alone, but are experienced
as incursions of transcendence in rational thought. For these reasons,
his philosophy is sympathetic towards the primary implications of
revelation theology, and it cautiously upholds the essential
philosophical claim of revelation: namely, that truth is a disclosure
of otherness (transcendence) to reason, or at least an interpreted
moment of otherness in reason. At the same time, however, Jaspers
cannot in any obvious way be described as a religious philosopher. In
fact, he was very critical of revelation theology, and of orthodox
religions more generally, on a number of quite separate counts. First,
he argued that the centre of religion is always formed by a falsely
objectivized or absolutized claim to truth, which fails to recognize
that transcendence occurs in many ways, and that transcendent truths
cannot be made concrete as a set of factual statements or
narratives. Religious world views are therefore examples of limited
mental attitudes, which seek a hold in uniform doctrine in order to
evade a confrontation with the uncertainty and instability of
transcendence. In positing transcendence as a realized element of
revelation, religion in fact obstructs the capacity for transcendence
which all people possess; religion claims to offer transcendence, but
it actually obstructs it. Second, then, as the foundations of dogma
and doctrinal orthodoxy, revealed truth-claims eliminate the
self-critical and communicative aspect of human reason, and they
undermine the dialogical preconditions of transcendence and
existential self-knowledge. Jaspers thus viewed orthodox religion as
an obstruction to communication, which places dogmatic limits on the
common human capacity for truthfulness and transcendence. Nonetheless,
as a philosopher of transcendence, he was also clear that human
truthfulness, or humanity more generally, cannot be conceived without
a recuperation of religious interpretive approaches and without a
recognition of the fact that the founding contents of philosophy are
transcendent. Much of his work, in consequence, might be construed as
an attempt to free the contents of religious thinking from the
dogmatic orthodoxies imposed upon these contents in the name of
organized religion.


The central idea in Jaspers’s philosophy of religion is the
concept of philosophical faith, set out most extensively
in Der Philosophische Glaube (Philosophical Faith,
1948) and Der Philophische Glaube angesichts der christlichen
Offenbarung (Philosophical Faith in face of Christian
Revelation, 1962). This notoriously difficult concept contains a
number of quite distinct meanings. First, it means that true
philosophy must be guided by a faith in the originary transcendence of
human existence, and that philosophy which negatively excludes or
ignores its transcendent origin falls short of the highest tasks of
philosophy. Second, however, it also means that true philosophy
cannot simply abandon philosophical rationality for positively
disclosed truth-contents or dogma, and that the critical function of
rationality has a constitutive role in the formation of absolute
knowledge. In this respect, Jaspers revisited some of the
controversies concerning the relation between religion and philosophy
which shaped the philosophy of the Young Hegelians in the 1830s. Like
the Young Hegelians, he insisted that faith needs philosophy, and
faith devalues its contents wherever these are dogmatically or
positively proclaimed. Third, then, this concept also indicates that
the evidences of faith are always paradoxical and uncertain and that
those who pursue knowledge of these contents must accept an attitude
of philosophical relativism and discursive exchange: if faith results
in dogmatism, it immediately undermines its claims to offer
transcendent knowledge. The concept of philosophical faith is thus
proposed, not as a doctrine of factual revelation or accomplished
transcendence, but as a guide to transcendent communication, which
balances the element of disclosure in faith with a critical
philosophical veto on the absolutism of religious claims, and which
consequently insists that transcendent knowledge must be accepted as
relative and incomplete. In this regard, Jaspers held the religious
aspects of his philosophy on a fine dialectic between theological and
anthropological assertions. He implied, at one level, that purely
secularist accounts of human life occlude existence against its
originary transcendent possibilities and freedoms. At the same time,
however, he also suggested that pure theological analysis closes
humanity against the relativity and precariousness of its truths, and
against the communicative processes through which these truths are
disclosed. Only philosophy which can at once embrace and relativize
secularism and embrace and relativize religion is able to undertake
adequate existential inquiry, and philosophy which, in either
direction, abandons the dialectical edge between these two commitments
ceases to be genuine philosophy.


This critical-recuperative attitude towards religious inquiry was
fundamental to many of the public controversies in which Jaspers
engaged. The religious elements of his work came under attack from the
Calvinist theologian, Karl Barth, who denounced the lack of objective
religious content in his concept of transcendence. More significantly,
though, Jaspers also entered into a lengthy and influential
controversy with Rudolf Bultmann, the resonances of which still impact
on liberal theological debate. At the centre of this debate was
Jaspers’s critique of Bultmann's strategy of
scriptural de-mythologization: that is, his attempt to
clarify the truth-contents of the scriptures by eliminating the
historical or mythological elements of the New Testament, and by
concentrating, in an existentially intonated exegesis, on the
perennially valid and present aspects of the Bible. At the time when
Bultmann first proposed this de-mythologizing approach Jaspers was
widely (although erroneously) identified with the liberal wing of
Protestant theology, and it was perhaps expected that he might declare
sympathy for Bultmann's hermeneutical approach. Jaspers, however,
turned sharply on Bultmann. He accused him, first, of propagating a
false rationalism in religious debate; second, of arbitrarily
dismissing the manifestations, embedded in myth, of the spiritual
experiences of those living in earlier historical époques; and,
third, of aligning all transcendent experiences to a standard scheme
of relative value, and so of imposing a new system of orthodoxy in
theology and undermining the manifold possibilities of
transcendence. In opposition to Bultmann, therefore, Jaspers concluded
that only a religious hermeneutic based in absolute
liberality, excluding all orthodoxy, could be appropriate to
the task of interpreting the transcendent contents of human life.
Interpretive methods which efface the traces of historical contingency
from transcendence and reduce transcendence to one predetermined
religious truth, he suggested, fail to reflect on the plural and
various forms in which transcendence can be interpreted, they
erroneously presuppose that transcendence can be encased in the
categories of one exclusive doctrine, and they undervalue the
constitutive historical variability of transcendence. As a consequence,
Jaspers argued implicitly for the importance of mythical or symbolic
forms in religious inquiry, and he indicated that both myth and
religion contain, in similar measure, the interpreted residues of
transcendence. His analysis of religion culminated in a discussion of
Trinitarian theology which, echoing Ludwig Feuerbach's anthropological
analysis, asserted that the three parts of the trinity should be
interpreted, not as factual elements of deity, but as symbolic ciphers
of human possibility. In this, he ascribed particular significance to
the second person of the Trinity, Jesus Christ, as a cipher for the
human existential possibility of inner change, reversal and
transformation. Wherever this cipher is hypostatically defined as mere
positive fact of belief, he concluded however, the freedom of
transcendence obtained through the sympathetic interpretation and
recuperation of this cipher is obstructed.


Underlying Jaspers’s interest in religion was a determination to
convert the elements of religious doctrine into an account of human
possibilities and freedoms. Indeed, the ambition behind his work on
religion and myth was no less than to liberate transcendence from
theology, and to permit an interpretive transformation of religiously
conceived essences into the free moments of human self-interpretation.
If his thought can truly be placed in the terrain of theological
discourse, therefore, his approach to religion is one of extreme
liberalism and latitudinarianism, which dismisses the claim that
transcendence is exclusively or even predominantly disclosed by
religion. The truth of religion, he intimated, only becomes true if it
is interpreted as a human truth, not as a truth originally external or
prior to humanity. In its orthodox form, however, religion normally
prevents the knowledge of transcendence which it purports to
offer.
6. Later Works: The Politics of Humanism


These humanistic reflections on the philosophy of religion are not
isolated components of Jaspers’s work. In fact, his criticism of
religious dogmatism evolved in conjunction with a wider doctrine of
humanism, which ultimately became the defining component of his later
work. Arguably, Jaspers was always a humanist; certainly, if humanism
is defined as a doctrine which seeks to account for the specificity,
uniqueness and dignity of human life his work can, from the outset, be
seen as a variant on philosophical humanism. The argument runs through
all his early works that human beings are distinguished by the fact
that they have authentic attributes of existence and
transcendence—that is, by their ability to raise questions about
themselves and their freedoms which cannot be posed in material or
scientific terms, and by their resultant capacity for decisive
reversal, self-transformation and transcendence. True humanity is thus
a condition of free self-possession and transcendent authenticity. In
general terms, existentialism can be divided between philosophers,
such as Jean-Paul Sartre, who defined existentialism as a humanism,
and those, such as Heidegger, who saw the organization of philosophy
around the analysis of human determinacy as a metaphysical corruption
of philosophy. Jaspers clearly belonged to the first category of
existential philosophers.


In his writings after 1945, most especially in Vom
Ursprung und Ziel der Geschichte (The Origin and Goal of
History, 1949) and Die Atombombe und die Zukunft des
Menschen (The Atom Bomb and the Future of Mankind, 1961),
Jaspers structured his work quite explicitly as a humanist doctrine.
From this time on, moreover, he attached greater importance to the
social and collective conditions of human integrity and he tended to
tone down his earlier construction of interiority as the place of human
freedom. In fact, even the term Existenz became increasingly
scarce in his post-1945 publications, and it was replaced, to a large
extent, by ideas of shared humanity, founded, not in the decisive
experiences of inner transformation, but in the resources of culture,
tradition and ethically modulated political life. Central to these
later works, consequently, was not only a turn towards humanistic
reflection, but also an inquiry into the politics of humanism and the
distinctively human preconditions of political existence.


Broadly reconstructed, in his later political work he argued that the
emergence of European totalitarianism—exemplified by both
National Socialism and Communism—was the result of a decline in
political humanity and of an increasing primacy of modes of technical
or instrumental rationality, which erode the authentic resources of
human life. He therefore sought to offer an account of a human polity,
able to provide an enduring bastion against totalitarian inhumanity.
First, he argued, the human polity must be sustained by an integral
cultural tradition, so that human beings can interpret the ciphers of
their integrity in the ethical contents of a national culture. The
political betrayal of humanity, he suggested, is usually flanked by,
and in fact presupposes, a cultural betrayal of humanity, and
totalitarian governance normally arises from the erosion or
instrumental subjection of culture. In the nineteenth century Marx had
argued that the reactionary malaise of German politics was caused by
the fact that German society habitually allowed culture to stand in
for politics and defined the relatively de-politicized educated
bourgeois elite [Bildungsbürgertum] as the pillar of
social order and the arbiter of progress. Jaspers responded to this
characterization of Germany by claiming that societies which undermine
the cultural role of the bourgeois elite are inherently unstable, and
that the educated bourgeoisie has a primary role to play in upholding
the preconditions of democratic culture. Second, he argued that the
human polity must be based in free communication between citizens:
communicative freedom is a prerequisite of public virtue. The human
polity, he thus implied, is likely to be some kind of democracy, based
in some degree of publicly formed consensus. Like Arendt, in fact, he
concluded that social atomization creates cultures in which
totalitarianism is likely to flourish, and that only unregulated
debate in the public sphere can offset this latent pathology of mass
society. Third, he argued that the resources of technological,
scientific and economic planning employed by the political system
should be kept at a minimum, and that the existence of an unplanned
sphere of human interaction is necessary for the maintenance of a
human political order. In this respect, he fervently opposed all
tendencies towards technocratic governance, which he identified both
in the Communist bloc in Eastern Europe, and in the rapidly expanding
welfare state of the Federal Republic under Adenauer. Technocracy, he
asserted, is the objective form of the instrumental tendencies in
human reason, and if it is not counterbalanced by the integrally human
resources of cultural or rational communication it is likely to result
in oppressive government. In this respect, he moved close to quite
standard variants on political liberalism, and he endorsed limited
government, relative cultural and economic freedom, and protection for
society from unaccountable political direction. Fourth, he also
argued that a human polity requires a constitutional apparatus,
enshrining basic rights, imposing moral-legal order on the operations
of the state, and restricting the prerogative powers of the political
apparatus. Like Kant, therefore, he advocated the institution of an
international federation of states, with shared constitutions, laws
and international courts. Fifth, however, he also retained aspects of
the elite-democratic outlook which he had first inherited from Weber,
and he continued to argue that the human polity must be supported and
guided by reasonable persons or responsible elites.


After the traumas of National Socialism and the war, however, it is
fair to say that Jaspers’s political philosophy never moved
finally beyond a sceptical attitude towards pure democracy, and his
political writings never fully renounced the sense that German society
was not sufficiently evolved to support a democracy, and Germans
required education and guidance for democracy to take hold. Even in
his last writings of the 1960s, in which he declared tentative support
for the activities of the student movement around 1968, there remain
traces of elite-democratic sympathy. For all his importance in modern
German politics, therefore, his philosophy of politics was always
slightly anachronistic, and his position remained embedded in the
personalistic ideals of statehood which characterized the old-liberal
political culture of Imperial Germany and persisted in the
conservative-liberal fringes of the Weimar Republic.


Jaspers left unfinished Die Großen Philosophen, whose
declared aim was “promoting the happiness that comes of meeting
great men and sharing in their thoughts”, and employed his
personal method of constant questioning and struggle. This is a
monumental project of universal history of philosophy, whose creators
were the outstanding philosophers who inspired the human
thought. Jaspers, who believed that only through communication with
others can we come to ourselves and to wisdom, regarded the
philosophers he discusses in this book as his “eternal
contemporaries” and “the disturbers” in the sense of
thinkers for whom doubt and despair loomed large. The first two
volumes of this work appeared in 1958, while the third and fourth have
been gathered from the vast material of his posthumous papers. The
editors Ermarth and Ehrlich have, however, been able to stitch
together a coherent book that, in accordance with Jaspers’s
plan, primarily covers the philosophers whom he termed “the
disturbers”: thinkers for whom doubt and despair loomed
large. The English translations were by Ralf Manheim and edited by
Hannah Arendt, and appeared in parts until 1994.
7. Commentary and Edition of the complete works (KJG)


The Heidelberg Academy (“Heidelberger Forum Edition”) and
the academy of sciences in Göttingen initiated a project of
gathering in one standard edition the unconnected variety of
distinguished editions, commentaries, and translations of the writings
of Karl Jaspers. The project is chaired by Otfried Höffe,
together with the editors Thomas Fuchs, Jens Halfwassen, and Reinhard
Schulz, with the cooperation of Anton Hügli, Kurt Salamun, und
Hans Saner. The planned project consists of three major divisions,
altogether comprising 50 volumes: works (I. 1–27), estate (II. 1–11),
and letters (III. 1–12). While the first division covers all the works
that were printed and published during Jaspers’s lifetime, the
second and the third encompass selections from the vast material of
his posthumous papers, some already published and others that have
never appeared. The set’s general objective is reviving the
investigation of the philosophical, contemporary, and cultural
preconditions for Jaspers’s thinking, and also tracing the
history of his impact. The work on this edition at the Universities of
Heidelberg and Oldenburg is projected to take 18 years and is the
fruit of cooperation with the Karl Jaspers Foundation in Basel. The
editors will have recourse to the unpublished writings kept at the
German Literary Archives in Marbach and the 11,000 volumes of the
Jaspers Research Library in the future Karl Jaspers House in
Oldenburg. Over and above the commentary itself, the edition is
designed to provide new impulses for research on the philosopher and
to enable the debates on present-day cultural and political issues to
profit from a species of thinking that can be described as
interdisciplinary and cosmopolitan in the best sense of those
terms. For now, the following volumes exist:

Karl Jaspers Gesamtausgabe (KJG) I/21:

Schriften zur Universitätsidee

Oliver Immel (Hrsg.)

2015. 508 pp.

ISBN 978-3-7965-3423-2

Karl Jaspers Gesamtausgabe (KJG) I/10:

Vom Ursprung und Ziel der Geschichte

Kurt Salamun (Hrsg.)

2016. XXXII, 284 pp. Leinen mit Schutzumschlag.

ISBN 978-3-7965-3429-4

Karl Jaspers Gesamtausgabe (KJG) I/13:

Der philosophische Glaube angesichts der Offenbarung

Bernd Weidmann (Hrsg.)

mit Lesebändchen.

2016. XC, 625 pp.

ISBN 978-3-7965-3431-7

Karl Jaspers Gesamtausgabe (KJG) III/8-1:

Ausgewählte Verlags- und
Übersetzerkorrespondenzen

Dirk Fonfara (Hrsg.)

2017. 700 pp.

ISBN 978-3-7965-3722-6

In production


The second section (KJG III/8.2), that will appear in 2018 is
devoted to the correspondence with Klaus Piper and Piper publishing
house.

Karl Jaspers Gesamtausgabe (KJG) I/8:

Schriften zur Existenzphilosophie

Dominic Kaegi (Hrsg.)

2018. Ca. L, 300 pp. Leinen mit Schutzumschlag.

ISBN 978-3-7965-3430-0

In production
Jaspers’s declared conviction that the methodological principles
remain largely unaffected by the increased materials supported his
efforts to add entire sections to the new versions of the book –
sections that aptly reveal his philosophical view on the pertinent
considerations in curing mental illness. Notwithstanding this, Jaspers
opposed the attempts to address existentialist ideas for the sake of
understanding mental illness. For him it is not possible that a human
being as a whole falls ill or alternatively that illness of any kind
can cover one's entire being, rather there are always parts that
remain uninfected with illness or healthy.
It is worth noting that the appearance of the fourth edition of
General Psychopathology was enabled despite the publication
ban to which Jaspers was subject since 1938 for his outspoken and
uncompromising resistance to the Nazis regime and his persistent
loyalty to his Jewish wife. Probably the same title from 1913 and the
scientific character, which covered the fact of incorporation of the
of considerable sections which where imprinted with his philosophical
thinking, were helpful in this regard. Despite ceasing practicing
psychiatry, Jaspers retain his interest in psychopathology and was
fully aware of the developments in the field, in particular regarding
the neurological and somatic aspects of mental illness. However, after
the fourth edition appeared, five more were printed in the same format
as the fourth, the latest appearing in 1973. An English translation
exists for the seventh edition only and was published in 1963 by J.
Hoenig and Miriam Hamilton. For various reasons—starting from
not considering the ‘real causes’ of mental illness,
continuing with its loaded style of writing and argumentation, its
severe (though inconsistent) criticism of psychoanalysis, which at
that time was regarded as indispensable in any consideration of
psychopathology, and other reasons—the reception of General
Psychopathology in the English-speaking countries was far from
enthusiastic, except for the most respectful, and was sometimes even
hostile.
Jaspers’s first intervention in philosophical debate, Psychology
of World Views, constructed a typology of mental attitudes, which,
close to Weber's model of ideal types, was intended to provide an
interpretive account of basic psychological dispositions. The
underlying argument in this work is that the constitutive fact of human
mental life is the division between subject and object
(Subjekt-Objekt-Spaltung). Human psychological
forms—or world views—are positioned as antinomical moments
within this founding antinomy, and they give distinct paradigmatic
expression to the relation between human subjective inclinations and
freedoms and the objective phenomena which the subject encounters.
Unlike Weber, however, Jaspers argued that the construction of world
views is not a merely neutral process, to be judged in non-evaluative
manner. Instead, all world views contain an element of pathology; they
incorporate strategies of defensiveness, suppression and subterfuge,
and they are concentrated around false certainties or spuriously
objectivized modes of rationality, into which the human mind withdraws
in order to obtain security amongst the frighteningly limitless
possibilities of human existence. World views, in consequence, commonly
take the form of objectivized cages (Gehäuse), in which
existence hardens itself against contents and experiences which
threaten to transcend or unbalance the defensive restrictions which it
has placed upon its operations. Although some world views possess an
unconditioned component, most world views exist as the limits
of a formed mental apparatus. It is the task of psychological
intervention, Jaspers thus argued, to guide human existence beyond the
restricted antinomies around which it stabilizes itself, and to allow
it decisively to confront the more authentic possibilities, of
subjective and objective life, which it effaces through its normal
rational dispositions and attitudes.
In addition to this psychological typology, Jaspers’s analysis of world
views also contains a wider critique of human rationality. Most modes
of rationality, he suggested, are conveniently instrumental or
ideological forms, which serve distinct subjective and objective
functions, and they habitually stand in the way of genuine knowledge.
At the same time, however, he also claimed that rationality possesses
capacities of communicative integrity and phenomenological
self-overcoming, and, if authentically exercised, it is able to escape
its narrowly functional form, to expose itself to new contents beyond
its limits and antinomies, and to elaborate new and more cognitively
unified conceptual structures. He therefore indicated that
formal-epistemological concepts of rationality must be expanded to
recognize that experience and committed actions are formative of
authentic knowledge, and that reason cannot, in Cartesian manner, be
monadically dislocated from its historical, sensory, experiential and
voluntaristic foundations. From the outset, therefore, Jaspers's work,
although methodologically marked by Weber, was also indelibly stamped
by Hegel's philosophy, and it sought to integrate the preconditions of
Hegel's phenomenology into a systematic psychological
doctrine. Indeed, at this early stage in his development Jaspers’s
thought hinged on an existential—or
Kierkegaardian—alteration of Hegelian philosophy. In this, he
transposed the dialectical process through which Hegel accounted for
the overcoming of cognitive antinomies in the emergence of
self-consciousness into an analysis of cognitive formation which sees
the resolution of reason's antinomies as effected through vital
experiences, decisive acts of self-confrontation, or communicative
transcendence.
In this early work, Jaspers introduced several concepts which assumed
great importance for all his work. Most importantly, this work
contains a theory of the limit (Grenze). This term designates
both the habitual forms and attitudes of the human mental apparatus,
and the experiences of the mind as it recognizes these attitudes as
falsely objectivized moments within its antinomical structure, and as
it transcends these limits by disposing itself in new ways towards
itself and its objects. In his early philosophy Jaspers thus ascribed
central status to ‘limit situations’
(Grenzsituationen). Limit situations are moments, usually
accompanied by experiences of dread, guilt or acute anxiety, in which
the human mind confronts the restrictions and pathological narrowness
of its existing forms, and allows itself to abandon the securities of
its limitedness, and so to enter new realm of self-consciousness. In
conjunction with this, then, this work also contains a theory of the
unconditioned (das Unbedingte). In this theory,
Jaspers argued that limit situations are unconditioned moments of human
existence, in which reason is drawn by intense impulses or imperatives,
which impel it to expose itself to the limits of its consciousness and
to seek higher or more reflected modes of knowledge. The unconditioned,
a term transported from Kantian doctrines of synthetic regress, is thus
proposed by Jaspers as a vital impetus in reason, in which reason
encounters its form as conditioned or limited and desires to transcend
the limits of this form. In relation to this, then, Jaspers’s early
psychological work also introduced, albeit inchoately, the concept of
existential communication. In this, he argued that the freedom
of consciousness to overcome its limits and antinomies can only be
elaborated through speech: that is, as a process in which consciousness
is elevated beyond its limits through intensely engaged communication
with other persons, and in which committed communication helps to
suspend the prejudices and fixed attitudes of consciousness.
Existentially open consciousness is therefore always communicative, and
it is only where it abandons its monological structure that
consciousness can fully elaborate its existential possibilities. In
this early doctrine of communication, Jaspers helped to shape a wider
communicative and intersubjective shift in German philosophy; indeed,
the resonances of his existential hermeneutics remained palpable in the
much later works of Hans-Georg Gadamer and Paul Ricoeur. Less
obviously, however, in this doctrine he also guided early existential
thinking away from its original association with Kierkegaard and
Nietzsche and, although assimilating Kierkegaardian elements of
decisiveness and impassioned commitment, he claimed that Kierkegaard's
cult of interiority, centred in the speechlessness of inner life, was a
miscarried attempt to envision the conditions of human authenticity.
The decision for authentic self-overcoming and cognitive unity can only
occur, he argued, through shared participation in dialogue.
The major publication of Jaspers’s earlier period, and probably of
his entire career, is the three-volume work: Philosophy
(1932). In this work, he retained the partly Hegelian focus of his
earlier publications, and he followed the spirit of Hegelian
phenomenology in providing an account of the formation of human
consciousness, which grasps consciousness as proceeding from the level
of immediate knowledge and progressing through a sequence of antinomies
towards a level of truthfully unified reflection and self-knowledge. In
this, Jaspers again accentuated the claim that the antinomies which
reason encounters and resolves in its unfolding as truth are at once
both cognitive and experiential antinomies, and that the lived moments
of human existence are always of cognitively constitutive relevance for
the formation of consciousness. These ideas in fact remained central to
Jaspers’s philosophy throughout its subsequent evolution. In his later
philosophical works, especially Von der Wahrheit (Of
Truth, 1947), he continued to give prominence to cognitive models
derived from Hegelian phenomenology, and he proposed a concept of
the encompassing (das Umgreifende) to determine the
phenomenological gradations of thought and being. However, in addition
to its concern with Hegelian themes, Philosophy also contains
a fundamental reconstruction of Kantian themes, it has its foundation
in a critical reconstruction of Kant's doctrine of transcendental
ideas, and it is built around an endeavour to explain the elements of
Kantian idealism as a systematic doctrine of subjective-metaphysical
experience.
The three volumes of Philosophy bear the titles
Philosophical World Orientation (volume I), The
Illumination of Existence (volume II), and Metaphysics
(volume III). Each volume of this book thus describes a particular way
of being: orientation, existence and metaphysical
transcendence are the three essential existential modalities
of human life. At the same time, each volume also describes a
particular way of knowing, which is correlated with a way of being:
orientation is cognitively determined by objectively verifiable
knowledge or by positive or scientific proof-forms, existence is
determined by subjective/existential self-reflection, and transcendence
is determined by the symbolic interpretation of metaphysical contents.
Together, the three volumes of Philosophy are designed to show
how human existence and human knowledge necessarily progress from one
level of being and one level of knowledge to another, and how
consciousness gradually evolves, through confrontation with its own
antinomies, from an immediate and unformed state towards a condition of
unity and integral self-experience. The three volumes are consequently
bound together by the argument that at the level of immediate objective
knowledge—of orientation in the world—human consciousness
raises subjective-existential questions about itself and the grounds of
its truth which it cannot resolve at this level of consciousness, and
it encounters antinomies which call it to reflect existentially upon
itself and to elevate it to the level of existence or existentially
committed self-reflection. At this higher level of consciousness, then,
existence raises metaphysical questions about itself and its origin
which it cannot begin to answer without an awareness that existence is,
at an originary or authentic level, transcendent, and that its
truth is metaphysical.
Each level of being in Jaspers’s Philosophy corresponds to
one of the Kantian transcendental ideas, and the modes of thinking and
knowing defining each level of existence elucidate the intellectual
content of Kant's ideas. The level of orientation in the world
corresponds to the idea of the unity of the world; the level of
existence corresponds to the idea of the soul's immortality; the level
of transcendence corresponds to the idea of God's necessary existence.
However, whereas Kant saw transcendental ideas as the formal-regulative
ideas of reason, serving, at most, to confer systematic organization on
reason's immanent operations, Jaspers viewed transcendental ideas as
realms of lived knowledge, through which consciousness passes and by
whose experienced antinomies it is formed and guided to a knowledge of
itself as transcendent. Jaspers thus attributed to
transcendental ideas a substantial and experiential content. Ideas do
not, as for Kant, simply mark the formal limits of knowledge, marking
out the bounds of sense against speculative or metaphysical questions.
Instead, ideas provide a constant impulsion for reason to overcome its
limits, and to seek an ever more transcendent knowledge of itself, its
contents and its possibilities. In his mature philosophy, therefore,
Jaspers transformed the Kantian transcendental ideas into ideas of
transcendence, in which consciousness apprehends and elaborates
the possibility of substantial or metaphysical knowledge and
self-knowledge. Central to this adjustment to Kant's conception of
ideas was also an implied, yet quite fundamental critique of the key
Kantian distinction between the transcendent and the transcendental. In
contrast to contemporary neo-Kantian readings of Kant, which were
prepared to acknowledge the ideal element in Kantian idealism only, at
most, as a regulative framework, generated by reason's own autonomous
functions, Jaspers argued that Kantian philosophy always at once
contains and suppresses a vision of experienced transcendence, and that
the Kantian ideas should be viewed as challenges to reason to think
beyond the limits of its autonomy, towards new and more authentic
contents, self-experiences and freedoms.
In replacing the transcendental with the transcendent, however,
Jaspers did not argue that transcendent contents are obtainable as
positive elements of human knowledge. On the contrary, he argued that
consciousness only acquires knowledge of its transcendence by
contemplating the evanescent ciphers of transcendence, which
signify the absolute limits of human consciousness. These ciphers might
be encountered in nature, in art, in religious symbolism, or in
metaphysical philosophy. But it is characteristic of all ciphers that,
in alluding to transcendence, they also withhold transcendent knowledge
from consciousness, and that they can only act as indices of the
impossibility of such knowledge. The attitude of consciousness which
apprehends its limits and its possible transcendence can therefore only
be an attitude of foundering or failing (Scheitern), and
transcendence can intrude in human consciousness only as an experience
of the absolute insufficiency of this consciousness for interpreting
its originary or metaphysical character. At this level, then, although
opposing the formality and experiential vacuity of neo-Kantianism,
Jaspers also accepted the original Kantian prohibition on positive
transcendent or metaphysical knowledge. He argued that consciousness
always has a metaphysical orientation to be other than, or transcendent
to, its existing forms, but he also claimed that this orientation can
only factually culminate in a crisis of transcendence, or in a crisis
of metaphysics. Although reconsolidating the metaphysical aspects of
Kantian philosophy, therefore, Jaspers’s own metaphysics is always a
post-Kantian metaphysics: it is a negative metaphysics, which
resists all suggestion that human reason might give itself an account
of metaphysical essences, which defines the realm of human meaning as
formed by its difference against positive metaphysical knowledge, but
which nonetheless sees reason, in Kierkegaardian manner, as driven by a
despairing desire for metaphysical transcendence.
Jaspers’s metaphysical reconstruction of Kantian idealism has been
denounced by other philosophers, most notably those in the broad milieu
of the Frankfurt School, as a stage in a wider course of cognitive
degeneration, which falsely translates absolute metaphysical contents
into moments of human inner experience. Despite this, there are good
grounds for arguing that Jaspers’s metaphysics is an important critique
of the fully autonomist accounts of rationality proposed by
neo-Kantianism, and it even coincides with the critiques of Kantian
formalism which underpinned the philosophies widely associated with the
Frankfurt School. Jaspers intuited that Kantian transcendentalism
suppressed a deep-lying impulse for transcendence, and this aspect of
Kant's thought was badly neglected by interpreters who saw Kant's
philosophy as a doctrine of pure immanence or autonomy. Adorno's later
argument that Kant's transcendental idealism always contains a lament
over the closure of reason against transcendence was thus anticipated
by Jaspers, albeit in subjectivist terms, and Jaspers and
Adorno—for all their political differences—can be placed
close together as thinkers who endeavoured to revitalize the
metaphysical traces in idealism. In any case, Jaspers’s insistence,
contra Kant and the neo-Kantians, that reason itself is not
the sole source of knowledge, and that the task of reason is not
proscriptively to circumscribe the sphere of its validity against
transcendence, but to overcome its cognitive limits and to envision
contents which cannot be generated by its own autonomous functions,
deserves to be rehabilitated as an abidingly significant contribution
to modern debates on metaphysics and epistemology.
The influences of Weber, Kant, Hegel and Kierkegaard are not
difficult to discern in Jaspers’s work. Similarly, it is also not
difficult to identify the ways in which his work was influenced by
Nietzsche. Jaspers borrowed from Nietzsche a psychologistic approach to
philosophical perspectives, and, like Nietzsche, he tended to view
philosophical claims, not as formally verifiable postulates, but as
expressions of underlying mental dispositions. For this reason, he also
borrowed from Nietzsche a dismissive approach to absolutized claims to
truthful knowledge, and a resultant rejection of all rational purism.
Most especially, however, like Heidegger, he took from Nietzsche a
critical approach to the residues of metaphysics in European
philosophy, and he denied the existence of essences which are external
or indifferent to human experience. At the same time, however, Jaspers
also clearly positioned his philosophy against many elements of the
Nietzschean legacy. He was clearly opposed to the naturalistic vitalism
evolving from Nietzsche's work, and his emphasis on human subjectivity
as a locus of truthful transcendence meant that Kierkegaard, rather
than Nietzsche, was the existential prototype for his work.
One further important formative influence on Jaspers’s philosophy,
however, was Schelling. Although he was at times critical of the simple
mysticism and the metaphysics of natural process in Schelling's
religious works, his metaphysical reconstruction of Kantian idealism
rearticulated some elements of the positive philosophy of the later
Schelling, and it mirrored his attempt to account for truthful
knowledge as a cognitive experience in which reason is transfigured by
its encounter with contents other than its own form. In this respect,
Jaspers adopted from Schelling a non-identitarian model of cognitive
life, which views true (or truthful) knowledge as obtained through acts
of positive interpretation and revelation at the limits of rational
consciousness. Unlike Schelling, he always rejected claims to absolute
positive knowledge; to this extent, he remained—in the ultimate
analysis—a Kantian philosopher. However, he was clearly
sympathetic to Schelling's critique of formal epistemological
negativism. Indeed, through his hermeneutical transformation of
idealism into a metaphysics of symbolic interpretation, he might be
seen, like both Schelling and Johann Georg Hamann before him, as a
philosopher who was intent on re-invoking the truth of revelation, as
an absolute and non-identical content of knowledge, against the
rational evidences of epistemology, and so on elaborating an
interpretive methodology adapted to a conception of truth as disclosed
or revealed.
The discrete but important influence of Schelling on Jaspers’s
philosophy also provides a clue to understanding Jaspers’s
philosophy of religion. At one level, Jaspers was philosophically
committed to a sympathetic retrieval of religious contents. He was
insistent that truth can only be interpreted as an element of radical
alterity in reason, or as reason's experience of its own
limits. Similarly, he was insistent that the conditions of human
freedom are not generated by human reason alone, but are experienced
as incursions of transcendence in rational thought. For these reasons,
his philosophy is sympathetic towards the primary implications of
revelation theology, and it cautiously upholds the essential
philosophical claim of revelation: namely, that truth is a disclosure
of otherness (transcendence) to reason, or at least an interpreted
moment of otherness in reason. At the same time, however, Jaspers
cannot in any obvious way be described as a religious philosopher. In
fact, he was very critical of revelation theology, and of orthodox
religions more generally, on a number of quite separate counts. First,
he argued that the centre of religion is always formed by a falsely
objectivized or absolutized claim to truth, which fails to recognize
that transcendence occurs in many ways, and that transcendent truths
cannot be made concrete as a set of factual statements or
narratives. Religious world views are therefore examples of limited
mental attitudes, which seek a hold in uniform doctrine in order to
evade a confrontation with the uncertainty and instability of
transcendence. In positing transcendence as a realized element of
revelation, religion in fact obstructs the capacity for transcendence
which all people possess; religion claims to offer transcendence, but
it actually obstructs it. Second, then, as the foundations of dogma
and doctrinal orthodoxy, revealed truth-claims eliminate the
self-critical and communicative aspect of human reason, and they
undermine the dialogical preconditions of transcendence and
existential self-knowledge. Jaspers thus viewed orthodox religion as
an obstruction to communication, which places dogmatic limits on the
common human capacity for truthfulness and transcendence. Nonetheless,
as a philosopher of transcendence, he was also clear that human
truthfulness, or humanity more generally, cannot be conceived without
a recuperation of religious interpretive approaches and without a
recognition of the fact that the founding contents of philosophy are
transcendent. Much of his work, in consequence, might be construed as
an attempt to free the contents of religious thinking from the
dogmatic orthodoxies imposed upon these contents in the name of
organized religion.
The central idea in Jaspers’s philosophy of religion is the
concept of philosophical faith, set out most extensively
in Der Philosophische Glaube (Philosophical Faith,
1948) and Der Philophische Glaube angesichts der christlichen
Offenbarung (Philosophical Faith in face of Christian
Revelation, 1962). This notoriously difficult concept contains a
number of quite distinct meanings. First, it means that true
philosophy must be guided by a faith in the originary transcendence of
human existence, and that philosophy which negatively excludes or
ignores its transcendent origin falls short of the highest tasks of
philosophy. Second, however, it also means that true philosophy
cannot simply abandon philosophical rationality for positively
disclosed truth-contents or dogma, and that the critical function of
rationality has a constitutive role in the formation of absolute
knowledge. In this respect, Jaspers revisited some of the
controversies concerning the relation between religion and philosophy
which shaped the philosophy of the Young Hegelians in the 1830s. Like
the Young Hegelians, he insisted that faith needs philosophy, and
faith devalues its contents wherever these are dogmatically or
positively proclaimed. Third, then, this concept also indicates that
the evidences of faith are always paradoxical and uncertain and that
those who pursue knowledge of these contents must accept an attitude
of philosophical relativism and discursive exchange: if faith results
in dogmatism, it immediately undermines its claims to offer
transcendent knowledge. The concept of philosophical faith is thus
proposed, not as a doctrine of factual revelation or accomplished
transcendence, but as a guide to transcendent communication, which
balances the element of disclosure in faith with a critical
philosophical veto on the absolutism of religious claims, and which
consequently insists that transcendent knowledge must be accepted as
relative and incomplete. In this regard, Jaspers held the religious
aspects of his philosophy on a fine dialectic between theological and
anthropological assertions. He implied, at one level, that purely
secularist accounts of human life occlude existence against its
originary transcendent possibilities and freedoms. At the same time,
however, he also suggested that pure theological analysis closes
humanity against the relativity and precariousness of its truths, and
against the communicative processes through which these truths are
disclosed. Only philosophy which can at once embrace and relativize
secularism and embrace and relativize religion is able to undertake
adequate existential inquiry, and philosophy which, in either
direction, abandons the dialectical edge between these two commitments
ceases to be genuine philosophy.
This critical-recuperative attitude towards religious inquiry was
fundamental to many of the public controversies in which Jaspers
engaged. The religious elements of his work came under attack from the
Calvinist theologian, Karl Barth, who denounced the lack of objective
religious content in his concept of transcendence. More significantly,
though, Jaspers also entered into a lengthy and influential
controversy with Rudolf Bultmann, the resonances of which still impact
on liberal theological debate. At the centre of this debate was
Jaspers’s critique of Bultmann's strategy of
scriptural de-mythologization: that is, his attempt to
clarify the truth-contents of the scriptures by eliminating the
historical or mythological elements of the New Testament, and by
concentrating, in an existentially intonated exegesis, on the
perennially valid and present aspects of the Bible. At the time when
Bultmann first proposed this de-mythologizing approach Jaspers was
widely (although erroneously) identified with the liberal wing of
Protestant theology, and it was perhaps expected that he might declare
sympathy for Bultmann's hermeneutical approach. Jaspers, however,
turned sharply on Bultmann. He accused him, first, of propagating a
false rationalism in religious debate; second, of arbitrarily
dismissing the manifestations, embedded in myth, of the spiritual
experiences of those living in earlier historical époques; and,
third, of aligning all transcendent experiences to a standard scheme
of relative value, and so of imposing a new system of orthodoxy in
theology and undermining the manifold possibilities of
transcendence. In opposition to Bultmann, therefore, Jaspers concluded
that only a religious hermeneutic based in absolute
liberality, excluding all orthodoxy, could be appropriate to
the task of interpreting the transcendent contents of human life.
Interpretive methods which efface the traces of historical contingency
from transcendence and reduce transcendence to one predetermined
religious truth, he suggested, fail to reflect on the plural and
various forms in which transcendence can be interpreted, they
erroneously presuppose that transcendence can be encased in the
categories of one exclusive doctrine, and they undervalue the
constitutive historical variability of transcendence. As a consequence,
Jaspers argued implicitly for the importance of mythical or symbolic
forms in religious inquiry, and he indicated that both myth and
religion contain, in similar measure, the interpreted residues of
transcendence. His analysis of religion culminated in a discussion of
Trinitarian theology which, echoing Ludwig Feuerbach's anthropological
analysis, asserted that the three parts of the trinity should be
interpreted, not as factual elements of deity, but as symbolic ciphers
of human possibility. In this, he ascribed particular significance to
the second person of the Trinity, Jesus Christ, as a cipher for the
human existential possibility of inner change, reversal and
transformation. Wherever this cipher is hypostatically defined as mere
positive fact of belief, he concluded however, the freedom of
transcendence obtained through the sympathetic interpretation and
recuperation of this cipher is obstructed.
Underlying Jaspers’s interest in religion was a determination to
convert the elements of religious doctrine into an account of human
possibilities and freedoms. Indeed, the ambition behind his work on
religion and myth was no less than to liberate transcendence from
theology, and to permit an interpretive transformation of religiously
conceived essences into the free moments of human self-interpretation.
If his thought can truly be placed in the terrain of theological
discourse, therefore, his approach to religion is one of extreme
liberalism and latitudinarianism, which dismisses the claim that
transcendence is exclusively or even predominantly disclosed by
religion. The truth of religion, he intimated, only becomes true if it
is interpreted as a human truth, not as a truth originally external or
prior to humanity. In its orthodox form, however, religion normally
prevents the knowledge of transcendence which it purports to
offer.
These humanistic reflections on the philosophy of religion are not
isolated components of Jaspers’s work. In fact, his criticism of
religious dogmatism evolved in conjunction with a wider doctrine of
humanism, which ultimately became the defining component of his later
work. Arguably, Jaspers was always a humanist; certainly, if humanism
is defined as a doctrine which seeks to account for the specificity,
uniqueness and dignity of human life his work can, from the outset, be
seen as a variant on philosophical humanism. The argument runs through
all his early works that human beings are distinguished by the fact
that they have authentic attributes of existence and
transcendence—that is, by their ability to raise questions about
themselves and their freedoms which cannot be posed in material or
scientific terms, and by their resultant capacity for decisive
reversal, self-transformation and transcendence. True humanity is thus
a condition of free self-possession and transcendent authenticity. In
general terms, existentialism can be divided between philosophers,
such as Jean-Paul Sartre, who defined existentialism as a humanism,
and those, such as Heidegger, who saw the organization of philosophy
around the analysis of human determinacy as a metaphysical corruption
of philosophy. Jaspers clearly belonged to the first category of
existential philosophers.
In his writings after 1945, most especially in Vom
Ursprung und Ziel der Geschichte (The Origin and Goal of
History, 1949) and Die Atombombe und die Zukunft des
Menschen (The Atom Bomb and the Future of Mankind, 1961),
Jaspers structured his work quite explicitly as a humanist doctrine.
From this time on, moreover, he attached greater importance to the
social and collective conditions of human integrity and he tended to
tone down his earlier construction of interiority as the place of human
freedom. In fact, even the term Existenz became increasingly
scarce in his post-1945 publications, and it was replaced, to a large
extent, by ideas of shared humanity, founded, not in the decisive
experiences of inner transformation, but in the resources of culture,
tradition and ethically modulated political life. Central to these
later works, consequently, was not only a turn towards humanistic
reflection, but also an inquiry into the politics of humanism and the
distinctively human preconditions of political existence.
Broadly reconstructed, in his later political work he argued that the
emergence of European totalitarianism—exemplified by both
National Socialism and Communism—was the result of a decline in
political humanity and of an increasing primacy of modes of technical
or instrumental rationality, which erode the authentic resources of
human life. He therefore sought to offer an account of a human polity,
able to provide an enduring bastion against totalitarian inhumanity.
First, he argued, the human polity must be sustained by an integral
cultural tradition, so that human beings can interpret the ciphers of
their integrity in the ethical contents of a national culture. The
political betrayal of humanity, he suggested, is usually flanked by,
and in fact presupposes, a cultural betrayal of humanity, and
totalitarian governance normally arises from the erosion or
instrumental subjection of culture. In the nineteenth century Marx had
argued that the reactionary malaise of German politics was caused by
the fact that German society habitually allowed culture to stand in
for politics and defined the relatively de-politicized educated
bourgeois elite [Bildungsbürgertum] as the pillar of
social order and the arbiter of progress. Jaspers responded to this
characterization of Germany by claiming that societies which undermine
the cultural role of the bourgeois elite are inherently unstable, and
that the educated bourgeoisie has a primary role to play in upholding
the preconditions of democratic culture. Second, he argued that the
human polity must be based in free communication between citizens:
communicative freedom is a prerequisite of public virtue. The human
polity, he thus implied, is likely to be some kind of democracy, based
in some degree of publicly formed consensus. Like Arendt, in fact, he
concluded that social atomization creates cultures in which
totalitarianism is likely to flourish, and that only unregulated
debate in the public sphere can offset this latent pathology of mass
society. Third, he argued that the resources of technological,
scientific and economic planning employed by the political system
should be kept at a minimum, and that the existence of an unplanned
sphere of human interaction is necessary for the maintenance of a
human political order. In this respect, he fervently opposed all
tendencies towards technocratic governance, which he identified both
in the Communist bloc in Eastern Europe, and in the rapidly expanding
welfare state of the Federal Republic under Adenauer. Technocracy, he
asserted, is the objective form of the instrumental tendencies in
human reason, and if it is not counterbalanced by the integrally human
resources of cultural or rational communication it is likely to result
in oppressive government. In this respect, he moved close to quite
standard variants on political liberalism, and he endorsed limited
government, relative cultural and economic freedom, and protection for
society from unaccountable political direction. Fourth, he also
argued that a human polity requires a constitutional apparatus,
enshrining basic rights, imposing moral-legal order on the operations
of the state, and restricting the prerogative powers of the political
apparatus. Like Kant, therefore, he advocated the institution of an
international federation of states, with shared constitutions, laws
and international courts. Fifth, however, he also retained aspects of
the elite-democratic outlook which he had first inherited from Weber,
and he continued to argue that the human polity must be supported and
guided by reasonable persons or responsible elites.
After the traumas of National Socialism and the war, however, it is
fair to say that Jaspers’s political philosophy never moved
finally beyond a sceptical attitude towards pure democracy, and his
political writings never fully renounced the sense that German society
was not sufficiently evolved to support a democracy, and Germans
required education and guidance for democracy to take hold. Even in
his last writings of the 1960s, in which he declared tentative support
for the activities of the student movement around 1968, there remain
traces of elite-democratic sympathy. For all his importance in modern
German politics, therefore, his philosophy of politics was always
slightly anachronistic, and his position remained embedded in the
personalistic ideals of statehood which characterized the old-liberal
political culture of Imperial Germany and persisted in the
conservative-liberal fringes of the Weimar Republic.
Jaspers left unfinished Die Großen Philosophen, whose
declared aim was “promoting the happiness that comes of meeting
great men and sharing in their thoughts”, and employed his
personal method of constant questioning and struggle. This is a
monumental project of universal history of philosophy, whose creators
were the outstanding philosophers who inspired the human
thought. Jaspers, who believed that only through communication with
others can we come to ourselves and to wisdom, regarded the
philosophers he discusses in this book as his “eternal
contemporaries” and “the disturbers” in the sense of
thinkers for whom doubt and despair loomed large. The first two
volumes of this work appeared in 1958, while the third and fourth have
been gathered from the vast material of his posthumous papers. The
editors Ermarth and Ehrlich have, however, been able to stitch
together a coherent book that, in accordance with Jaspers’s
plan, primarily covers the philosophers whom he termed “the
disturbers”: thinkers for whom doubt and despair loomed
large. The English translations were by Ralf Manheim and edited by
Hannah Arendt, and appeared in parts until 1994.
The Heidelberg Academy (“Heidelberger Forum Edition”) and
the academy of sciences in Göttingen initiated a project of
gathering in one standard edition the unconnected variety of
distinguished editions, commentaries, and translations of the writings
of Karl Jaspers. The project is chaired by Otfried Höffe,
together with the editors Thomas Fuchs, Jens Halfwassen, and Reinhard
Schulz, with the cooperation of Anton Hügli, Kurt Salamun, und
Hans Saner. The planned project consists of three major divisions,
altogether comprising 50 volumes: works (I. 1–27), estate (II. 1–11),
and letters (III. 1–12). While the first division covers all the works
that were printed and published during Jaspers’s lifetime, the
second and the third encompass selections from the vast material of
his posthumous papers, some already published and others that have
never appeared. The set’s general objective is reviving the
investigation of the philosophical, contemporary, and cultural
preconditions for Jaspers’s thinking, and also tracing the
history of his impact. The work on this edition at the Universities of
Heidelberg and Oldenburg is projected to take 18 years and is the
fruit of cooperation with the Karl Jaspers Foundation in Basel. The
editors will have recourse to the unpublished writings kept at the
German Literary Archives in Marbach and the 11,000 volumes of the
Jaspers Research Library in the future Karl Jaspers House in
Oldenburg. Over and above the commentary itself, the edition is
designed to provide new impulses for research on the philosopher and
to enable the debates on present-day cultural and political issues to
profit from a species of thinking that can be described as
interdisciplinary and cosmopolitan in the best sense of those
terms. For now, the following volumes exist:
Karl Jaspers Gesamtausgabe (KJG) I/21:

Schriften zur Universitätsidee

Oliver Immel (Hrsg.)

2015. 508 pp.

ISBN 978-3-7965-3423-2
Karl Jaspers Gesamtausgabe (KJG) I/10:

Vom Ursprung und Ziel der Geschichte

Kurt Salamun (Hrsg.)

2016. XXXII, 284 pp. Leinen mit Schutzumschlag.

ISBN 978-3-7965-3429-4
Karl Jaspers Gesamtausgabe (KJG) I/13:

Der philosophische Glaube angesichts der Offenbarung

Bernd Weidmann (Hrsg.)

mit Lesebändchen.

2016. XC, 625 pp.

ISBN 978-3-7965-3431-7
Karl Jaspers Gesamtausgabe (KJG) III/8-1:

Ausgewählte Verlags- und
Übersetzerkorrespondenzen

Dirk Fonfara (Hrsg.)

2017. 700 pp.

ISBN 978-3-7965-3722-6

In production
The second section (KJG III/8.2), that will appear in 2018 is
devoted to the correspondence with Klaus Piper and Piper publishing
house.
Karl Jaspers Gesamtausgabe (KJG) I/8:

Schriften zur Existenzphilosophie

Dominic Kaegi (Hrsg.)

2018. Ca. L, 300 pp. Leinen mit Schutzumschlag.

ISBN 978-3-7965-3430-0

In production