Karl Leonhard Reinhold was born in Vienna October 26, 1757 (though
many older sources erroneously give 1758 as his year of his birth). He
studied at the Jesuit Seminary in Vienna for a year, until the order
was suppressed in 1773, at which time he entered the Barnabite
seminary. Following his ordination, he became a Barnabite monk and
served for several years as a parish priest and teacher of philosophy.
Reinhold’s first publications were book reviews and short essays in
popular newspapers, in which he showed himself to be a zealous advocate
of Josephite reforms and an enthusiastic exponent of radical
Enlightenment and religious toleration.
In 1783 Reinhold moved to Leipzig and converted to Protestantism. He
also became a Freemason and a member of the Illuminati, and he
remained an active Freemason until the end of his life. Possessed of a
restless, inquiring spirit, Reinhold’s early intellectual trajectory
led him from orthodox Catholicism, to reformed Catholicism, to
materialism and atheism, and then to Leibnizianism and to Humean
skepticism. Yet he always remained true to the ideal of
“Enlightenment,” at least as he understood that ideal, and
he never ceased to insist that philosophy ought to make a practical
difference in the world. For all of his forays into the most technical
and arcane philosophical debates and issues, he never wavered in his
insistence that true “popularity” must remain the goal of
philosophy, and that the ultimate test of any system is its capacity
for convincing everyone of its truth. Enlightenment, for Reinhold, was
no abstract pursuit of truth, but a program of religious, moral,
social, and political reform. Coupled with this commitment to
popularity, was a pedagogic zeal to do everything in his power to
spread the message of popular Enlightenment—whether in its
materialist, its neo-Leibnizian, its skeptical, its Kantian, its
Fichtean, its Bardilian, or its distinctively “Reinholdian”
form—as widely and as effectively as possible.
In 1784, after studying philosophy for a semester in Leipzig,
Reinhold moved to Weimar, where he became a confidant (and son-in-law)
of C. M. Wieland and a regular contributor to Wieland’s widely read
Der Teutsche Merkur. It was in this journal that his famous
series of “Letters on the Kantian Philosophy” began to
appear in 1786. It is with these “Letters,” which were
subsequently published in revised and expanded form in two volumes,
that Reinhold’s name enters the history of philosophy. What Reinhold
found in Kant is clearly expressed in the first of his many private
letters to the latter: namely, a way to resolve the debilitating
conflict between faith and reason, “superstition” and
“disbelief,” “heart” and “head.”
And this is precisely the aspect of the new, Critical philosophy that
is emphasized in his Letters on the Kantian Philosophy: not
Kant’s radical new account of space and time, nor his audacious effort
to provide a transcendental deduction of the pure categories of the
understanding, but rather the conclusions and implications of the
“transcendental dialectic.”
Kantianism was recommended by Reinhold, above all, for its allegedly
salubrious and enlightened practical consequences, particular
with respect to religion and morality. It was not for nothing that
Reinhold described this new philosophy to readers of Die Teutscher
Merkur as “the gospel of pure reason.” Rational belief
in God, in the immortality of the soul, in the reality of free will:
such are the articles of this new “gospel”—a gospel
promulgated, everyone agreed, far more effectively and popularly by
Reinhold than by Kant himself. Even Kant professed to be charmed by
Reinhold’s effort and gratified by his success.
On the strength of his newfound fame as author of the
Letters, Reinhold was invited to be the inaugural occupant of
the first professorial chair devoted exclusively to the new Kantian
philosophy, and thus he began lecturing at the University of Jena in
1787. First at Jena, and then later at the University of Kiel, Reinhold
proved to be an immensely popular and influential teacher, much beloved
by his students. (Of the approximately 860 students enrolled in Jena in
the Spring Semester of 1794, 600 were enrolled in Reinhold’s three
lecture courses.) Indeed, Reinhold was largely responsible for making
Jena the center of German philosophy, which it remained for the next
several decades.
In his published Letters on the Kantian Philosophy Reinhold
had excused himself from the task of presenting and examining the
theoretical foundations of Kant’s Critical philosophy, in order to
concentrate instead upon the practical consequences of the same. But
once he arrived at Jena he set himself to the former task, the
surprising result of which was not so much the popularization of
another aspect of Kant’s thought as a first, historically momentous
effort to revise and recast the theoretical
foundations of the new transcendental idealism in a new, allegedly more
coherent and systematic form. The fruit of this revisionist effort was
Reinhold’s own “Elementary Philosophy” (see below), which,
though only a passing phase in Reinhold’s own development as a
philosopher, remains his most substantial and effective contribution to
the historical development of German Idealism.
Reinhold’s Elementary Philosophy is most fully expounded in three
works he published in rapid succession during his tenure at the
University of Jena: Versuch einer neuen Theorie des menschlichen
Vorstellungsvermögens [Attempt a New Theory of the Human
Power of Representation] (1789), Beyträge zur
Berichtigung bisheriger Missverständnisse der Philosophen,
Erster Band [Contributions toward Correcting the Previous
Misunderstandings of Philosophers, Vol. I] (1790), and Ueber
das Fundament des philosophischen Wissens [On the Foundation
of Philosophical Knowledge] (1791).
Reinhold’s radical revision and implicit critique of orthodox
Kantianism exercised an immediate and immense influence upon his
contemporaries, and particularly upon the philosopher who followed him
at Jena in 1794, namely Johann Gottlieb Fichte. But though Fichte was
thoroughly convinced by Reinhold’s arguments for the incompleteness of
Kant’s own presentation of the Critical philosophy and by his demand
for an immediately certain “first principle” of the same,
he was not satisfied with Reinhold’s own efforts to satisfy these
demands and, in the Aenesidemus review and elsewhere, made
public his own criticisms of the Elementary Philosophy and of
Reinhold’s “Principle of Consciousness.” For a few years
following Fichte’s arrival in Jena and Reinhold’s transfer to Kiel, the
two men engaged in a wide-ranging and stimulating philosophical
correspondence, though they never met.
The final upshot of Reinhold’s Auseinandersetzung with
Fichte was the former’s recantation of his own Elementary Philosophy
and transference of his allegiance to the standpoint of Fichte’s
Wissenschaftslehre. This conversion was made public in early
1798, in a lengthy review essay in the Allgemeine
Literatur-Zeitung of Fichte’s recent writings, and it was
elaborated the following year in Reinhold’s Ueber die Paradoxien
der neuesten Philosophie [Concerning the Paradoxes of the most
recent Philosophy], in which he explicitly acknowledged the
inadequacy of his own Principle of Consciousness as the foundation of
philosophy as a whole and endorsed Fichte’s proposal for a more
“active” first principle (the Tathandlung, or
“fact-act” of the I’s self-positing), which would be
capable of fully integrating theoretical with practical reason, as well
as uniting theoretical and practical philosophy.
As his contribution to the Atheism Controversy of 1798/99, which led
to Fichte’s departure from Jena, Reinhold published a pamphlet in
Fichte’s defense. However, it was not long before he grew dissatisfied
with what he perceived to be the “one-sidedness” of
Fichte’s philosophy—and indeed, of transcendental idealism as a
whole—and publicly sought some “third way,” which could
reconcile the opposing positions of Fichte and Jacobi (whose
contribution to the Atheism Controversy was an influential “Open
letter,” criticizing philosophy in general and Fichte’s
transcendental idealism in particular as “nihilism.”) This
effort on Reinhold’s part to mediate the differences between the
transcendental idealist “philosopher of freedom” (Fichte)
and the common-sense “non-philosopher of faith” (Jacobi)
pleased neither party, and signaled the quick and abrupt end of
Reinhold’s short-lived “Fichte phase.”
After resolutely turning his back on the new post-Kantian idealist
philosophy that he himself had done so much to instigate, Reinhold
now presented himself to the public, in the six issues of his own
Beyträge zur leichtern Uebersicht des Zustandes der
Philosophie beym Anfange des 19. Jahrhunderts [Contributions
to an Easier Overview of the State of Philosophy at the Beginning of
the Nineteenth Century] (1801–1803), as a partisan of the
“logical realism” of C. G. Bardili, which was an effort to
base philosophy upon pure logic and upon an appeal to what Bardili
called “thinking qua thinking.” It was this effort
on Reinhold’s part, in the first issue of the Beyträge,
“to reduce philosophy to logic” that drew the sarcastic ire
of Hegel in his notorious appendix to his Differenz des
Fichte’schen und Schelling’schen Systems der Philosophie
[Difference between the Fichtean and Schellingian System of
Philosophy] (1801)
Soon enough, however, Reinhold became dissatisfied with Bardili’s
position as well, and began publicly to criticize the same “from
the standpoint of language” and to reject all efforts to ground
philosophy in pure formal logic. Reinhold’s final project as a
philosopher can be described as a pioneering effort to take seriously
the implications of ordinary language for philosophy itself and to
insist upon the intimate relationship between speaking and thinking.
These writings of Reinhold’s final years went nearly unnoticed during
his own lifetime and have generally remained unknown until the present
day; yet they would appear to merit the attention of contemporary
philosophers and scholars, inasmuch as they anticipate in certain ways
the “linguistic turn” of so much subsequent philosophy
After a lifetime of philosophical inquiry, during which he
influenced countless readers and students, while himself moving
restlessly from one theoretical standpoint to another, Reinhold died in
Kiel in 1823.
No sooner did he begin lecturing on the first Critique than
Reinhold began to have serious doubts about the completeness of Kant’s
philosophy, the soundness of its theoretical foundations, and the
adequacy of Kant’s own arguments and deductions. With remarkable
alacrity and considerable ingenuity, he took it upon himself to remedy
these perceived defects in Kant’s own presentation and to construct his
own, allegedly more systematic, well-grounded, and “universally
acceptable” version of the new Critical philosophy.
Though Reinhold sometimes referred to his new system simply as
“philosophy without a nickname,” it soon became known by
another name that he used for it, namely: “Elementary
Philosophy” or “Philosophy of the Elements”
[Elementarphilosophie]. After introducing his new
philosophical ideas in his own lectures, Reinhold began laying them
before the public in a series of essays in popular and professional
journals, essays which were then revised and expanded as chapters of
the three books which together constitute his “official”
exposition of the Elementary Philosophy: Versuch einer neuen
Theorie des menschlichen Vorstellungsvermögens (1789),
Beyträge zur Berichtigung bisheriger Missverständnisse
der Philosophen, Erster Band (1790), and Ueber das
Fundament des philosophischen Wissens (1791).
Reinhold introduced his presentation of the Elementary Philosophy
with the following “metaphilosophical” questions: How is
philosophy possible as a strict science, and what is the distinguishing
feature of such a science? Following Kant, as well as the entire
rationalist tradition, Reinhold maintained that the essence of science
lies in universality and necessity. But these are properties of
thought, not of sensation or intuition. Only through thinking and
judging can we recognize universality and necessity, a recognition that
is, in turn, formulated and expressed in concepts and propositions. The
business of philosophy is therefore to establish “universally
valid” [allgemeingültig] propositions in a manner
that allows their necessity and universality to be universally
recognized as binding upon everyone [allgemeingeltend]. This
last requirement reveals the intimate link between Reinhold’s earlier
efforts at “popularizing” the Kantian philosophy and his
subsequent efforts to expand and to ground this same system. One of the
constant hallmarks of Reinhold’s philosophical efforts was his
conviction that a genuinely scientific philosophy must be capable of
being understood and recognized as true by everyone.
What makes philosophy “scientific,” according to
Reinhold, is not simply that it consists of propositions arrived at by
thinking, but rather, the logical connection between the propositions
in question—that is, their systematic form. Over and over
again, in one forum after another, Reinhold trumpeted the same
declaration: scientific philosophy is systematic philosophy.
Accordingly, he embarked upon an influential analysis of systematic
form as such, in order to gain insight into how Kantianism could be
made rigorously systematic and therefore genuinely
“scientific.”
The fundamental hallmarks of systematic form, according to Reinhold,
are consistency and completeness, but it was the former of these that
attracted most of Reinhold’s attention. The only way to be sure that
any two propositions are truly consistent with one another—and
hence, the only way to determine whether a number of philosophical
propositions actually constitute a “system”—is to show
that they can all be traced back to the same first principle or
foundation [Grundsatz]. And the only way to show that they can
indeed be “traced back” to such a first principle is by
actually “deriving” them therefrom. (Despite his efforts to
clarify this point, Reinhold’s conception of philosophical
“derivation”—which is apparently not to be understood as
simple logical deduction—nevertheless remains extraordinarily
murky.)
It follows that a philosophical system must begin with a single
first principle, which “determines” all the other
propositions of the system. (Here again, there is a certain obscurity
in Reinhold’s claim, inasmuch as he insisted that the first principle
“determines” only the “form” and not the
“content” of all the other, subordinate propositions, yet
he also described the relationship between the first principle and the
subordinate principles as a “syllogism,” in which the
latter are “derived” from the former.) Only if propositions
are logically related to one another in this manner can they constitute
a “system.” A system with two or more “first
principles” is not a system at all, but several different
systems. As for the completeness problem, Reinhold’s implicit solution
seems to have been to seek an a priori first principle that could be
known in advance to encompass the entire domain of experience, and
hence of philosophy.
What, however, can one say about the truth (or, as Reinhold was more
likely to say, the “validity” [Gültigkeit])
of the proposed first principle itself? If the validity of a
philosophical proposition is determined by its systematic, logical
connection to other propositions, then what determines the truth of the
first principle, from which the system as a whole is generated or
derived? The answer, Reinhold thought, is obvious: the first principle
and systematic starting point of philosophy must be
self-evident. It must be immediately certain.
Despite reservations concerning the capacity of the first principle
to determine the content, as opposed to the form, of the propositions
derived from it, Reinhold unequivocally maintained that the first
principle of all philosophy had to be a material (or synthetic) as well
as a formal (or analytic) principle. Otherwise, “scientific
philosophy” would be identical to formal logic and would have no
content of its own, which Reinhold (at this point anyway) staunchly
denied. Moreover, according to Reinhold, the establishment of such a
universally valid and immediately certain first principle is not merely
a pressing requirement of theoretical reason, but also a matter of the
utmost practical urgency, inasmuch as in the absence of such a
foundational first principle “philosophy itself is impossible as
a science, in which case the basis for our ethical duties and rights —
as well as those duties and rights themselves—must remain forever
undecided” (Beyträge I, p. 367).
Granted, then, that a system of philosophy must begin with a single,
immediately certain, synthetic first proposition or “grounding
principle”: where might one turn in order to discover and to
recognize the first principle in question, a proposition that alone can
serve as the foundation or “ground” of all other
philosophical propositions and cannot itself be established by any
argument? The answer is, we must turn within—to the
consideration of consciousness itself. This, Reinhold maintained, is
precisely what Kant (not to mention Descartes) had done, albeit he did
not succeed in presenting the fruits of his inquiries in an adequately
scientific and systematic form.
What then is the “first principle” of the Elementary
Philosophy? It is the “Principle of Consciousness,” namely,
the proposition that “in consciousness, the subject distinguishes
the representation from the subject and the object and relates the
representation to both” (Beyträge I, p. 167). In
this proposition, the term “representation”
[Vorstellung] designates whatever we are directly conscious of
whenever we are conscious of anything whatsoever; the term
“subject” designates the one who “is conscious”
of whatever one is conscious of (the “conscious subject” or
“subject of consciousness”); and the term
“object” designates that “of which” the
representation is a representation (the intentional object of
consciousness, that to which the representation
“refers”).
Though “self-evident” and “universally
valid,” the proposition asserting this tripartite character of
consciousness is, according to Reinhold, not analytic but synthetic.
The Principle of Consciousness is not a tautology, yet anyone who
reflects upon what is asserted by this principle will immediately
recognize its truth and universal validity, inasmuch as it expresses
what Reinhold called a “universally recognized fact of
consciousness.”
Self-evidence alone, however, is not enough. One of the chief merits
of the Principle of Consciousness, according to Reinhold, is that from
it one can then derive the starting point of Kant’s own
philosophy, which appears to begin with a sheer, ungrounded assumption
of the distinction between intuiting and thinking, the difference
between theoretical and practical reason, etc. From this point,
Reinhold assures us, one can then proceed to the derivation of a
complete system of philosophy as a whole, as envisioned but never
actually accomplished by Kant himself. (One must recall that Reinhold’s
work on Elementary Philosophy preceded Kant’s third
Critique.)
With the Principle of Consciousness Reinhold believed he had
uncovered that “common root” of thought and sensibility,
which Kant had declared to be unknowable. By commencing his analysis at
the level of “representations as such,” Reinhold was
convinced that he had, so to speak, hit philosophical rock bottom,
inasmuch as all consciousness is self-evidently
“representational” in character. (Fichte, however, in his
Aenesidemus review and his early writings on the
Wissenschaftslehre, would subsequently challenge precisely
this claim.) Thus, Reinhold’s “Theory of Representation”
(which is the first section of the Elementary Philosophy) purports to
provide Kant’s Critical philosophy with the very foundation it so
sorely lacks. And the Principle of Consciousness is, in turn, the
foundational or first principle of this new Theory of Representation —
and hence the first principle of philosophy as a whole.
By far the most original and influential portion of the Elementary
Philosophy is its first part, the Theory of Representation, which is
devoted entirely to an analysis of our fundamental spiritual power —
the power of representation itself [Vorstellungsvermögen]—in an effort to determine “everything that can be known a
priori concerning the representations of sensibility, understanding,
and reason.” This foundational portion of the Elementary
Philosophy thus purports to provide a thorough and complete analysis of
the necessary features of representation qua representation,
an analysis that claims to show “that space, time, the
twelve categories, and the three forms of the ideas
are originally nothing but properties of mere
representations” (Fundament, pp. 72–73). This same
analysis of our power of representation also claims to establish the
distinction between the form and content of representations, the
necessity of both receptivity and spontaneity on the part of the power
of representation, the necessary multiplicity of sensations, and the
unknowability of things in themselves.
If Reinhold displays considerable originality and ingenuity in
deriving the above mentioned results from his first principle (the
Principle of Consciousness), the same cannot be said of the subsequent
section of the Elementary Philosophy, the “Theory of the Power of
Cognition,” which follows Kant’s own exposition much more closely
than the Theory of the Power of Representation and becomes increasingly
schematic—and less convincing—as it advances. (Reinhold’s sole
attempt at complete exposition of his “Theory of the Power of
Cognition” is roughly sketched in Book 3 of the Versuch,
whereas the “Theory of the Power of Representation” is
treated in elaborate detail in all three of his book-length
presentations of the Elementary Philosophy.)
One may recall that Reinhold’s intention was to provide a new
foundation not merely for the “theoretical philosophy”
expounded by Kant in the first Critique, but for the Critical
philosophy as a whole, including Kant’s practical philosophy. In fact,
however, Reinhold provided his readers with only the barest hints of
how his Elementary Philosophy might embrace Kant’s account of will and
of practical reason. Significantly, this occurs in the final, 19 page
section of his “Theory of the Power of Cognition,” entitled
“Theory of the Power of Desire,” in which Reinhold limits
himself to what he himself describes as the mere “outline”
of a strategy for demonstrating the unity of theoretical and practical
reason: if willing is the condition for the possibility of actual, as
opposed to merely possible representation and cognition, then the
“power of desire” conditions the powers of cognition and
representation.
Unfortunately, Reinhold never fleshed out this fascinating outline,
never provided any arguments for the same, and never indicated how this
provocative claim concerning the relation of willing to knowing could
be reconciled with the “immediate certainties” of his
starting point. And this was precisely what provoked his most brilliant
and critical reader, J. G. Fichte to attempt his own version of an
Elementary Philosophy—a version that would begin with the
unity of the theoretical and the practical and that would, with the act
of “positing” or Setzen, claim to have discovered
a starting point even more “basic” than that of mere
“representation.” (It is significant that Fichte’s
unpublished notebook of 1793/94, in which he first sketched what would
subsequently be known as the Wissenschaftslehre or
“Theory of Scientific Knowledge,” was titled “Private
Meditations on Elementary Philosophy/Practical Philosophy.”)
It would be difficult to exaggerate the influence of Reinhold’s
inquiries into systematicity and first principles upon an entire
generation of philosophers. Though some recent research on Reinhold and
the “Jena circle” of the late 1780s has stressed the degree
to which Reinhold himself soon came to have doubts about the project of
“philosophy from a single principle” (see the work of
Dieter Henrich and his students, such as Marcello Stamm), this project
was nevertheless enthusiastically embraced by Fichte and the young
Schelling, and inspired others, notably Hegel, to re-examine (and to
question) the alleged connection between systematic form and
self-evident first principles. Reinhold’s subsequent reservations about
his own Elementary Philosophy notwithstanding, the Elementary
Philosophy remains one of the clearest examples of a thoroughgoing
“foundationalist” project in the history of European
philosophy.
During Reinhold’s own lifetime, or at least during certain phases of
the same, he was among the more influential philosophers in Germany —
first as an immensely successful popularizer of the Kantian revolution
and then, with his effort to construct an Elementary Philosophy, as one
of the founders of “post-Kantian idealism.” This, however,
nearly exhausts his positive influence upon his contemporaries.
Following the heyday of German idealism, Reinhold’s name has
generally been relegated to the history of philosophy, within which he
is assigned the role of serving as a small, but not insignificant rung
on the alleged ladder “from Kant to Hegel,” and this is
precisely how he is still treated in most general histories of
philosophy (as well as in this entry). In this context, Reinhold is
usually credited with (or blamed for) putting the issues of systematic
form and “philosophical foundations” at the center of
philosophical concern. Even those, such as Fichte, who roundly
criticized the details of his Elementary Philosophy professed sincere
admiration for Reinhold’s “systematic spirit.” And many of
those who rejected his contention that the Principle of Consciousness
could serve as the first principle of a philosophy as a whole,
nevertheless praised him as the philosopher who first recognized the
need for some such principle and first sought to provide Kantianism
with a solid “foundation.” In both of these respects,
Reinhold served as an important catalyst or stimulus for further
philosophical developments.
Given this situation, it his hardly surprising that—with a few
minor exceptions—the only works of Reinhold familiar even to most
scholars, as well as the only writings by him to be reissued after his
lifetime, were the Letters on the Kantian Philosophy and the
three, above-mentioned volumes in which he expounded his Elementary
Philosophy. This, however, is unfortunate, inasmuch as these texts
represent only a small fraction of Reinhold’s literary output and do
not include some of his most original ideas, projects, and literary
productions, such as his final writings on philosophy and language and
his pioneering, lifelong efforts to get philosophers to take seriously
the history of their own discipline and to understand the
“history of philosophy” philosophically.
This situation has recently begun to change, however. A critical
edition of Reinhold’s voluminous and important philosophical
correspondence was inaugurated in 1983 (though only one of the
projected ten volumes has appeared to date), and plans are currently
afoot for an edition—the first ever—of Reinhold’s complete
works.  Newly edited editions of some of Reinhold’s major works have
also begun to appear, most notably the two volumes of his
Beyträge zur Berichtigung bisheriger Missverständnisse
der Philosophen, edited by Alessandro Lazzari and issued in the
“Philosophische Bibliothek” series published by Felix Meiner.
For many years, the serious secondary literary on Reinhold was very
sparse and was dominated by Alfred Klimmt’s monograph (see below).
Recent years, however, have seen a spate of new articles and monographs
devoted to Reinhold, the most significant of which are the works by
Wolfgang Schrader and the recent, groundbreaking book by Martin
Bondeli. Also worth mentioning is Alexander von Schönborn’s
annotated bibliography of Reinhold’s writings, a fine example of
scholarly detective work and an essential tool for further research. In
conjunction with and as part of the renaissance of Fichte studies over
the past four decades, there have been numerous efforts to reexamine
the relationship between Reinhold and Fichte, and, in particular, to
reassess the precise debt of the Wissenschaftslehre to the
Elementary Philosophy. Accordingly, the scholarly literature on Fichte
includes numerous studies of this aspect of Reinhold’s achievement.
Even more recently and for the first time ever, Reinhold’s ideas
have begun to be expounded, criticized, and debated among Anglophone
scholars and philosophers, including Karl Ameriks, Frederick C. Beiser,
Daniel Breazeale, Paul Franks, and Alexander von Schönborn. A
recent annual meeting of the Eastern Division of the American
Philosophical Association featured a session devoted almost entirely to
a debate (between Ameriks and Breazeale) over Reinhold’s actual
contribution to post-Kantian philosophy and the merits of his position.
Such a debate would have been unimaginable even a few decades ago.
Appreciation and discussion of Reinhold among Anglophone readers is,
however, not likely to spread very widely until more of Reinhold’s
writings have become available in English. Until very recently the English
reader had to make do with incomplete translations of two works by
Reinhold: one, by George di Giovanni, of excerpts from the
Fundament and another, by Sabine Rohr, of portions of the
Verhandlung über die Grundbegriffe und Grundsätze der
Moralität aus dem Gesichtspunke des gemeinen und gesunden
Verstandes.  In 2005 a fine translation of the first series of
Reinhold’s “Letters on the Kantian Philosophy,” translated by James
Hebbeler and edited by Karl Ameriks, was published as the series of
“Cambridge Texts in the History of Philosophy.”  However, the rest of
Reinhold’s philosophical writings still await English translation.
In 1998 Reinhold’s philosophy was the subject of an international
academic conference—the first such conference ever to be devoted to
Reinhold—in Bad Homburg, Germany. The second international Reinhold
conference was held in Luzern, Switzerland in 2002; the third, in
Rome, Italy in 2004; the fourth in Montreal, Canada in 2007, and the fifth in Siegen, Germany.  (The proceedings of all five of these conferences have now been published.) The level
of scholarship and philosophical acumen on display at these two events
was very high and augurs well for the future. Indeed, one could argue
that the future of Reinhold Studies is brighter today than at any time
since Reinhold’s death.