Kūkai grew up during the Nara period (710–784CE) when the
Nara Buddhist schools flourished and the country was centralized under
the rule of the imperial family. And he was active during the
beginning of the Heian period (794–1185CE) when
institutionalized Nara Buddhism underwent reform due to the influence
of newer ideas coming from China, including Kūkai’s own
importations. He comes from an aristocratic family, the Saeki, and as
a boy, he was educated by his maternal uncle, a Confucian scholar. At
the age of seventeen or eighteen, he entered the state university at
the then-capital Nagaoka but was soon disillusioned with its Confucian
education. He suddenly dropped out of the university and retired into
the natural setting of the mountains, where as legend has it, he
devoted himself to various forms of esoteric practices. A few years
later at the age of 24, he completed the final version of his first
treatise, the Sangô shîki (Indications of the Goals
of the Three Teachings) that covers and compares the teachings of
Confucianism, Taoism, and Buddhism. Herein one can discern
Kūkai’s reasons for turning from Confucianism to Buddhism. In
the text, Kūkai relates how as a student he met a Buddhist
priest who taught him an esoteric meditative practice called the
Kokûzôgumonji no ho
(“Âkâśagarbha’s method for seeking hearing and
retaining”), which involved the recitation of a mantra a million
times and was supposed to endow the practitioner with miraculous
powers of memory and understanding.
What Kūkai found in Buddhism was a concrete path towards
enlightenment (and liberation from suffering) that involves bodily
practice and direct experience rather than mere theoretical
speculation. Kūkai however did not involve himself in the
official schools of the Nara Buddhist orthodoxy for they emphasized
the exegetical study of the scriptures without providing any
theoretical grounding for ritual practice. Instead he remained in the
remote mountain regions of his native Shikoku as an unofficial and
privately ordained mendicant. It appears that between the ages of 24
and 31, he wandered through its various mountains and sacred sites,
practicing asceticism. Noticing the many different branches and
sûtras (scriptures) of Buddhism, he hoped to find its
unifying essence that would also bridge the gap between ritual and
experience on the one hand and doctrine and theory on the other
hand. It was during this search that he came across the mid-seventh
century esoteric Buddhist text of the Dainichi-kyô
(Skrt: Mahâvairocana Sûtra; Chn: Ta-ji
Ching; “Great Sun scripture”). Intuiting that this
text, with its dual emphasis upon esoteric practice and doctrine,
would provide the kind of knowledge that he was seeking, Kūkai
decided to travel to China to study it.
It was only in 804 at the age of 30 or 31 that Kūkai was thus
officially ordained so that he could travel with an official
government embassy to China. He travelled to Ch’ang-an, the
great cosmopolitan capital of the T’ang (Tang) dynasty, where he
resided for thirty months. During this period, he studied Indian
Buddhism, Hindu teachings, and Sanskrit with two Indian monks.  But
more significantly he met Hui-kuo (Huiguo; Jpn: Keika)
(746–805), the seventh patriarch of Chen-yen (Zhenyan; Jpn:
Shingon; Skrt: Mantrayâna) Buddhism, from whom he received
initiation into the two lineages of Chen-yen esoteric Buddhism, one
centered around the Vajradhâtu (Diamond realm) mandala based on
the Vajraśekhara Sûtra (“Adamantine {or
Diamond} Pinnacle scripture”) and the other focussing upon the
Garbha (Womb) mandala based on the Mahâvairocana
Sûtra. Kūkai’s accomplishment during his stay in
China is phenomenal in that not only did he manage to succeed Hui-kuo
in becoming the eighth patriarch of esoteric Buddhism, he also managed
to study Sanskrit, Chinese poetry and calligraphy, and various other
minor arts.
Kūkai returned to Japan in 806 at the age of 33. He arrived in
Kyushu with a voluminous amount of sûtras, collections of
mandala paintings, treatises and commentaries, books of poetry, and
ritual paraphernalia. In Kyushu, he composed the Shorai
mokuroku (A Memorial Presenting a List of Newly Imported
Sûtras and Other Items) that gives a brief account of his
activities in China, describes what distinguishes esoteric Buddhism,
and lists the items he had collected and brought back to Japan.
However he was not permitted to enter the capital due to political
unrest and was obliged to remain in Kyushu for another three
years. Only with the retirement of Emperor Heizei (r. 806–809),
did the new Emperor Saga order Kūkai in 809 to move to the new
capital of Kyoto to reside at Takaosan-ji, the center of the Kyoto
Buddhist world, where he remained until 823. Under the patronage of
the new emperor, Kūkai became appointed over the years to
various administrative positions of several important official
temples. This allowed him to perform the first public esoteric ritual
for “nation-protection,” followed by other public esoteric
ceremonies, including mass initiation rituals and the founding of an
annual ritual (the Mishuhô) to be held at court, hence
gaining official recognition for the efficacy of esoteric Buddhism and
preparing the rise of Buddhism as an ideological force in medieval
Japan.
It was during his period at Takaosan-ji that he wrote some of his
major treatises of philosophical interest to us, such as
Benkenmitsu nikkyôron (Treatise on the Differences
Between Esoteric and Exoteric Teachings) around 814, and the
so-called Sanbu-sho (“Three Writings”) of
Sokushinjôbutsugi (On the Meaning of
“Attaining Buddhahood in this Very Embodied
Existence”), Shôjijissôgi (On the
Meanings of “Sound, Sign, and Reality”), and
Unjigi (On the Meaning of the Syllable
Hûm) in the 820s. And towards the end of his life
he completed in 830 what has been considered to be his magnum
opus, the Himitsu mandara jûjûshinron
(Treatise on the Ten States of the Mind as a Secret
Mandala) in ten volumes, and soon afterward,
completed its summary version, the Hizô hôyaku
(The Precious Key to the Secret Treasury) in three volumes.
In 816 Kūkai began building a monastic center in Mt. Kôya,
and there he died in 835 at the age of 61. In 921, he posthumously
received from Emperor Daigo and his court, the honorific title,
Kôbô Daishi (“Great Teacher Who Spread the
Dharma”).
Kūkai called his form of Buddhism, Shingon, which
means “the word of truth.” This is the Japanese
pronunciation of the Chinese chen-yen (zhenyan) and
the Sanskrit mantra. The form of Buddhism that he learned in
China was an importation from India of Mantrayâna
(Mantra vehicle {or: “school”}) Buddhism, more often known
as Vajrayâna (Diamond {or: “Lightning Fast”}
vehicle). The word mantra signifies a secret teaching
inexpressible in ordinary words or linguistic formulations. This form
of Buddhism, whose origin dates back to the mid-seventh century India,
is more popularly known today in the West as “Tantric
Buddhism,” especially in its Tibetan incarnation. It is
characterized by its emphasis upon rituals, involving the use of
mantras, mandalas, and other means in order to control both body and
mind to experience the “ultimate.” Two major texts,
associated with this form of Buddhism, made their way into China from
India: Mahâvairocana Sûtra (Jpn:
Dainichi-kyô) from the mid-seventh century and
Vajraśekhara Sûtra (Jpn:
Kongôchô-gyô) from the later-seventh
century. Mantrayâna made its way east to China during the
T’ang dynasty (713–765) around the beginning of the eighth
century through the translating and propagating efforts of the Indian
priests Śubhâkarasimha (Jpn: Zenmui; 637–735) who
brought the Mahâvairocana Sûtra to China;
Vajrabodhi (Jpn: Kongôchi; 671–741), the sixth patriarch of
Mantrayâna, who brought the Vajraśekhara
Sûtra to China; and Amoghavajra (Jpn: Fukû, an
abbreviation for Fukûkongô; 705–74), Vajrabodhi’s
disciple, who won the support of successive emperors during the
T’ang period; and the Chinese priest, I-hsing (Yixing; Jpn:
Ichigyô; 683–727) who learned the teachings of
Mahâvairocana Sûtra from Śubhâkarasimha
and the teachings of Vajraśekhara Sûtra from
Varjabodhi. Kūkai’s own teacher Hui-kuo had also received
initiation under both lineages of these two major sûtras, and
is credited with gathering together their teachings into one
system. In the meantime during the eighth century, another branch of
Mantrayâna made it north from India to Tibet. But Chen-yen
Buddhism in China did not survive the severe persecution of Buddhism
in general in 845. Kūkai however had by then already succeeded
in transmitting to Japan the esoteric doctrines he had studied in
China. For much of the doctrines and practices, which he had imported,
became influential amongst the official Nara monasteries. But his form
of Buddhism was not just a product of his inheritance and
appropriation of the Buddhism he encountered in China. As it involved
developments and contributions uniquely his own, we may regard him not
only as the transmitter but as the founder of the Japanized
version of Mantrayâna known as Shingon.
Kūkai has been regarded as the first comprehensively
philosophical thinker in Japanese intellectual history. The influence
of Mahâyâna philosophy is noticeable but they are
interpreted through the lens of Mantrayâna with its emphasis upon
the inseparability of ritual practice from theoretical doctrine.
Traditionally, his thought has been divided into the following
aspects: 1) the theoretical (kyôsô) which
explicates the uniqueness and distinction of esoteric Buddhism
(mikkyô) as opposed to exoteric Buddhism
(kengyô) and demonstrates its validity and
efficaciousness; and 2) the practical (jisô), which
prescribes his method of meditation and ritual. Ultimately however the
theoretical and the practical are inseparable in Kūkai’s
thought. Within the deep profundity and subtleties of his doctrine,
one recognizes philosophical elements inherited from Madhyamaka,
Yogâcâra, T’ien-t’ai (Tiantai), and Huayen (Huayan) Buddhist
thought. But with these are incorporated the elements of devotional
piety and magico-esoteric practice even in his theoretical
writings. What is especially pronounced and distinct in his thought is
the significance of bodily experience and practice. Buddhist truths
for Kūkai were not simply meant to be intellectually mused over
but to be experienced through bodily practice. One might say
then that for Kūkai it is the body that provides the medium
whereby theory and practice, doctrine and ritual, thought and
experience, are non-dualistic.
A major contribution made by Kūkai for the orthodoxy of Nara
Buddhism with his systematization of esoteric doctrines, was to bridge
the gap between textual study and ritual practice.  Kūkai’s
works provided for the first time a theoretical grounding for the
incantation of mantras and dhâranīs and other
esoteric practices already present in Nara Buddhism. It did this by
explicating their relationship to the doctrines expressed in the
scriptural texts.  While esoteric elements were already present in
Nara Buddhism, their very raison d’etre, other than as
forms of magic, and their very connection to Buddhist doctrines had
been left in the dark. Kūkai’s success may be attributable to
his ability to provide a sound and intelligible systematic exposition
of the meanings of the esoteric elements of Buddhism and of the
interrelationships between text, ritual, and icon. In doing so it
succeeded in bridging the gap between esoteric rituals and scriptural
doctrines. (Abe 1999, 11) Kūkai had to work out such an
exposition in order to establish and legitimize the independence and
role of his Shingon Buddhism vis-à-vis the other forms of
Buddhism already existent in Nara Japan.
Of Kūkai’s so-called theoretical works, the philosophically
most significant are Benkenmitsu nikkyôron, Himitsu
mandara jûjûshinron, Hizô
hôyaku, Sokushinjôbutsugi,
Shôjijissôgi, and Unjigi. The former three
provide comparative analyses exploring what distinguishes Shingon
esoteric Buddhism from other forms of religious thought and practice,
including the exoteric forms of Buddhism. The latter three are
expositions of the Shingon worldview and its concepts, and are grouped
together to comprise the so-called Sanbu-sho
(“Three Writings”). Benkenmitsu nikkyôron (2
vols.)  written in 814/815 sets forth the differences between esoteric
and exoteric Buddhism to emphasize the superiority of the
former. Starting from this foundation (i.e. of the distinction and
superiority of the esoteric standpoint), Kūkai composed the
Sanbu-sho, in rapid succession from around 821 to
824. These “Three Writings” provide expositions of what
commentators have called the “metaphysics” of Shingon,
dealing in detail with the three so-called mysterious aspects of the
cosmic truth (Dharma): its “body, speech, and mind.”
Sokushinjôbutsugi explicates the concept of
sokushinjôbutsu or enlightenment in one’s immediate
embodied existence. Shôjijissôgi and Unjigi
are unique works of a “metaphysical linguistics.” They
examine the interrelationship (which is ultimately non-dualistic)
between the phenomenal world, its sounds (or “voices”) as
“signs” (or “letters”), and reality itself,
the “meaning,” they convey. In doing so, those two works
explicate the Shingon concept of hosshin seppô, the
Buddha’s preaching of the Dharma via cosmic phenomena. In
fact all three of these “Three Writings” deal with the
embodied realization of the Dharma. But they do this from the
different angles of the microcosm of the human body and the macrocosm
of the cosmic body.  Embodiment then plays an important role in
Kūkai’s Buddhism. As we shall see below, the embodiment of the
Dharma as such also involves the incorporation of the mantra and the
mandala along with other esoteric features. The work that represents
the culmination of Kūkai’s thought, completed at the age of 57
in 830, is his Jûjûshinron (10 vols.) along
with its abridged version, Hizô hôyaku (3
vols.). These two works position Shingon esotericism as the
culmination of all Buddhist and religious standpoints. They make the
grand claim that Shingon provides the most comprehensive view to
truth, the Dharma. All other religious views on the other hand are
mere approximations of that truth in various degrees and from various
perspectives. Each religious standpoint then corresponds to a specific
level of development of the human mind, which in ten states leads up
to the enlightened mind. The final culminating stage of enlightenment
then is what corresponds to Shingon doctrine as the most
comprehensive, and hence “most true.” Nevertheless, the
pre-Shingon and exoteric teachings each have their rightful place
within this scheme so that they are not utterly discounted. In
addition to the above-mentioned six major works, there is also
Kūkai’s first work — written prior to his trip to China
—, the Sangôshîki. This was his first look at
Buddhism in comparison with Taoism and Confucianism. In the following
however, I shall focus on Kūkai’s thought in the six major
works. These are his mature works, and also universally recognized as
his most important theoretical works.
In Benkenmitsu nikkyôron, Kūkai sets out to
establish the basic differences between the brand of Buddhism he was
introducing to Japan, which he regarded as “esoteric
teachings” (mikkyô; “secret
teaching”) on the one hand, and the forms of Buddhism already
officially recognized and practiced in Japan, which he classified as
“exoteric teachings” (kengyô;
“revealed teaching,” “public teaching”). This
distinction between “esoteric” (mitsu) and
“exoteric” (ken) Buddhism is not found in his
Indian predecessors.  But some of his Japanese predecessors had
already been using the binary ken-mitsu categories.
Kūkai’s contribution was to interpret them in a new way through
appropriation of the esoteric texts he had brought back from China.
In Kūkai’s thinking, that distinction is crucial. While we shall
discuss some of these ideas in the following sections with greater
depth, we may here summarize the general distinctions laid out in
Benkenmitsu nikkyôron for now as follows: 1) For
exoteric Buddhism, the “embodiment of truth” (Skrt:
dharmakâya; Jpn: hosshin) is abstract and
transcendent and hence does not preach. But for esoteric Buddhism, the
phenomenal world from the enlightened perspective — that is, the
standpoint of the Buddha — is the preaching activity of
the cosmic Buddha Dainichi (Skrt: Mahâvairocana) and
as that “embodiment of truth.” Hence while
exoteric teachings may be traced to Śakyamuni, the historical
Buddha, esoteric teachings come directly from the Buddha Dainichi. 2)
For exoteric Buddhism, the absolute truth, i.e., the Dharma,
transcends world and language, and thus cannot be explained. But for
esoteric Buddhism, that Dharma itself is being perpetually expressed
in and as its embodiment in the phenomenal world, in
its sounds, movements, and forms, and even in the thoughts of sentient
beings. In other words, its embodiment refers not only to the
meditation of the Buddha but also to the Buddha’s creative and
communicative activities. 3) Exoteric Buddhism lacks, according to
Kūkai, a practical methodology for experiencing
esoteric truths. While exoteric Buddhism emphasizes the
intellectual study and comprehension of the doctrines set forth in the
sûtras, esoteric Buddhism provides a bodily hermeneutic whereby
esoteric truths hidden in the sûtras as well as in the world at
large can be experienced. And: 4) For exoteric Buddhism, it takes
three infinitely long epochs of repeated rebirths of training in order
for one to attain enlightenment (Buddhahood); but esoteric Buddhism
makes it possible for anyone, irrespective of karmic dispositions, to
immediately become a buddha in one’s present embodied state.
In order to understand the above-mentioned distinctions made by
Kūkai, we need to comprehend what exactly the Buddha signifies
for Kūkai. This is also important as his esoteric view of the
Buddha underlies all of the major points of his philosophy that we
shall be discussing further below.
In traditional Mahâyâna Buddhist theory, the Buddha is
conceived in terms of three modes or forms of embodiments
(trikâya): dharmakâya (Jpn:
hosshin), nirmanakâya, and
sambhogakâya. While originally the term buddha,
meaning “enlightened one,” was reserved for
Śakyamuni, the historical founder of Buddhism, it eventually came
to designate the ideal for humanity. This ideal became equated with
the “truth” (Skrt: Dharma; Jpn:
hô), taught by the Buddha, of the nature of being.  To
be a “buddha” is then to be enlightened to that truth,
which came to also mean the realization of one’s non-duality with the
Dharma. It is in this significance that one way of understanding the
Buddha is in terms of the universal “embodiment of the
Dharma” (Skrt: dharmakâya; Jpn:
hosshin). For traditional Mahâyâna, this
hosshin is an abstract principle and hence impersonal and
non-preaching. However as implied in the foregoing section, for
Kūkai the hosshin is identified with the Buddha
Dainichi. That is, in one aspect the hosshin may be
understood to be a personal being who preaches the Dharma by
concretizing it in the cosmos as his own body. (Of course though to
avoid anthropomorphism, the hosshin cannot be reduced to this
aspect.) In the traditional three-body doctrine, however, it is the
other two forms of embodiment that preach. The Buddha, when regarded
as embodying the Dharma in an historical earthly being, such as
Śakyamuni, who preaches the Dharma to humans, is called the
nirmanakâya (“embodiment of
transformation”). And the Buddha as enjoying his fruits of
enlightenment by residing in a celestial buddha-realm, while unfolding
further truths for advanced bodhisattva beings and acting as a savior
to the earthly, is called the sambhogakâya
(“embodiment of bliss”).  An example of would be Amida
residing in his “Pure Land.”
What distinguishes Kūkai’s understanding of the Buddha is that
he takes the notion of the “embodiment of the Dharma”
literally and radically. Hosshin in Shingon thought is not an
abstract truth transcending the mundane world. Rather all
phenomena and thing-events of this cosmos, in their very transience,
are each themselves embodiments of truth and the cosmos as a whole
comprised of these impermanent and interdependent beings is eternally
an embodiment of truth, the hosshin. Moreover this concrete
cosmic identification between Buddha, truth, and the cosmos of
thing-events, was “personal.” That is, hosshin
was equated with the Buddha Dainichi. The cosmos as the
manifestation of truth, the Dharma, was itself hence equated with the
body of the personal Buddha Dainichi. And in turn, Dainichi with his
cosmic body is then the embodied personification of the universal
Buddha-nature inherent in all beings and the Dharma that is manifest
everywhere. Prior to Hui-kuo, this identification of Dainichi with the
hosshin in Mantrayâna Buddhism was ambiguous and not
thorough. In the Dainichi-kyô, a sun metaphor is used to
name its central Buddha, “Dainichi”
(Mahâvairocana, transliterated as
Makabirushana), meaning “Great Sun,” as the being
whose light illuminates and enlightens all beings in a way akin to the
sun’s life-giving light. All other deities are seen as manifestations
of this light.  Dainichi’s identification with the hosshin
nevertheless remains ambiguous. While he probably influenced
Kūkai in regards to this equation, Hui-kuo himself however left
no written explications. Kūkai thus has been regarded as the
first to provide a complete and systematic exposition of the nature of
the Buddha Dainichi as the hosshin. The sun metaphor
of illumination — as the source of both being and of knowledge
(enlightenment) — befits the universality of the
hosshin perfectly. The illumination of the “Great
Sun” (Dainichi) becomes accordingly understood to mean the
omnipresencing of the Dharma throughout the cosmos, an omnipresencing
in turn equated with the Buddha’s preaching. This “proof”
that the hosshin does in fact preach helped Kūkai in
distinguishing his esoteric doctrines from those of exoteric
Buddhism.
This identification between Dainichi and hosshin held many
implications for Kūkai, which became worked out in his various
doctrines. For example, the equation of Dainichi’s body-and-mind with
the cosmos itself also means the immanent presence of the Buddha
within, and as, the body-and-mind of each and every one of
us. And so Dainichi’s “enlightened mind”
(bodhicitta) becomes synonymous with the Mahâyâna
doctrine of “original enlightenment” (hongaku)
within all beings. But as the Dharma signifies the interdependent
origination, hence, emptiness (kû) of all beings, its
embodiment may be said to be an “empty body.” We will
examine these ideas in greater detail later.
Kūkai’s Shingon Buddhism postulated four forms of embodiment
as the hosshin itself. This notion of the four forms
of the hosshin (shishu hosshin) roughly corresponds
to, while reworking, the Mahâyâna trikâya
doctrine. 1) First there is the hosshin in its absolute
sense, called jishô hosshin. This is the
embodiment of the Dharma as Dainichi eternally remaining in the state
of samadhi but also engaging in a monologue, which reveals
its “self-nature” and unfolds the Dharma through its
omni-presencing manifestations in the cosmos. 2) Secondly there is the
juyû hosshin, which is the hosshin
enjoying bliss.  But this is characterized in its two aspects: A)
“the self-oriented embodiment”
(jijuyûshin) describing the hosshin as
enjoying its own state of samadhic bliss; and B) “the
other-oriented embodiment” (tajuyûshin)
describing the hosshin in the form of various celestial
buddhas directing the blissful fruits of self-enlightenment for the
benefit of others. 3) Thirdly there is the hosshin in its
historical and earthly transformation, called henge
hosshin as manifest in the enlightened personage of
Śakyamuni. This historical Buddha guides ordinary, ignorant, and
irreligious people towards the Dharma, but for this sake must
improvise skillful (or: expedient) means (Skrt: upâya;
Jpn: hôben) appropriate to the time, place, and
comprehension of a given audience. 4) And fourthly there is the
hosshin in its universal emanation, called tôru
hosshin. This is its manifestation in all sorts of bodily forms
appropriate to the situation in order to expound the Dharma, often
appearing in the same form as the listener in order to share in his
suffering. This conception also became generalized by Kūkai to
include all phenomenal thing-events — together with their
respective environments or “realms” — as
“bodies” filling up the entire cosmos. As such every
phenomenon plays the role of a “buddha,” teaching some
aspect of the Dharma and expressing the Buddha’s enlightened wisdom
and compassion, to realize the original enlightenment of
all. Interestingly this implies that each one of us are
already buddhas expounding some aspect of the Dharma to one
another, but which we must then become aware of in order to realize
our own Buddhahood.
It is interesting to note that the celestial buddhas and the
historical buddha (Śakyamuni) are here included as themselves
forms of the hosshin, when in the traditional
trikâya doctrine of Mahâyâna, they were
distinguished from the hosshin, which in turn was seen as
abstract and impersonal. Furthermore, according to this doctrine of
the four forms of the hosshin, it is not only the celestial
buddhas in the heavens and the historical buddha on earth who preach,
but all four forms. From Kūkai’s esoteric standpoint,
the hosshin even in its samadhic self-enjoyment is
preaching the Dharma in its cosmic monologue — for its very
embodiment is the cosmos itself so that its samadhic
experiencing of the Dharma permeates everywhere and everywhen. Simply
put, Dainichi as the hosshin and as the
personification of the Dharma concretely embodied in the cosmos, is
directly preaching the Dharma to the world via his
omni-presencing being. And while in the broader sense the
hosshin is thus preaching via the cosmos, in the
narrower sense its preaching is manifest in the teachings of esoteric
Buddhism itself. On the other hand the doctrines of what Kūkai
classified as exoteric are traced to either what the historical
buddha, Śakyamuni, preached or what the celestial buddhas are
preaching in the heavenly dimensions. Insofar as they themselves are
embodiments of the hosshin, what they preach are indirectly
teachings of the hosshin. But their teachings are
provisional, relative only to the comprehension of their audience and
the circumstance of time and place wherein they are
preached. Kūkai claims, however, that through training in
Shingon esotericism, one can receive the teachings of the
hosshin directly — that is, receive the
timeless and absolute, cosmic and holistic, truth of the Dharma in its
very embodiment. This was a radical and heterodox claim at the time
since the teaching common to all orthodox Buddhist schools was that
the sûtras can all be traced back to the preachings of
Śakyamuni and this lineage is what legitimated their use of the
sûtras. But for Kūkai, the historical Buddha was but one
manifestation of the cosmic Buddha, Dainichi, who embodies the truth
(Dharma, hô) it preaches as the hosshin.
In addition to its four forms of embodiment, Kūkai (in his
Sokushinjôbutsugi chs. 3, 4, 5) systematically
elucidates three aspects as belonging to the hosshin in its
cosmic significance: the six universal elements (rokudai) as
comprising its own body or somaticity (hontai), the four
mandalas (shimandara) as constituting its “marks”
or forms of appearance (yôsô), and the three
mysteries (sanmitsu) constituting its functions
(sayô). In all three aspects, there is involved an
interrelationship of non-duality between its macro-cosmic significance
and its micro-cosmic significance, that is, between the
hosshin qua cosmos as a whole and the practitioner
as a being forming a part of, and partaking in, the cosmos. The three aspects
interpenetrate to make-up the macrocosmos while in their non-duality
with cosmic constituents, they become manifest through successful
Shingon practice and in one’s consequent enlightenment.
Kūkai’s elucidation of these three aspects provide both a
theoretical and a practical grounding for his own conception of
sokushinjôbutsu or “becoming Buddha in this very
embodied existence,” by clarifying both its possibility and its
method. Japanese commentators have often classified his thought along
the following lines: the theory of the six universal elements as
providing a metaphysic, the theory of the four mandalas as providing
an epistemology, and the theory of the three mysteries as providing a
metapraxis. But one must also keep in mind that all three concerns
— metaphysical, epistemological, and practical — are
intertwined and inseparable in Kūkai’s thinking.  Furthermore
all three involve the significance of the body so that even in his
so-called “epistemology,” embodiment cannot be
ignored.
In the immediately following subsections I will briefly discuss each
of these aspects before providing a more detailed exposition of them in
the following sections.
Hosshin in its somaticity is identified with the cosmos as an
organic whole wherein thing-events come and go via
interdependent origination. The cosmos as such is called
hokkai (Skrt: dharmadhâtu; world/realm of the
Dharma), and in turn as the hosshin, it is the body
or soma (tai) of the Buddha Dainichi. (However it
should not be understood as substantial in the western
philosophical sense because it is “empty” — more on
“emptiness” below.) Hence Kūkai in
Shôjijissôgi cites lines from the
Avatamsaka Sûtra that “all
lands are in the body of the Buddha,” or that “each hair
[of the Buddha] contains myriad lands as vast as oceans…”
And yet simultaneously the truth, the Dharma, embodied in the entire
cosmos is manifest within each of its micro-cosmic parts. This view
that the whole permeates its parts — reminding us perhaps of the
more recent theories of holonics or the holographic model of the
universe — allows Kūkai to show that the hosshin
does indeed preach the Dharma throughout the cosmos in its every
single aspect.
This great cosmic body of the hosshin embraces all phenomena
through the mutual “non-obstruction” of the six universal
elements (rokudai muge). (Mutual
“non-obstruction” or muge here must be understood
to mean what allows for their interrelations and interpenetrations
that constitute things. In being non-substantial, they do not obstruct
each other. And “universal” or dai here must be
understood in its literal sense as “great,” meaning that
it does not exclude any phenomena or thing-event in the cosmos at
all.) As the cosmos, the hosshin is made up of the six
“great” elements (fire, earth, water, air, space,
consciousness) which interrelate to constitute thing-events in their
interdependent origination. Their interaction thus constitutes the
somaticity of an ever-evolving whole. But as dependent origination
equals emptiness (Skrt: śûnyatâ; Jpn:
kû) in Buddhism, this cosmic body is an embodiment of
the Dharma qua emptiness. Moreover emptiness also signifies
“space,” for the same graph (kû) is used
to mean “emptiness” and “space.” Hence the
cosmic body in its endless vastness, as space embracing everything,
can be seen as providing the space for the emergence of thing-events
through the intermingling of the six elements. Thus Dainichi’s body as
the cosmic embodiment of the Dharma pervades all beings to
make up, through the six elements, each of their own bodies. And yet
from another perspective, as the cosmic body is a vast emptiness that
makes room for the emergence of beings, each of these beings are in
turn empty. For being and emptiness in the Buddhist understanding are
two intertwining aspects of the same truth. (We shall discuss the more
precise sense of “emptiness” in the following sections.)
So the hosshin in its somaticity designates the ontological
ground of all beings but also designates their underlying
de-ontologizing (or: me-ontologizing; or even better: anontological) emptiness, their
non-substantiality.
The hosshin in its cosmic significance appears in the form
or figure (sô) of a mandara (Skrt:
mandala). That is, its cosmic body appears in a mandalic pattern,
as represented in the mandalas used in Shingon ritual.
Correspondingly the mind of a sentient being is also supposed to
take on the form of a mandala especially as he advances in
practice to realize non-duality with the mandalic
hosshin. That is, the mind-and-body experience of each
sentient being mirrors in its own way the mandalic pattern of the
cosmos. As one becomes enlightened, one comes to realize this
inter-mirroring.  In the envisioning of reality as a mandala, the
practitioner, who on the one hand is aiming for Buddhahood, is at
the same time also the Buddha existing in the mandalic reality
and expressing itself in mandalic form.  Whether seen as the form
experienced in the mind or as the form of the cosmos, the mandalic
figure is the Buddha’s mode of expressing the Dharma. This mandalic
appearance of the Buddha is categorized into four types, which we will
discuss in a section below.
The function of the hosshin is equated with all movements and
change that occur in the cosmos. Such cosmic alterations are
categorized in three ways in terms of visible form (e.g., loco-motion
or change of place, and trans-formation or change in shape), the
audible (sound), and the mental (the thinking process). Visible
alterations are movements of Dainichi’s body (shin), audible
alterations are movements of Dainichi’s speech (ku), and
mental alterations are movements of Dainichi’s thoughts
(i). Together they are called the “three
mysteries” (Skrt: tri-guyha; Chn: san-mi; Jpn:
sanmitsu) making up the functions (yû) of the
hosshin. Since the body of Dainichi is the cosmos itself,
these “three mysteries” of its functions are at work in
all thing-events and are ultimately non-dualistic with the
corresponding movements of ourselves.
Kūkai (e.g. in his Sokushinjôbutsugi, ch.3)
discusses Dainichi as a “body of the six great elements”
(rokudaishin, rokudai-taidai), which are the five
universal material elements (godai) of earth, water, fire,
wind/air, and space, representing the “known,” plus the
universal mental element (shindai) of consciousness,
representing the “knower.” Ultimately the five material
elements make up the body of Dainichi and the sixth element designates
the mind of Dainichi. Their dynamic but harmonious interplay
constitute the “timeless yoga” or samadhi (Jpn:
jô) of Dainichi’s body-and-mind. But since Dainichi is
equated with the cosmos, all things comprising the whole world are
generated and perish through the interplay —
“non-obstruction” and “interfusion” — of
these elemental constituents. Kūkai then is definitely not an
idealist taken in its western philosophical significance, and
Shingon thought in this aspect is distinct from the teachings of the
“mind-only” (Yuishiki; Skrt:
Vijñapti-mâtratâ) school of Buddhism.  For
the mental and the material, for Kūkai, are two non-dualistic
(interpenetrating and mutually non-obstructing) aspects of the same
Dharma — as depicted in the two mandalic embodiments, which we
shall discuss below. In other words Kūkai does not reduce
reality to either mind or matter; his perspective is neither merely
idealist nor merely materialist.
The interrelationship amongst the elements signifies their
non-substantiality, i.e. the fact that they are not ontologically
independent, and in Buddhist parlance this means
“emptiness” (śûnyatâ,
kû). Hence all elements and things they constitute,
including the entire cosmos is empty. Dainichi’s body, as the
hosshin that embodies the Dharma, is an embodiment of
emptiness, analogically understood as a vast empty space — it is
in part analogical but also exemplary of emptiness. Rather than
obstructing the emergence of things, this emptiness permits it through
their interdependent origination, which is the meaning of
emptiness. Their materiality is then just as real as their emptiness,
and emptiness and matter are non-dualistic. True to the “middle
way” of Buddhism, Kūkai treads a path that avoids
reifying substantialism on the one hand as well as utter nihilism on
the other hand. And in the non-dualistic interrelationships between
body and mind, matter and emptiness, known and knower, the Dharma
itself, as the truth of non-duality in interdependent origination
qua emptiness is revealed in every physical and mental
process of the cosmos as the embodiment of the Dharma.
The “horizontal” interpenetration between the elements,
i.e., the interdependence and mutual non-obstruction amongst the
immanent phenomena of the cosmos, also translates into the
“vertical” interpenetration between the whole and its
parts, that is, between Dainichi as embodied in the cosmos and all
thing-events within. The implications of such cosmic non-duality
for the practitioner is immensely significant. In non-duality
with the cosmic Buddha, one’s unenlightened self in both
mind-and-body is thus an expression of the hosshin, an
embodiment of the Dharma. That is, as one’s mental states
express the samadhi of Dainichi, so also one’s body
along with the bodies of all living and non-living things, in every
bodily movement, manifests Dainichi’s body and its
movements. Dainichi is preaching the Dharma through all phenomena
of the cosmos. But as we ourselves are the bodies through which
Dainichi preaches, we are enabled to realize the cosmic
samadhi that our bodies-and-minds express. This points
to the non-dualistic significance between the two exemplary concepts of
Shingon Buddhism: hosshin seppô and
sokushinjôbutsu, both of which we shall examine in detail
in the following sections.
As the hosshin, the Buddha Dainichi preaches the Dharma
via his omnipresencing, that is, through every sensible media
of the cosmos. Kūkai called this, hosshin seppô
(literally: “the dharmakâya’s expounding of the
Dharma”), and used its concept (e.g. in his Benkenmitsu
nikkyôron) as an important criterion for distinguishing
esoteric Buddhism from exoteric Buddhism. In his work
Shôjijissôgi, this concept of hosshin
seppô serves as the starting point. The seppô
(“preaching,” “expounding”) therein is equated
with the phenomena of the cosmos as comprising
shôjijissô, that is, sound, sign, reality, and their
meanings. (We will discuss the linguistic or semiological significance
of this idea in the following section.) The point is that every thing
and every event in the universe, as objects of our six senses, are the
Buddha’s preaching of the Dharma. Each phenomenon manifest serves to
explain (setsu) the truth, the Dharma. The hosshin
in its omnipresencing throughout the cosmos, permeating every aspect
of it, is perpetually informing all things of the Dharma. This cosmic
omnipresencing of the Dharma via hosshin seppô entails a
dynamism of continuous activity that accounts for the movements within
the universe — both physical and mental.
Since everything to which Dainichi preaches, is itself his
manifestation as an embodied part of the cosmos, the sermon is
ultimately a monologue. The expounding of the Dharma is in one
sense then really the Buddha’s monologic expression of his own
self-enjoyment in samadhic bliss. And yet simultaneously
it expresses Dainichi’s compassion for the unawakened (though
ultimately they are non-dualistic with the Buddha) so that they may
also enjoy the fruits of the Dharma. Through the help of
Dainichi’s compassionate con-descension or kaji (more on
this in a later section), the practitioner is enabled to inter-resonate
with the sermon of the cosmos.
The idea of hosshin seppô also expresses a
universalization in Shingon of the Mahâyâna Buddhist notion
of expedient (or: skillful) means. The Shingon doctrine of
hôben kukyô (“ultimacy of expedient
means”) means that any phenomenon or thing-event of the cosmos
can serve as a means to enlightenment, entailing a gradation of
understanding, hinging on how the event speaks to the person relative
to the time, place, and situational context. This also corresponds to
the levels of mental states discussed in Kūkai’s
Jûjûshinron (which we will examine in a further
section below). The key to immediate and complete enlightenment
however is to understand the comprehensive (or
holistic) sense of the truth being spoken by the cosmos as a
whole even if through the medium of a particular thing-event.
Kūkai’s claim was that only through the Buddhism of esoteric
teachings can one attain to an experiential recognition of
hosshin seppô, i.e. that the cosmos itself is describing
the immediate enlightened body-and-mind state of the Buddha. By
contrast exoteric truths preached by other forms of Buddhism are meant
for a specific audience in a specific place and time, and hence are
conditional, relative, and provisional.  Moreover exoteric truths are
limited by human language, which is inadequate to describe the state
of enlightenment and the absoluteness of the Dharma. The esoteric
truth revealed in hosshin seppô on the other hand
unfolds through a non-human language, that is, a cosmic and esoteric
language originating in the hosshin itself. This is the
language of the mantra or in Japanese, shingon, literally
meaning “the word of truth,” and from which Kūkai’s
brand of Buddhism derives its name. Mantra (shingon) is the
language of the cosmos involving all mental and physical-sensible
phenomena.  The esoteric truths expressed in this mantric language of
the Buddha/cosmos reveal themselves only in accordance with the
reader’s capacity to attune himself to, and read, this cosmic
(con)text of the mantric universe.
The idea of the mantra, inherited from Indian Mantrayâna,
occupies a significant position in Kūkai’s philosophy, which he
elucidates in each of his Sanbu-sho and systematically
and most comprehensively in his Shôjijissôgi.
Mantras denote the reality of all dharmas
(shohô) — the elemental constituents of
reality — as themselves signifying the Dharma preached by the
hosshin. (In Buddhism, the term dharma
(hô) has many meanings, among which are the
significances of truth itself and the elemental constituents of
reality. When speaking of truth in its absolute sense as preached by
Dainichi or as embodied in the dharmakâya
(hosshin), I have been capitalizing Dharma, and when
speaking of the elements that constitute reality, I leave
dharma uncapitalized.)  It represents the primordial speech
of the Buddha Dainichi uttering and expositing the Dharma, taken in
both its restricted human significance and its broader cosmic
significance. That is, Dainichi’s sermon as a mantra in the broad
sense means all phenomena in general as vibrations emanating
from Dainichi’s eternal samadhi through the interplay of the
elements via the three media of body, speech, and
mind. All objects of the six senses as based upon those three
media of visible and tangible forms, audible sounds, and thoughts,
embody mantras as syllables uttered by Dainichi. And in its narrower
sense the mantra takes the abbreviated verbal form of syllables
written in the esoteric sûtras and uttered in esoteric ritual
practice by the practitioner. That is, the mantras uttered by
practitioners in ritual practice are to be taken as focused
condensations of those cosmic vibrations in a particular sound. They
are condensed manifestations of the content of Dainichi’s sermon,
namely the truth of enlightenment, the Dharma.
In the broader sense of mantra, the whole cosmos is a language or text
that must be “read” if one is to receive its meaning (the
Dharma). Kūkai expresses this in the term
shôjijissô. Shôji means
“sound-and-sign.” Shô (or:
sô), meaning “sound,” is the breath of
Dainichi, the vibrations of the five material elements in their
mutually non-obstructively colliding interplay that resonate sounds
through the air. In the narrower sense, this would be the mantras
voiced in ritual. Ji, meaning “sign,”
“word,” “letter,” or
“character/graph,” is sound in its signifying character as
naming or meaning something. As letter, it also provides a
material base whereby the sign’s distinction from other signs becomes
retained and fixed. For what makes something a sign signifying a
specific meaning rather than another is difference
(shabetsu). Anything that manifests its distinction from
others in virtue of its pattern (mon) — the various
combinations of shape, color, and movement among visual objects
— then, for Kūkai, is a sign or letter
(ji). Marking distinct patterns (mon), such things
are “characters” (monji;
“pattern-letter”). In the broadest and cosmic sense then,
all phenomena of the six senses (i.e., the five physical senses plus
the thinking mind) as constituted by the inter-vibrations of the five
material elements and via their mutual distinctions
(shabetsu), serve as letters of the cosmic (con)text,
ultimately signifying the Dharma but in its different aspects. In its
narrower significance, however, ji would be the written
Sanskrit letters as saturated with that esoteric meaning of the
Dharma. Jissô, meaning “reality,” is that
which is named, intended, meant, as evoked by sho becoming
ji. The ultimate referent or meaning of the world as text is
the Dharma in the spontaneous playing of its embodiment, the
hosshin. In turn the process of articulation of the Dharma by
the hosshin generates everything in the cosmos, including the
myriad beings, their various realms, and its various forms of
embodiment such as the celestial buddhas and the historical human
buddha. It also generates human languages in general which are thus
seen as manifestations of this cosmic articulation. The cosmos as such
is a text articulating the Dharma within the empty space of the vast
limitless and formless body of the hosshin. The cosmos as
mantra is hence hosshin seppô.
From the mantric articulation of the Dharma emerge ten realms and
their respective languages (of hell dwellers, hungry ghosts, animals,
asuras, humans, celestial heaven dwellers, śrâvakas,
pratyeka-buddhas, bodhisattvas, and buddhas).
Each realm as an articulation of the Dharma, has its own
“sounds-and-signs,” i.e., its own language, in accordance
with a specific perspective corresponding to the degree of
enlightenment and illusion of its inhabitants. But only the language of
the highest, the most comprehensive realm, i.e., the realm of the
Buddha, is identified with the “true word”
(shingon, mantra), designating the Dharma as it
is. The nine other languages are by contrast “illusory
words” (môgo). And yet they nevertheless do express
the Dharma, each from its own relative and limited perspective.
In this restricted sense, they are all mantras as well. For they
take part in the cosmic text of the hosshin written in the
same inter-referential interrelationships obtaining in all thing-events
via the interplay of the same universal elements. The
difference is that while the other languages are not conscious of their
source, the most comprehensive language, the
“sounds-and-signs” of the Buddha-realm, entails
self-awareness of its mysterious origin.
The text of the Dainichi-kyô itself is taken by
Kūkai to be a condensation in scriptural form of that cosmic
text of the mantra, comprising of the most comprehensive language of
the Buddha-realm. And that same mantric text is then further condensed
into each syllabic-root letter of the Sanskrit alphabet itself, which
thus serves as a means for meditation. In Kūkai’s scheme (set
out in his Dainichikyô kaidai), the true
original text of the Dainichi-kyô is the eternal Dharma
itself as the cosmic (con)text or mantra and cosmic mandala, existing
permanently and comprising the universe and all phenomena. Within the
world, an abridged translation appeared that supposedly consisted of
20,000 volumes and was circulated in India but became lost. The
version Kūkai brought back from China is a much smaller one,
but his claim is that every word, character, stroke or dot, within it
in its mantric nature encompasses countless meanings and
truths. Thus while the most abbreviated text is implaced within the
original cosmic text, the entire content of the cosmic text is itself
encapsulated within the characters of its abridgment representing a
condensation. This “inter-textuality” exemplifies the
Hua-yen (Huayan; Jpn: Kegon) sense of interpenetration whereby the
entire whole is contained within each part, but here this Hua-yen idea
is translated in mantric terms. This same scheme used in explaining
the Dainichi-kyô was used by Kūkai to explain the
relationship of the Kongôchôgyô and other
esoteric texts to the world as well.
What exactly is the Dharma, the truth that all languages and all texts
point to as their mysterious source? Kūkai explicates its
significance qua emptiness in terms of “primal
non-origination” (Skrt: âdyanutpâda; Jpn:
honpushô). What Kūkai means by
“non-origination” is related to his understanding of the
emptiness of things and the differential referentiality of signs.  By
incorporating the Mahâyâna thought of emptiness,
Kūkai’s linguistic ontology of the mantra proves to be
simultaneously a linguistic “an-ontology” (or:
“meontology”) of sorts.  Every phenomenon of the cosmos, being empty
of substantiality, is what it is through its interdependent
origination (Skrt: pratītya-samutpâda; Jpn:
engi).  Likewise each signifying letter of the cosmic text is
what it is not because of its own substantial identity but
rather through its difference from other signifying letters. Its
identity is constituted not on the basis of a self-same essence but
rather in reference to, and difference from, others. Signification
then for Kūkai is nothing but differentiation
(shabetsu), which is another way of speaking of the
non-substantiality, i.e., emptiness, of phenomena. Every thing —
rocks, mountains, ants, etc.  — is what it is in mutual
distinction with everything else.  And this differentiation occurs
via its implacement into a specific situation or context
vis-à-vis other things in an endless chain of mutually
referring (and differing) correlative thing-events. In reference to
others and without substantial self-presence, each thing-event is
hence empty. In this respect, every thing, as signifying letter, is an
embodiment of emptiness.  And as such a sign or letter manifesting
emptiness and differential referentiality, each thing-event is thus a
mantra, Dainichi’s “seal of wisdom of differentiation”
(shabetsu chiin). The cosmic text constituted of mutually
differing signs is then the empty place of empty things, and as such,
the ultimate scripture of emptiness. The hosshin as the
embodiment of this truth, the Dharma, is thus itself differentiation,
emptiness.
The world emerges in the articulation of the Dharma through such
mutual differentiations in pattern. From out of the sea of emptiness,
through Dainich’s articulation qua mutual interplay of the
five material elements, the cosmos is ordered into distinct and
discrete things and events, and the hosshin transforms itself
into a legible — albeit ambiguous — cosmic (con)text. This
linguistic cosmogeny is simultaneously ontological and
me-ontological. For each thing as sign in differential reference to
the rest of the cosmic text, mirrors the infinity of all the other
mutually referring and mutually differing thing-events. In its own
emptiness, each thing-letter mirrors the emptiness of the cosmos,
i.e., the Dharma. They are traces of the hosshin’s
omnipresencing non-substantiality, emptiness as the “primal
non-originating” source of these thing-events in their
beginningless and endless interrelations.  Kūkai takes this
linguistic cosmo-genesis in emptiness via the
hosshin’s world-play, to be the meaning behind the
“playful striding of great emptiness,” mentioned in the
Dainichi-kyô (T18:21a) and which he quotes in his
Sokushinjôbutsugi. Furthermore this cosmogeny that is an
articulation of truth, the writing of the cosmic text, is open-ended
and on-going, dynamically being continuously reworked.  This accounts
for the ambiguity of the cosmic text and every sign within it.
The ambiguity of the mantric nature of the cosmos and of
all thing-events is in the fact that they entail simultaneously both
hope and difficulty for enlightenment. The language of the
hosshin in the form of thing-events may either guide one to
enlightenment or deceive one into delusion. For in spite of their
emptiness, their interdependent origination, thing-events can be easily
reified in light of human desires. When this happens the cosmic
text they constitute is misread under the pretext that the world as
such is nothing but a system of substantial things, and that any
corresponding language is nothing but a system of signs representing
those substantial things. Through the reification of their being,
their “primal non-originating” emptiness is ignored. 
And correspondingly one becomes predisposed to cling to them and hence
suffer. But this lack of essential origins in each and every
phenomenon, the absence of their first cause, simultaneously means that
we ourselves, all sentient beings, are endowed with the original
enlightenment of the hosshin (hongaku hosshin). 
Hence there is hope for the realization of this enlightenment
for all.
Shingon ritual practice attempts to trigger this realization through
the mantric pronunciations of the five basic syllables of Sanskrit
— A,Va, Ra, Ha, Kha
—, emulating the primordial utterance of Dainichi. This is
to attune the practitioner to the inter-resonance of the basic elements
underlying all phenomena, so that he may hear the “true
words” being preached by Dainichi. The mantra’s power
is in its incomprehensibility to human understanding. Its
significance cannot be explained analytically or understood
conceptually; it is instead to be experienced in ritual. Through
ritualized experience, these intellectually incomprehensible sounds, in
the self-deconstruction of any assumed or projected meaningfulness,
paradoxically evoke the emptiness they mean and the emptiness of their
meaning, the emptiness of all in their mutual non-obstruction and
interdependence. Its incomprehension makes explicit the
materiality and dynamic process involved behind the emergence of
signs. This undermines any linguistic assumption of the
substantiality of things and hence any delusory attachments to
them. What is invoked is a paradigm shift from seeing the surface
pattern of things to seeing their underlying emptiness. (Abe 1999,
297–98)  In addition to mantric intonations, another form of
practice was a-ji meditation, wherein the written form of the
Sanskrit letter A is treated as an object of meditation. 
The purpose of such concentrated attention on the material form of a
sign is to gain some sort of an experiential comprehension of its
esoteric significance, somewhat similar to that of mantra incantation
as just discussed. However we must note the special significance
of the particular letter A, which we shall discuss below.
The two most important mantric syllables from Sanskrit
— in the Siddham (Jpn: shittan) script system
popularized in East Asia — emphasized in Shingon Buddhism, in
both sound and graph, are A and Un
(hûm). The former is the seed-syllable of
Dainichi as explicated in the Dainichi-kyô and the
latter is the seed-syllable of the Kongô-satta
(Vajrasattva, a buddha-being believed to have received instruction
directly from Mahâvairocana) as explicated in the
Kongôchô-gyô, and together seen as
non-dualistic in significance. In the following I will discuss the
significance of these seed-syllables.
Kūkai in several works (especially in
Shôjijissôgi andUnjigi) explicates the
syllabic letter A as signifying the above-mentioned
“primal non-originating” character of all thing-events, as
the “mother” of all syllables, letters, and languages, and
the king of all mantras. The sound A is also the primal sound
made when the mouth first opens to exhale. And in its written form,
A constitutes the first stroke of every other
syllable. A is the first syllable of the Sanskrit alphabet as
well as of the Sanskrit words for “origin”
(âdi) and “unborn” (anutpâda),
combined in the Sanskrit word “primal non-origination”
(âdyanutpâda). It is also the first letter of the
root mantra of Dainichi as depicted in the Taizô Mandara (which
we shall discuss below): A Vi Ra Hûm
Kham Hûm (Jpn: A Bira
Un Ken).  Furthermore in Sanskrit, A is used as a
negative prefix.  All of these manifold meanings are combined in
Shingon’s mantric use of A to represent the primal
vocalization of Dainichi. Its omnipresence in form and sound
symbolizes the Buddha-nature of the hosshin pervading
everywhere, while condensing the significance of that all-prevalence
within its singular form and sound. But its all-pervasiveness also
means the origin of all things in their interdependence, that is,
their interdependent origination, hence emptiness. This emptiness of
substance is denoted by its use as a negative prefix, i.e., the
absence of self-presence in infinite referentiality. As stated above,
A signifies the “primal non-originating”
character of all being. For in signifying the origin of all in their
on-going dependent origination A is thus the “origin of
no origin.” What this points to is the endlessness of the chain
of conditions behind each thing-event, never reaching an ultimate
origin or first cause. But paradoxically this primal absence of any
distinguishing origin, this ubiquitous in-difference of all
differentiation, is itself the ultimate origin of all thing-events in
their mutual differentiations and co-relativity. Or put differently,
Dainichi’s mind (along with his body), making no discrimination
between this and that, is like a great space (“emptiness”;
kû) from out of which he transforms himself through
self-differentiation into the myriad thing-events and beings. This
causeless cause is symbolized in the last letter in Sanskrit, the
letter H, the first letter of the mantra
Hûm (Jpn: Un).  Its meaning thus
coincides with the “primal non-origination” denoted by the
first letter of the alphabet, A. The syllable A,
together with H then embodies the meanings of emptiness,
dependent origination, and primal non-origination, all expressing the
beginningless and endless dynamic non-substantiality of the entire
cosmos and all being, the empty space that is the body of the
hosshin, the Dharma of all dharmas.
It should be remembered however that while Kūkai thus links the
hosshin’s preaching to the mantric sound and letter
of A, this same preaching, symbolized in A, in fact
encompasses all movements of the cosmos, involving colors, shapes,
silence, bodily movements, etc., not just the explicitly vocal.
Dainichi preaches the Dharma via all phenomenal means through
the three media, the “three mysteries,” of body, speech,
and mind, omnipresencing himself through all objects of the six senses
(the five physical senses plus thought). The entire cosmos is hence
the language of the Buddha, inseparable from the Buddha’s body that is
in fact the embodiment of the Dharma (i.e., hosshin,
dharmakâya). We now turn to the mandalic aspect of the
embodiment of the Dharma and of Dainichi’s preaching of the
Dharma.
Viewed in light of the concept of hosshin seppô, the
cosmos is a flowering of the Dharma preached by Dainichi, as it spreads
outward towards beings receiving it in various degrees in accordance
with their level of understanding. The form that this flowering
takes is the mandala (Jpn: mandara). The mandala in
Shingon Buddhism is a diagram or picture, usually a painting,
picturing the doctrines expounded in the two major esoteric scriptures,
Dainichikyô and
Kongôchôgyô. It depicts visually the form
that enlightenment takes as it becomes manifest in the universe. 
In other words, it is taken to be a visual depiction of the
hosshin itself and the flowering of hosshin
seppô throughout the cosmos, serving as a map for one’s
journey to enlightenment.
                 
This use and understanding of the mandala was another distinction of
Shingon Buddhism differentiating it in Kūkai’s mind as esoteric
from exoteric Buddhism.  The mandala proves to be “a metaphor for a
new envisioning of reality, self, and world” (Gardiner 2008, 44), a
vehicle for the transformation of vision, whereby
one envisions the world as a mandala.  Kūkai’s
contention was that exoteric teachings move the practitioner towards
the central summit of the mandala, step-by-step from its own specific
vantage point without taking a comprehensive view of the
whole. Esoteric teachings on the other hand take the entirety of the
cosmic mandala into one comprehensive view, allowing for the
practitioner to leap, as it were, into the center to realize
non-duality with the hosshin.
In the esoteric tradition that Kūkai inherited from Hui-kuo,
there are two major mandalas that depict the hosshin in two
different mandalic forms. Each mandala originally belonged to one of
the two esoteric lineages, which became combined in China, and is
associated with either of the two sûtras. All Shingon
doctrines, traceable to the two sûtras, are supposed to be
pictorially depicted in these two mandalas: the Taizô
(Skrt: Garbha, “Womb of enlightenment”) and the
Kongôkai (Srkt: Vajradhâtu,
“Vajra realm,” “Diamond realm” or
“Realm of the adamantine thunderbolt”) mandalas.  Together
they are called ryôbu mandara and represent a
comprehensive unity. Each are also associated with one of the two
different concepts of ri (pattern, order — referring to
emptiness as the reason discerned in patternment) and chi
(wisdom, i.e., the wisdom of emptiness). Accordingly the
hosshin can be understood in its embodied form as
ri-hosshin (or rishin) and as chi-hosshin
(or chishin), two aspects which are ultimately non-dualistic
(richi funi). The ri-hosshin is depicted in the
Taizô mandara that expresses truths expounded in the
Dainichi-kyô. And the chi-hosshin is depicted
in the Kongôkai mandara that expresses truths expounded in the
Kongôchô-gyô. Both depict Dainichi as the
central deity, with buddhas and bodhisattvas surrounding him in
geometric arrangement.
The Taizô-mandara (full name: Daichitaizôsei
mandara; Skrt: Garbhakośadhâtu mandala;
“Great compassion womb repository birth mandala”)
represents the “female principle” and expresses the
material world in its underlying empatternment of ri, which
is the Buddha’s view to truth from the summit of enlightenment
downward to the mundane world of humans. Ri (Chn:
li) often translated into English as “principle,”
in fact has the sense of “pattern,” and in the esoteric
Buddhist context signifies the pattern found in the interplay of the
five material elements that constitute the myriad thing-events and
phenomena. As the material elements form the objects of cognition, the
mandala depicting the rishin represents the known. In his
commentary on the Dainichi-kyô
(Dainichi-kyô kaidai), Kūkai equates the
nature of Dainichi taken as jishô hosshin with this
rishin. He then in turn identifies the rishin as the
original enlightenment intrinsic to all sentient beings but hidden in
its unmanifest potentiality as what is to be known. 
As a descending view from the summit, this Taizô mandala
represents the enlightened universe from the perspective of compassion,
an expression of the “female” principle. Just as a
mother enfolds her child in the care of her womb, the Buddha’s
compassion nurtures the original enlightenment in all. With the
lotus as chief symbol, the picture represents the manifestation of
Dainichi through his cosmic activities. Dainichi occupies the
unmoving center with myriad buddhas, bodhisattvas, and other deities
layered around it, while Dainichi simultaneously pervades all up to the
outermost edges of the diagram. From that center, enlightenment
radiates outward in a spiral, passing through the various buddhas and
bodhisattvas, descending through various levels of being and mind,
outward to the phenomenal world as it becomes more and more concrete,
reaching the human world and further into the realms of animals,
hell-beings, and hungry ghosts. Thus a wellspring of activity is
depicted to be endlessly flowing out of the center. This activity
manifests the welling-up of compassion from the Buddha’s wisdom
as it moves outwards and downwards. Simultaneously all beings are
directed inwards and upwards towards enlightenment depicted in the
mandalic center. The two movements are non-dualistic.
The Kongô-kai mandara (Srkt: Vajradhâtu
mandala; “Vajra-realm
mandala”) represents the “male priciple” and embodies
the vajra-wisdom, a wisdom that is adamantine and imperishable
and that illuminates and enfolds all beings. This symbolizes the
sixth element, the mental element of chi (wisdom), referring
to the mental realm of the knower, the subject of cognitive
experience. But it also represents the Buddha’s adamantine
power of illumination that realizes enlightenment, symbolized by the
vajra (an adamantine weapon with many points). In this
respect the mind it symbolizes is not only the practitioner’s
mind but also the all-comprehensive mind of Dainichi as indestructible
potentials of the cosmos, as the Buddha’s “embodiment of
wisdom” (chishin). 
This Kongô-kai mandala is a rectangle consisting of a
combination of nine smaller mandalas, each an originally independent
mandala, juxtaposed to depict a double spiraling movement, centrifugal
and centripetal: on the one hand outward of the Buddha’s enlightenment
towards the phenomenal world, and on the other hand inward of beings
on the periphery from the mundane world in spiritual progression
towards enlightenment at the center. Of the nine smaller mandalas, the
most basic, which are on the lower left corner, are representations of
the so-called “four mandalas” (shimandara) that
Kūkai classified as the form of appearance of the
hosshin. (More on the shimandara in the next
section.)  All together the nine depict the unending activity of the
enlightened mind, moving clockwise from the center, to take on
increasingly concrete forms, engaging in skillful means to help the
unenlightened, while the unenlightened evolve towards the center. From
the Buddha’s perspective, the center is moving outwards; and from the
individual practitioner’s perspective, the periphery is being drawn
inwards. Enlightened wisdom cannot remain aloof from the realities of
unenlightened life. Skillful means thus embodies wisdom in concrete
phenomenal activity. In this respect, the mandala emphasizes the
non-duality between wisdom (hannya) and skillful means. And
it symbolizes the wisdom that knows truth, the Dharma, in all its
separate manifestations.
Together these two mandalic forms depict the form of the cosmos as a
dynamic process interrelating and uniting the transcendent and the
mundane, the enlightened and the ignorant, Buddha and man, macrocosmos
and microcosmos, matter and mind, pattern and wisdom. They visually
represent two simultaneous overlapping aspects of enlightenment,
variously described as emptiness and form, compassion and wisdom,
object and subject, the dimension from which the practitioner
is guided by the Buddha and the dimension towards which the
practitioner evolves. In Kūkai’s reading, these are inseparable
aspects of the hosshin, depicted in the two mandalas from
different but non-dualistic perspectives. Enlightenment would be the
experiential realization of their non-duality: richi funi. In
Shingon practice, therefore the Taizô mandala (rishin)
is hung on the east wall of the meditation hall; and the Kongôkai
mandala (chishin) is hung on the west wall.
In addition to the two mandalic embodiments of the hosshin,
Kūkai (in Sokushinjôbutsugi, ch.4) classifies
mandalas in general into four types, depicting the different ways
whereby the Dharma is manifest: 1. The “great mandala”
(Skrt: mahâ-mandala; Jpn: daimandara)
symbolizes the cosmic Buddha in its physical extension along with all
the stages of being, including the buddhas, bodhisattvas, and deities
that are depicted in perfect anthropormophic form surrounding Dainichi
at the center and painted in different colors to represent different
material elements. 2. The “samaya mandala” (Skrt:
samaya-mandala; Jpn: sanmaya mandara) pictures the
Buddha-cum-universe through a variety of articles or signs,
symbolizing the omnipresencing of Dainichi’s intention (Skrt:
samaya; Jpn: sanmaya). They include swords, gems,
lotus, vajra, etc., as each signifying a specific improvisation of a
skillful mean to enlighten the unenlightened. This also represents the
unity-in-diversity of all thing-events as forms of Dainichi’s
body. 3. The “Dharma mandala” (Skrt:
Dharma-mandala; Jpn: hô mandara) pictures the
universe as the sphere of Dainichi’s continuous communication of truth
(Dharma), as depicted in the arrangement of mantric seed
syllables. And 4. The “karma mandala” (Skrt:
karma-mandala; Jpn: katsuma mandara) was originally
a three-dimensional mandala in sculpted form — including the
physical layout of the temple compound at Mt. Kôya — but
which more often became a painted one instead. Showing the activities
(karma) of buddhas and bodhisattvas implied in the other
three, this mandala depicts the fact that every change in any form
within the cosmos is an act of the hosshin and conversely
that every act of the hosshin is an occurrence of things and
events in the cosmos. The four then depict four different aspects of
truth: body (the five material elements), mind (intention, compassion,
the sixth element), speech (communication), and action (all
movements). Through meditation upon them one comes to view everything
as a mandala, the cosmos as a mandalic unfolding of the
Dharma. Ultimately the mandala depicts not only the cosmos or the
Dharma as object but also one’s own interior self in meditation as one
interiorizes it or as one visualizes it within.
One of the most distinguishing characteristic of Kūkai’s
Buddhist thought is his concept of sokushinjôbutsu, the
attainment of enlightenment in this very embodied existence. This idea
of sokushinjôbutsu represents the apex of Kūkai’s
synthesis of Buddhist theoria and praxis. The
doctrine itself is not explicit in the two major esoteric
sûtras, the Dainichikyô and the
Kongôchôgyô. The idea first appears rather in
I-hsing’s commentary on the Dainichikyô (Ta-jih
Ching Su; Commentary on the Mahâvairocana
Sûtra). Kūkai was the first however to provide the
idea with a systematic explication in his
Sokushinjôbutsugi, which has been regarded by
commentators as the most important of his philosophical
expositions. Kūkai’s appropriation and systematic development
of the theory takes the form of a unique philosophy of praxis
that is simultaneously a philosophy of the body.
The phrase sokushinjôbutsu means literally,
“attaining enlightenment in this very body” or
“becoming buddha in this very body.” “Body”
(shin) — as Kūkai explains in
Sokushinjôbutsugi, ch. 6 — here is not merely
one’s corporeal body but one’s lived embodied existence of
body-and-mind as one whole. In addition “body” here takes
on myriad significances when one views sokushinjôbutsu
in light of Kūkai’s other concepts such as hosshin
seppô and sanmitsu. Sokushin (“this
body”), for example, can signify the cosmos of the
hokkai as the macrocosmic body of the hosshin
with which one’s own embodiment is non-dualistic. It can mean each of
the six universal elements or all of them together that comprise the
cosmic body and its samadhi. It can also mean the four
embodiments of the hosshin. It can mean the bodies of all
living things other than one’s self. In correspondence with the
“three mysteries” of body, speech, and mind, or
mudra, mantra, and mandala, it can mean bodily gestural
symbols (in), figures of letters (ji), and
expressive demeanor or countenance (gô). All of these
senses of “body” are interrelated and inseparable,
mutually mirroring one another.
                 
Shingon has inherited much of the metaphysics of Chinese
Mahâyâna thought: e.g., the equation of hosshin and
hokkai, traceable to Hua-yen Buddhism; and the equation
of the hosshin with the universal Buddha-nature inherent in
all beings as their “original enlightenment”, traceable to
T’ien-t’ai (Tiantai; Jpn: Tendai) Buddhism. Combining
these Mahâyâna equations, in Shingon, the embodiment of the
Dharma equals the cosmos as the realm of truth, the Dharma, which in
turn means the inherent universal original enlightenment (honnu
hongaku) in all beings. But what distinguishes Kūkai’s
thought is in his focus upon the body and its concrete practice. The
cosmos is the “body of truth” and our own bodies take part
in that cosmic body. It is this bodily aspect, as a universal medium
or plenum that allows for the concretization of universal
enlightenment to be realized through ritualized bodily
experience. Both Hua-yen and T’ien-t’ai had similar
notions of universal original enlightenment although that idea was
quite new to Japan at the time. But what they lacked was any concrete
ritual means for realizing that enlightenment aside from basic
meditation.  Kūkai contended that their teachings were thus
lacking in the area of practice. His emphasis upon a bodily ritual
praxis that cohered with scriptural doctrine provided them
with soteriological — rather than just magico-secular —
significance.  This helped to bridge the gap between theory and
practice, doctrine and ritual, that was previously left unexplained by
the orthodox Nara schools of Buddhism. As a consequence of his
explication of sokushinjôbutsu, Kūkai
thus provided both a coherent explanation of the
relationship between theory and practice, and a concrete
method for realizing through bodily experience those teachings, a
practical method for realizing what Mahâyâna already taught
in China as hongaku.
Kūkai’s claim was that this esoteric method of
ritual-bodily-meditational practice — involving the three media
(or “mysteries”) of body, speech, and mind — will
allow one to realize one’s direct embodied participation in the
Dharmic samadhi of the hosshin, i.e.,
“enlightenment in this very embodied existence”
(sokushinjôbutsu). The lack of any systematic esoteric
ritual practice in exoteric Buddhism — from Kūkai’s
perspective, their rituals were unsystematized, haphazard —,
fails to lead to immediate enlightenment.  Moreover the orthodox
teaching of the exoteric schools was that it would take innumerable
rebirths of training until one could attain Buddhahood. Kūkai
instead claimed that esoteric Buddhism, with its rituals and
meditational methods, can lead one, regardless of karmic
dispositions, to instant enlightenment “in this very
body.” Through yogic and mantric practices
involving the body, the practitioner was to eliminate all attachments
to the substantiality of self and of things and to their
dichotomization — this for the sake of immediately realizing
non-duality with the hosshin. In this way the idea of
sokushinjôbutsu is put forth as a major distinguishing
characteristic of esoteric from exoteric Buddhism, demonstrating the
possibility of attaining enlightenment in one’s presently
embodied existence in distinction from the long and gradual process
over countless aeons of rebirths as taught by the exoteric
schools.
For Kūkai this bodily and concrete nature of the realization of
original enlightenment, which he so emphasized, is ultimately
predicated upon the fact that one’s self and Buddha are non-dualistic,
that man in his very embodied existence — that is, in
body-and-mind — is already a micro-cosmic mirror of the
hosshin. We next turn to this aspect of man’s mirroring of
the Buddha, which simultaneously is also the Buddha’s salvific helping
of man.
The realization of enlightenment cannot be attained on one’s own. For
one is not a substantial, i.e., ontologically independent, being to
begin with. As the cosmos itself is a web of interdependently
originating thing-events, nothing can stand alone to claim complete
self-sufficiency. The same interdependency that obtains horizontally
between the constituents of the cosmos also obtains vertically. That
is, the whole is what it is in virtue of its parts just as the parts
are what they are in partaking of the whole. The realization of
enlightenment then as an event, as well as the relative degrees of
spiritual development, entails a micro-cosmic and macro-cosmic
correlativity. This is expressed in Sokushinjôbutsugi,
ch. 5, in Kūkai’s notion of kaji (Skrt:
adhisthâna), which has been variously translated as
“empowerment” or “grace.” In religious (or
devotional) terms, this is explained to involve both the
Buddha’s great compassion and the practitioner’s piety, devotion, or
faith, which in their correspondence, act together in the attainment
of enlightenment.  But one must keep in mind that kaji in
itself is not necessarilly enlightenment because the empowerment is in
proportion to the level of spirituality attained by the
practitioner. Through such mutuality, one’s own effort partakes in the
omnipresencing of the hosshin, realized in various
degrees. This mutuality is expressed in the meanings of the
two characters that make up kaji: Ka, literally
meaning “adding” or “increasing,” is explained
to be the Buddha’s compassion that pours down upon, entering into, the
practitioner’s mind (shin) like sunrays on water.  And
ji, literally meaning “retaining” or
“holding,” is explained to refer to the practitioner’s
mind that keeps a-hold of, absorbs, the compassion just as water
retains and reflects the sunlight. Ka is the gift
that Dainichi gives; and ji is our acknowledgment of
that gift by cherishing it.  Practically speaking this
becomes expressed in the bodily ritual training that the practitioner
undergoes as he strives to ascend “upwards,” to meet
Dainichi’s compassionate descent “downwards.” In the
terminology that becomes later popularized with Pure Land Buddhism,
this would signify a mutuality and non-duality between self-power
(jiriki) and other-power (tariki). The two movements
are aspects of a single movement of enlightenment. In other words,
one’s own striving is the “grace” of the Buddha
helping one towards enlightenment. But this cannot simply be construed
to mean one’s reliance upon other-power but entails that one must
appropriate that “grace” in self-power. This mutuality of
kaji is also expressed in Kūkai’s phrase,
nyûga ganyû (“[Buddha] entering into me,
and I entering [into Buddha]”).
Kaji is realized as one becomes aware of one’s self and
activity as the micro-cosmic manifestation of the macro-cosmic
activity and mystery of the cosmos itself. One could then also say
that kaji expresses the mutuality and coherence or
co-responding that obtains between the two major concepts
characterizing esoteric Buddhism for Kūkai: hosshin
seppô and sokushinjôbutsu, as two ways of
conceiving from different angles the same interrelationality of the
cosmos in its mantric and mandalic expressions. That is to
say, in the mantric and mandalic nature of this
interrelationality, the Buddha’s hosshin seppô on the
one hand descends from the summit and spreads-out from the center, and
the practitioner’s sokushinjôbutsu on the other hand
raises him from below and gravitates him to the center. Their
simultaneity means their non-duality as different aspects of the same
dynamism of a cosmic emptiness. To realize this, is to affirm one’s
own original enlightenment in one’s present body in simultaneous
reception of Dainichi’s expounding of the Dharma.
The “true words” (mantra) preached by Dainichi,
as we have already seen, are equated with the dynamism of the cosmos
itself, which includes our own mental and bodily experiences. The
Buddha’s preaching through every phenomenon is classified by
Kūkai in terms of the three forms of bodily, verbal, and mental
activities, or the three media of mudra (ingei),
mantra, and mandala, i.e., Dainichi’s cosmic gestural
language, phonic language, and imaging language. Dainichi expresses
the self-enjoyment of his enlightenment in these three functions of
bodily gestures (mudras), the intoning of sounds (mantras),
and visualizing-thinking (mandalas). Since the cosmos is Dainichi’s
body-and-mind, his deeds, words, and thoughts (or visualizations) form
the configurations, resonances, and patterns of the universe, in these
three media of “body, speech, and mind,” called the
“three mysteries.” All visible and/or tangible forms and
movements constitute the Buddha’s body and its movements, all sounds
are his voice, and the mind’s comprehension of this principle is the
manifestation of the Dharma in mandalic form expressing the Buddha’s
state-of-mind. That is, all objects of the six senses make up the
configurations, resonances, and patterns of the cosmos, the cosmic
body-and-mind of the Buddha Dainichi, communicating the Dharma.  As
Kūkai explains in his Unjigi, the three mysteries are
in every single phenomenon, passing through all stages of being
without discrimination, including stones, plants, trees, animals,
humans, gods, demons, and places. Each of these serves as a
“linguistic” medium that communicates Dainichi’s sermon in
his omnipresencing, a sermon of the Dharma which cannot be expressed
or described by means of the mundane human languages.
As these three media are in fact different expressions of the same
Dharma, they are not independent of each other. For example, the
mantra is an expression of the mandala in sound, and conversely, the
mandala conveys in pictures what the mantra intones. Together
they convey in visual form and in audible sound, the meaning of the
Dharma. Through these three media, sentient beings are thus
aroused from their ignorance to realize their own enlightenment.
Implaced within this vibrating cosmos, we are all then taking part in
Dainichi’s bodily, verbal, and mental activities as “originally
enlightened,” non-dualistic with the Buddha. On the basis of
kaji, which we discussed above, the three mysteries of the
hosshin and the three corresponding forms of activities of
sentient beings inter-permeate. That is, our own bodily, verbal, and
mental activities are already expressions of the three mysteries of
the hosshin. This inter-permeation is hence “always
already,” and yet what is lacking for the most part is our
awareness of it that would realize it. That is why Kūkai,
following the Dainichikyô, prescribes the ritual
practice of bodily acts, verbal acts, and mental acts. Bodily acts
involve mudra-formations — these are complex series of
gestural movements of the hands and fingers in coordination with
mantra-chanting and visualizations —, meditative bodily
postures, and the handling of ritual instruments. Verbal acts involve
mantra-recitations and other forms of prayer formulas or chants and
verses (dhâranīs). And mental acts involve
visualizing or focussing upon mandalas or the figures of Sanskrit
mantra letters as well as visualizations (kansô,
kannen) of deities or buddhas — a realization of self
and world in the sense of both transformation and
awakening as their fruit.  Together with ingei
(mudra) and shingon (mantra), the
practitioner’s kansô allows the mandalic structure
inseparable from the insight attained in such practice — an
“image” that in itself is visually unrepresentable and hence
irreducible to the visual mandalic icon — to unfold. The three
acts are performed simultaneously in a practice wherein the
practitioner utters a mantra, forms mudras, and visualizes
their form and meditates their meaning and lets his mind abide
in samadhi, all at the same time. 
The point of Shingon practice is to intentionally accord with, or
inter-resonate with, Dainichi’s movements, mirroring the macrocosmic
world in one’s own microcosm. Thereby original enlightenment is
realized in one’s very own embodied dynamism of bodily, verbal, and
mental acts. Shingon ritual meditative practice, as such, involving
all three activities is meant to intentionally express the realization
of one’s participation in the cosmic mantra language of the
hosshin. This practice then provides the means of penetrating
Dainichi’s cosmic mantric language so that one may directly comprehend
and experientially verify hosshin seppô. By making use
of all of the faculties of one’s embodied existence — thinking,
feeling, sensing, acting, visualizing, etc. —, one is led
via kaji to comprehend the Dharma, not merely conceptually or
intellectually but through one’s body-and-mind. In non-duality with
the Buddha’s cosmic embodiment, one’s own three human activities
(Srkt: trikarma; Jpn: sangô) — bodily,
verbal, and mental — immediately become experienced as
the Buddha’s own acts, the three cosmic mysteries, as immanent to
one’s self.  Thereby one is now intentionally participating in the
yoga or samadhi of Dainichi, thus realizing one’s
own original enlightenment. In this state called “secret”
or “mysterious samadhi” (himitsu
sanmaji) or “secret meditation” (himitsu
zen), with the help of kaji, the integration between
man’s “three acts” and Buddha’s “three
mysteries” is realized, and Buddha “enters me and I
enter” Buddha.  As one’s mind thus becomes enlightened and one’s
body becomes “adamantine,” one attains Buddhahood.  (See
Sokushinjôbutsugi, ch.5) In bodily-mental co-respondence
with the hosshin’s omnipresencing via the three
mysteries, Kūkai claims, the non-duality between self and
Buddha is thus realized immediately in one’s embodied existence, thus
sokushinjôbutsu.
With successful completion, this practice of the three mysteries,
which initially has the aspect of “with form”
(usô) — that is, in rituals —, comes to
occur naturally, no longer restricted to its ritualized context. That
is, the individual’s every action in daily life, without ritual form
(musô), comes to intentionally reflect the enlightened
body-and-mind of the Buddha and its three mysteries.  Every word
uttered is thus a mantra, every bodily movement a mudra, and
every thought samadhi. It is in this culmination of bodily
practice, that all of Kūkai’s major concepts, hosshin
seppô, hongaku, sanmitsu,
sokushinjôbutsu, nyûga ganyû,
converge in the attainment of Buddhahood. While from the Shingon
esoteric perspective, this attainment is instant, from another
perspective, viewed in light of all other (i.e., exoteric) doctrines,
the attainment is gradual and relative. We now turn to this final
topic in our discussion of Kūkai, the development of the mind
through ten states from the animal to the enlightened.
By 830 Kūkai has shifted his interest from an earlier focus
upon the controversy between Madhaymaka and Yogâcâra
concerning the emptiness or existence of the dharmas and his critique
of their view on language as not conveying truth (the Dharma), to
evaluating Buddhist doctrines as a whole, including the other major
Buddhist schools.  This shift is most likely connected to the dispute
on-going during that period between the founder of the Tendai school,
Saichô, and the older Nara Buddhist schools.  In providing a
comprehensive scheme that would explain the place of each religious
teaching as well as the place of esoteric Buddhism in relation to the
other Buddhist doctrines, Kūkai aimed to demonstrate the
significance of his version of Buddhism.
In this scheme, Kūkai is adamant in using the above-discussed concepts to
distinguish esoteric from exoteric Buddhism. And yet, given a bird’s
eye view, the truth, the Dharma, in Kūkai’s scheme is
encompassing enough to include exoteric Buddhism and all other
teachings as its unfoldings or manifestations, in relative degrees in
accordance with the appropriate circumstance or context and the level
of attainment. In order to explain the different levels or states
(jû, literally “dwellings” or
“lodgings”) of mind (jûjûshin) that
correspond to the various doctrines of other schools and religious
sects, Kūkai developed an hierarchical scheme. Shingon Buddhism
is placed at the top of the hierarchy as providing the most
comprehensive view to the Dharma. Kūkai provides this
systematization in what many consider to be his magnum opus,
Himitsu mandara jûjûshinron (Treatise on
the Secret Mandala of the Ten States of Mind)
in ten volumes, composed around 830, five years before his death.  It
was written in response to an order of Emperor Junna that each
Buddhist sect present an introductory treatise of its teachings. When
the text proved to be too difficult for the emperor, Kūkai
produced an abridged and more accessible treatise on the same theme,
Hizô hôyaku (Precious Key to the Secret
Treasury) in three volumes. At the core of both works is this
classification of the various doctrines whereby each is critically
evaluated under the light of the culminating and most comprehensive
view of Shingon.  A similar sort of system of classifying doctrines,
called p’an-chiao (panjiao)
or chiao-pan (jiaoban) (Jpn:
kyôsô hanjaku or kyô-han) already
existed in China, e.g. within the T’ien-t’ai and the
Hua-yen traditions. Such a system of classification proved helpful in
their attempts to distinguish themselves from, and at the same time,
incorporate previous doctrines as expedient means that are relatively
true. The Lotus Sûtra had also already expressed the
similar idea that various doctrines were meant as expedient means that
lead eventually to a fuller truth (expressed within its own text). It
is Kūkai’s own invention however to associate the different
doctrines evaluated and classified with specific states of mind or
stages of spiritual attainment.  That is, each state in the
development of the mind is correlated with a specific set of doctrines
appropriate to it, as its perspective and lived experience of reality,
true to a certain extent within its limited purview but not yet the
whole truth until the final state is reached. In other words, to move
up this hierarchy of levels of mind, is to experience the unfolding of
the Dharma as one becomes further awakened until one fully realizes
one’s enlightenment in non-duality with the Dharma itself, i.e. the
attainment of Buddha-hood. From a mandalic perspective, this unfolding
of the Dharma is also indicative of one’s evolution from the periphery
towards the center of the mandalic universe. However as each level of
mind is a “dwelling” or “lodging” place for
the mind, the hierarchy from the lowest to the highest
“stages” is sequential only in the exoteric
dimension. That is to say that the sequential ordering is not
necessary in itself when viewed from the esoteric, i.e., holistic,
standpoint. In other words, it is possible to move directly from any
state or “dwelling” to the most comprehensive realm.
                 
The teachings evaluated here not only include Buddhist schools but
also variations of Brahmanism, Hinduism, and Indian religious
practices as well as Chinese non-Buddhist doctrines. And the Buddhist
teachings include the major Indian and Chinese doctrines that have
made their way to Japan: Ritsu (Chn. Lu-tsung, Vinaya studies), Kusha
(based on Abhidharma), Jôjitsu (Skrt. Satyasiddhi, based on
Sautrântika), Hossô (Skrt. Yogâcâra, Chn.
Fa-hsiang), Sanron (Chn. San-lun based on Indian Madhyamaka),
Tendai (Ch. T’ien-t’ai), Kegon (Chn. Hua-yen), and
Shingon. Kūkai’s classification system may be briefly
summarized in the following schema:
1st to 3rd states: Pre-Buddhist stages:
worldly “vehicles” of samsaric entrapment:
1st state: “The mind of the goat foolishly
transmigrating in the six destinies (or realms)” (ishô
teiyô-shin): The state of desire driven by animal instincts
without moral restraint; the stage to which belong common people,
hell-beings, hungry-ghosts, beasts, asuras
(“titans”), and various deities or celestial beings trapped
in their samsaric destinies.
2nd state: “The mind of the child tempered but
ignorantly obsessed with moral precepts” (gudô
jisai-shin): The state of ethical actions and virtue that promote
social order but without any “religious” goal; the stage to
which belong Confucianism and the Buddhist precepts (ritsu)
for the laity.
3rd state: “The mind of the child composed and
fearing nothing” (yodô mui-shin): The state of
deity worship and extrinsic magico-religious practice for the sake of
overcoming anxiety with the thought of attaining supernatural powers or
immortality, or reaching an eternal and blissful heaven; the stage to
which belong Taoism and various forms of Hinduism or Brahmanism.
4th to 10th states: Buddhist stages (the
fourth to ninth being exoteric Buddhism and the tenth being esoteric
Buddhism):
4th to 5th states: Hinâyâna stages:
“vehicles” of those who aspire towards self-enlightenment
without caring for the enlightenment of others.
4th state: “The mind of one affirming only the
elements and negating the self” (yuiun muga-shin): The
state of the śrâvaka who analyzes phenomena into the
psycho-physical “aggregates” (skandhas) and/or the
elements (dharmas), to thus negate any belief in a permanent
ego (atman); the stage to which belong the teachings of the
historical Buddha and his direct disciples and of the
Abhidharma scholastics. While the substantiality of
reality is thus deconstructed into its elemental dharmas, the
dharmas themselves however become fetters, thus taking from
three lives to sixty aeons to achieve liberation.
5th state: “The mind freed from karmic seeds”
(batsu gôinju-shin): The state of the
pratyeka-buddha, who, masterless on his own, attains insight
into the chain of dependent origination to recognize the impermanence,
self-less-ness, and non-substantiality of all, thus preventing new
karma to arise. But in enjoying a certain level of
“enlightenment,” he falls back into the
“egoism” of self-complacency, compassionless apathy towards
fellow beings, and the narrow vision of other-worldliness. Hence
he has not yet reached complete enlightenment. The
Sautrântika school belongs to this stage.
6th to 9th states: Mahâyâna stages:
“vehicles” of the bodhisattvas, those who seek
enlightenment both for self and for others, by overcoming self-other
duality and recognizing the interdependency between self-enlightenment
and other-enlightenment and between wisdom and compassion.
6th state: “The mind of the Mahâyâna
adherent who is concerned with others” (taen
daijô-shin): The state of Yogâcâra with its
Vijñapti-mâtratâ (Jpn: yuishiki)
standpoint that everything is “mind-only,” reached by its
analysis of thing-events as phenomena of consciousness originating from
a deep un-conscious “storehouse” or “receptacle
consciousness” (âlaya-vijñâna). 
Its point is to detach oneself from the discriminating objectification
of phenomena in order to realize the tranquility of
“mind-only” from a non-discriminating perspective, which
would allow the practice of “great compassion.”  And
yet this still takes several aeons of practice to achieve and is not
the final state.
7th state: “The mind of one who realizes
non-origination” (kakushin fushô-shin): The state
of Madhyamaka with its śûnyavâda (Jpn:
kûgan) standpoint that everything is empty. Here
reifying and substantializing conceptions — including both
objects and mind — that act as fetters are eliminated through
Nâgârjuna’s eight-fold negations which via their
dependent origination show their emptiness.
8th state: “The mind of one who realizes harmony
with the one path of truth” (nyojitsu ichidô-shin
or ichidô muishin): The state of T’ien-t’ai
with its standpoint of “oneness of all,” wherein one
realizes that one moment contains eternity, a single thought contains
all possible worlds, and a sesame seed contains a mountain, i.e. the
non-duality between one and many; and between emptiness, dependent
origination, and their “middle.”
9th state: “The mind of one who realizes the
absence of substance within ultimate truth” (goku
mujishô-shin): The state of Hua-yen with its standpoint of
the mutual non-obstruction and interpenetration between the patternment
(Chn: li; Jpn: ri) of all and the concrete
thing-events (Chn: shih; Jpn: ji) on the basis of
their emptiness, whereby one and many are non-dualistic. This
non-duality is extended to the level of the entire
dharmadhâtu.
10th state: Both Tendai and Kegon for Kūkai however
lack the crucial element of direct experiential understanding to truly
realize what they preach. One must thus proceed further by means of
bodily ritual practice provided by the next and final state:
Mantrayâna: “The mind of secret sublimity”
(himitsu shôgon-shin). This is the state of Shingon,
whose esoteric teachings and bodily experiential practice constitute
the summit of the development of the mind. At this summit hosshin
seppô is revealed and one attains
sokushinjôbutsu through the micro-macro-cosmic
correlativity of the three mysteries and through kaji. 
Rather than rejecting or negating the previous states, this final
state fulfills and encompasses their standpoints from what is claimed
to be the most comprehensive standpoint, in view of — or rather
in non-duality with — the Dharma. In light of the Dharma, the
truths taught in those previous states are but relative or provisional
truths, expedient means that are helpful only insofar as they lead one
towards this final truth but which can also serve as fetters if one
becomes attached to them. Each state is referred to as a
“palace” (kyû or gû), which
are all combined in the one grand cosmic palace
(hokkaigû or hokkai shinden). This grand
palace constitutes the entire cosmos as a mandala, with the tenth and
highest state, the innermost secret palace of Dainichi, at the center
and summit from which the Dharma emanates into its various
manifestations in the lower states, the outer palaces. The closer one
is to the center, the stronger one feels the pull of kaji
drawing one up towards the central summit. But as stated above, the
sequential ordering of the hierarchy is not necessary when the whole
is viewed from this most comprehensive standpoint. For the grand
cosmic palace penetrates and comprehends all of the specific palaces
or dwellings of the mind. Hence one can make a sudden leap from any
point in this cosmic mandala towards the center by successfully
engaging in the esoteric practice of Shingon Buddhism.  It is this
mandalic structure that the term mandala in the title of the
longer version of this work (Treatise on the Secret Mandala of the
Ten States of Mind) signifies.  It refers to the blueprint of the
cosmic embodiment of the Dharma (hosshin), which in turn
structures one’s (ritual) practice in its arrangement and how one
accordingly experiences the Dharma.
Among the better known philosophers of the Kyoto School, references to
Kūkai or Shingon, when compared to Zen or Pure Land Buddhism, are
hardly noticeable.  It has been suggested that this neglect may have
something to do with an intellectual’s prejudice against the
“esoteric,” e.g.  the significance of ritual with its
symbols and images, which are not so easily amenable to rational
comprehension and instead conjure up preconceptions of the
“occult” and the “magical.” However the
philosophical aspects of Shingon Buddhism are often traceable to the
same Mahâyâna seeds that sprouted Zen. Once such
prejudices are overcome, it would not be so difficult for the
contemporary philosopher to find in Kūkai a well-spring of ideas
and thoughts which may be of interest today.
We need to acknowledge, however, that Kūkai and Shingon Buddhism
in general have not altogether been ignored by contemporary
philosophers of Japan.  Even within the Kyoto School, its current
representative Ueda Shizuteru in a 1993 lecture, Basho to
mandara, discusses the significance of mandalas in Shingon
Buddhism in relation to the ontological structure of human existence
understood in his terms as being-in-the-twofold-world.  In his
analysis of Kūkai’s mandalas, Ueda approriates contemporary
philosophical concepts, such as Nishida’s “place”
(basho), Nishitani’s “field” (ba), and
Heidegger’s “being-in-the-world”
(In-der-Welt-sein), and takes the mandala as indicative of
the always assumed semantic space (imi kûkan) belonging
to the world (sekai) as the total framework of meanings
(imi no waku gumi) wherein we find ourselves.  A couple of
other graduates of Kyoto University’s philosophy department have
entire books on Kūkai.  In Kūkai no shisô ni
tsuite, Umehara Takeshi discusses Kūkai both as a religious
practitioner and as a theorist, who explicates the world’s infinite
“treasure” unfolding within the self.  And ex-Nishidian
turned Marxist, Yanagida Kenjûrô, has a study on
Kūkai and his works: Nihon shingon no tetsugaku: Kūkai
Hizôhôyaku to Ben’kenmitsu nikyôron.
Among other twentieth century Japanese philosophers, Yuasa Yasuo,
known for his theory of the body, often refers to the doctrines and
practices of Shingon Buddhism, and has writen entire chapters on
Kūkai in Shintairon: Tôyôteki shinshin ron to
gendai and The Body: Towards an Eastern Mind-Body
Theory.  Comparative philosopher of religion, Izutsu Toshihiko,
as well, in Ishiki to honshitsu and other works, has found
Kūkai’s ideas – especially his cosmological-linguistic
theory – inspiring enough to incorporate into his own theory of essence
as part of his attempt to build a synthetic “Oriental
philosophy” (tôyô tetsugaku).  Philosopher
of Buddhist thought, Tamaki Kôshirô discusses the
significance of Kūkai’s philosophy within the history of Japanese
Buddhism in his Nihon bukkyô shisô ron.  And
philosopher of religion and religious studies scholar Nakazawa
Shin’ichi, like Ueda, focuses on Kūkai’s mandalic philosophy in
his book, Seppen kyokusenron.  He reads Kūkai’s works on
Shingon as involving a hydrodynamic mode of thinking that in its
flexibility deals with the non-Euclidean currents of nature with its
forces of reality, undulating in ripples and forming vortexes.  He
views the Shingon mandala as approximating, with its circles and
lines, what is expressed in today’s fractal geometry, whereby the
infinitesimally microcosmic part endlessly and indefinitely iterates
the patterns of the whole of nature in its innumerable vortexes and
curves.
Kūkai’s ideas engender an holistic view towards nature and the
cosmos as encompassing ourselves and in our interrelationships with
others. They may be of relevance to the dilemmas we face today in this
epoch of globalization, religious wars, technological
“enframing” (to use Heidegger’s terminology), and
environmental hazards. And in terms of scholarship, as can be seen in
some of the above-mentioned Japanese scholars’ works on Kûka,
Kūkai offers a wealth of ideas for comparative analyses:
e.g. with Derrida on the world as text, with Process thought on
“cosmo-holism,” with Merleau-Ponty or Deleuze on the
significance of the body and bodily spatiality and interrelationality
vis-à-vis the environment, with Nishida or Hegel on dialectics
and interrelationality, or with major “mystic” thinkers of
other religious traditions such as Ibn Arabi of Islam or Meister
Eckhart of Christianity on a dynamic non-duality as opposed to both
static monism and subject-object dualism. Kūkai’s thinking
provides a wealth of insights, of much value, to offer to philosophers
of today.