Most historical genealogies of Latin American feminism trace their
origins to the social movements beginning in the 1960s and 1970s
centered around women’s liberation. However, feminist ideas in
Latin America are much older than those which have been documented as
part of feminist political action. The origins of Latin American
feminist ideas can be found in reflections on conditions of otherness
that emerge as a result of colonialism and in critiques of norms that
render the category of man the entry point for humanity. By the 60s and
70s, feminism in Latin America had a firmly rooted history concerned
with articulating difference and alterity from a non-dominant
perspective (Gargallo 2004: 80).
There are lacunas in Latin American feminist genealogy as the
writings of non-white women from the 19th and early
20th centuries (and earlier) are seldom found in written
form, given that many non-white women were illiterate, and their
stories were not textually documented. Their ideas and histories were
orally transmitted, and current local oral traditions account for them
(Gargallo 2010: 12a). For instance, the colonial resistance of
Baraúnda, wife of Garifuna leader Satuyé, is legendary
for her people; her memory travels in songs sung by Garifuna women of
Honduras and Belize. Similarly, the story of Anacaona, Taino chief
(cacica) of Jaragua Hispañola, is one of colonial
resistance; prior to her execution she was offered clemency in return
for becoming a concubine for a Spaniard, and her refusal and subsequent
death solidified her legendary status which is immortalized in songs
from Haiti, Dominican Republic, and Puerto Rico. The stories of
Indigenous women of these times continue to be shared orally through
myth, songs, and proverbs, and contribute to the foundations of Latin
American feminist thought (Gargallo 2010: 14a).
One of the earliest documented writers in the Latin American
feminist tradition comes from the 17th century. Arguing in
favor of the educational and intellectual rights of women, Juana
Inés María del Carmen Martínez de Zaragoza Gaxiola
de Asbaje y Ramírez de Santillana Odonojú
(1651–1695), recognized by many as Juana Inés de la Cruz
or Sor Juana of Mexico, was a self-educated scholar of the Baroque
period whose writings have garnered quite a bit of philosophical
attention as part of the Latin American philosophical canon. She was
well known during her lifetime as evidenced by multiple publications of
her work. However, by the second half of the 18th century,
her fame diminished as attention to Baroque poetry declined. In 1951,
her work recovered attention with the publication of her complete works
(Gargallo 2009: 419).
Juana Inés de la Cruz was one among many feminist writers who
advocated for social and cultural changes, including the role of women.
Teresa Margarida da Silva e Orta of Brazil (1711–1793) was the
first woman in the Portuguese-speaking world to publish a novel and the
first Brazilian-born person to edit a book in Europe. She advocated for
the autonomy of the Indigenous and the rights of women in science
(Gargallo 2004: 80). Flora Tristán of Perú
(1803–1844) argued for women’s equality and its important
relationship to workers’ rights (Gargallo 2004: 80). Argentinian
abolitionist Juana Manso (1819–1875) detailed education and
philosophical instruction as a route to the moral and intellectual
emancipation of women. This position was taken up at the end of the
century by figures like Rita Cetina Gutiérrez of Mexico
(1846–1908) and Visitación Padilla of Honduras
(1882–1960) (Gargallo 2009: 418). Cetina Gutiérrez founded
La Siempreviva in Mérida, Mexico’s first secular school
for poor girls and an art college for young women. She is cited as one
of Mexico’s first feminists who promoted secular education of
women and fought for their self-determination. Padilla founded the
Sociedad Cultural Feminina, which promoted access to education,
especially for women.
The existence of early Latin American feminist ideas was not
attended to until years after their inception. The impact of ideas
centering on women’s rights to intellectual and educational life,
equality, and workers’ rights was not immediate since they were
not given importance in their respective contexts. During the feminist
movements of the 20th century, many of these figures
re-emerged as part of a Latin American feminist theoretical landscape
(Gargallo 2004: 81). Early Latin American feminist ideas came to be
evaluated through historical memory that gives weight to the claim that
Latin American feminist ideas existed prior to the women’s
movements of the 1960s and 1970s.
Feminist ideas from the early 20th century are
transnational. Ideas move with pushes for social change. Hence, a key
issue for contemporary Latin American feminist writers is the
importance of tracking the movement of ideas and reminding us that
ideas migrate and reconfigure depending on their contexts. The
intersection between women’s ideas about resistance and the ideas
that could lead to social transformation was not necessarily understood
as feminist in its time. More often than not, women’s ideas in
regards to justice, equality, and political change converged with other
political projects that focused on improving the poor working
class’s conditions and not specifically women’s conditions.
Their ideas for social change were molded into general claims about
access to education and transformation of laboring material conditions.
Ideas that are now coded as feminist are identified as such in
retrospect, but in order to do them justice, they need to be accounted
for in their historicity.
The Mexican Revolution (1910–1920) had a profound impact on
the development of feminist ideas (Gargallo 2004: 82). Most notably,
the revolution focused on education, and in this political landscape,
feminist ideas had the historical impact of influencing the thoughts
and actions of women in Mexican society (Gargallo 2004: 82). In 1915,
Salvador Alvarado became governor of the Yucatán and functioned
as a vehicle for social and political change until 1918 when he was
called to return to military duty. He supported a feminist movement in
the region initiated by Rita Cetina Gutiérrez in 1870, noted
earlier as one of Mexico’s earliest feminists and founder of La
Siempreviva. Moreover, his tenure in office gave room and support for
women’s political activism in the region. The first two feminist
congresses in the history of Mexico were held in Mérida in
January and November of 1916, giving floor to discussions on the right
to vote and political participation, abortion and contraception, as
well as education (Gargallo 2004: 83). By 1923, the socialist party of
the Yucatán had three women deputies and one alternate (Gargallo
2004: 84).
Given the impact of the Mexican Revolution, it is no surprise that
some of the first feminist ideas to reach historical identification are
found in its wake. Nevertheless, feminist ideas stretched beyond Mexico
and across Latin America and the Caribbean. In 1880, women
abolitionists in Brazil published a newspaper titled A familia
and argued for changes in dress norms. In 1910, Argentina witnessed the
first Feminist International Congress which fought for peace,
education, and social participation (Gargallo 2004: 85). In 1912, women
in Colombia declared the defense of civil rights of married women. In
1916, women in Panamá founded Club Ariel and Centro de Cultural
Feminina, which supported intellectual and physical education as well
as the political life of women, and whose motto centered on virtue and
nationhood. In 1924, Visitación Padilla denounced the presence
of U.S. marine military infantry in Honduras and Central America in the
Boletín de la Defensa Nacional. She founded the
Círculo de Cultura Femenina which supported the education of
women and resisted North American military intervention during the
Second Honduran Civil War (1924). In 1928, women of Ecuador sued the
state, demanding the right to vote, and received it one year later
(Gargallo 2004: 86).
Luisa Capetillo (1879–1922) exemplifies the convergence of
feminist ideas and ideas concerning broader social transformation. Born
in Arecibo, Puerto Rico, Capetillo was home schooled and secured a job
as a reader in cigar-making factories, reading to workers and
transferring ideas to workers as they rolled cigars. Capetillo’s
employment as a reader served as an important locale from which workers
developed a consciousness of trade unions, socialism, anarchism, and
women’s rights (Ruiz 2016: 6). Although readers were typically
men, it was not uncommon to find women in cigar factories as the
cigar-making industry modernized and became the second national
industry in the first decades of the 20th century (Ramos
1992: 29). Hence, it is not accidental that some of the first feminist
ideas of Puerto Rico emerged in cigar factories and in the proletariat
presses significantly before the suffrage movement later in the century
(Ramos 1992: 30). Capetillo’s feminist ideas are grounded in her
class politics that saw emancipation occurring at the nexus between
labor empowerment and gender equality (Ruiz 2016: 13). Although often
heralded as the first feminist writer of Puerto Rico and the first
woman to ever publish a book about women in Puerto Rico,
Capetillo’s work most importantly shows how early 20th
century Latin American feminist ideas and writers were very much
grounded in the lived material conditions of their times. In the case
of Capetillo, her feminist anarchism brewed at the core of her
understanding of workers’ emancipation as a woman who herself
labored in the trenches of modernity.
Early 20th century Latin American feminist history
concludes with women’s suffrage. The years spanning
1870–1947 are generally considered the pivotal years for
women’s suffrage (Gargallo 2004: 94). However, to view this slice
of history as merely centered on suffrage misrepresents the
multiplicity of feminist ideas and activities developed during the
time. These years also witnessed the push for social transformation
oriented around ideas of equality and justice that included, but was
not limited to, the right to vote. The push for equality framed
women’s insistence on public access to education, which impacted
not just women but the impoverished as well. The call for a more just
social order framed how women were thinking about their locale in
resistance to military intervention as well as labor movements. Hence,
the ideas that emanate from this period are multidimensional. The era
is identified as closing out with the accomplishment of suffrage.
However, the right to vote emerged at different times throughout the
region, owing to the diversity of local politics. For instance, Ecuador
was the first country in South America to enfranchise women in 1929.
That same year, Puerto Rico enfranchised literate women and in 1935,
gave the vote to all women. Uruguay followed shortly after in 1932,
Cuba in 1933, and El Salvador in 1939. However, the suffrage movement
stagnated in other countries: women were enfranchised in Nicaragua and
Perú in 1955, and only in 1961 did Paraguay give women the
vote.
Coined by Julieta Kirkwood of Chile as the “years of
silence”, the years spanning from 1950–1970s/1980s saw
women (mostly middle-class) increasing their political presence by
participating in popular social movements and political parties
(Kirkwood 1986: 70). However, their social and political participation
lacked explicit feminist demands. Although not a strict set of dates,
the years of silence lasted well into the 1980s for some parts of Latin
America (e.g., Chile); these years, the time of baby boom and populism,
were politically rife in post-World War II Latin America. It was also a
time characterized by McCarthyism which precipitated the U.S.
intervention in Guatemala and the Dominican Republic with intentions of
warding off communism (Gargallo 2004: 94). These years also witnessed
the fall of the Somoza dictatorship in Nicaragua in 1956 as well the
rise of conflict and military regimes in countries like Colombia,
Argentina, and Chile. Hence, political mobilization took place around
the changing landscape of Latin America, and middle-class women
participated, but their explicit role in these movements is complicated
by the fact that their presence and impact were not readily documented
(Ungo Montenegro 2000: 45). Notwithstanding, the years of silence were
not quiet on pages. Women during these years were literarily active and
produced texts that privileged their position which was theoretically
underappreciated because of their literary style (Gargallo 2004:
95).
The relationship between literature and philosophy has been explored
as part of the Latin American philosophical tradition. For instance,
one position holds that the Latin American literary tradition of essay
writing contains insights that can ameliorate the troubles of Latin
American philosophy at large (Pereda 2006: 196). Nevertheless, the
points of literary departure for many Latin American philosophers are
seldom women, although Latin American women in the middle of the
20th century wrote amply about their identities in
relationship to gender, race, ethnicity, and nationality (Gargallo
2004: 97). It is important to appreciate that not all women’s
writing during this time pushed for social change. Some narratives
played into patriarchy and machismo, forced marriage, and
social isolation. At the same time, some women presented narratives
that exposed doubts and resistances to the patriarchal ordering of the
world (Gargallo 2004: 97). Unfortunately, women writers of this time
are often folded into literary traditions, hindering their recognition
as thinkers and theorists. One notable example is Rosario Castellanos
of Mexico.
In 1950, at the age of 25, Castellanos defended her master’s
thesis in philosophy at Universidad Nacional Autónoma de
México (UNAM). The project, titled Sobre cultura
feminina, explored women’s role in the production of culture
(Gargallo 2004: 89). She was a prolific writer. However, Castellanos is
largely remembered as a literary figure and a poet. It was not until
1974 (after her death), that the publication of her most famous work
El Eterno Feminino was recognized as theoretically rich,
speaking on themes of gender, ethnicity, and nationhood. Today, she is
recognized as a leading voice in the feminist movement of Mexico, her
work arguing for the construction of a feminine subjectivity that
defies the identity imposed by patriarchal cultural norms. As a result,
her work has aided in establishing a different vision of political life
for women in Mexico (Gargallo 2004: 90).
The 1950s–1970s was a fervent time of women’s writing
across Latin America. Antonia Palacios of Venezuela wrote Ana
Isabel, una niña decente (1949), Castellanos of Mexico
wrote Balún-Canán (1957), and Albalucía
Ángel of Colombia wrote Estaba la pájara pinta
sentada un verde limón (1975). Further notable examples
include the Mexican poet Enriqueta Ochoa whose published works span
1947–2008 and Marvel Moreno, one of the most influential female
writers of Colombia. In the 1980s, Moreno broke through the literary
mold of her times marked by the work of Gabriel García Marquez
with the publication of Algo tan feo en la vida de una
señora bien (1980). The protagonists of the book, who are
women, serve as vehicles for the exploration of life in a patriarchal
society. Moreno placed value on providing a genealogy of women as her
protagonists (e.g., the daughter, the mother, the grandmother),
reflecting the importance of transgenerational communication amongst
women. Thus, some argue her works provide a thematic thread of
rebellion that runs through the lives of women and unites them in their
histories of resistance to patriarchal social orders (Gargallo 2004:
106).
While dubbed the “years of silence”, the work of women
writers during this period did find voice through literature and
poetry. Their theoretical reflections were subsequently appreciated
with the resurgence of feminism in the later decades.
The years spanning the 1970s–1990s were marked with important
social and political transformation for women in Latin America amidst
complex political backdrops. Transitions from military regimes and
processes of democratization as well as peace negotiations provide the
context in which women’s mobilization emerges across Latin
America. The plurality of political conditions gave way to the
development of diverse feminist ideas. The feminism of this time, also
commonly referred to as neofeminism, was particularly attuned to the
body (Bartra 2001: 1). Grounded in the pre-1970 history of Latin
American feminism, neofeminism strove toward the validation of
women’s rights, but specifically centered on women’s
freedom over their bodies. The neofeminist perspective translated into
mobilizing on issues of abortion, motherhood, sexual autonomy, rape,
and abuse (Bartra 2001: 1).
Contemporary Latin American feminism surged during politically
somber times, especially under the presence of military regimes or
nominal democracies that repressed civil liberties often in the name of
national security (Saporta Sternbach et al. 1992: 397). Hence, as a
social movement, Latin American feminism was born with an intrinsically
oppositional and occasionally clandestine character (Saporta Sternbach
et al. 1992: 397). As international organizations attempted to
influence national health and population policies and governments to
control women’s bodies, the foci of Latin American feminisms grew
more complex (Saporta Sternbach et al. 1992: 403).
One notable characteristic of feminism during this time is the
recognition of womanhood as a shared status. Women during these decades
found identity in their status of womanhood and their shared condition
that differentiated them from men (Gargallo 2004: 88). They rejected
“man” as the standard model around which their political
action organized. The push for social and political transformation
focused less on equality (e.g., the right to vote) and more on a desire
for liberty, denying notions of femininity as subordinate to
masculinist constructions of humanity (Gargallo 2004: 111). Latin
American feminism of the late 20th century encouraged
encounters between women that recognized them as subjects, with their
own histories, and on their own terms (Gargallo 2004: 88).
Amid military regimes, the 1970s were characterized by a
mobilization of women that took motherhood to be a political category.
In some countries, women resisted state repression as mothers of those
who had disappeared at the hands of the state (Gargallo 2004: 113). The
CoMadres (Comité de Madres) of El Salvador formed in 1977 to
investigate the disappearance of missing relatives. They photographed
the bodies of people found in the streets of El Salvador in order to
aid in identification. In the same year, the Asociación Madres
de Plaza de Mayo in Argentina organized as mothers to search for their
disappeared children as a result of state terrorism enacted by the
military dictatorship that spanned the years of 1976–1983. In
Mexico, critical stances on motherhood were initiated by the
neofeminist group Mujeres en Acción Solidaria (MAS), which
protested the sanctifying myth of motherhood on the eve of
Mother’s Day at El Monumento a la Madre (a monument honoring
mothers) in Mexico City. They resisted the myth that a woman’s
role in society should be circumscribed to motherhood (Gutiérrez
2012: 42). The protest continued in the years that followed.
The push to disconnect motherhood from womanhood set the stage for a
separation between the reproductive capacities of women’s bodies
and their sexual health (Gargallo 2004: 114). Claims to the
decriminalization of abortion emerged under access to reproductive
rights that sought to give women control over their own bodies. Thus,
the right to abort was defended on the grounds of a woman’s
right to individual autonomy (Gargallo 2004: 114). In 1976, El
Movimiento Nacional de Mujeres, along with other autonomous feminist
groups, organized one of the first congresses on the decriminalization
of abortion that maintained the interruption of pregnancy as a
woman’s decision that should be made accessible through all
institutions of public health (Gargallo 2004: 114). In the years that
followed, feminists in Mexico used a variety of symbolic strategies in
their fight for the legalization of abortion. They dressed in black to
publicly mourn the women who had died as a result of clandestine
abortions (Garagallo 2004: 115). Today, abortion remains tiered in
access throughout Latin America. Countries such as Chile, Nicaragua,
Dominican Republic, and El Salvador prohibit abortion entirely, even
under conditions where it would save a woman’s life. In
countries like Mexico, Guatemala, Panamá, and Venezuela
abortion is legal only under conditions where it saves the life of the
woman. However, in countries like Argentina, Costa Rica, and Ecuador
abortion is legal to the extent that it preserves the physical health
of the woman. In some countries, conditions of rape are understood as
part of the preservation of physical health (e.g., Argentina), while
in others, the extension is made to allow abortion to the extent that
it preserves the mental health of the woman (e.g., Colombia). Cuba,
Uruguay, and Puerto Rico are places that have legalized abortion
without any restrictions that would require some particular reason. Although the
battle for access to abortion began during the 1970s, it continues to
be a contested political issue especially in places where access is
entirely denied or restricted by other factors: physical health,
mental health, or life preservation.  Moreover, in places like Puerto
Rico, the question of abortion is intricately bound up with histories
of forced sterilization, making the issue more politically charged and
complex.
As a time characterized by state repression, the 1970s were also a
time of awakening for many women who demanded social change (Bartra
2001: 6). Latin American feminists not only challenged patriarchy by
defining themselves as distinct political subjects, but also challenged
male paradigms of domination expressed through the militaristic and
counter-insurgent state. The reality of state repression made Latin
American feminisms distinct in their ability to unveil the patriarchal
foundations of militarism and institutionalized violence (Saporta
Sternbach et al. 1992: 397). The intimate relationship between
patriarchy and military state repression is best elucidated by the
intersection between Chilean feminist activism and the push for
democratization in Julieta Kirkwood’s famous phrase:
“Democracia en el país, en la casa y en la cama”,
which translates to: “Democracy in the nation, in the house, and
in the bed” (Kirkwood 1986: 14). Latin American feminism of the
1970s was linked to an activism that believed authoritarian regimes
found their roots where patriarchal oppression trickled into the
“private” sphere. By the late 1970s, opposition movements
emerged throughout Latin America, joined by women from all walks of
life defying their historical exclusion from political life (Saporta
Sternbach et al. 1992: 398–399).
The heterogeneity of contemporary Latin American feminism can be
traced to the diverse political conditions from which its activism
emerged. Nevertheless, a theme can be found in the commitment to change
the social relations of production, including reproduction. Throughout
the region, women collectively participated in movements to engender
human rights by seeking better access to education, healthcare, and
urban services as well as resistance to military state repression
(Saporta Sternbach et al. 1992: 401). Latin America’s economic
dependence and political repression during these years set the stage
for a distinct militant feminist activism that would continue to spread
into the decade of the 1980s.
The 1980s were characterized by the expansion of feminist theory and
practice. Feminists started focusing on specialized activities that
deepened their vision of politics, culture, and society. The number of
feminist magazines, films, and video collectives increased.
Furthermore, the number of centers for rape victims and abused women,
as well as feminist health collectives, lesbian groups, and other
specifically gendered projects grew during this time (Saporta Sternbach
et al. 1992: 404). As feminists increased their activities in feminist
projects, they began creating more civil society organizations or
NGO’s (non-government organizations) (Millán 2014:
154).
One of the most important events to mark the 1980s was the first
Encuentro Feminista Latinoamericano y del Caribe held in Bogotá,
Colombia. The Encuentros (“Encounters”), as they came to be
called in short, served as regional critical forums for debates about
feminist politics and the movement’s overall relationship to
social justice in Latin America and the Caribbean. The attendees of the
First Encuentro came together on the heels of geographic and political
isolation with a desire to carve out a path for autonomous politics.
Over the years, the Encuentros extended the map of feminist politics
(Saporta Sternbach et al. 1992: 405).
The First Encuentro convened in Bogotá, Colombia, over the
course of four days in July 1981; more than two hundred women from over
fifty organizations attended. The region-wide gathering brought
together many strands of feminism, creating a heterogeneous movement
with considerable tensions and conflicts. For instance, during the
planning stages of the meeting, heated discussions emerged between
independent/autonomous feminists, often identified as
autónomas or feministas, and militant
political feminists affiliated with political parties (e.g.,
socialist), often referred to as militantes. Independent
feminists expressed concern over the possibility that feminists aligned
with political parties might try to impose sectarian agendas diverting
attention from issues central to feminist organizing (e.g.,
reproductive rights) (Saporta Sternbach et al. 1992: 407).
The most widely attended Encuentro of 1981, “Feminism and
Political Struggle”, focused on the autonomy of the feminist
movement, double militancy (concurrent participation in a political
party and the feminist movement), and feminism and imperialism (Saporta
Sternbach et al. 1992: 408). The response to the session exemplified
the diversity of ideas involved in the feminist struggle. All of the
participants agreed that women suffer a specific oppression by virtue
of their womanhood, which is exacerbated by class. Their agreement
translated into particular demands: equal pay, end of the double
workday, and the right to safe abortion as well as the right to choose
motherhood (Saporta Sternbach et al. 1992: 408). Furthermore, it was
clear that the political parties of the time across the region were not
centered on these demands in their claims for social change. Two
notable positions were developed in response to the session. The first
position maintained that neither capitalism nor socialism on their own
could end women’s oppression. Women’s liberation needed to
be articulated outside the networks of party-affiliated activism that
would make demands for complete social transformation to alter
oppressive relations. They held that severing the militante
and the feminista was to misunderstand feminist politics,
which is a comprehensive political praxis. The focus of feminist
political activism needed to be in targeted feminist organizations,
since the revolutionary Left tended to place men in the center (Saporta
Sternbach et al. 1992: 409). The second position held that feminism on
its own could not be revolutionary because of its inherent commitment
to socialism. They thought feminism should be an organic outgrowth of
socialist struggles that could not be separated from struggles against
class oppression. Double militancy, on this view, was a practical
difficulty, but one that could be overcome (Saporta Sternbach et al.
1992: 409).
The 1981 Encuentro reflected the larger social and political
conditions out of which Latin American feminisms were evolving. The
conflict between the feministas and the militantes
exemplified the divergences in Latin American feminisms during the
1980s. However, it also reflected the genesis of Latin American
feminist ideas in women’s political activism. So, although mired
in conflict, the Encuentros signaled the intimate ties between ideas
regarding gender struggle and the political conditions that give rise
to those ideas.
The Second Encuentro, held in Lima, Perú in July 1983,
thematically focused on patriarchy, a controversial topic
given its association with imperialist American and European feminisms.
The Encuentro reflected a shift in feminist claims, identifying that
sexism was not just an outcome of capitalism, but rather shaped by a
patriarchal sex/gender system that functioned autonomously (Saporta
Sternbach et al. 1992: 412). Moreover, the Second Encuentro experienced
a public response to the visibility of lesbian identity within Latin
American feminisms, forcing many heterosexual women to confront their
homophobia (Saporta Sternbach et al. 1992: 412). The meeting also
pushed the topic of racism, which resurfaced in subsequent years both
in the Encuentros and the larger landscape of Latin American feminist
ideas that launched staunch critiques on the omission of race and
racism from dominant feminist conversations.
The growth of the Encuentros testified to the growth of feminisms
throughout the region. The Fourth Encuentro held in Taxco, Mexico
(1987) brought together 1,500 women. As the end of the decade was
nearing, the Fourth Encuentro reflected increased complexity in Latin
American feminist politics, which was made palpable by the recurrence
of the question: “Who is a feminist?” (Saporta Sternbach et
al. 1992: 421). The discussion reflected divergences in what
constituted feminist politics and whether general community organizing
was sufficient to characterize feminist organizing, particularly where
community groups were controlled by the church or local political
parties (Saporta Sternbach et al. 1992: 421). Nevertheless, a key point
remains that when the Encuentros began in 1981, feminism was still a
“dirty word”, but by 1987, feminism had gained legitimacy
and was validated in Leftist political circles, notably in the
Nicaraguan revolution (Saporta Sternbach et al. 1992: 421). The
Encuentros continued to demonstrate the diverse growth of Latin
American feminisms as a thriving and expansive map of ideas grounded in
different strands of political activism. Although the Encuentros
continue to the present day, the Encuentros of the 1980s were
significant developments which reflected an evolving social movement
with tense but important relationships among revolutionary struggles,
feminist goals, and claims for social justice.
At the end of the 1980s, as the HIV/AIDS epidemic peaked, sexual
politics became increasingly conservative. Sex, once viewed as a
political act that could blur the private/public divide and subvert
traditional gender roles, became fraught with difficulty. Young
feminists came of age at a time when sexual education shifted toward
narratives of the risks of sex and not its disruptive political
potential (Gargallo 2004: 123–124). Furthermore, the closing of
the decade saw the continued linking between feminism and NGOs that
would be characteristic of the institutionalization of feminism in the
1990s. For some, institutionalization entailed de-radicalization of
feminist politics in Latin America and the Caribbean (Gargallo 2004:
125).
Latin American feminisms during the 1990s are characterized by a
focus on gender equality and non-discrimination within the confines of
institutions governed by neoliberal policies (Coba & Herrera 2013:
18). As a result, they are referred to as liberal feminisms not
grounded in resistance, but rather in their adaptation to a neoliberal
infrastructure that was ushered in throughout the region. Neoliberalism
had a distinct impact on women’s activism and the development of
feminist ideas. Women were one of the most affected groups with the
shifts in economic policies, and the phrase “feminization of
poverty” accurately captured the detrimental impact on
women’s lives. Many women joined the menial labor force (e.g.,
maquilas, agricultural labor) without any labor rights or
access to fair wages (Gargallo 2004: 117).
At the same time, feminist activists started coupling their efforts
with organizations that targeted policy change in favor of women and
operated with a distinct language about violence, health, and human
rights in tune with liberal politics (Gargallo 2004: 125). The concept
of the autonomous individual reigned as the explanatory framework for
development. Under the umbrella of individuality, people were
responsible for their own survival and development which were dependent
on their initiative in a market economy (Coba & Herrera 2013: 18).
In this context, the activist politics that had once characterized
feminist organizing shifted to less radicalized organizational
institutions. A substantial portion of the feminist movement that
transitioned to institutions did so without critiquing economic
policies and neoliberalism (Bastian Duarte 2012: 157).
Institutionalized feminists started working alongside governments and
agencies, which prioritized change in public policy but did not seek to
investigate the roots of inequality that justified the need for policy
change. Moreover, conditions emerged where NGO’s were able to
offer specialized resources for women. In doing so, they promoted
far-reaching gender discourse that was standardized with the
universalizing criteria of the United Nations. With their hands tied by
donors, these organizations were not necessarily mindful of the
priorities of local organizations or their populations (Bastian Duarte
2012: 157). As a result, the infrastructure of institutionalization
exacerbated existing power imbalances across ethnic and class
lines.
Among the institutions participating in the institutionalization of
feminisms was the academy. From the late 1980s well into the 1990s,
women’s studies programs started organizing throughout
universities. Moreover, the study of feminist philosophy more broadly
started finding its way into curricula as the activism of earlier
decades pressured universities to support women’s and gender
studies (Schutte & Femenías 2010: 400). The decade marked
the professionalization of feminism. Feminism, which had once been an
orienting force of activism, became employable and profitable (Bartra
2001: 11). However, this is not to discredit the tremendous effort that
the development of university programs required. As university programs
became institutional fixtures, they also served as counter-hegemonic
spaces where resistance could be facilitated.
The 1990s also saw the initiation of journals and formal
publications. In 1990, Debate Feminista was launched by Marta
Lamas. It remains one of the most impactful journal publications on
intellectual feminisms. In 1991, La Correa Feminista was
created to bring together the thoughts of autonomous and radical
feminists. It ran until 1998 when the editors self-assessed the
journal’s goals and decided to launch Creatividad
Feminista, an online publication which ran until 2008, when its
daughter site, MamaMetal, was created. Finally, La Doble
Jornada sprang as a feminist supplement to La Jornada,
Mexico’s leading Leftist newspaper, and ran from 1986–1998
(Millán 2014: 156).
During this time, Latin American feminisms began to privilege the
use of the category gender or the gender perspective
over patriarchy as the conceptual framework from which to talk
about the situation of women. The shift to using language of
gender is largely owed to the importation of North American
feminist ideas. In the Latin American context, Gayle Rubin’s work
received substantial attention as evidenced by numerous translations as
well as by extensive commentary on its complex understanding of the
sex/gender system (Gargallo 2004: 21). However, it is important to note
that the term was already being deployed by scholars and carried with
it a variety of connotations (Schutte 1998b: 88).
Gender was translated to Spanish as
“género”, which to many was a poor translation.
Género, which translates to English as
“species” or “kind”, traveled to the Latin
American context via academic publishing and sparked debate on its
aptness to map onto the feminist conditions of the region. The gender
perspective, which employs the paradigm of radical individualism
characteristic of the decade, comes to stand alongside the concept of
empowerment as one that can specifically target women’s needs.
The language of gender and empowerment was used by the United Nations
as part of their universalizing goals for women during the 1995 World
Conference on Women held in Beijing, a moment which marked mounted
tensions around the de-politicization of Latin American feminisms
(Bastian Duarte 2012: 157).
The use of the themes of gender and empowerment was further deployed
by newly democratized states. Feminist activists found themselves in a
different relationship to the state as it adopted the language of
gender. Once a vehicle of repression, especially under
military rule, Latin American feminists now had to contend with a
drastically different engagement with the role of the state, one that
had co-opted the very terms of a movement that was initiated in
opposition to its repression. Newly formed liberal democracies
understood women as potential markets for modernizing and development,
thus deploying the language of gender and empowerment (Alvarez 1998:
271). However, the way in which the state managed poverty as part of
its modernizing mission was mired in individualism with little focus on
communities.
Political and economic transitions influenced the development of
feminist ideas. Activism became institutionalized and the feminist
movement grew in various directions. As the 90s came to a close, what
started out as a spontaneous social movement with radical ideas about
patriarchy, militarism, and democratization found its way into the
halls of institutions and organizations that stifled feminist activism.
The institutionalization of feminism was so profound that its political
promise seemed lost. However, as the opening of the 21st
century demonstrates, this was not the case. Institutionalization was
not without critique, and the early 2000s marked the emergence of new
voices that took liberal dominant feminisms to task by focusing on
anti-neoliberal and decolonial critique which began to call out the
hegemonic practices of Latin American feminisms.
The institutionalization of feminism came under scrutiny in the
2000s. Autonomous feminists argued that as feminist practices continued
to normalize, they failed to account for the inequities among women. As
the century came to a close, critiquing (marginal) voices emerged,
arguing that liberal feminism tended to overlook difference, inequity,
and exclusion amongst women located in vastly different social and
cultural locations (Coba & Herrera 2013: 18). The Eighth Encuentro
(November 1999) held in Juan Dolio, Dominican Republic, reflected the
presence of these emerging voices as dominant feminisms’
“Others”: Indigenous women, Afro-descended women, and
lesbians whose position relative to the Encuentros had been marginal.
The claims of inclusivity and diversity of the Encuentros were brought
under critical scrutiny as they argued that their identities had been
obscured under liberal feminism, which took gender to be characteristic
of a foundational unity for the encounters. These
desencuentros (“disencounters”) formed the basis
of new social and political critique that characterized the emerging
voices.
In response to the neoliberal shifts of the 80s and 90s, the early
21st century brought with it an anti-neoliberal discourse to
Latin American feminisms that was further fed by decolonial and
anti-patriarchal stances. Amongst these were positions that argued for
the decolonization of universal feminism by taking into account the
axes of race, ethnicity, and sexuality in the articulations of
identity. The 2000s were also marked by an attempt to dry out the
institutionalization of gender. At the same time, there has not been an
impetus to reconfigure a social movement in the wake of neoliberal
shifts (Coba & Herrera 2013: 19).
We are currently witnessing an emergence of ideas that is starting
to reshape how we think about Latin American feminisms. However, the
project of reconfiguration is still very much in process. In this
context, critical ideas about race and the history of racism have
entered mainstream concerns, predominantly voiced from Afro-descended
standpoints (Curiel 2007). Further, lesbian feminists have brought
forth criticisms of liberal feminism for not only paying less attention
to race and racism, but also for centering on heteronormativity as part
of the feminist agenda. One notable position holds that there is an
inextricable link between lesbianism and feminism insofar as the
adoption of a self-conscious feminism entails shifting engagement with
dominant masculinity on all levels and this includes the realm of
desire (Espinosa Miñoso 2011: 403). Indigenous feminists have
also uncovered critical insights in the relationships among community,
the state, and political belonging. Their ideas about the balance
between ethnic belonging and critiques of sexism are a call to dominant
liberal feminism to rethink its concept of culture and community that
risks reducing Indigenous women to targets of development (Bastian
Duarte 2012: 164). The emergence of these critical ideas takes liberal
feminism to task by calling out the dominance of middle-class,
white/mestiza, and heteronormative models for feminist
projects as not only exclusionary, but also profoundly harmful.
Notably, most of these positions take decolonization as an orienting
project and maintain that racism and heterosexism are rooted in
colonialism whose impact continues to plague Latin America and the
Caribbean.
In 2007, GLEFAS (Grupo Latinoamericano de Estudio, Formacíon
y Acción Feminista) was founded with the intention of creating a
space for dialogue within the lesbian and feminist movement in Latin
America and the Caribbean as well as with other social and land
struggle movements in the region. They self-describe as seeking to
produce political analysis from an anti-racist, anti-military,
anti-colonial, anti-capitalist, lesbian feminist perspective. In line
with their philosophical vision, they published Tejiendo de otro
modo: Feminismo, epistemología y apuestas decoloniales en Abya
Yala (2014b) as an outgrowth of a colloquium held in Chapel Hill,
North Carolina in 2012. The book brings together a diverse group of
contemporary voices that intervene on hegemonic understandings of
feminism in the region in order to make room for a collective that
appreciates the diversity of knowledges. Speaking from the margins, the
book takes as its central claim that decolonization is concomitant with
de-patriarchialization. Hence, it reflects a shift in contemporary
Latin American feminist writings that are paving the way for critical
considerations of capitalism, imperialism, democracy, and identity.
These new voices of dissent are changing the landscape of Latin
American feminisms with unique ideas that call for rethinking what it
means to be a feminist today.
Autonomy is a foundational, albeit contested, concept in
Latin American feminisms. It is a foundational concept to the extent
that feminist identity has hinged on the conceptualization of
autonomy.  However, how autonomy is defined has been widely debated as
the term has been deployed in varying capacities. Autonomy has been
used conceptually to forge alliances between women’s groups in
Latin America that seek to eradicate gender-based oppression. It has
also been used to avoid co-option by actors like political parties,
NGO’s, the state, and funding agencies. The result is a tension
between the retention of ideological and financial autonomy and the
widening of feminisms’ scope and impact. Thus, the varying use
of autonomy calls into question how it is being defined (Alvarez et
al.  2003: 542).
The history of feminist autonomy in Latin American feminism is
rooted in the activism of the 1970s and 1980s where it was invoked in
opposition to militant feminists (militantes) involved with
the political parties of the Left. Autonomy, in this context, was
defined as independence from any organization that understood the fight
for women’s liberation as a secondary goal. On the other side
stood those who took the fight for revolutionary social change as
concurrent with feminist involvement and advocated for double
participation (Alvarez et al. 2003: 543). The rise of the political
Left in many Latin American countries involved resistance to political
regimes, and the question of where dedication was rooted reflected the
relationship between feminism and the possibilities for social change.
Feminist activism revealed the way in which the negotiation of autonomy
was and continues to be an evolving concept. As the 1980s progressed
with their shifting political landscape, the idea of autonomous
feminism came to be redundant. Hence, an understanding of engaged
autonomy emerged, which maintained the importance of retaining a
feminist stance while negotiating or participating in social practice
(Alvarez et al. 2003: 543).
The concept of autonomy surfaced throughout the Encuentros that
spanned the 1970s–1990s and further illuminated the question of
inclusion. If being autonomous entailed commitments to women’s
liberation, being autonomous also signaled participation in a feminist
project. However, it is contestable what the criteria of inclusion
under the label of feminism was. As Latin American feminisms underwent
institutionalization, two logics characterized the problem of
inclusion.
The policy-advocacy logic argued for promoting feminist-influenced
gender policy through governmental or non-governmental organizations.
On the other hand, the identity-solidarity logic distanced itself from
formal institutions and remained centered on women’s movements
through the development of feminist ideas in community and politics
(Alvarez et al. 2003: 548). However, neither one of these necessarily
entailed the inclusion of all women as is demonstrated by contemporary
critiques of the hegemonic practices of Latin American feminisms that
failed to pay attention to the importance of race, class, ethnicity,
and sexuality in shaping subordination (Alvarez et al. 2003: 565).
Cutting across these logics is the way in which inclusion in feminism
is contingent upon practice. How autonomy is understood hinges upon an
understanding of feminist practice, and those practices are shaped by
dynamics of inclusion and exclusion. Eventually, autonomy would be
re-defined through individual and collective commitment to the
transformation of women’s lives and society as a whole (Alvarez
et al. 2003: 557). At present, there is not a settled definition of
feminist autonomy, but rather a pluralism of understanding that tracks
a variety of proposals for understanding feminist engagement and
practices.
Attention to North-South hemispheric relations has been one key
theoretical issue of Latin American feminism reflected in the ample
scholarship on the migration of ideas. Latin American feminisms, much
like Latin American philosophy, have shown concern over the
authenticity of ideas that have traveled from epistemic centers (e.g.,
the United States, Europe). However, unlike Latin American philosophy,
Latin American feminisms have responded to this concern by developing
theories that attend to dynamics with which ideas travel and the way in
which ideas are re-negotiated and re-signified as they move across
locations. Generally, the claims about the ways in which ideas are
reconfigured as they enter new contexts emerge over concerns about the
travel of ideas in a North-South direction, which not only remains
non-reciprocal, but further signals the centrality of North America and
Europe as the centers of knowledge production. Latin American feminisms
have critically argued against the general understanding that ideas are
formed in the “North” and travel to the “South”
(Connell 2014). In order to defend this position, it is argued that the
act of translating is itself a materially situated political task that
re-signifies ideas as they migrate into varying contexts. The ideas
that emerge in the Latin American context are themselves unique to the
circumstances that generate their conditions of articulation. However,
circumstance is not sufficient to create uniqueness; rather, the
processes of translation involved in the movement of ideas across
hemispheres shift meaning.
Translation can be understood as any act of description,
interpretation, or dissemination. It is always caught up in power
relations that are configured by the asymmetries between people,
languages, and regions (Lima Costa 2014a: 20). In the context of the
Americas, the movement of ideas occurs across asymmetrical power
relations. Ideas encounter roadblocks and migratory checkpoints as they
attempt to cross borders (Lima Costa 2014a: 21). As a result, dialogue
across hemispheres mirrors asymmetries of power and has led to the
mistaken notion that nothing originates from the Global South, but
rather is only imported into the region from the Global North.
Translation is made further complex by “theory brokers”
(e.g., academics, donors, feminist NGO’s) that mediate the
movement of ideas (Lima Costa 2014a: 25). As ideas move, their meanings
shift, and their transformation is contingent on the culture or
discipline that receives them (Lima Costa 2014a: 29). Hence, discursive
migration is not neutral, and in the process, location comes to frame
how to understand the reconfiguration of ideas. Thinking about
translation through the matrix of discursive migration illuminates the
way in which difference and power play a crucial role in how knowledge
becomes legitimated across difference.
Placing translation at the center of feminist practices recognizes
that translation is both politically and theoretically indispensable
for feminist, anti-racist, decolonial, and anti-imperial alliances
(Alvarez 2014: 1). Translation is framed as a translocal phenomenon
insofar as it does not involve a fixed location, but further links
geographies of power (e.g., national, local) with subject positions
(e.g., gender/sexual, ethnoracial) (Alvarez 2014: 2). In this
conceptual space, Latin America and the Caribbean are configured with a
heterogeneity of Latinidades within the United States and
within Latin America and the Caribbean that exist and move across
multiple border spaces (Alvarez 2014: 2). Identities are formed in the
nexus between borders, the spaces of intense confluence that
characterize transmigrations across the region.
Subjectivity is both place-based and mis- or displaced with the
movement of ideas. In this context, difference emerges as a rich
terrain from which to engage others. For some, the difference that
mediates speaking positions is always characterized by degrees of
incommensurability as we can never be fully transparent with each other
across conditions of alterity. However, the condition of
incommensurability is not sufficient to abandon translation, but rather
an imperative to hear others in and across their difference (Schutte
1998a: 61).
One method of navigating the conditions of incommensurability is
recognizing the complexity and diversity of speaking positions with
which we engage. The term transloca has been argued to aid in
elucidating such complexities of difference. Embodying both the
processes of translation (“trans”) and the
material effects of location (“loca”), the
transloca highlights multiple dimensions that shape conditions
of difference (Alvarez 2014: 4). Following the claims about
translocation, transloca as a subject position attends to the
movement of bodies, text, capital, and theory along the North-South
axis as they produce new epistemologies for apprehending the
globalizing Americas (Alvarez 2014: 4). Translocas are
world-traveling translators, cultural and political mediators, and
hence also agents of transculturation (Alvarez 2014: 8). The term is
intended to illuminate the way in which subjectivity is forged in and
through movement across hemispheres mediated by location and
translation. Attending to the dimensions of hemispheric movement
elucidates the conditions of alterity that generate incommensurability,
but also puts into focus the way translation mediates the processes of
identity formation.
The arguments in regard to discursive migration, translation, and
translocas further capture the links among Latin America, the
Caribbean, and the United States as part of an intertwined diaspora
(Alvarez 2014: 7). The intertwining is one that stretches in many
hemispheric directions and as a result, makes Latin/a America a
heterogeneous epistemic horizon. From Latinas in the United States to
Afro-Latinas in Latin America, the ideas produced at the borders and
nexus between, in, and through hemispheres are best understood by
appreciating practices of translation. Hence, to think through Latin/a
America as an epistemic locale, in its multidimensionality, requires a
politics of translation that can foster coalition-building across
hemispheres in spite of alterity. If taken seriously, feminist theories
of translation demonstrate that ideas are products of hemispheric
locations, incommensurable with their predecessors (local or imported).
The discourses produced in Latin America and the Caribbean are not only
alternative reconfigurations of ideas, but also ruptures in political
epistemic practices. They call into question the notion that knowledge
production is a naturalized feature of particular places
(Femenías 2007: 14). Thus, the traffic of ideas generates new
and diverse spaces from which to think about locations of difference
(Femenías 2007: 15).
Another key debate that has emerged as a part of the broader Latin
American feminist conversation on the politics of translation has been
over the use of the term gender, which, as previously noted,
entered the hemispheric frame with the translation of Gayle
Rubin’s scholarship into Spanish. The term was translated into
Spanish as género, whose direct translation is more
akin to “genre” or “species”. Latin American
feminists have contested the legitimacy of gender as a
category of feminist analysis (Schutte & Femenías 2010:
403).
Prior to the introduction of the term gender, feminists
most readily used the concept of patriarchy because it offered
a framework grounded in ideological and socioeconomic conditions that
allowed for articulating the cause of women’s oppression (Schutte
& Femenías 2010: 403). In many ways, patriarchy
served as a glue of consciousness-raising in late 20th
century women’s movements of Latin America, helping connect women
by identifying their shared subordinate status under conditions of
patriarchy.
During the Second Encuentro in 1982 (Lima, Perú)
patriarchy was declared the foundational category from which
Latin American feminists sought to understand their realities. It was
deployed as an explanation for the subordination of women, but also
extended as an explanation for the conditions of compulsory
heterosexuality, repression, violence against women and children, the
prohibition of abortion, and varying forms of social injustice
(Gargallo 2004: 92). It was further linked into frameworks that sought
to identify the role of militarization and capitalism in the oppression
of women. Hence, it provided a methodological frame from which to
articulate claims about power, oppression, and domination that united
women on many fronts. Patriarchy was a conceptual stronghold
of Latin American feminism akin to what imperialism was to national
liberation struggles (Gargallo 2004: 92). It was explanatorily powerful
because it could account for complex realities while also providing an
explanation for the shared experiences of women. Unfortunately, the
explanatory power of the term was so expansive that it rendered
historical specificities opaque since nothing could exist at its
margins (Gargallo 2004: 92).
Replacing the focus on patriarchy, the gender
perspective (“perspectiva de género”) or
gender focus (“enfoque de género”) became
the methodological framework from which to talk about women and
women’s issues across Latin America. Woman was replaced
as a foundational category by gender, which became a blanket
term so user-friendly that anyone could use it as a referent to
women’s issues (Schutte & Femenías 2010: 404). The
ease with which it was used entailed the softening of radical militant
critiques of patriarchy that had characterized feminist
theorization in earlier decades. Gender was incorporated into
public policy and social programs by state and intergovernmental
organizations, reflecting the way in which it could be taken up as part
of the lexicon for even policies not feminist-inspired (Lima Costa
2014a: 26). On the flip side, the Vatican during its preparation for
the 1995 Conference on Women feared using the word gender as
it might entail the acceptance of homosexuality, the destruction of the
patriarchal family, and the dissemination of feminism (Lima Costa
2014a: 28).
Although the movement of gender across hemispheres is far
from complete, it is important to recognize the way in which the
traffic of gender took place in and through material
conditions. One notable method of translating and migrating concepts is
through academic journals, and the debates on the uses of
gender have revealed broader reflections on how concepts come
to carry epistemic weight. The transnational citational market is one
key dimension in this process as who gets cited, where, and by whom
exposes the routes through which theories have traveled in global
contexts (Lima Costa 2014b: 142). In light of the conceptual travel and
use of gender, Latin American feminisms ask that one consider
the way in which the global privileging of English as the linguistic
medium impacts what knowledge is allowed to circulate (Lima Costa
2014b: 142). Moreover, these reflections bring to the fore the fact
that English cannot be viewed as a transparent medium as its privileged
status sets the stage for what gets taken up as worth translating in
the first place. It should then be no surprise that gender has
traveled so far. Its traffic is a marker of the imperative to create
conditions for productive “mis-translations” that create
spaces for heterogeneous conceptual development (Lima Costa 2014b:
144).
Although gender has been a key focus of analysis, Latin
American feminist thought has also concentrated on the importance of
accounting for the complexity of identity. Conceptually,
gender on its own is insufficient to account for the
complexities of identity. Notably, Latin American feminisms have paid
attention to the ways in which class, race/ethnicity, and sexuality are
necessary components for understanding the lived experience of
identity, which is never conceptualized as pure nor one-dimensional
(Feménias 2007: 16).
The idea that class is a key dimension of women’s lives is one
that is rooted in Latin American feminist activisms of the late
19th and early 20th centuries. As previously
noted in Section 1 (on the history of Latin American feminism),
women’s fights for equality of this time were framed in terms of
equitable access to social goods (e.g., education). The impact of this
push was the transformation of the material lives of people living in
poverty more generally. Considerations of the importance of class
conditions in understanding the plight of women and the poor have been
long rooted in Latin American feminist ideas. Feminist projects
concerned with the advancement of women in civil society converged
with labor movements and anti-imperial resistance (e.g., Luisa
Capetillo). This trend re-emerged during resistance movements of the
1970s that aligned feminist projects with revolutionary parties of the
Left across Latin America. As a result, attention to class dimensions
has long been part of the feminist methodology. However, this
attention has not been without fault. Contemporary theories from the
work of Afro-descended women have argued that the overwhelming
attention paid to class has come at the expense of analyzing the role
that racism has played in the marginalization and exclusion of
African-descended and Indigenous populations (Curiel 2007).
The reflections on race/ethnicity of Latin American feminist
methodology are diverse, demonstrating the racial heterogeneity
generated by the colonial condition. Colonialism not only initiated
contemporary understandings of race/ethnicity but generated conditions
of racial formation under systems of exploitation and subordination.
Specifically, the colonial history of Latin America entailed the
subordination of Indigenous and Afro-descended peoples (Schutte &
Femenías 2010: 407). Economically, colonialism entailed the
enslavement and exploitation of these populations. Culturally,
colonialism ensured the imposition of a socio-symbolic order that
entrenched whiteness as a norm and cultural authority (Schutte &
Femenías 2010: 407). Concurrently, norms of gender and class
emerge through the production of race, whose economic impact is
reflected through the link between whiteness and class ascension.
Subsequently, nation-building projects in Latin America and the
Caribbean were forged by political elites with patriarchal ideologies
mired in racism and classism. The impact of these ideologies has
entailed a racialized social stratification that reflects the privilege
of whiteness and leaves women disproportionally affected (Curiel 2007:
98).
Against this backdrop, feminist reflections on race/ethnicity have
sought to undermine the racism of national ideologies that have led to
their subordination and marginalization. One such ideology is that of
mestizaje which emerged as part of nation building projects
throughout Latin America and the Caribbean. Mestizaje favored
the formation of a racially-mixed people but came saturated with
Eurocentrism and privileged the whitening of the Americas.
Mestizaje ensured structural inequalities as it racialized
class differences while maintaining racism a myth. On the heels of
these conditions, notable contributions to the discussion on
race/ethnicity in Latin America and the Caribbean have come from
Afro-descended and Indigenous women who have been systemically
marginalized in these social processes. They argue that
mestizaje functions as a sequel to colonialism that continues
to entail subordination and marginalization in social life (Curiel
2007: 98).
Racialized women in Latin America and the Caribbean have also
pointed to the racism of dominant feminist methodology that took
womanhood to be a shared categorical status but dismissed the
importance of the specificities determined by race/ethnicity and class
identity. In so doing, the voices of racialized women have opened up
new avenues for contemporary critical feminist investigation. For
instance, Afro-descended women have shown how the methodologies of
studying women from colonial times detrimentally read the lives of
enslaved women one-dimensionally as solely victims of slavery,
overlooking the ways in which many participated in acts of resistance.
Acts like the waste of household goods or self-induced abortions to
avoid the enslavement of children are best understood as acts of
domestic marronage and need to be read as part of the history of
Afro-descended women in the Americas (Albert 2003). In this context,
the call for a more multidimensional analysis of racialized women also
entails demonstrating that for racialized women, the public and the
private spheres are not separate entities as hegemonic feminism
purported (Curiel 2016: 49). Hence, a call for the blackening of
feminism has emerged as a way of elucidating the relationship between
racism and sexism in order to better understand the histories of women
throughout the Americas (Carneiro 2005).
Further, racialized women of Latin America and the Caribbean have
provided new constructive frameworks for conceptualizing racialized and
ethnic identities. One such attempt can be found in the development of
Amefricanidad, a term coined by Afro-Brazilian scholar
Léila Gonsalez, that resists the use of Latinidad
because of its Eurocentric underpinnings, much like how
mestizaje downplays the Indigenous and African dimension of
Latin America and the Caribbean (Curiel 2007: 99). Building on the use
of Amefricanidad or Amefricanicity, others have
argued for the use of the term as a privileged epistemology that
enhances the visibility of Afro-descended feminism in the region
(Alvarez & Caldwell 2016: v). Amefricanidad tracks the
importance of African and Indigenous roots of identity, but also seeks
to think from within those identities as it pursues an intersectional
approach to racism, colonialism, and imperialism (Alvarez &
Caldwell 2016: v). Amefricanidad tracks racialized identity,
but at the same time signals plurality in its capacity to capture the
multiple inheritances of Latin America and the Caribbean.
By keeping the impact of the colonial condition at the center of
theory, contemporary Latin American and Caribbean feminists have also
critically evaluated norms of sexuality, a topic which dominant liberal
feminism long maintained at the margins. The lesbian movement of Latin
America and the Caribbean stems from mixed-gender homosexual
organizations that were in dialogue with the feminist movement of the
late 20th century (Bastian Duarte 2012: 165). However, for
much of this time, discussions on sexual preference were set aside
within the liberal feminist agenda. Lesbian feminism, much like the
larger panorama of Latin American feminism, is heterogeneous.
Nevertheless, there is one common theoretical denominator: the
imperative to transform ideas and practices related to
heteronormativity, lesbianism, and gender relations (Bastian Duarte
2012: 169). At stake in the analysis of lesbian feminism is the way in
which heteronormativity permeates all aspects of lived experience,
including the intersections among sexuality, race/ethnicity, class, and
gender. For instance, Afro-descended lesbian feminists have linked
racism and sexism to heteronormativity by arguing that the obligatory
dimensions of heterosexuality are intimately bound up with the
reproduction of racist and sexist practices (Curiel 2016: 50). Others
have argued that there is an intimate relationship between lesbianism
and feminism that hinges on the recognition that liberation for women
is founded in decentering patriarchy, which often involves
re-negotiating relationships with men and masculinity on all levels
(Espinosa Miñoso 2011: 404).
Implicit in discussions of the complexity of identity is the
relationship between the individual and the collective. The
relationship between structural collective conditions and the formation
of individual identity attends to the ways in which human beings are
not isolated meaning-makers. However, when the conditions of
meaning-making reflect the heirlooms of colonialism, oppression,
patriarchy, or obligatory heterosexuality, tense negotiations are
required between the individual and the collective. Indigenous
feminists have negotiated the political and personal value of ethnic
belonging with individual feminist claims (Bastian Duarte 2012: 164).
The liberal neofeminist movement has long emphasized the importance of
sexual and reproductive rights of women, but while these issues may
represent core aspects of many women’s lives, they do not
represent core issues in Indigenous women’s struggles.
For instance, the topic of violence is one at the center of feminist
concerns of many political persuasions. However, from the perspective
of Indigenous feminism, violence is not just constructed in terms of
gendered violence but is also generated by those who have seized and
destroyed Indigenous lands (Bastian Duarte 2012: 163). Hence, an
understanding that projects violence solely centered on individuality
will not be sufficient to generate conditions of equality for
Indigenous feminists whose collective identities serve as the primary
method of preserving their cultural systems (Bastian Duarte 2012: 164).
The meaning of equality and justice for Indigenous feminists of Latin
America and the Caribbean follows the specificity of their politics,
which takes the role of the community as central to identity and hence
calls for new ways of thinking about the relationship between
individual feminist demands and collective transformation (Bastian
Duarte 2012: 165). Although not all Indigenous peoples of Latin America
and the Caribbean reside in their own communities as many have migrated
to more urban areas, it is important to appreciate the ways in which
community in a multifaceted sense operates as an important feature of
transformative projects.
Latin American feminist philosophy emerges at the nexus between
theory and practice. The social activism of the 20th century
fueled the production of theories that form the tradition of Latin
American feminist philosophy as well as its place in the academy.
However, the study of Latin American feminist philosophy remains scarce
and derelict (Gargallo 2015, Other Internet Resources). The existence
of Latin American feminist philosophers has been largely denied, and
the specificities of their theoretical contributions have been erased
under the sexist, Eurocentric orientation of philosophy. Recognition of
their existence is a political act that contests the dominant
architecture of the history of philosophy. Taking account of Latin
American feminist philosophy requires a historical and philosophical
reconstruction that understands the fact that women from Latin America
and the Caribbean have long been thinkers. The philosophical work that
remains to be done requires engagement with their ideas.
Latin American feminist philosophy is political (Gargallo 2004: 41).
The ideas that pushed social transformation in the 20th
century movements are grounded in politics that recognized the
imperative for social change. The political dimension of Latin American
feminist philosophy is reflected in the fact that many Latin American
feminist philosophers were or are activists, and the span of their
thought often reflects their participation in resistance movements.
Resistance can mean many types of political projects, and in the
context of Latin American feminist philosophy, the act of citing is
understood as political because it works toward building a
philosophical canon that legitimizes the voices of women long excluded
from philosophical practice.
Tracing a philosophical history of Latin American feminist thinkers
is a task that merits scholarly attention, and to date there is a
lacuna of resources. One major obstacle is linguistic as a lot of
textual sources have not been translated. Furthermore, the resources
themselves are not ample, although some notable publications have been
made. The Antología del pensamiento feminista
nuestroamericano: tomo 1 del anhelo a la emancipación
(2010a) and Antología del pensamiento feminista
nuestroamericano: tomo 2 movimiento de liberación de las
mujeres (2010b) coordinated by Francesca Gargallo are some of the
first large-scale publications to anthologize Latin American and
Carribean feminist philosophical writings. They are non-exhaustive
resources that testify to the theoretical, argumentative, and
methodological contributions of Latin American and Caribbean feminist
writers spanning from the 15th to the 20th
century. As the anthology rescues writers often lost to the pages of
history, it also takes Latin America and the Caribbean, as
nuestra or our America, as the point of theoretical
departure. Thus, it enables a collective recognition of a history of
feminist thought that does not depend on North America or Europe for
its identity. The anthology further demonstrates that Latin American
feminist philosophical thought is hardly new. It is grounded in a
history of resistance to social and political conditions that impeded
the recognition of women as knowledge-producers (Gargallo 2009: 418).
It has been argued that early feminist philosophies are some of the
first systems of thought to account for the politics of legitimacy
whereby social conditions grant privilege to the epistemic productions
of one group in order to exclude and delegitimize the voices of others
(Gargallo 2009: 420). The critique of legitimacy is one that follows
Latin American feminist philosophy well into the 20th and
21st centuries.
For instance, Juana Inés de la Cruz (1651–1695), one of
the most cited writers of this tradition, advocated for the
intellectual life of women, which entailed denouncing norms of
hegemonic masculinity. Her image as a protofeminist writer has been
associated with lesbianism, as she led a monastic life and in so doing,
resisted the dominance of masculinity (Gargallo 2009: 419). Her
existence as an intellectual defied the authority of her times and her
resistance is reflected in her writing.
A further example can be found in the thought of Luisa Capetillo
(1879–1922), which is rooted in her participation in labor
movements in Puerto Rico and the United States during her lifetime. As
a cigar factory reader, she was employed by the workers and functioned
as an intellectual and cultural intermediary by reading workers
everything from news to political theory. Capetillo became a reader at
a time when forty percent of the tobacco workers and eighty-seven
percent of the agricultural work force of Puerto Rico were illiterate
(Ramos 1992: 14). However, the presence of readers, like Capetillo,
made the tobacco labor force one of the most socially conscious (Ramos
1992: 21). Her activism drew intellectual support from European
anarchist philosophy that traveled to Puerto Rico through translations
of authors like Tolstoy, Dostoevsky, Diderot, Bakunin, Kropotkin, Marx,
and Nietzsche (Ramos 1992: 27). Capetillo made a mark on the Puerto
Rican labor movement, but she became a transnational migrant as she was
driven out of Puerto Rico by a government crackdown on anarchists (Ruiz
2016: 3). In her short life of forty-two years she would come to reside
in New York City, Ybor City, and La Habana as she continued her
activism by organizing labor strikes, arguing against the institution
of marriage, engaging in stylized resistance by wearing men’s
clothing, and publishing four books (Ramos 1992: 66). Capetillo’s
most important contribution was producing ideas rooted in a
workers’ rights movement that moved across nations and was itself
inspired by the travel of ideas.
Philosophy as a field of study in Latin America and the Caribbean
was institutionalized and professionalized in the years spanning
1940–1960. Hence, it is no surprise that subsequently women
gained formal university education in philosophy. Matilde Carranza
(1892–1981), born in San José, Costa Rica, was Costa
Rica’s first woman to receive a Ph.D. in philosophy. She attended
the University of Wisconsin and is also noted as one of the first women
to receive a doctoral degree from the university. Her philosophical
thought centered on the importance of education for social
transformation, which aligned with her anti-despotic and egalitarian
politics. However, her most notable impact was shattering the myth that
women were not apt for philosophy, thus paving the way for women of
other generations (Prada Ortiz 2013: 32–33). Ana Isabel Alfaro
(1944–1990), born in Alajuela, Costa Rica, studied philosophy at
the University of Costa Rica. Her philosophical commitments centered on
the role of education in national development, as she took education to
be socially transformative. As a result, Alfaro saw the role of the
university as an integral part of social change. Her commitments to the
transformative powers of education were methodologically rooted in
interdisciplinarity and cultural diversity. Notably, Alfaro placed
importance on the creative power of women within her philosophy of
education, arguing for their creative potential and reflecting this
commitment in her political alliances with poor women (Prada Ortiz
2013: 55).
Following suit, Monelisa Lina Pérez Marchand, Victoria Junco
Posadas, Olga Victoria Quiroz Martínez, Rosa Krauze, Elsa
Cecilia Frost, Vera Yamuni, and María del Carmen Rovira Gaspar
entered academic philosophy in Mexico in the middle of the
20th century through the seminars of José Gaos
(Gargallo 2015, Other Internet Resources). Notable among these is Vera
Yamuni (1917–2003) and María del Carmen Rovira, who
recognized the importance of doing philosophy from a Latin American
perspective with a keen eye toward the specificities of women. Rovira
would apply this methodology to historicism and Yamuni to humanism
(Gargallo 2009: 423). Yamuni is particularly important as her work and
place in the academy influenced many generations of feminist
philosophers. She was a transnational thinker born of Lebanese parents
in Costa Rica, although she did most of her studying, teaching, and
writing in Mexico. Yamuni studied under Gaos and would dedicate a part
of her intellectual career to engaging with the work of Gaos, notably
critiquing his misogyny. She further dedicated time to translate texts
from English and Arabic to Spanish, reflecting her commitment to
creating conditions of philosophical access (Prada Ortiz 2013: 71).
However, she is notably remembered as a feminist thinker through her
work on Sappho, Virginia Woolf, and Simone de Beauvoir, as well as her
feminist analysis of the role of women in the history of philosophy.
Her writing conceptually explored sameness and difference long before
it became a hotbed of feminist philosophical analysis in the 1990s
(Prada Ortiz 2013: 87). Her influence as a feminist philosopher is
profound as she has been cited as the first to introduce feminist
philosophy into Mexico by her student Graciela Hierro, who became an
iconic figure of Latin American feminist philosophy in the 1980s and
1990s (Prada Ortiz 2013: 83).
The social transformation of the 1970s and 1980s reverberated into
the field of philosophy. As women increasingly began to establish
themselves in the academy, their ideas developed. On the shoulders of
symbolic mothers and the politics of the times, Latin American feminist
philosophy began to proliferate as a diverse system of thought that
took feminist theorizing to be a form of politics. However, the points
of departure for analysis varied. Graciela Hierro, student of Yamuni,
developed a feminist ethics informed by utilitarianism that explored
the intimate relationship between ethics and politics focused on
liberation and pleasure. For Hierro, women’s politics is one
centered on making claims about the role of women in a society where
the condition of womanhood is understood as a variant characteristic of
human life (Hierro 1990). Hierro, much like Yamuni and the women that
came before her, functioned as a symbolic philosophical mother to many
as she heavily influenced a generation of feminist scholars. Eli
Bartra, a student of Hierro’s, maintained that feminism is a
theoretical current dedicated to uncovering what it means to be a
woman. For her, the feminist project is political because feminism is a
political philosophy (Bartra 2001: 12). Diana Helena Maffía of
Argentina, influenced by Bartra, further maintains that feminism is
both a political position and a critical theory that lends itself
toward the revision of political ideals (Rietti & Maffía
2005). María Luisa Femenías, also writing from Argentina,
maintains a link between feminism and politics but takes Latin American
feminism to be characterized by its unique appreciation of the
intersections among gender, class, race/ethnicity, and religion as they
collectively forged conditions of existence (Femenías 2007).
Urania Ungo Montenegro of Panamá defines feminism as a political
theory of women that reflects the relationship between women and
politics (Ungo Montenegro 2000).
Although they diverge in their characterizations of the relationship
between feminism and politics, all of these positions share a general
understanding that to philosophically discuss Latin American feminism
is to engage in political theory in a way that elucidates the diverse
and complex relationships among women, gender, and politics. This list
is by no means exhaustive, and further figures like Rosario Castellanos
of Mexico and Celia Amorós of Spain should not be forgotten as
they influenced the positions developed by these thinkers. Furthermore,
philosophers like Ofelia Schutte, Cuban-born and writing in the United
States, have made notable contributions to the landscape of Latin
American feminist philosophy, reminding readers that the feminist
tradition occupies a part of a wider tradition of political liberation
and theory of Latin America. All of these women dared to be thinkers at
times when being a Latin American woman in philosophy was unheard of,
and they have come to form the foundation of a canon of thinkers that
paved the way for new and emerging voices.
Dissident voices of the early 2000s waged a decolonial critique that
came to characterize contemporary Latin American feminist philosophical
scholarship. Influenced by the pivotal contributions of María
Lugones (2007, 2008), contemporary decolonial Latin American feminist
scholarship has tackled Eurocentrism, colonial underpinnings, and
omissions of identity in feminist philosophy. Lugones was an integral
voice in the formation of a decolonial feminist tradition as she was
the first scholar to articulate the concept of the coloniality of
gender. In conversation with the scholarship of Peruvian Aníbal
Quijano (2000), she maintained that the modern sex/gender system is
rooted in the colonial project that imposes a dimorphic sex/gender
system framed through heteronormativity. Complementing Quijano, she
maintains that the colonial/modern gender system required the
categorization of human and non-human and the invention of racial
divisions of the human. However, she critically adds that gender played
an important role in these relationships, a point Quijano overlooks. As
a result, the status of white women, existing alongside colonizing
white men, operated on a different nexus committed to the reproduction
of racialized humanity. The peoples of the colonized world did not
participate in the modern gender system prior to its imposition. The
import of this argument is that gender and sexuality are
co-constitutive of race and are formed in and through the colonial
project that sought to subordinate colonized peoples. Hence, to
theorize about gender entails a look at the heirlooms of colonialism
that built the possibilities of the modern world through the
categorization of people into racialized, gendered humanity. This
critique problematizes any idea of shared gender in womanhood because
it fails to account for the racial and class differences that cut
across the formations of identities in the Americas.
One of the most notable and comprehensive texts that brings Latin
American decolonial voices together is Tejiendo de otro modo:
feminism, espistemología y apuestas descoloniales en Abya
Yala (2014b), edited by Yuderkys Espinosa Miñoso, Diana
Gómez Correal, and Karina Ochoa Muñoz. The book provides
a critical intervention in contemporary Latin American feminisms from
the diverse positions and experiences of women (Escobar 2014: 11).
Rooted in decolonial epistemic practices, the book reconceives Latin
America as Abya Yala, the Kuna (Indigenous people of
Panamá and Colombia) term for what colonizers termed
“America”. Abya Yala translates as “land of
full maturity” or “land of vital blood” and is taken
as a methodological starting point for theorizing ways of knowing
through a decolonial lens. The contributors adhere to the claim that
decolonization cannot occur without de-patriarchialization. In other
words, resistance to capitalism, racism, homophobia, and all forms of
domination related to our modern social order has to incorporate
strategies of de-patriarchialization (Escobar 2014: 11). As such, the
text brings to the fore the importance of intersecting Latin American
feminisms with decolonial thought and exemplifies new emerging critical
voices that contribute to growth and proliferation.
The scholarship notably produces a Latin American feminist genealogy
committed to prioritizing the voices of those systematically
marginalized or ignored and decenters dominant white,
upper/middle-class feminisms that have failed to account for difference
(Espinosa Miñoso et al. 2014a: 14). The scholarship is a further
testament to the fact that no one dominant category will solve the
problem of unification (Espinosa Miñoso et al. 2014a: 20). The
project of decolonial feminisms is not framed by privileging one
category of analysis over another (e.g., race over gender); rather, it
proposes a systemic critique focused on the conceptual framework of
dominant Latin American feminisms, calling attention to the ways it has
reified classism, sexism, racism, and heteronormativity. The project of
decolonial feminisms is a movement in process, but its core seeks to
bring together the productions of thinkers, intellectuals, feminist
activists, lesbian feminists, Afro-descended women, Indigenous peoples,
poor mestizas, and allies committed to the historical
recuperation of anti-racist theory and practice from the epistemic
position of Abya Yala (Espinosa Miñoso et al. 2014a:
32).
The Latin American decolonial feminist tradition has found
influential allies in the Latina/x feminist tradition of the United
States. Latina/x feminisms took shape during the 1960s and 1970s as
part of a wide range of political struggles seeking gender and social
justice that comes to form a wide landscape of theories. The term
“Latina/x” is broad, but far from monolithic as it can
capture a range of identities (e.g., Afro-Latina, Afro-Caribbean,
Nuyorican, Xicana). It symbolically encapsulates identity conditions of
migration, immigration, and diaspora to the United States from
countries in Latin America and the Caribbean. Although Latina/x
feminisms are a wide-ranging field, they generally adhere to a system
of thought that attempts to unravel interlocking systems of oppression,
reflecting on the conditions of borderlands, race/ethnicity, gender,
sexuality, immigration, and religion in unique ways. Most importantly,
Latina/x feminist theory pays close attention to lived experience and
made notable contributions to theories of identity that extend beyond
the borders of the United States. Here, figures like Gloria
Anzaldúa, Cherríe Moraga, Emma Pérez, Juanita
Ramos, Norma Alarcón, Chela Sandoval, Mariana Ortega, Ofelia
Schutte, and María Lugones have been of significance. Notably,
the work of Anzaldúa influenced Lugones’ conceptualization
of the coloniality of gender, which is at the centerfold of decolonial
feminist theory in both Latin America and the United States. Although
theories are always tied to their locations, they also travel in ways
that require attending to the processes of re-signification undergone
through their traffic. It is for this reason that some decolonial
feminist thinkers have called for closer attention to the specificities
of alterity that might set limits on the theoretical application of
ideas (Mendoza 2014: 101). Notwithstanding, the Latina/x feminist
tradition has been influential on its own merits and continues to pave
coalitional roads with Latin American and Caribbean thinkers both
within and outside the United States.
The history of Latin American and Caribbean feminist ideas is
extensive. However, it is one that remains underappreciated in North
American and European academic spaces. The omission of Latin American
feminisms is further compounded by the fact that most of its primary
resources remain untranslated from Spanish, making the travel of ideas
difficult. For some, the linguistic inaccessibility might not be
problematic as it signals the need for epistemic centers to accommodate
across difference, and for others, it merely highlights the ample
amount of work that remains to be done. Either way, the Latin American
feminist tradition is one that methodologically reminds its readers
that theory is always grounded in practice. Thus, placing the ideas of
women and their push for social transformation at the centerfold of
philosophical and theoretical activity demands contextualization. For
philosophical practices more specifically, Latin American feminisms
remind us that women have been thinking much longer than they have been
credited for and philosophers need to merely start asking: What were
they thinking about?