Every legal system contains obligation-imposing laws, but there is
no decisive linguistic marker determining which these are. The term
“obligation” need not be used, nor its near-synonym,
“duty.” One rarely finds the imperative mood. The Canadian
Criminal Code imposes an obligation not to advocate genocide thus:
“Every one who advocates or promotes genocide is guilty of an
indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding
five years.” The English Sale of Goods Act says that,
“Where the seller sells goods in the course of a business, there
is an implied condition that the goods supplied under the contract are
of merchantable quality.” That these laws create
obligations follows from the way “offence” and
“implied condition” function in their respective areas of
law, not from the language in which they are expressed.
On the face of it, some laws have other functions. A requirement
that “a will must be signed” generally imposes no 
duty—not a duty to make a will, and not even a duty to have it
signed if you do—it sets conditions in the absence of which the
document simply does not count as a valid will. Nonetheless, some
philosophers, including Jeremy Bentham and Hans Kelsen, argue that the
content of every legal system can and should be represented solely in
terms of duty-imposing and duty-excepting laws. Bentham asks,
“What is it that every article of law has in common with the
rest? It commands and by doing so creates duties or, what is
another word for the same thing, obligations” (Bentham 1970,
294). (For a related contemporary view, see Harris 1979, 84–106.) They think
that analyzing laws this way reveals what legislators or subjects most
need to know: under what conditions the coercive power of law will
ultimately be met. Others argue that even if such a reduction were
possible, it would be unwieldy, uninformative and unmotivated,
concealing as it does the different social functions that laws fulfil
(Hart 1994: 26–49) and the different kinds of reasons for action that
they create (Raz 1990). Others still, despairing of any principled way
of knowing what a law is, have abandoned the problem entirely and tried
to develop a theory of law that bypasses it (Honoré 1977; Dworkin
1978: 71–78). At a minimum, it does seem clear that whether or not all
laws impose obligations, they can only be fully understood
through their relations to those that do. Thus, a legal right is an
interest that warrants holding others under an obligation to protect
it, a legal power is the ability to create or modify obligations, and
so forth.
What then are legal obligations? They are legal requirements with
which law's subjects are bound to conform. An obligatory act
or omission is something the law renders non-optional. Since people
plainly can violate their legal obligations,
“non-optional” does not mean that they are physically
compelled to perform, nor even that law leaves them without any
eligible alternative. On the contrary, people often calculate whether
or not to perform their legal duties. Could it be then that obligations
are simply weighty reasons to perform, even if sometimes neglected or
outweighed? This cannot be a sufficient condition: high courts have
important reasons not to reverse themselves too frequently, but no
legal obligation to refrain. Nor is it necessary: one has an
obligation, but only a trivial reason, not to tread on someone's lawn
without his consent.
If their content does not account for the stringency of obligations,
what does? An historically important, though now largely defunct,
theory explained it in terms of penalty. Following Hobbes and Bentham,
the English jurist John Austin says that to have a legal obligation is
to be subject to a sovereign command to do or forbear, where a command
requires an expression of will together with an attached risk, however
small, of suffering an evil for non-compliance. “When I am
talking directly of the chance of incurring the evil, or
(changing the expression) of the liability or obnoxiousness to the
evil, I employ the term duty, or the term
obligation…” (Austin 1832, 18). Others conceived an
indirect connection between duty and sanction. Hans Kelsen holds that
what is normally counted as the content of a legal duty is in reality
only part of a triggering condition for the mandatory norm which
commands or authorizes officials to impose a sanction: “[A] norm:
‘You shall not murder’ is superfluous, if a norm is valid:
‘He who murders ought to be punished’”(Kelsen 1967, 55).
And thus, “Legal obligation is not, or not immediately, the
behavior that ought to be. Only the coercive act, functioning as a
sanction, ought to be” (Kelsen 1967, 119).
None of these versions of the sanction theory survived H.L.A. Hart's
criticisms (Hart 1994, 27–42; cf. Hacker 1973). First, they misleadingly
represent a range of disparate legal consequences—including
compensation and even invalidation—as if they all function as
penalties. Second, they render unintelligible many familiar references
to duties in the absence of sanctions, for example, the duty of the
highest courts to apply the law. Third, they offer an inadequate
explanation of non-optionality. “You have an obligation not to
murder” cannot merely mean “If you murder you will be
punished,” for the law is not indifferent between people, on the
one hand, murdering and being jailed, and on the other hand not
murdering at all. “The right to disobey the law is not obtainable
by the payment of a penalty or a licence fee” (Francome v.
Mirror Group Newspapers Ltd. [1984] 2 All ER 408 at 412). Such
dicta are commonplace and reflect familiar judicial attitudes. Most
important, the normal function of sanctions in the law is to reinforce
duties, not to constitute them. It is true that one reason
people are interested in knowing their legal duties is to avoid
sanctions, but this is not the only reason nor is it, contrary to what
Oliver Wendell Holmes supposed, a theoretically primary one. Subjects
also want to be guided by their duties—whether in
order to fulfil them or deliberately to infringe them—and
officials invoke them as reasons for, and not merely
consequences of, their decisions.
Sensitivity to such matters led Hart to defend a rule-based
theory. He says that while sanctions might mark circumstances in which
people are obligedto conform, they have an obligation
only when subject to a practiced social rule requiring an act or
omission. The fact that subjects use it as a rule marks it as
normative. Three further features distinguish obligation-imposing
rules: they must be reinforced by serious or insistent pressure to
conform; they must be believed important to social life or to some
valued aspect of it; and their requirements may conflict with the
interests and goals of the subject (Hart 1994, 85–88). This account of
the nature of obligations is not an account of their
validity. Hart does not say that a legal duty is binding
whenever there is a willingness to deploy serious pressure in its
support, etc. He holds that a duty is legally valid if it is part of
the legal system (i.e., if it is certified as such by the tests for law
in that system), and a legal duty is morally valid only if there are
sound moral reasons to comply with it. But, at least in his early work,
he offers the practice theory as an explanation of duties 
generally—legal duties are the creatures of legal rules, moral duties of
moral rules and so on. (Hart later modified this view, see 1982,
255–68; and 1994, 256.)
The constitutive role of social pressure is sometimes considered an
Austinian blemish on Hart's theory, but there are in any case more
serious problems with it as a general account of obligations (Dworkin
1978, 50–54; Raz 1990, 53–8). People readily speak of obligations when
they are well aware that there are no relevant social practices, as
might a lone vegetarian in a meat eating society. And Hart's practice
conditions may be satisfied in cases where there is no obligation but
only generally applicable reasons, as when victims are regularly urged
to yield their wallets to a mugger. At best, Hart's theory will apply
only to a special class of obligations in which the existence of a
conventional practice is an essential part of the reasons for
conformity, though even here, the theory is open to doubt. (See Dworkin
1978, 54–58; Green 1988, 88–121)
A third account is reason-based. On this view, what
constitutes obligations is neither the social resources with which they
are enforced, nor the practices in which they may be expressed, but the
kind of reasons for action that they offer. Legal obligations are
content-independent reasons that are both categorical and pre-emptive
in force. The mark of their content-independence is that their force
does not depend on the nature or merits of the action they require: in
most cases, law can impose an obligation to do X or to refrain
from doing X (Hart 1958; 1982, 254–55; but cf. Markwick 2000).
That they are pre-emptive means that they require the subject to set
aside his own view of the merits and comply nonetheless. That they are
categorical means that they do not condition their claims on the
subject's own goals or interests.
This view is foreshadowed in both Hobbes and Locke, but its most
influential contemporary version is due to Joseph Raz (1977; 1990,
35–84). He argues that obligations are categorical reasons for action
that are also protected by exclusionary reasons not to act on
some of the competing reasons to the contrary. Obligations exclude
some contrary reasons—typically at least reasons of
convenience and ordinary preference—but they do not normally
exclude all: an exclusionary reason is not necessarily a conclusive
reason. The stringency of an obligation is thus a consequence not of
its weight or practice features, but of the fact that it supports the
required action by special normative means, insulating it from the
general competition of reasons. Or at any rate this is what obligations
do when they have the force the claim, i.e., when they are binding. The
theory does not assume that all legal obligations actually are binding
from the moral point of view, but it does suppose that the legal system
puts them forth as if they were—a consequence that some have
doubted. (Hart 1982, 263–67; Himma 2001, 284–97) And while this account is
invulnerable to the objections to sanction-based and practice-based
theories, it does need to make good the general idea of an
‘exclusionary reason’, and some philosophers have expressed
doubts on that score also (Perry 1989, Regan 1987): is it ever reasonable to
exclude entirely from consideration an otherwise valid reason?
The account has, nonetheless, been adopted by legal philosophers with
otherwise starkly contrasting views of the nature of law. (Compare,
e.g., Finnis 1979, 231–59 and Marmor 2001).
A competitive market is not a legal system, even though people
adjust their behaviour in response to relative prices and the whole
constitutes a form of social order. Neither was the system of mutual
nuclear deterrence, though it guided behaviour and generated norms that
regulated the Cold War. Many philosophers and social scientists agree
that a social order is a legal system only if it has effective
authority. An effective (or de facto) authority may
not be justified, but it does stand in a special relation to justified
(de jure) authority. Justified authority is what effective
authorities claim, or what they are generally recognized to have.
What is legal authority, and how is it related to obligations? It is
a kind of practical authority, i.e. authority over action. On one
influential view, “To claim authority is to claim the right to be
obeyed” (Wolff 1970, 5). There are, of course, authorities that make
no such claim. Theoretical authorities, i.e., experts, are not
characterized by claims to obedience—they need not even claim a
right to be believed. And there are weaker forms of practical
authority. To give someone authority to use your car is merely to
permit him. But political authority, of which legal authority is one
species, is normally seen as a right to rule, with a correlative duty
to obey. On this account law claims the right to obedience wherever it
sets out obligations. And to obey is not merely to comply with the law;
it is to be guided by it. Max Weber says it is “as if
the ruled had made the content of the command the maxim of their
conduct for its very own sake” (Weber 1963, 946). Or, as Robert Paul
Wolff somewhat more perspicuously puts it: “Obedience is not a
matter of doing what someone tells you to do. It is a matter of doing
what he tells you to do because he tells you to do it”
(Wolff 1970, 9). This is not to say that one obeys only in treating the
authority's say-so as an indefeasible reason for action; but one must
treat as a binding content-independent reason. The question whether
there is an obligation of obedience to law is a matter of whether we
should act from the legal point of view and obey the law as it claims
to be obeyed (Raz 1979, 233–49).
It is an interesting feature of this account that it supposes that
one can tell what the authority requires independent of whether the
requirement is justified on its merits. Richard Friedman argues:
“[I]f there is no way of telling whether an utterance is
authoritative, except by evaluating its contents to see whether it
deserves to be accepted in its own right, then the distinction between
an authoritative utterance and advice or rational persuasion will have
collapsed” (Friedman 1973, 132). An idea of this sort is developed by
Raz into one of the leading arguments for the “sources
thesis”, the idea that an adequate test for the existence and
content of law must be based only on social facts, and not on moral
arguments. (See the entry on 
  legal positivism.) Authority's subjects
“can benefit by its decisions only if they can establish their
existence and content in ways which do not depend on raising the very
same issues which the authority is there to settle” (Raz 1994,
219). If law aims to settle disputes about moral issues, then law must
be identifiable without resolving these same disputes. The law is
therefore exhausted by its sources (such as legislative
enactments, judicial decisions, and customs, together with local
conventions of interpretation). This kind of argument has been
generalized (see Shapiro 1998), but also subjected to criticism. It is
uncertain what sort of constraint is posed by the idea that it should
not involve “the very same issues”—perhaps if
morality is a necessary condition only there could be moral tests for
authority that leave the relevant dependent reasons untouched (Coleman 2001,
126–7). And while law does indeed serve as a scheme for guiding and
appraising behaviour, it may also have other functions, such as
educating its subjects about right and wrong, and this may be
ill-served the attitude that the rules are to be obeyed in part because
they are the rules (Waluchow 1994).
The obligation-correlative view of authority is not universally
accepted. Some argue that legal authority involves no claim right, but
only a set of liberties: to decide certain questions for a society and
to enforce their decisions. (Soper 2002, 85 ff; cf. Ladenson 1980; Greenawalt 1987;
47–61; and Edmundson 1998, 7–70). The liberty conception must answer two
questions. First, is it not a feature of a right to decide that it
requires subjects to refrain from acting on competing decisions? If the
law says that abortion is permissible and the Church says that it is
not, what does the denial of the Church's right to decide amount to if
not that public policy should be structured by the former decision and
not the latter, even if the latter is correct? Second, does the right
to enforce include a duty of subjects to pay the penalty when required?
If it does, then this is only a truncated version of the
obligation-correlative theory—one that holds that punitive and
remedial obligations, but not primary obligations, are binding. If not,
it is starkly at variance with the actual views of legal officials, who
do not think that subjects are at liberty to evade penalties if they
can.
This reaches a methodological issue in the philosophy of law. Some
consider that the character of law's authority is a matter for
descriptive analysis fixed by semantic and logical constraints of
official language and traditions of argument. Others maintain that such
analysis is impossible or indeterminate, and that we are therefore
driven to normative arguments about what legal authority should be
(see Soper 2002; Finnis 1979, 12–15). Crudely put, they think that we should
understand law to claim only the sort of authority it would be
justifiable for law to have. Such is the motivation for Friedrich
Hayek's suggestion that ‘The ideal type of law … provides
merely additional information to be taken into account in the decision
of the actor’ (Hayek 1960, 150). Hayek favours the free market, and
concludes that the nature of legal authority should be understood
analogically. The most radical position of this sort is Ronald
Dworkin's. He prefers what he calls a “more relaxed”
understanding of legal authority (Dworkin 1986: 429). Others have
argued that the pre-emptive notion of authority is unsatisfactory
because it is too rigid (e.g., Perry 1989). Dworkin's objection runs much
deeper. His position is not that law communicates only a weaker form of
guidance; it is that law is not to be understood as trying to
communicate anything at all. A subject considering his legal duties is
not listening to the law; he is engaged in “a conversation with
oneself,” and is “ trying to discover his own intention in
maintaining and participating in that practice” (Dworkin 1986,
58). On this view there is no fact of the matter about what law claims
that is independent of what each does well to regard it as
claiming.
However we resolve the methodological question, there are two
parallel normative questions:
What is the relationship between these? Some maintain that
obligation comes first: “[T]hough obligation is not a sufficient
condition for coercion, it is close to a necessary one. A state may
have good grounds in some special circumstances for coercing those who
have no duty to obey. But no general policy of upholding the law with
steel could be justified if the law were not, in general, a source of
genuine obligations” (Dworkin 1986, 191). The idea is that
merely having justice on one's side is an inadequate ground for
coercing others; one also needs a special title flowing from the moral
status of the law. (Contrast, for example, Locke's view that everyone
has an “executive power of the law of nature,” at least
outside political society (§ 13).)
Others contend that this gets the relationship backwards. First, it
is doubtful whether one could have an obligation to obey an
illegitimate regime. As Rawls says, “[A]cquiesence in, or even
consent to, clearly unjust institutions does not give rise to
obligations” (Rawls 1971, 343; but cf. Simmons 1979, 78–79). If
so, at least some conditions of legitimacy precede an obligation of
obedience. Second, there are substantive reasons for thinking we would
not have obligations to obey if the law were not already
justified in upholding its requirements “with steel.” A
legal system that could not justifiably coerce could not assure the
law-abiding that the recalcitrant will not take them for suckers.
Without being able to solve this assurance problem it would be unjust
to impose obligations on them, and unjust to demand their obedience.
Underlying this suggestion is that idea that familiar idea that
effectiveness is a necessary—but certainly not 
sufficient—condition for justified authority. (See Kelsen 1967, 46–50; cf.
Finnis 1979, 250)
It may affirm our confidence in the obligation-correlative view to
know that from earliest times philosophical reflection on political
authority has focussed on the obligation to obey. The passive
obligation of obedience is certainly not all we owe the law (Parekh 1993, 243;
Green 2003, 543–47) but many have taken it to be law's minimum demand.
This gives rise to a puzzle. As Wolff puts it: “If the individual
retains his autonomy by reserving to himself in each instance the final
decision whether to co-operate, he thereby denies the authority of the
state; if, on the other hand, he submits to the state and accepts is
claim to authority then … he loses his autonomy” (Wolff 1970,
9). Wolff resolves the dilemma in favour of autonomy, and on that basis
defends anarchism.
Some of Wolff's worries flow from the “surrender of
judgement” itself—how can it ever be rational to act
against reason as one sees it? Others flow from the fact that it is a
surrender to the law. On the first point, it is relevant to
notice that promises and contracts also involve surrender of judgement
and a kind of deference to others (see Soper 2002, 103–39), yet a rational
anarchist needs such voluntary commitments to substitute for
authoritative ordering. A principled objection to every surrender of
judgment is thus self-defeating. Moreover, there seem to be cases in
which by surrendering judgement on some matters one can secure more
time and resources for reflection and decision on things that are more
important, or with respect to which one has greater capacity for
self-direction. A partial surrender of judgment may therefore enhance
the agent's autonomy overall.
This suggests that Wolff's concern is better understood as
scepticism about whether it is justifiable to surrender one's judgment
wholesale to the law. Some philosophers have queried the
intelligibility of this doubt; they say that it is of the
nature of law that there is an obligation to obey it, at least
in its central case (Fuller 1958, 100; Finnis 1979, 14–15). Some go so far as to
conclude that it is therefore absurd to ask for any ground of
the duty to obey the law: law is that which is to be obeyed (McPherson 1967,
64). We need a way into this circle, and the best entrance is in
specifying the nature of law in a way compatible with various theories
of its nature. Three features are especially important (drawing on Hart
1994, 193–200; Raz 1990, 149–54; and Lyons 1984, 66–68.) First, law is
institutionalized: nothing is law that is not connected with
the activities of institutions such as legislatures, courts,
administrators, police, etc. Second, legal systems have a wide
scope. Law not limited to the affairs of small face-to-face groups
such as families or clans, nor does it only attend to a restricted
domain of life such as baseball. Law governs open-ended domains of
large, loosely structured groups of strangers and it regulates their
most urgent interests: life, liberty, property, kinship, etc. But
although law necessarily deals with moral matters, it does not
necessarily do so well, and this is its third central feature: law is
morally fallible. This is acknowledged by both positivists and
natural lawyers, whose slogan “an unjust law is not a law”
was never intended to assert the infallibility of law.
The question of political obligation, then, turns on whether there
is are moral reasons to obey the mandatory requirements of a
wide-ranging, morally fallible, institutionalized authority. This
obligation purports to be comprehensive in that it covers all legal
obligations and everyone whose compliance the law requires. It is not
assumed to bind come what may, though it is to be one genuine
obligation among others. Some philosophers also consider that it should
bind people particularly to their own states, i.e., the states of which
they are residents or citizens, and that an argument that could not
show that one had more stringent duties to obey one's own country than
a similarly just foreign one would be in that measure deficient
(Simmons 1979, 31–35; Green 1988, 227–28). Finally, it is common ground the
obligation exists only when a threshold condition of justice is
met.
A theory of political obligation is non-voluntarist if its
principles justifying legal authority do not invoke the choice or will
of the subjects among its reasons for thinking they are bound to obey.
Three such arguments have some currency.
“[W]hy should I obey the government is an absurd question. We
have not understood what it means to be a member of political
society if we suppose that political obligation is something we might
not have had and that therefore needs to be justified”
(McPherson 1967, 64). On this view, the many attempts to find independent
moral principles to justify obligation are not merely mistaken, they
are conceptually confused; they exhibit a “symptom of
philosophical disorder” (Pitkin 1965, 75). The matter is resolved by
attending to the meaning of “member”. It is hard to find
philosophers who still think that normative questions can be resolved
by linguistic considerations, but there are, surprisingly, some who do
think that this argument strategy is essentially correct. Ronald
Dworkin, for instance, claims, “Political association, like
family or friendship and other forms of association more local and
intimate, is itself pregnant of obligation” (Dworkin 1986, 206).
His obstetrical theory is parthenogenetic: politics is a form of
association that in itself bears obligations. Having a virgin
birth, obligation has no father among familiar moral principles such as
consent, utility, fairness, and so on. We justify it by showing how it
is a kind of “associative” or “communal”
obligation constitutive of a certain kind of community.
People in organic associations do often feel obligations to other
members, but we normally seek an independent ground to justify them
(see Simmons 1996; Wellman 1997). One version focuses on the value of
obligations attached to social roles. The duty to obey is there
explained by giving an account of the social role involved, for
instance “member”, “citizen,” or
“subject”. It is important to see that there is not one
problem here, but two. There is a matter of content: what does
the political role actually require? And there is the matter of
validity: what makes these requirements binding on its
occupants? (See Hardimon 1994.) But these are intimately linked: one cannot
solve the second independently of the first. There is no
general answer to the question why role duties bind—it
depends on the roles and the duties.
Dworkin, in contrast, believes we do generally have “a duty to
honour our responsibilities under social practices that define groups
and attach special responsibilities to membership,” (Dworkin
1986, 198) provided the group's members think that their obligations
are special, personal, and derive from a good faith interpretation of
equal concern for the well-being of all its members. In truth, however,
these conditions are not a matter of the members’ actual feelings
and thoughts—they are interpretive properties that we would do
well to impute to them (201). Even so, why do they ground a duty of
obedience as opposed to a duty of respectful attention, or a duty to
apologize for cases of non-compliance? Certainly obedience is not part
of Dworkin's paradigm virtue of “fraternity”—mutual
aid and support are the normal obligations there. Indeed, the classical
associative model for political authority was not fraternity, but
paternity, against which Locke argued so decisively. This is
not to deny that we owe something to those decent associations of which
we find ourselves non-voluntary members—but we do need some
further argument to determine exactly what this amounts to.
A more typical non-voluntarist theory says authority may be
instrumentally justified as a way to help its subjects do what they
ought.
Raz calls this the “normal justification thesis” (NJT).
It is satisfied only if the authority bases his directives on the
reasons which apply to the subjects (the “dependence
thesis”) and if the subjects take his directives as pre-emptive
reasons, displacing their own judgments about what is to be done on the
merits (the “pre-emption thesis”). Three points need
emphasis. First, a normal justification is not a unique justification,
but one typical to a variety of practical and theoretical authorities.
At its core idea is that justified authorities help their subjects do
what they already have good reason to do; it does not apply when it is
more important for the subjects to decide for themselves than to decide
correctly. Second, although NJT has similarities to
rule-utilitarianism, it is not a utilitarian theory: that requires
further commitments about what sort of reasons are relevant and how
about indirect policies may be pursued. Third, NJT does not require
valid authority to promote the subject's self-interest. For example, if
there are investments it is immoral to make (e.g., in countries that
tolerate slavery) then a consultant's recommendations merit deference
only they steer one away from those investments: it is not enough (or
permissible) for them to maximize one's financial returns. NJT is
governed by whatever reasons correctly apply to the case, not
reasons of which the agent is aware, or which serve his self-interest
narrowly understood.
Something like this does capture the way we justify deferring to
expert opinions of scientists or to the advice of doctors who know
better than we do. Were we to try to second-guess them we could not
profit from their expertise. To accept them as authoritative therefore
requires deferring to their judgement, and allowing that to displace
our own assessment of what is to be done. This is not blind
deference: the subject remains attentive to higher-order considerations
that determine whether the authority is trustworthy, acting in good
faith, and so on. And the deference may be limited in scope and subject
to checks of its effectiveness over time.
How far do such considerations apply to political authority? They do
to some extent. A legislator or administrator may know better than most
what is to be done to preserve the salmon fisheries or to slow global
warming. But some scientists may know as well, or better, and in some
areas there are be no criteria of relevant expertise at all. The only
prospect of broadening NJT's reach therefore rests on its application
to integrate the activity of many people who must cooperate but who
disagree on these matters and more. If authority is able to create or
support valuable schemes of social cooperation, subjects may be
justified in obeying even though that is not the scheme they would
themselves have chosen. It is sometimes argued that this is so in
general “co-ordination problems” and in situations in which
individual reasoning might be self-defeating, for instance, in
prisoner's-dilemmas.
It is uncertain how far deference to authority is really needed
here. The extent to which people need authoritative guidance to secure
cooperation varies with context. And law can solve some problems of
cooperation simply providing information or by restructuring incentives
(see Green 1988, 89–157). That suggests that NJT covers only a narrow
range of legitimate state activity. But in another way it seems too
broad. We do not think that political authority should be acknowledged
whenever the rulers can better ensure conformity to right
reason. There are matters that are too trivial or otherwise
inappropriate for political regulation. Perhaps some sort of threshold
condition must first be met, and NJT should be confined to issues of
general social importance.
Arguments based on necessity may be motivated by just that worry. On
this account, it is not enough that someone be able to help others
track right reason, he must be able to do so within a certain domain.
Locke thought the most urgent question for political philosophy was to
“distinguish exactly the business of civil government”
(Locke 1982, 26), to determine what things are properly Caesar's. Some
contemporary writers take a related view. Elizabeth Anscombe argues
that the domain of authority is the domain of necessary social
functions. “If something is necessary, if it is, for example, a
necessary task in human life, then a right arises in those whose task
it is, to have what belongs to the performance of the
task” (Anscombe 1978, 17). There are, then, two questions: What tasks
are necessary? What rights are needed to perform them?
Answers to the first question range widely. George Klosko ties it to
the production of “presumptively beneficial public goods,”
goods that any one would want and which require social co-operation to
produce (Klosko 1992). Others are more extravagant. Finnis thinks law
must provide a comprehensive framework for realizing a list of
supposedly self-evident values including life, knowledge, play and
religion (Finnis 1979, 81–97, 154–56). An influential intermediate answer
ties political authority to the realm of justice and grounds obedience
in a natural duty: “This duty requires us to support and comply
with just institutions that exist and apply to us. It also constrains
us to further just arrangements not yet established, at least when this
can be done without too much cost to ourselves.” (Rawls 1971,
115)
The basis of Rawls's theory in necessity becomes evident if we
explore what it might be for a just institution to “apply to
us.” A.J. Simmons persuasively argues that an Institute for the
Advancement of Philosophers cannot benefit us, however justly, and then
demand that we pay its dues (Simmons 1979, 148). He proposes therefore
that a normatively relevant sense of application requires that one
accept the benefits—but that is to transform a natural
duty account into a weakly voluntarist one like fairness. (See below,
§ 5.3.) Jeremy Waldron diagnoses the force of such counterexamples
as deriving from the fact that, although operating justly, the
Institute is not something whose activities are required by
justice: they are optional, not necessary (Waldron 1993). This
seems correct; but if we then restrict the domain of authority to
necessity we will again leave many legal obligations behind. Many of
the activities of a legitimate government are optional. It must save us
from the state of nature, but law's ambitions are more expansive than
that. It also does things that are permissible but not necessary:
enacts residential zoning, declares official languages, establishes
national holidays, supports education and the arts, and creates honors.
And in the service of what is mandated by necessity, law draws lines
and sets standards that are themselves merely permissible—an
age of consent, an acceptable level of risk-imposition, formalities for
wills and marriages, and so on—what Aquinas called
“determinations” of just requirements. The content of all
this valuable and permissible state action is underdetermined by the
theory of legitimacy and is grounded in considerations other than
necessity. So necessitarian arguments leave unsupported 
some—possibly a lot—of valuable state action. Moreover, it is
unclear what is necessary for law to fulfil its socially
necessary functions. Anscombe refers to the right to have what is
necessary for the role, but what is that? Hume thought it obvious that
political society could not exist without “exact obedience of the
magistrate” but this is surely empiricism without the facts.
Everyone knows that a legal system can, and does, tolerate a certain
amount of harmless disobedience and that this in no way hampers its
capacity to function.
“The Right of all Sovereigns,” says Hobbes in
Leviathan (chap. 42) “is derived originally from the
consent of everyone of those that are to be governed.” In the
Second Treatise (§ 95) Locke says: “Men being
… by nature all free, equal, and independent, no one can be put
out of this estate and subjected to the political power of another
without his own consent.” The ideological influence of such
theories in the struggles for representative government and
decolonisation was immense. Few now deny, in the words of the American
Declaration of Independence, that all governments “deriv[e] their
just powers from the consent of the governed.” It is perhaps not
too much to say that consent has become the normal justification for
political authority.
But whose consent, and to what? Not the consent of our ancestors,
for such an “original” contract, as it was called in the
seventeenth century, can have no authority over those who did not agree
to it. A voluntarist theory requires the actual consent of each
subject. But this cannot mean consent to every law or application
thereof. The evident absurdity of that idea leads Finnis to declare
consent “intrinsically implausible”: “the need for
authority is, precisely, to substitute for unanimity in determining the
solution of practical co-ordination problems which involve or concern
everyone in the community” (Finnis 1979, 248). Consent theorists,
however, have not generally proposed the principle as a solution to
“practical co-ordination problems.” Unanimous consent would
be a very bad decision rule: the transaction costs would be
enormous and hold-outs could block many desirable policies. Consent is
more commonly proposed as a part of the constitution rule that
sets up the political community in the first place. Consent theorists
reject, therefore, Kant's idea in the Metaphysics of Morals
(§ 44) that the mere capacity of A to violently affect
B's interests is sufficient licence for anyone to subject them
both to a regime of positive law. For consent theorists, an
A-B interaction does not become a candidate for
authoritative regulation until A and B agree to unite
under one jurisdiction. We cannot ask which or what sort of authority
is justified over both the Kurds and the Shiites in Iraq until we
answer why there should be one at all. Beyond this foundational role,
however, consent theorists take different views of whether it has any
further significance in policy. Locke thinks it is then displaced by
majority rule by delegates as the natural procedure for most decisions;
for Rousseau, this is but another form of slavery.
Even in its confined role, however, consent has attracted powerful
criticism. (For a good survey see Simmons 1979, 57–100; for a qualified
defence see Beran 1987.) These focus on the questions of whether it is in
fact given and, if given, whether it would bind. Consent is not mere
consensus or approval; it is a performative commitment that undertakes
an obligation through the very act of consenting. Like other promises
and oaths, however, there are limits to its validity. We need to ensure
that consent is not defeated by mistake, coercion or duress. It must
also respect substantive limits on its validity. Locke argues that one
cannot consent to be killed, and thus not to slavery, and thus not to
anything tantamount to slavery, including absolute government. One can
imagine a similar argument to the conclusion that political consent
must be revocable. But as we build in all these validity conditions the
commitment itself seems to be doing less and less work. Pitkin thinks
that in Locke's version it becomes “essentially
irrelevant” (Pitkin 1965, 57). Consent is saved from irrelevance only
if we can explain why we also value a power to bind ourselves
to obey. David Hume could conceive no reason at all: promise-keeping is
an “artificial virtue” serving the public good, just like
obedience to law. So long as law is tolerably legitimate—and
Hume is prepared to give it a very wide berth—a promise to obey
is redundant, for any plausible answer to the question why we are bound
by the promise would “immediately, without any circuit, have
accounted for our obligation to allegiance;” “being of like
force and authority, we gain nothing by resolving the one into the
other” (Hume 1985, 481). A consent theory need not, however,
“resolve” allegiance into a promise—there may also
be non-promissory conditions on obedience—but it must explain
why it should be conditional on it. Three sorts of arguments have been
popular. First, there are instrumental reasons for wanting deliberate
control over the liability to legal duties. In political authority,
where the stakes are as high as they come, the power to give and
withhold consent serves an ultimate protective function beyond what we
could expect from the fallible institutions of limited government.
Second, consent enables people to establish political allegiances by
creating new political societies or joining existing ones without
awaiting the gradual emergence of bonds of community and reciprocity;
consent is an immediate passport to “perfect membership” in
a commonwealth. (Locke: § 119). Third, though consent is defined
by its performative character, ancillary non-performative features
naturally accompany it: consent also expresses the acceptability, or at
least tolerability, of the government. This may mark consented-to
rulers as salient from among a number of possible contenders, and it
may signal that they stand a good chance of being effective, which is
itself a necessary condition for the justification of any political
authority.
It is open to doubt how persuasive such considerations are. But
matters are even worse, for it is in any case clear that many people
have done nothing that counts as giving such consent. Even freely given
oaths of office and naturalization do not usually amount to a general
commitment to obey the law (Greenawalt 1987). Other acts are even less
plausibly so interpreted. Plato's Crito introduces the idea
that continued residence counts as some kind of tacit consent to obey,
and Locke extends that to include any enjoyment of the benefits of
government—“whether it be barely travelling freely on the
highway” (§ 199). Whatever the moral relevance of these
facts, they do not count as consent, for people do these things without
imagining they will create obligations, and they do them in
circumstances in which they have no feasible alternative. Other
non-promissory actions, for example voting or participating in
politics, fare no better: many do not vote, and few who do regard it as
undertaking any duties at all. Perhaps we can say that if
people consent, and if the relevant legitimacy conditions are
fulfilled, then they will have a duty to obey the law. That is
obviously a far cry from establishing law's claims.
Consent supposes that obligations of obedience must be somehow
undertaken by acts the point of which is to assume an obligation. There
are weaker forms of voluntarism. Some relationships that one may freely
enter (or at least exit) are marked by obligations. In essence, this is
a voluntarist version of the theory of constitutive obligations
considered above in Section 4.1, and it offers the most plausible
interpretation of arguments from gratitude (Walker 1988; Klosko 1989) or
community.
On such views we are bound to obey because that is an appropriate
expression of emotions we have good reason to feel: gratitude to the
law for all that it gives us, respect for its good-faith efforts to
guide us, or a sense of belonging to the community. In the last case,
the relationship cannot merely be that of being a subject of the law;
it must be something like membership in the community whose law it is
(Raz 1979, 250–61). Friendship provides an analogy. People choose their
friends, but not in order to have obligations to them. A flourishing
friendship does, however, bring obligations in train. In addition to
the familiar reasons for fulfilling its duties of support, honesty,
reciprocity etc., it is plausible to suppose that doing so also
expresses and is known to express loyalty to one's friends, and that
that gives additional support to the duties. Similarly, suggests Raz,
“A person identifying himself with his society, feeling that it
is his and that he belongs to it, is loyal to his society. His loyalty
may express itself, among other ways, in respect for the law of the
community” (1979, 259). This is bound to be a somewhat loose 
fit—the institutional and bureaucratic structure of law means that
it will generally be an imperfect expression of the society it
regulates. And, as Raz notes, expressive arguments apply only to those
who actually stand in this special relation; they do not show that it
is obligatory to do so, nor that it is obligatory to express one's
loyalty in this way rather than some other. Moreover, it is unclear why
we should even think that obedience is a fitting expression of this
sort of relationship in the first place. Is this a well-entrenched
convention? Is it somehow normatively appropriate? Loyalty to one's
friends is not normally shown in obeying them. Why should
loyalty to the community be any different?
Perhaps the most influential voluntarist argument grounds political
obligation in neither performative nor expressive acts, but in a
bare willingness to benefit from a system of mutual restraint. This is
the territory of fairness, or fair play, as articulated by Hart (1955)
and elaborated by Rawls (1964). The core idea is that those who accept
the benefits of fair scheme of cooperation have a duty to do their
allotted part under that scheme: if others obey the law to our benefit,
we owe them a duty not to take a free-ride on their compliance.
The idea that law's benefits must be accepted may not be a
necessary condition for the validity of all obligations of fair play
(Arneson 1982; Klosko 1992), but it is essential for any that aspire to be
consistent with political voluntarism. If a scheme of cooperation
simply thrusts benefits on people as the unavoidable fall-out of the
cooperative activity of others—even very valuable 
benefits—any duty of compliance would have to be justified by one of the
non-voluntary principles considered above. Adding the acceptance
condition does not of course reduce fairness to consent: those
who jump subway turnstiles do not mean to assume an obligation to pay
the fare. But it does renders fairness vulnerable to the very same
objection: not enough people perform the relevant action. The
central benefits of an effective legal system, including security and
order, are all the sort of non-excludable public goods that Simmons
(1979, 138–39) calls “open benefits.” They can be avoided
only at great cost, and in many cases not at all. What's more, not all
cases of disobedience can plausibly be represented as free-riding, and
obligations of fairness track the jurisdiction of the law only in a
rough-and-ready way. Fairness will give rise to obligations whenever
there is a beneficial practice of mutual constraint and accepted
benefit—it matters not whether this is sustained by a law
claiming jurisdiction over the subjects.
As the above survey suggests, there are plausible objections to each
of the dominant justifications for the duty to obey the law. (For
helpful assessments of other theories, see also Wasserstrom 1963; Smith 1973; and
Simmons 1979.) Each leaves significant gaps in the authority of law.
This is not an impossibility proof—only anarchists like Wolff
think that justified political authority is impossible. But neither is
it just the familiar problem that philosophical theories provide only a
rough fit to our casuistic judgements. It is that the typical
justifications for authority are all sensitive to context in a way that
the claims of law are not. To put it another way, law itself purports
to determine how far and in what contexts its authority binds.
The resulting scepticism about the obligation to obey has given rise
to a debate about its significance (Senor 1987; Gans 1992, 90). As in other areas
of philosophy, some treat sceptical conclusions as a reductio
against whatever premises seem to support them; others are inclined to
follow the arguments where they lead. In assessing the significance of
scepticism, one needs to bear in mind several points: