The position of many important writers on legal rights is difficult
to ascertain on this point, because it is not one they addressed
directly. Hohfeld (1919), for example, confined his discussion entirely
to legal rights and never mentioned moral ones. Hart did write about
moral rights (1955, 1979) as well as legal ones (1973, 1994), but not in a
way that allows for much direct comparison. Bentham (1970 [1782]) wrote
extensively about the analysis of legal rights, but, notoriously,
thought that the idea of natural moral rights was conceptual
nonsense.
Mill (1969 [1861]), whilst endorsing Bentham’s overall Utilitarian
position, did not share his scepticism about moral rights, and seems to
have thought that moral and legal rights were, analytically,
closely connected — “When we call anything a person’s right, we
mean that he has a valid claim on society to protect him in the
possession of it, either by the force of law, or by that of education
and opinion.” Those things which ought to be so protected were,
in his view, those which concerned the fundamentals of human
well-being, and were therefore a sub-set of those things which a person
ought to have on grounds of utility.
Whilst not necessarily sharing Mill’s view about all rights being
related to fundamentals of well-being, many contemporary writers (e.g.,
Raz 1984a, 1984b; Wellman 1985, 1995) agree that the core concept
of a right is something common to law and morality, though some have
argued that jurisprudential writers, particularly Hohfeld, provide a
better and clearer starting-point for general analysis than previous
writers in moral philosophy. The view that the core concept is common
to both would appear to be consistent with maintaining that,
nevertheless, in terms of justification in practical reasoning, legal
rights should be based on moral ones.
Not all philosophers have agreed that rights can be fully analysed.
White (1984), for example, argued that the task is impossible because
the concept of a right is as basic as any of the others, such as duty,
liberty, power, etc (or any set of them) into which it is usually
analysed. He agreed, however, that rights can in part be explained by
reference to such concepts. White’s approach, based largely on close
linguistic analysis, has remained something of a minority one.
The remaining approaches can be categorised in different ways, but a
main division is between those who think that rights are singled out by
their great weight as practical reasons, and those who think that
rights are not special in this regard, but instead are to be analysed
into duties, permissions, powers, etc, or some combination of these,
perhaps with the addition of other conditions.
Dworkin (1973, 1975, 1981, 1986), in one formulation of his theory of
rights, was a proponent of the first view. According to that, rights
enjoy a categorial priority in weight over any other consideration
which is not itself right-based.  Clearly, it is true of many legal
systems that constitutional rights, or some of them, should outweigh
any other consideration which is not itself derived from a
constitutional right. But that seems to be primarily because of the
constitutional status of the right. Both in law and in morality many
rights are of a rather trivial nature. In morality such rights can,
arguably, sometimes be justifiably outweighed even by considerations
of personal convenience (cf. Raz 1978).  Similarly in law it seems
that many prima facie rights can be defeated by what the
court regards as considerations of the general interest. Dworkin’s
(1977) response to the latter type of criticism was to argue that, on
closer inspection, the consideration opposing the right can be seen as
itself an instantiation of another general right. But this depends on
the contentious claim that the only considerations that courts can
justifiably rely upon are pre-existing rights. The objection has also
been raised that, as a general theory of the nature of rights, it
risks being self-defeating, since any consideration whatsoever can
then be argued to be right-based, which leaves rights with no special
role in practical reasoning. (For discussion of Dworkin’s theory,
including his other formulations, see Yowell 2007.)
Most writers have, instead, favoured the view that rights are to be
analysed into other, more basic, notions, principally those of duty,
permission and power, with perhaps the addition of other criteria. This
means that not all rights will be of great importance. Their importance
will vary with the strength of the grounds for the duty, permission or
power. Before looking more closely at these accounts, another point
should be mentioned. Theorists are divided between those who think that
rights are, as it were, the ‘reflex’ of the duty,
permission or power, and those who think that the right has a priority
over them. The question is whether the duty, etc, grounds the right, or
the right the duty. Most older writers (e.g., Bentham, Austin, Hohfeld,
Kelsen) appear to have adhered to the first view, whilst more recent
writers (e.g., MacCormick, Raz, Wellman) take the second. The second
view has the implication that the force of a right is not necessarily
exhausted by any existing set of duties etc, that follow from it, but
may be a ground for creating new duties as circumstances change. This
latter view seems to accord better at least with the way that
constitutional legal rights work.
Amongst those who think that rights can be analysed, at least in
part, into duties, permissions and powers, there is a further main
division. Some think that the essence of a right is to have choice or
control over the corresponding duty etc. Others think that the main
thing is that one’s interests are protected by the duty etc. Hart and
Wellman are amongst the proponents of the first view, Bentham, Austin,
MacCormick and Raz are amongst those maintaining some version of the
second.
An outline of Hart’s (1973) theory may be given as an
illustration of the first view. According to Hart, someone (call him
‘X’) may be a legal right-holder primarily in one
of two ways. First of all, X may have a bilateral permission
to perform some action, i.e., X is permitted both to
A and to not-A (together with there being some
prohibitions on others interfering). Secondly, someone else may have a
duty (e.g., to pay X £10) over which X has
control, primarily by waiving or enforcing it. Since X has a
choice in each case that explains why he is referred to as being a
right-holder. One difficulty about this kind of theory is to explain
our apparent reference to rights when there is no choice, eg when one
is not only entitled to vote in elections, but also obliged by law to
do so.
Two different versions of the interest theory can be seen,
corresponding to the question about the priority of rights mentioned
above.
According to older versions, such as those of Bentham and Austin,
X is a right-holder because he is the beneficiary, or intended
beneficiary, of another’s duty, or perhaps of the absence of a duty on
him which the law might otherwise have imposed. For example, if
X has a right to be paid £10 by Y, then this is
explained by saying that Y has a duty, the performance of
which (handing over the £10) is intended to benefit X. One
problem about this theory is to explain why the criminal law, although
it may in part exist to protect moral rights, is not generally regarded
as directly conferring legal rights on individual citizens, despite the
fact that they are intended beneficiaries of the corresponding duties.
(There may, of course, in many systems be parallel civil law rights,
but that is a contingent matter. See more on this point below.)
A more modern version of this theory was proposed by MacCormick
(1977), who argued that a right-holder was the intended beneficiary of
a specific share of benefit, rather than just being a generalised
beneficiary of the rules. However, even with this amendment, it remains
difficult to explain third party rights under contracts. Suppose
X and Y enter into a contract which imposes duties on
each of them with the intention that performance of these will benefit
Z. According to the theory, Z must (conceptually) be
a legal right-holder. But it is in fact an entirely contingent matter
as to whether Z is or not. Some legal systems recognise
Z as having rights in such a situation and others do not. In
Britain, for example, Scots Law long recognised such rights under
certain conditions, but English Law did not until the position was
changed by statute in 1999.
More recent versions, such as those of Raz (1984a, 1984b), take a
different tack altogether. According to them, to say that X
is a right-holder is to say that his interests, or an aspect of them,
are sufficient reason for imposing duties on others either not to
interfere with X in the performance of some action, or to
secure him in something. This, inter alia, gets round the
third-party rights’ problem, because the explanation is simply that it
is all a question of whether the system recognises the interests of
Z as part of the reason for X and Y’s
duties, or whether it is only the interests of X and
Y. Raz (1997) has emphasised that this does not mean that only
the right-holder’s interests are relevant to the question of whether
something should be recognised as a right. Considerations of the
general or common interest may be relevant too.
Whilst discussion has continued on the relative merits of the choice
and benefit theories, and ever more sophisticated versions of each
have been proposed (see, for example, the three-sided debate in
Kramer, Simmonds and Steiner 1998, Kramer 2010, Vrousalis 2010, Van
Duffel 2012), some writers have attempted to offer different, or
combined, approaches.  Wenar (2005) argues for what he calls a
‘several functions’ theory.  According to this, any ‘Hohfeldian
incident’ (or combination of them) which grants exemption, discretion
or authorisation, or entitles the holder to protection, provision or
performance is a right.  Kramer and Steiner (2007) claim, however,
that this is really no more than another version of benefit theory,
and not superior to existing ones.  Another proposal is made by
Sreenivasan (2005), which is intended to apply only to claim-rights
and not to other varieties of right.  The essence of it is
that Y has a claim-right that X perform an action if
and only if Y’s measure of control over X’s duty
matches (by design) the measure of control that advances Y’s
interests on balance.  This, too, is criticised by Kramer and Steiner
(2007) on the basis that it would include the case in which someone
has, on the basis of his own interests, deliberately not been granted
any such power at all.  Yet this, they claim, would lead to a highly
implausible expansion of the class of those who would have to be
regarded as right-holders.
A number of subsidiary questions can be raised.
Firstly, should rights be analysed solely in terms of duties on
others (together with some other condition), or do we need to bring in
also other concepts, such as permission, power and immunity? Hohfeld
thought that, strictly speaking, something was a legal right only if it
corresponded to a duty on another, but he argued that legal usage was
often confusing because the reference was really to one of the other
concepts. Thus, in his view, the law sometimes also said that
X had a right if (1) he had a permission to A, (2) he
had a legal power to A, (3) Y had no legal power to
affect him.
While some (e.g., d’Almeida 2016), have maintained that Hohfeld was
correct to assert that liberty-rights involve only permissions, others
(e.g., Waldron 1981 and Raz 1984a, 1984b) have been exponents of the
view that rights should be seen as giving rise only to duties. Hart
(1973), following Bentham, had argued that a liberty-right should be
seen as a bilateral permission to A together with duties on
others not to interfere with X’s A-ing. Waldron and
Raz argue that it is an important feature of rights that they entitle
the right-holder to do not only that which is right, but also (within
bounds) that which is wrong. This they regard as best explained by
seeing rights as imposing only duties of non-interference on others,
not as granting the right-holder a permission. (See also Herstein
2012, 2014.) An alternative view (Campbell 1997) is to see some
rights as indeed granting permissions, but to point out that in
granting a legal permission the law is not saying that there may not
be reasons against performing the action, only that (within the bounds
of the permission) the law will act as if there were not.
Powers raise a different issue. Many writers (e.g., Hohfeld 1919, Hart
1973) have considered them as being a type of right. By a legal power
we mean the ability to bring about changes in legal rules or their
application (plus some further conditions). Usually, of course, the
lawmaker in granting a power also grants a right to exercise it, but
occasionally this is not so, for example where the exercising of the
right would itself be a crime or a civil wrong. In English Law, for
example, until the position was recently changed by statute, a thief
had, in certain special circumstances, the legal power to pass good
title in the goods he had stolen to a third party, even though by doing
so he committed a civil, and possibly also a criminal, wrong. This
seems to indicate that powers should not be thought of as being rights
themselves.
Powers also illustrate a general problem about the analysis of legal
rights, and arguably of rights in general. Namely that of whether an
element should be seen as part of the very essence of the concept of a
right, or whether it is merely an element in that which is
(contingently) its content, i.e., that which there is a right to do or
have.
Relatedly, of the four fundamental types of rights which Hohfeld
claimed to identify, immunities raise problems, though somewhat
different ones. An immunity arises when Y has no power to
change X’s legal position. But is an immunity itself a right
or is it simply a means of protecting a right, i.e., by making it
immune from removal or alteration? As with powers, views have differed
about this.
There has been much dispute amongst philosophers as what to kinds of
entities can be right-holders. Corresponding pretty much to the general
dispute about the very nature of rights, some have argued that any
entity which would benefit from the performance by others of legal
duties can be a right-holder; others that it has to be an entity which
has interests; others that it has to be an entity capable of exercising
some kind of control over the relevant legal machinery. And there are
variants of all these positions.
There has to be a sense in which legal systems can confer rights on
such entities as they please. This is because it has long been
recognised that legal systems can regard as legal persons such entities
as they please. In England, for example, ‘the Crown’ has,
for centuries, been regarded as a legal entity, although what this
means in terms of office-holders, far less the actual human beings who
occupied those offices, has changed greatly over that time. Likewise,
all modern societies recognise the legal existence as persons of
companies or corporations and frequently of such entities as trade
unions, government departments, universities, certain types of
partnerships and clubs, etc.
One of the most contentious areas in recent years has been whether
young children, the severely mentally ill, non-human animals, areas of
endangered countryside, etc, can properly be regarded as legal
right-holders. Clearly anyone who has locus standi before a
court must be a holder of some rights within the system. But it does
not seem to follow automatically that an entity which does not, or
which is physically or mentally incapable of bringing a legal action,
is not thereby a right-holder. For it may be the intention of the
system that the interests of that entity should be represented by
another person. Given then, that all these entities may be protected by
law, and that someone can bring some kind of legal action to ensure
that those duties are enforced, when would we say that the entity
itself is a right-holder and when not?
The answer will often turn upon whether one embraces an interest- or
a choice-theory of rights. MacCormick (1976), for example, argued that
any theory of rights which could not accommodate children’s rights must
be deficient, and this was a reason, in his view, for adopting an
interest theory. Wellman (1995), on the other hand, claims that to
assert that very young children or the severely mentally ill can have
legal rights is to distort the concept of a right, since they lack the
relevant control of the legal machinery. Instead, he argues, the
relevant rights should be seen as belonging only to those who can bring
the relevant actions on their behalf. For example, in his view a very
young child would not have a right not to be negligently injured by the
conduct of another. Rather, it would be the case that the child’s
parent had a right that their child not be negligently injured. One
difficulty about this position appears to be that it does not easily
square with the relevant remedial rights (e.g., to damages) that the
law would recognise. In this example the law would clearly compensate
the child’s loss in being injured, not the parent’s loss in their child
being injured (though the latter might be a separate ground of action
in some systems).
The issue here is: whether there are any fundamental aspects of rights
which are exclusive to, or at least more important in, legal systems,
as opposed to morality. 
Five particular sub-issues may be raised here.
Remedial rights are those which arise because of a breach of a primary
one. Clearly they arise also outside the law, for example a duty to
apologise or make amends even if there is no legal obligation to do
so. But legal remedial duties are generally more precise, and, just by
the nature of law, institutionalised.
It is one of the main functions of legal systems to provide remedies
for breach (or sometimes anticipated breach) of the primary rights
which they confer. So if someone is injured by the negligence of
another there will usually arise a remedial right to damages. If he is
killed there may arise in members of his family an independent right to
compensation, and so on. Other types of remedial right can include
those for court orders requiring the party at fault to execute, or
refrain from, some particular course of action, very often that which
they had a duty to do, or to refrain from, under the primary right.
Such rights are often very complex in the detail. For example the
measure of damages may be different if the wrongful act is a
tort/delict, as opposed to a breach of contract. Likewise, in many
systems, some remedies must be granted as a matter of right whilst
others are at the discretion of the court. By way of illustration of
the remedies in the two British legal systems, reference may be made to
Lawson (1980) and Walker (1974).
Usually remedial rights will themselves have further remedial rights
attached, for example, to have the court impose a more coercive order,
perhaps with the threat of a criminal or quasi-criminal sanction, or to
have a person’s assets frozen or confiscated, in the event, for
example, that someone has failed to pay damages previously awarded by
the court. The details of these further remedial rights vary from
system to system.
A related, more controversial, point is as to whether criminal, as
opposed to civil, law confers any legal rights on the citizens
protected by it. The orthodox view is that it does not, although there
may well be a parallel civil right. Take the case of someone who is
wrongfully assaulted. In most legal systems this will be both a crime
and a tort/delict. The civil law clearly gives a remedial right, eg. to
sue for damages. But since, in most jurisdictions, it is mainly (and
sometimes exclusively) the state which decides whether to prosecute for
the criminal aspect, the more usual view is that the citizen has no
legal right corresponding to the criminal aspect.
The issue is often complicated, legally, by the absence of clear
indication from the legislature as whether it intended, by a particular
statute, to create only a crime or also to confer civil law rights on
citizens. A further complication can be that criminal courts sometimes
exercise a quasi-civil function (e.g., to make a restoration or
compensation order after a conviction for theft), and vice
versa (e.g., the power of a civil court to award punitive or
exemplary damages).
This issue is different from that of whether criminal law can act to
recognise and protect moral rights. It seems possible to suggest that
it can, since moral rights can be protected not only by legal rights,
but also by legal duties on others (without corresponding legal
rights). For example, a legal system could create a criminal offence of
harassment in order to protect a moral right to privacy, without
thereby necessarily recognising a legal right to privacy, i.e.,
something which would act as a positive reason in favour of privacy in
interpreting unclear rules, or in developing the law.
In the case of many legal rights a condition has to be satisfied for
their possession or exercise. This, in itself, does not make legal
rights different from many moral ones. Just as one has a legal right to
damages for assault only if one has been assaulted, one has a moral one
to an apology for being insulted only if one has been insulted. But
legal rights can give rise to more complicated situations, which rarely
arise in morality.
In the above examples we can say that the right-token, as opposed to
the right-type, comes into existence only when the condition for its
instantiation is triggered. But legal systems sometimes say that that
the right-token exists before one of the conditions for the exercise of
the right exists. Essentially, it is the difference between saying
“if p, X has a right to A” and
“X has a right, if p, to A.” In
the latter case the implication is that the right-token exists now, not
just that it will exist. Why should we say this? One proposed answer is
that legal systems, unlike morality, have devised sets of rules for
transmission of rights even before the triggering condition for the
exercise of the right has arrived.
Suppose, for example, that X, under his will, left a sum of
money to Y, on condition that Y had attained the age
of 21. It may be that the correct way of understanding the provision,
under the rules of the legal system, is that only if Y had
attained 21 when X died does he have a right to the money. But
it may be that the correct way of understanding it as saying that
Y, even if he has not attained 21 when X dies,
acquires a right to the money, but it is to be paid only when he is 21.
One practical difference is that in the latter case the right can pass
to Y’s successor in title if Y, having survived X,
nevertheless dies before he is 21. In the latter case, lawyers describe
the right as ‘vested.’ There can be many complex legal
rules relating to this type of situation, and they vary greatly from
jurisdiction to jurisdiction. Reference should be made to textbooks,
primarily on testamentary succession, in the jurisdiction.
A further particular kind of legal rights, or group of rights, which
has received an increasing amount of attention from theorists is that
of property rights. Discussion of this belongs more properly to that of
property itself — see the entry on
 property.
 Only some very brief points will be made here.
The first is as to whether property rights, and hence the concept of
property, are essentially legal in their nature, or whether they are
more general social phenomena which are simply recognised and protected
by law in all modern societies. According to Bentham (1843) “
… there is no natural property … property is entirely the
creature of the law.” Bentham’s argument is essentially that what
we mean by property is security of expectation in being able to keep,
sell, use, etc, objects, and only the law can guarantee such
security.
On the other hand, it is certainly possible to talk coherently about
property in a way that does not necessarily correspond to the legal
position. A parent may for example say to a young child that a certain
toy is theirs, though in law it is the parent’s. Likewise it may be
plausible to claim that concepts of ownership and possession, though
they may be less securely protected, can exist in societies which do
not have anything that we normally recognise as a fully-fledged legal
system. Some people will perhaps regard these kind of examples as
indications that the concept of property is not essentially legal,
whilst others may incline to the view that these are simply
metaphorical extensions of a concept which is legal au
fond.
Secondly, it should be noted that, in law, property rights can be of
many different types. Although ownership is obviously one of the most
important, another major class is that of possession, whether temporary
or relatively permanent. For example, the right to use a car which one
has hired for a week or to live in a certain house for the rest of
one’s life. Yet other types, falling short of either ownership or
possession, could be, for example, to walk across the local farmer’s
field or have one’s next-door neighbour maintain his side of the joint
garden wall.
The details of property rights vary from jurisdiction to jurisdiction
perhaps more than those of almost any other types of right. Further,
many jurisdictions have different rules relating to property rights in
land (and its fixtures) as opposed to all other types of entity. For
these details reference should be made to specialist books in the
jursdiction.  (Cf. Hume 1740, Book III, Section III, where he
discusses the notions that, in his view, lie behind rules of
occupation, prescription, accession and succession, by which property
may be acquired. He points out that not infrequently one cannot
sensibly claim that a rule of particular content is better than one of
somewhat different content.  The important thing is, rather,
that some legal rule on the matter exists.)
Even when considering just ownership, there is debate amongst
theorists as to how this should be analysed. Some see it as essentially
a cluster of other property rights of particular content, such as those
to possession, income, etc, whilst others see it as being basically a
structural relation between rights, content being comparatively
irrelevant. For example as being the person to whom possession or use,
even though those may presently belong to others, would ultimately
return if a certain series of contingent events were to occur.
For further discussion of property in a philosophical context see
Honore 1960, 1961; Becker 1977; Waldron 1988; Munzer 1990;
Campbell 1992; Harris 1996; and Penner 1997. (Some of these are
concerned more with the moral justification of ownership.)
The above account of rights has been written largely from the point
of view of Anglo-American law and philosophy. It should, however, be
mentioned that there is one aspect of legal rights which is to be found
amongst the European Continental writers, but of which there is no
trace in the Anglo-American tradition. That is the description of
rights as being ‘subjective’ (droits subjectifs;
subjektive Rechte).
In French and in German the same word (droit,
Recht) serves as the noun which refers both to rules of law
and the rights which are created by them, and therefore disambiguation
is required.
In French law the distinction is drawn by distinguishing between
le Droit objectif (the noun spelt with a capital according to
some, but not all, writers) and les droits subjectifs. (For
general discussion see, for example, Cornu 2014.) However, French law
seems at the same time to confine the term ‘droits
subjectifs’ to a sub-class of legal rights, namely rights
which are primarily those of private citizens, eg to make a will or
contract. The term appears not to extend to such rights as those of a
government agency owning property or a government minister making a
legal order under delegated powers.
German law seems to draw a basically similar distinction between
‘das Recht’ and ‘subjektive
Rechte’ (see, for example, Dietl & Lorenz 2016/2005).
Many of the issues relating to this are not confined to rights, but
are shared with duties and powers, so only a brief outline will be
given.
In most modern legal systems certain fundamental rights are
conferred by the constitution. This usually gives them a certain degree
of priority over competing legal considerations, but this can vary from
system to system. Sometimes constitutional rights will have an absolute
priority over any other consideration not itself based on a
constitutional right. Sometimes they will merely favour one legal
outcome rather than another, without dictating it.
Constitutions will vary, too, as to whether certain rights are
‘entrenched’ or not. Entrenchment can be absolute, in which
case the rights cannot be removed or altered by any constitutional
means (as is the case with some of the ‘basic rights’ in
the German Constitution), or it can be relative, requiring only a more
onerous procedure than that for normal legislation (as with the
Constitution of the USA.).
Constitutions will also vary on the extent to which human rights
recognised under international law or treaty are recognised in national
law. For example, in some countries in Europe, the European Convention
on Human Rights, and decisions of the European Court of Human Rights
thereon, are incorporated into national law and override any national
law inconsistent with them. In others, such as the United Kingdom, the
courts have, so far as possible, to interpret legislation to be
consistent with the Convention, but have no power to strike it down even if
they find it to be clearly inconsistent.
Other rights can be conferred by normal legislation or by common law
(ie. the tradition of judge-made law). One interesting point is that,
arguably, many legal rights are conferred by no positive law, but arise
simply from the absence of any law to the contrary. That is, it is
probably a practical necessity that every legal system has an unwritten
‘closure rule’ to the effect that whatever is not
prohibited is permitted. If some types of rights are essentially
permissions, then many such rights arise in this way. In most legal
systems my right to cross the street, for example, is of this nature.
Probably no positive law will say that I can do so, and possibly no
more general enacted right will imply it.