Leibniz conceived of metaphysics as an a priori demonstrative
science. In its ideal form metaphysics would be presented in a
manner analogous to Euclid's Elements, where
propositions are rigorously demonstrated on the basis of definitions
and axioms. The point of departure for this conception of
metaphysics is Leibniz's theory of truth. Leibniz thought
that truth consisted in conceptual containment: a proposition is
true just in case the concept of the predicate is contained in the
concept of the subject. This implies that all metaphysical truths
are conceptual truths. Leibniz thought that a concept could be
defined by analyzing it into simpler component concepts. A
rigorous demonstration, for Leibniz, consists in a “chain of
definitions” (catena definitionum) where one moves from
premises to a conclusion via the substitution of definitionally
equivalent terms (A II.i.398; L:198). In order for such
demonstrations to attain the degree of certainty found in geometry they
would need to be set forth in a purely formal system, which Leibniz
termed his “universal characteristic” (characteristica
universalis). The universal characteristic would allow one
to express in a purely formal manner the composition of any concept on
the basis of a set of primitive concepts. This system of
representation, in conjunction with a logical calculus for expressing
identity and inclusion relations among concepts, would enable one to
set forth a strictly demonstrative metaphysics (see Rutherford 1996 for
a detailed discussion of Leibniz's conception of a demonstrative
metaphysics). 
Leibniz's conception of an ideal metaphysics was incredibly
ambitious. He made impressive progress on the project during his
career, though he fell well short of attaining his lofty ideal. 
Some of Leibniz's very early texts contain stretches of argument
that are not carefully divided into axioms, definitions, propositions,
and demonstrations, but which could be reconstructed to fit that
model. Consider, for example, Leibniz's unpublished 1672–3
Confessio Philosophi (The Confession of a Philosopher). 
Towards the beginning of this work, after providing definitions of
“God,” “justice,” “love,” and
“harmony,” he demonstrates that “happiness consists
in the most harmonious state of mind” (A VI.iii.117;
CP:31). Leibniz then argues (in the voice of The
Philosopher): 
Leibniz's demonstration is slightly informal here (as one
might expect in a dialogue), but it could easily be reconstructed in
deductive form. In 1675–6 Leibniz wrote a number of unpublished
papers and notes on metaphysical topics (most of the papers are
included in Parkinson's De Summa Rerum: Metaphysical
Papers, 1675–1676). These texts include definitions of key
metaphysical concepts and many informal demonstrations of metaphysical
propositions. In the late 1670's Leibniz completed several
short drafts of works that were divided into axioms, definitions, and
propositions, although the subject matter of those works was not
strictly metaphysical (see De Obligatione Credendi A
VI.iv.c.2149–2155 and Animadversiones in schedam ex Batavis
Missam A VI.iv.c.2204–2210). In 1679 Leibniz quickly
composed a work that was closer to the ideal of a demonstrative science
of metaphysics than anything he had written to date (De
Affectibus AVI.iv.b.1410–1441). It contained a long list of
definitions of key terms along with some demonstrations of metaphysical
principles and theses. Leibniz's project continued in the
1680's in a series of extensive definitional studies of key
concepts (see e.g. De Notionibus Omnia Quae Cogitamus
Continentibus A.VI.iv.a.398–405, Definitiones Notionum
Metaphysicarum atque Logicarum A.VI.iv.a.624–630, and Tabula
Notionum Praeparanda A.VI.iv.a.630–635). By 1690 Leibniz had
developed a logical calculus for expressing identity and inclusion
relations among concepts. Around this time, however, Leibniz
began to doubt whether it was possible to discover absolutely primitive
concepts. He also did not succeed in developing his purely formal
system of representation, the universal characteristic. Without
primitive concepts or the universal characteristic it was not possible
for Leibniz to attain his ideal of a fully demonstrative
metaphysics. It is plausible to think that Leibniz could
nevertheless have completed a work that was an approximation of the
ideal, written in Latin and using non-primitive concepts. Leibniz
insisted throughout his later years that he could complete a work along
these lines. In 1710, for example, he explains to correspondent
Charles Hugony that in his (Leibniz's) recently published
Essais de théodicée he set forth one part of his
views “in an informal manner” and that he is
“thinking of [writing] a Latin work in which I will try to unfold
my entire system” (G 3:680). And in 1715 Leibniz writes to
Biber: “if God will grant me more free time, I will attempt
by means of well-formed demonstrations to impart to a good portion of
my views the certainty of Euclid's Elements”
(LBr:64). But Leibniz never did unfold his entire system, even in
this less ambitious form. 
Leibniz's account of the ideal form of metaphysics provides
the basis for one of the ways that he distinguishes between the
esoteric and the exoteric. In one of his earliest philosophical
works, a very opinionated preface to an edition of a book by Marius
Nizolius, Leibniz distinguishes between esoteric and exoteric modes of
philosophizing. In this text he claims that the notion of
demonstration provides the line of demarcation between the esoteric and
exoteric modes. In the former “all things are
demonstrated” while in the latter less rigorous forms of
argumentation are utilized (e.g., supporting a proposition by means of
an analogical argument). Works written in the exoteric mode,
though useful in various respects, are “not most rigorous, not
most exact” (A VI.ii.416). In this and other texts Leibniz
equates the esoteric mode of philosophizing with the geometrical model
of demonstration, as briefly described above. 
We have already seen that Leibniz never completed a work in
metaphysics that was in strict accordance with the geometrical model of
demonstration. It follows from this that all of Leibniz's
metaphysical writings are exoteric (in this sense), strictly
speaking! It is important to recognize, however, that there are
degrees of exoteric discourse. Works like Leibniz's famed
Monadologie, for example, are less exoteric (or more esoteric)
than Leibniz's Essais de théodicée because
they more closely approximate the geometrical ideal. 
Leibniz advocated the geometrical model of demonstration as the
ideal form for metaphysics throughout his career. He claimed
later in his career that he had all the materials at hand to compose a
work that was a close approximation of the ideal. Yet such a work
he did not compose. Why did Leibniz not make more progress on
this task, which would seem to be of such great importance? 
Leibniz often mentioned his lack of free time as the reason for not
completing an esoteric treatise. But this seems to provide an
incomplete explanation of the situation. Though his
extra-philosophical duties were numerous and burdensome, he made the
time to write quite a lot on metaphysical subjects. If he thought
that the geometrical model of demonstration was indeed the ideal form
for metaphysics, one cannot help but wonder why he did not find the
time to begin composing such a work. 
It is likely that there were several additional factors that led
Leibniz to compose exoteric rather than esoteric works. Consider
the following remarks on the distinction between exoteric and esoteric
modes of exposition in his 1704 Nouveaux Essais sur
l'entendement humain (an unpublished critical examination of
Locke's Essay Concerning Human Understanding written in
dialogue form). The remarks occur in the context of a discussion
of the precision (or lack thereof) in natural language:
In this intriguing text Leibniz (through the voice of Theophilus)
notes that few people have tried to write in the esoteric mode, and
even fewer (if any) have succeeded in the endeavor. He also
suggests several reasons that authors avoid esoteric expositions. 
Esoteric texts are both difficult to compose and unlikely to attract
readers, presumably because of their intimidating formal
apparatus. And what is the point of writing a text that no one is
going to read? This point is also emphasized by Leibniz in a 1705
letter to Burnett: “I never write anything in philosophy
that I do not treat by definitions and axioms, though I do not always
give it that mathematical air, which puts people off, for one must
speak in a familiar manner to be read by ordinary people” (G
3:302). Despite these significant drawbacks to writing in the
esoteric mode, Leibniz insists that if someone pursued this strategy
“in the right way” it would be a worthwhile project. 
In the New Essays Leibniz does not explain what doing this
“in the right way” would involve. He does, however,
provide some important additional remarks on esoteric philosophy
earlier in the text. In the Preface he points out some
key differences between his philosophy and the philosophy of
Locke:  
In these remarks Leibniz is using the term “esoteric” in a
subtly different way than he is in the earlier quote from the New
Essays. Whereas in the first text “esoteric”
designated a mode of presenting one's philosophy, in this
text it concerns the content of one's philosophy. Here he is
drawing attention to the fact that his philosophy is less
“popular” than Locke's.  Locke's philosophy is popular in
the sense that much of his philosophy accords with the deliverances of
the senses and so-called “common sense.” Leibniz's
philosophy, in contrast, is often very abstract and far removed from
ordinary opinions. The ordinary person, for example, is unlikely to
believe that bodies are aggregates of an infinity of immaterial
mind-like entities (a thesis that Leibniz affirms on a number of
occasions). This puts Leibniz at a significant disadvantage when it
comes to presenting his philosophy to the general public.  Readers are
far more likely to find favor with Locke's philosophy given that it
coheres much better with their current beliefs (see Nelson 2007 for
more on this general theme). 
In some of his letters to trusted correspondents Leibniz makes this
point in even stronger terms. Consider, for example, what Leibniz
writes to Pierre Bayle in 1702:
These are striking words. Read in isolation from his other
remarks on the exoteric/esoteric distinction, one might take this text
to suggest that Leibniz had two distinct philosophies—a false
philosophy suitable for presentation to the public, and his true
philosophy, which he only revealed to a few trusted
correspondents. But Leibniz's claim is not as radical as it
might initially seem. His point, as additional texts will make
clear, is that he thinks it is often useless and harmful to
straightforwardly present the content of his metaphysics to
the public (and even to trusted correspondents). The esoteric
character of the content of Leibniz's metaphysics made it
susceptible to being seriously misunderstood—a state of affairs
that Leibniz was deeply concerned to avoid. 
Leibniz faced what might seem like an intractable problem. He
thought that the ideal form for metaphysics was the esoteric mode of
presentation. However, he knew that few people were inclined to
read texts presented in the esoteric mode due to their daunting formal
structure. Even worse, Leibniz thought that the content of his
philosophy was such that most people were likely to misunderstand it in
fundamental ways. How then would it be possible for him to
communicate his views to the public? An answer to this question
is suggested in some unpublished remarks appended to metaphysical notes
that Leibniz wrote in 1676. I have divided it into several parts
for ease of reference:
[a] is a terse reference to the esoteric mode of presentation. 
Although this is the way that metaphysics should ideally be written, he
thinks that it would be a mistake to publish anything that
“conflicts too much with received opinions.” As we
have already seen, this is because many people will regard it as
absurd, summarily reject it, or misunderstand it entirely (possibly all
three at the same time!). Leibniz suggests a strategy of
selective omission, not to permanently hide the controversial features
of his philosophy, but as part of a longer-term strategy of preparing
his readers to understand his most esoteric doctrines. In some
cases he thinks that sympathetic readers who study his texts
“more profoundly” will be able to infer the esoteric
conclusions themselves. In [d] he suggests a complementary
strategy of supplementation. In subsequent works he can
explicitly draw the conclusions that may have only been implicit in the
initial text. Taken collectively Leibniz's remarks in this
passage suggest that the primary function of exoteric texts is to serve
as intellectual stepping stones that enable his readers to gradually
move from received opinions to esoteric doctrine.
A number of Leibniz's remarks in later texts confirm that he
conceives of exoteric texts as important preparatory works. 
Consider, for example, what he writes to Fontenelle in 1704: 
Here Leibniz explicitly claims that his choice to present various
features of his philosophy in journal articles should be understood as
part of a broad exoteric strategy to prepare his readers to understand
the “true metaphysics.” This helps shed light on some
of Leibniz's better-known remarks about the composition of his
journal articles. Consider what Leibniz writes to correspondent
Nicolas Remond in 1714:
Leibniz's strategy of adapting himself to the language of the
schools in some articles and to the language of the Cartesians in
others is one of his core exoteric strategies. He thinks that
using language that is familiar with his readers is a good way to make
his views seem not too far removed from received opinions. This
is not merely a feature of his published writings. Leibniz
tailors his writings in a similar way in his private
correspondences. For example, in his correspondence with Jesuit
theologian Bartholomew Des Bosses he frequently employs scholastic
terminology, and in his correspondence with (largely) Cartesian
physicist Burcher de Volder he sometimes presents his views with a
Cartesian slant. To use a more concrete example, early in the
correspondence with de Volder, Leibniz appeals to the doctrine of
continued divine creation, which he (Leibniz) regards as a central
Cartesian tenet. Although he initially presents the doctrine in a
way that makes it seem like this is a point of common doctrine between
him and the Cartesians, it emerges later in the correspondence that
Leibniz only affirms the doctrine in a qualified sense (for a detailed
discussion of this issue see Whipple 2011). The general strategy
here is to use language that is familiar to the reader or correspondent
and to emphasize initial points of agreement. Fine-grained
differences and esoteric implications are typically avoided at the
initial stages of engagement.
One important general point that emerges from Leibniz's
remarks in the letter to Remond is that there was more than one set of
“received opinions” that he needed to take into
account. The received opinions of a Cartesian and the opinions of
someone who was committed to a version of Aristotelian Scholasticism
would be different in fundamental respects. In the letter cited
above Leibniz speaks of another of his works, the Principes de la
Nature et de la Grace, fondés en raison (Principles of
Nature and Grace, Based on Reason), which targets yet another
audience—those who are not accustomed to the style of the
Cartesians or the scholastics. When it comes to exoteric
philosophy, one size does not fit all. Different strategies are
required for people with different backgrounds and views. 
Leibniz is sometimes described as being an eclectic
philosopher. There are different ways of understanding
eclecticism, but the basic idea is that an eclectic philosopher is one
who incorporates ideas from a wide range of sources. In certain
places Leibniz characterizes himself as proceeding along these
lines. He famously writes to Remond, for example, that:
 “I have tried to uncover and unite the truth buried and
scattered under the opinions of all the philosophical sects, and I
believe I have added something of my own that takes a few steps
forward…most sects are right in a good part of what they affirm,
but not so much in what they deny” (10 Jan 1714, G3:606–7;
L:654). It is undeniable that Leibniz read from an extraordinary
range of sources and that his thought was influenced by a number of
these texts. Although the precise nature of these influences is a
matter of scholarly controversy that cannot be engaged in this article,
it is important to note that Leibniz's exoteric strategies bear
significantly on this general topic. Recall the final sentence in
the long quotation from Leibniz's 1676 notes on exoteric
philosophy: “In this metaphysics, it will be useful for
there to be added here and there the authoritative utterances of great
men, who have reasoned in a similar way; especially when these
utterances contain something that seems to have some possible relevance
to the illustration of a view (A VI.iii.573).” Appealing to
similarities between his views and those of his predecessors is one of
Leibniz's strategies for presenting his philosophy in a way that
makes it seem to be not too far from received opinions. We need
to remain open to the possibility that Leibniz's proclamations of
continuity between his thought and the thought of his philosophical
forebears often mask subtle or not so subtle differences between their
respective views. Nuanced differences and radical implications
may be left implicit or omitted entirely in his more exoteric
works. One might put the point as follows. Leibniz is not
merely finding ideas in other philosophers and incorporating them whole
cloth into his philosophical system. In some cases, at least,
Leibniz develops distinctive philosophical views and then seeks out
similar ideas in his predecessors as a strategy for presenting his
views to the public (see Schepers 2008 and Mercer, 2001:23–59 for more
on this topic).
Leibniz first presented his philosophy to the public in an essay
titled “Système nouveau de la nature et de la
communication des substances, aussi bien que de l'union
qu'il y a entre l'âme et le corps” (New
system of the nature and communication of substances, and of the union
of the soul and body). This essay was published in 1695 in the
Journal des savants. If one were to read this essay in
isolation from Leibniz's other writings (as would have been the
case with most of his readers) one would likely have no idea that it is
an exoteric text. He prefaces the essay in the following way:
Note that Leibniz claims that his meditations are “not at all
popular” and that many people will not be able to appreciate
them. These remarks, in conjunction with the comment on
preconceived opinions, are designed to encourage the reader to
seriously consider the views that he will be presenting despite the
fact that they will be difficult to understand and will likely
diverge—perhaps significantly—from the reader's
current beliefs. What Leibniz leaves unsaid, however, is that the
Système nouveau is written according to the exoteric
mode of presentation. First, the essay is clearly not written in
accordance with the formal apparatus of definitions and demonstrations
that is required in a strictly esoteric presentation. Second, and
perhaps more significantly, Leibniz purposefully omits some of the most
controversial features of his philosophical system in this
essay. 
In order to more fully appreciate the exoteric features of the
Système nouveau it will be helpful to consider this
text in relation to Leibniz's earlier Discours de
métaphysique (Discourse on Metaphysics). Leibniz
wrote the Discours in 1686. Although it was not
published during his lifetime, this text has become one of
Leibniz's most famous works. It is best known for
presenting the complete concept theory of substance. This theory
states, roughly, that each substance has an infinitely complex complete
concept that specifies everything that will ever happen to that
substance. It is contained in the complete concept of Judas, for
example, that he betrays Jesus (along with everything else that can be
truly predicated of Judas). Leibniz was well aware that his
readers would think that the complete concept theory implies that all
of a person's actions are necessary, and thus that no person is
free. In the main text of the Discours and in its
section headings Leibniz attempts to show that Judas' betrayal of
Jesus, for example, is both contingent and free. Part of
Leibniz's strategy for showing this is his claim that
Judas' reasons for betraying Jesus “incline without
necessitating.” Leibniz's discussion of these thorny
philosophical issues is exoteric, at least to a certain degree. 
Like the Système nouveau it was not written in strict
accordance with the esoteric mode of presentation. And arguably,
Leibniz's use of language such as “inclination without
necessitation” is carefully chosen with the aim of making his
position seem closer to received views. 
The section headings of the Discours were sent to Antoine
Arnauld, a well-regarded theologian and philosopher of the day, to see
how the text would be received. Leibniz could not have been
encouraged by Arnauld's response: “I find in these
thoughts so many things which alarm me and which almost all men, if I
am not mistaken, will find so shocking, that I do not see of what use a
writing can be, which apparently all the world will reject” (G
2:15). Arnauld singled out as an example the complete concept
theory of substance, which he took to imply a “more than fatal
necessity” that would undermine the very possibility of human
freedom. Leibniz's attempts to forestall this implication
in the sections headings of the Discours had not worked as
planned, at least for Arnauld. Leibniz attempted to assuage
Arnauld's concerns in subsequent letters with moderate success.  
It is no surprise that Leibniz chose not to publish the
Discours. It is also no surprise that the complete
concept theory of substance does not make an appearance in the
Système nouveau. This does not imply that Leibniz
abandoned the complete concept theory; it might just be that he came to
realize that it was not the most effective way of introducing readers
to his philosophical system. Leibniz utilizes the exoteric
strategy of selective omission, choosing to avoid a detailed discussion
of necessity and contingency. Instead he introduces his theory of
substance by appealing to the less controversial characteristics of
unity and activity, and by trying to show how his theory could resolve
the notorious problem of mind-body interaction. Letters to some
of Leibniz's correspondents confirm that he was “testing
the waters” in the Système nouveau, and that he
would reveal more of his system to the public if it was well
received. He writes to Simon Foucher:  
Leibniz's aim was not to permanently hide his views on
contingency, fate, and freedom. By selectively omitting some of
these more controversial features of his system he increased the
likelihood that his readers would grasp the features of his system that
were presented in the Système nouveau. Once they
endorsed these parts of the system they would be more receptive to
Leibniz's views on more controversial topics. Such was
Leibniz's hope, in any case.
Leibniz returned to the topics of fate, necessity, and contingency
in the one philosophical book that he published during his lifetime,
the Essais de théodicée of 1710. It has
been suggested in the secondary literature that Leibniz's
treatment of necessity and contingency in this text is exoteric to a
significant degree (Adams, 1994:52). For example, Leibniz
frequently uses terms such as “inclination without
necessitating,” “moral necessity,” and
“hypothetical necessity” without providing strict
definitions of them. Some of Leibniz's predecessors
understood these terms in ways that implied a non-deterministic view of
human action. According to most interpretations of
Leibniz's considered views on these issues (based on a number of
texts other than the Essais de théodicée), he
was committed to a strict determinism (but not necessitarianism) about
human actions. However, by omitting definitions of terms like
“moral necessity” in the Essais de
théodicée Leibniz might have allowed readers that
were committed to non-deterministic accounts of “moral
necessity” to assume that he was using this concept in a way that
was less deterministic than his considered view allowed. This is
in keeping with Leibniz's stated strategy of not presenting
anything to the public that is too far removed from received
opinions. One way of not presenting something to the public that
is far removed from received opinions is to selectively omit it (his
strategy in the Système nouveau). Another
strategy is to present a view that is far removed from received
opinions in a way that makes it seem less removed than it actually
is. If Leibniz is utilizing this latter strategy in the
discussions of necessity and contingency in the Essais de
théodicée, it does not imply that Leibniz is trying
to permanently mislead his readers. As we have seen, he has
several general strategies for helping his reader progress to a more
rigorous understanding of his views. One of the strategies is to
provide subtle hints such that a “more profound”
examination of the text would yield a deeper understanding. By
omitting clear definitions of terms such as “moral
necessity,” however, it is not clear whether there is enough
material in the Essais de théodicée for even a
discerning reader to grasp Leibniz's views on necessity and
contingency. But Leibniz did not claim that such inferences could
always be made on the basis of an exoteric text alone. In a
number of cases his exoteric treatments need to be supplemented by a
more rigorous work. And we must keep in mind that Leibniz clearly
did conceive of the Essais de théodicée in
precisely this way (see Antognazza, 2009:481–2). He writes to
Charles Hugony shortly after its publication: 
Leibniz's remarks in this passage cohere well with the other
remarks on exoteric philosophy that we have considered thus far. 
As in the case of the Système nouveau and
Leibniz's other journal articles, he conceives of the Essais
de théodicée as a preparatory work that will help
prepare his readers for a more systematic and rigorous presentation of
his views. 
We have seen that the primary function of exoteric texts is to serve
as intellectual stepping-stones that bridge the gulf between received
opinions and esoteric truth. Leibniz utilizes a wide range of
strategies in his exoteric works, some of which we have already
discussed. Several additional strategies deserve mention as
well. Let us begin by returning to Leibniz's remarks on the
distinction between esoteric and exoteric modes of presentation in the
1670 Preface to Nizolius:
One point that we take Leibniz to be making here is that in exoteric
contexts propositions can be treated as hypotheses rather than
providing rigorous demonstrations of them. He seems to think that
in certain cases his readers will be less hostile to a novel thesis if
it is presented as a hypothesis than if it is presented as a thesis
that can be demonstrated from metaphysical principles. Although
propositions that are presented hypothetically are not demonstrated
they can be motivated and illustrated by examples, analogies,
metaphors, and stories (as he says later on). He does not,
however, claim that an esoteric work cannot contain analogies,
metaphors, and the like. It can include these things, which
“give a pleasing respite to a weary soul,” so long as they
are carefully distinguished from the rigorous demonstrations that form
the core of the work. Leibniz notes that this difference is also
observed in mathematics where demonstrations, which are rigorous and
exact, are carefully distinguished from scholia in which reasoning can
be treated in a more familiar manner.
It is striking to look at a text like the Monadologie
through the lens of Leibniz's remarks about the distinction
between esoteric and exoteric modes of presentation in the Preface to
Nizolious (and the other texts that we have considered thus far). 
The text is replete with analogies, metaphors, and other forms of
argumentation that fall well short of rigorous demonstrations. On
the assumption that Leibniz remains committed to his early account of
the distinction between the esoteric and the exoteric, it follows that
even the Monadologie, which has traditionally been taken to be
one of the definitive statements of Leibniz's mature metaphysics,
contains numerous exoteric features. As in the case of
the Système nouveau, Leibniz does not explicitly flag
the exoteric features of this work as exoteric. It is thus easy
to mistake exoteric illustration for esoteric demonstration.
Before considering a few particular examples of exoteric strategies
in the Monadologie (and other texts), we should incorporate
one of Leibniz's most revealing remarks about why his philosophy
was easy to misunderstand. In the letter to Hugony quoted in the
previous section Leibniz said that he needed to present his philosophy
in an informal manner because it was likely to be misunderstood in
relation to the senses. This suggests that the tendency
people have to rely on a sensory-based theory of knowledge is one of
the primary stumbling blocks that prevent them from understanding his
philosophical system. Many of Leibniz's core concepts and
principles can only be adequately grasped through the intellect, not
through the senses or the imagination (see Leibniz's remarks on
force in De Ipsa Natura (G 4:508; AG:159)). One of
Leibniz's main exoteric strategies for dealing with this
situation is to utilize sensible analogies,
imaginative metaphors, anecdotes, and stories to introduce and
motivate his abstract concepts, principles, and theses. Such
metaphors and analogies enable his readers to attain an introductory
understanding of the thesis or principle in question. Let us
consider a few examples.
In explaining the thesis that there is no inter-substantial
causation between finite substances in the Monadologie,
Leibniz famously says: “monads have no windows through
which something can enter or leave” (G 6:607; AG:214). This
metaphor of being “windowless” helps the reader attain some
understanding of Leibniz's thesis, but it will be an imperfect
understanding to the extent that it involves conceiving of monads as
being extended. 
Leibniz frequently uses imagistic metaphors to describe God's
sustenance of finite substances. Late in the
Monadologie, for example, he writes: “all created
or derivative monads are generated, so to speak, by continual
fulgurations of the divinity from moment to moment” (G 6:614;
AG:219) And in the Essais de théodicée
Leibniz uses the analogy of a heavy-laden boat travelling down a river
to explain how God and finite substances can be said to co-operate in
the production of particular effects in the ordinary course of nature
(T:30–1). Both the metaphor and the analogy provide useful but
imperfect devices for conceiving of things that cannot be sensed or
imagined, strictly speaking. In reading Leibniz's texts it
is important to recognize that these are only metaphors and
analogies—they are not meant to provide metaphysically rigorous
descriptions of divine action. 
Leibniz is committed to the principle of the identity of
indiscernibles. This principle states, roughly, that it is
impossible for there to be two numerically distinct substances that are
qualitatively identical. In discussing this principle Leibniz
sometimes supports it by appealing to an anecdote and other empirical
considerations. In the anecdote he recalls discussing the
principle with an “ingenious gentleman” who thought he
could find two perfectly identical leaves. Princess Sophia, who
was observing the conversation, “defied him to do it; he ran all
over the garden a long time to look for some but it was to no
purpose” (4th letter to Clarke, G 7:372;
AG:327–8). Leibniz also defends the principle by appealing to the
empirical results of the microscopists: objects that can seem
qualitatively identical to the naked eye (two drops of water, or two
drops of milk) are shown to be different when viewed under the
microscope. Neither the anecdote nor the appeal to microscopes is
intended to be anything like a rigorous proof of the principle of the
identity of indiscernibles. A rigorous proof would show how the
principle is derived a priori from other principles such as
the principle of sufficient reason. 
Few people are likely to interpret Leibniz's anecdote
concerning the principle of the identity of indiscernibles as a
rigorous argument. Other cases are more easily misunderstood,
however. Consider section 17 of the
Monadologie: 
It is easy to see why this is one of the better-known passages in
the Monadologie. It contains a vivid imaginative thought
experiment that is presented in support of an anti-materialist
conclusion, namely that perception is inexplicable by means of shapes
and motions. Given that thought experiments along these lines
have been popular in contemporary philosophy of mind it might seem
natural to suppose that Leibniz takes the thought experiment to provide
a conclusive argument for his conclusion (it is sometimes referred to
as “Leibniz's Mill Argument”). Although this is
not the place to discuss the issue at length, we can say that
Leibniz's remarks on the exoteric/esoteric distinction suggest
that this might not be the case. It is plausible to think that
the passage is designed to appeal to people who rely heavily on the
imagination in doing philosophy; it could be a heuristic that will help
motivate Leibniz's thesis that perception is a property of simple
substances and not of bodies, not a rigorous argument for this
conclusion . 
As the discussion of Leibniz's Mill Argument suggests, it is
not always easy to recognize when Leibniz is using an exoteric
strategy. Another place where an exoteric strategy might be at
work is in one of his most frequent “arguments” for the
theory of simple substances. Consider the first section of the
Principes de la Nature et de la Grace and the first three
sections of the Monadologie:
[1] A substance is a being capable of action. It is
simple or composite. A simple substance is that which
has no parts. A composite substance is a collection
[l'assemblage] of simple substances, or
monads. Monas is a Greek word signifying unity,
or what is one. Composites or bodies are multitudes; and simple
substances—lives, souls, and minds—are unities. There
must be simple substances everywhere, because, without simples, there
would be no composites (G 6:598; AG:207).
[2] 1. The Monad, which we shall discuss here, is
nothing but a simple substance that enters into
composites—simple, that is, without parts. 2. And there
must be simple substances, since there are composites; for the
composite is nothing more than a collection, or aggregate
[un amas, ou aggregatum], of simples. 3. But where there
are no parts, neither extension, nor shape, nor divisibility is
possible. These monads are the true atoms of nature and, in
brief, the elements of things (G 6:607; AG:213).
These texts contain important similarities and differences. In
[1] he speaks of “composite substances,” which he also
describes as “bodies,” while in [2] he speaks only of
“composites.” Setting these differences aside for the
moment, both texts contain a version of what has been termed the
“grounding argument” for simple substances. Taken at
face value, the texts suggests the following argument:
The reader seems invited in these passages (particularly in [1] and
the first two sections of [2]) to conceive of the relation between
simples and composites in a straightforward and intuitive way. If
you have a dozen eggs, for example, you must have twelve individual
eggs. Trying to argue that one could have a dozen eggs without
having any individual eggs seems a hopeless task indeed. The
argument also initially lends itself to a kind of physical
atomism. If one thinks that tables and chairs, for example, are
collections of indivisible physical atoms, then the argument is once
again intuitive and difficult to deny. It becomes clear in the
third section of text [2] that the relation between composite and
simple cannot be quite this straightforward because the simples are not
extended. Leibniz also makes this point in the section that
follows [1] in the Principes de la Nature et de la
Grace. But something like the intuitive picture
remains. There are composites (bodies). Composites are
collections of simples. If you put a bunch of simples together
you get a composite. It is natural to think that the relation
between simples and composites is understood on the model of part and
whole. Simples are the parts that compose wholes (bodies).
Leibniz's considered view is far more nuanced and less
straightforward than texts [1] and [2] suggest. First, Leibniz
does not think monads compose bodies in the manner of a part/whole
relation. As he explains elsewhere, a part of a whole must be
“of the same sort” as the whole (G 3:591). Monads and
bodies are not of the same sort because only the latter are
extended. This implies that the parts of an extended body must
themselves be extended. Leibniz does assert on a number of
occasions that bodies are aggregates of monads (or simple
substances). However, he has a technical conception of an
aggregate (see Lodge 2001). Suppose, for example, that there were
a carton of twelve eggs sitting on a table. This alone would not
imply that there was an aggregate of eggs, strictly speaking. For
there to be an aggregate of eggs there would need to be at least two
eggs that are perceived by a mind as being one thing (i.e., by
perceiving them as a unity). So you cannot merely add together a
bunch of eggs to get an aggregate of eggs. Similarly, you cannot
merely add together a bunch of monads to get an aggregate of
monads. You only have an aggregate if there is a mind that
perceives the individuals as constituting one thing. The precise
details of how one should understand Leibniz's claim that bodies
are aggregates of monads is a matter of scholarly controversy that we
need not engage here. It will suffice to make the following
points. The fact that bodies are aggregates of monads implies
that bodies depend ontologically on monads but it does not imply that
the relation between monads and bodies is a part/whole relation.
 As Leibniz explains to de Volder, “properly speaking,
matter isn't composed of constitutive unities, but results from
them…substantial unities aren't really parts, but the
foundations of phenomena” (G 2:268; AG:179).
Once one becomes aware of Leibniz's technical notion of an
aggregate and of certain aspects of his conception of the part-whole
relation, it becomes less clear exactly how the “grounding
argument” in texts [1] and [2] is supposed to work. The
intuitive appeal of the argument seems to depend, at least in part, on
assuming a straightforward account of the relation between bodies and
monads that Leibniz does not actually endorse. Leibniz seems to
encourage this oversimplified account of the relation by omitting an
explanation of his notion of an aggregate and of his account of the
part-whole relation, among other things. This suggests that
Leibniz is not trying to provide a fully rigorous argument for the
existence of simple substances or a full explanation of the relation
between monads and bodies in the Monadologie or the
Principes de la Nature et de la Grace. What Leibniz is
doing, one might think, is helping his readers attain a preliminary
grasp of the relation between bodies and simple substances—to
help them recognize that simple substances provide some kind of
ontological grounding for the world of bodies. By introducing the
view in the form of a simple and intuitive argument Leibniz helps to
motivate the radical idea that an infinity of immaterial mind-like
simple substances exist. The reader will thus be more likely to
take the view seriously enough to consider the further elaborations of
the theory that are presented in the remainder of the texts. This
is not to deny that Leibniz might have had a fully demonstrative
“grounding argument” for the existence of simple
substances, or that he wanted the fully demonstrative argument to be
consistent with the versions of the argument that are presented in
texts [1] and [2]. The point is that Leibniz omits too many
essential distinctions and details for even a very discerning reader to
be able to reconstruct a demonstrative argument merely on the basis of
texts [2] or [3]. On this reading significant portions of the
Monadologie and the Principes de la Nature et de la
Grace are exoteric in content and form. They serve to
introduce some of the central features of Leibniz's metaphysics
while omitting many important details (more details are omitted in the
latter text, as we will soon see). 
Let us now consider one notable difference between the
Monadologie and the Principes de la Nature et de la
Grace. In the Principes de la Nature et de la Grace
Leibniz speaks of “composite substances” while in the
Monadologie he only speaks of “composites.” 
The difference is puzzling. In the Monadologie Leibniz
is typically taken to be presenting a strictly monadological
metaphysics according to which simple substances are the only finite
substances. Bodies exist and animals exist, but they are not
substances (roughly speaking he thinks that an animal is a dominant
monad and its organic body, which is itself an aggregate of
monads). A number of texts suggest that neither bodies nor
animals are true unities, and only a true unity (an unum per
se) can qualify as a substance, strictly speaking. Any
reality that bodies and animals possess is in some way derivative of
the reality of simple substances. The obvious puzzle is that
Leibniz speaks of simple and composite substances in the
Principes de la Nature et de la Grace. What are we to
make of these seemingly divergent claims?
One way of accounting for divergent claims in different texts is to
say that Leibniz had different views on the issue over time. 
There is no question that Leibniz's views on substance changed to
some degree over the course of his career (exactly how much they
changed is one of the most contentious issues in Leibniz
scholarship). However, the developmental strategy is more
difficult (though not impossible) to deploy in the present case because
both texts were written around the same time in 1714. Another
possibility (suggested in the secondary literature) is that Leibniz is
exploring different theories of substance at this point in his
career. Though he is tempted by a strictly monadological
metaphysics (as presented in the Monadologie), he is also
considering an ontology that countenances the existence of simple
substances and corporeal substances (where corporeal substances are
“animals” as described in the previous paragraph). 
Leibniz is laying out this latter theory in The Principes de la
Nature et de la Grace (see Hartz 2007). There are some
prima facie reasons for resisting an interpretation along
these lines (though it cannot be conclusively ruled out). First,
Leibniz does not describe himself as a “theory pluralist”
with respect to substance. As we have seen, Leibniz consistently
refers to his philosophy as a (single) system. This is one of the
things that make it amenable to the geometric model of
demonstration. When Leibniz addresses the fact that he has not
unfolded his entire system in a single work, he emphasizes that this is
not because he has not thought the system all the way through. In
one of his less modest moments he writes to Burnett, for example:
Another place where Leibniz emphasizes the systematicity of his
philosophy is in his correspondence with Des Bosses:
My views certainly are connected with each other in such a way that
no link can be removed without the chain's being broken. 
From the very consideration of possible worlds and God's choice,
it follows both that he has chosen the best and that he has chosen it
with one decree, whose object, obviously, is the chosen world (October
1708 letter to Des Bosses, LR 113).
If only the attribute of incomprehensibility were proper to God
alone! Then, our hope of knowing nature would be greater. 
But it is all too true that there is no part of nature that could be
known perfectly by us, and the very interconnection of things proves
this. No creature, however elevated, can perceive distinctly or
comprehend the infinite at the same time; but, on the contrary, whoever
comprehends even one part of matter likewise comprehends the whole
universe on account of the same interconnection I mentioned. My
principles are such that they can hardly be separated one from
another. Whoever knows one well, knows them all (7 November 1710
letter to Des Bosses, LR:189).
More could be said about the context of these passages and exactly
how they should be interpreted. At the very least, however, these
texts do not suggest that Leibniz saw himself as unsure about which
theory of substance to endorse. That being said, Leibniz wrote a
considerable amount on the theory of monads and bodies between 1710 and
1714. Did Leibniz's views on substance evolve during those
intervening years? 
To answer this question one would need to delve deeply into
Leibniz's long and fascinating correspondence with Des Bosses (as
well as other texts). This is obviously not the place to provide
such an investigation, but we can briefly summarize a standard
interpretation of one of the central moments of the correspondence (see
Look and Rutherford's introduction to the Leibniz-Des Bosses
Correspondence, xlix-lxxviii). As a Jesuit priest, Des Bosses was
interested in determining whether Leibniz's philosophy could
provide an adequate ontological framework for the doctrine of
transubstantiation. The central point of contention in their
discussion of this issue concerned the reality of corporeal
substance. Did Leibnizian corporeal substances meet the criteria
for being a substance in the strict sense of the term? On a
monadological view a corporeal substance (or animal) is a dominant
monad united with an organic body, which is itself an aggregate of
subordinate monads. The “union” of a dominant monad
and its organic body consists in certain harmonious perceptual
relations that obtain between the dominant monad and the subordinate
monads of the organic body. This rather weak notion of union is
not sufficient to make the dominant monad and its organic body truly
one being. This implies that a corporeal substance is not a
substance strictly speaking because it does not possess per se
unity. Des Bosses thought that this reductive view of corporeal
substance did not provide a robust enough conception of the reality of
bodies to properly ground the doctrine of transubstantiation. In
response to Des Bosses' concerns Leibniz developed the notion of
a substantial bond (vinculum substantiale). This
substantial bond (superadded by God) could serve as a kind of
metaphysical glue uniting the dominant monad and the subordinate monads
of an organic body. Leibniz told Des Bosses that the only way for
a corporeal substance to be a per se unity would be through
one of these substantial bonds. Arguably, Leibniz did not endorse
the theory himself; he told Des Bosses that he preferred the more
ontologically parsimonious version of the theory of monads (letter of
16 June 1712; LR:255). 
The correspondence with Des Bosses has thus been taken to provide
support for the interpretive thesis that Leibniz's mature
ontology of finite substance countenances the existence of simple
substances exclusively (but see Garber 2009 for an opposing
view). The correspondence also shows, importantly, that the mere
occurrence of the word “corporeal substance” in a text does
not immediately imply that Leibniz takes corporeal substances to be
substances, strictly speaking. These conclusions might
help resolve the apparent tension between Leibniz's remarks on
substance in the Monadologie and the Principes de la
Nature et de la Grace. The text of the Monadologie
more accurately reflects Leibniz's considered position because it
only characterizes simple substances as “substances.” 
The Principes de la Nature et de la Grace, in contrast, is
less rigorous (more exoteric) because it uses the term “composite
substance” when composites are not substances, strictly speaking
(Rutherford 1995, 281–2). 
But why would Leibniz use a term like “composite
substance” in the Principes de la Nature et de la Grace
if it did not accurately reflect his considered position? Here is
one possible answer. In presenting his theory of simple
substances Leibniz was concerned to avoid a fundamental
misunderstanding. The misunderstanding is that if the only
substances are unextended simple substances, then bodies must be mere
illusions. Leibniz does not think that bodies are mere
illusions. His view of bodies (from the perspective of the theory
of monads) is, roughly, that they are “real but not fully
real.” To adequately grasp Leibniz's view one must
understand that his ontology countenances different levels or degrees
of reality. Simplifying things considerably, these degrees range
from the ideal (the least real) to the phenomenal (mid-grades of
reality) to the level of monads (the most real). Bodies fall
within the purview of the phenomenal: they are more real
than entities that are purely ideal (e.g., space) but less
real than simple substances. Bodies are accorded an enhanced
degree of reality (in comparison to merely ideal entities) because they
are well founded on the reality of monads. The precise nature of
this “well founding”—and of Leibniz's
ontological scheme more generally—is a complicated and
controversial matter. The nuanced framework (however one might
fill in the details) does not lend itself to a straightforward and
intuitive presentation in several paragraphs of text. 
One can reasonably view the Principes de la Nature et de la
Grace as one of the most exoteric presentations of Leibniz's
theory of monads. In the text he omits nearly all of the details
of his nuanced ontological scheme. He describes bodies as
“composite substances” so that his reader will recognize
that both simple substances and bodies are “real.” By
overemphasizing the degree of reality that he grants bodies he is able
to introduce the theory of monads in a way that makes it appear less
far removed from received opinions. It also helps avoid the
serious misunderstanding that bodies are mere illusions—a
misunderstanding that one could easily fall into in the absence of a
full presentation of Leibniz's ontological scheme. 
This very brief sketch of an “exoteric resolution” of
the textual discrepancy between Leibniz's use of the word
“substance” in the Monadologie and the
Principes de la Nature et de la Grace provides an alternative
to the “developmental” and “two theory”
readings of the relevant passages mentioned earlier. It suggests
a more general moral for Leibniz scholarship. Whenever one is
faced with texts that appear to provide conflicting remarks on an
issue, it is important to consider whether an exoteric strategy that
could resolve the apparent conflict might be at work. It is not
easy to determine when an exoteric strategy is at work given that
Leibniz rarely flags the features of his works that are exoteric within
the works themselves. One must consider Leibniz's general
remarks on exoteric strategies along with any additional texts that
explicitly or implicitly bear on the passages in question. It is
only once all of these texts have been examined that one can argue that
a particular interpretive hypothesis is the best all things
considered. 
Throughout his career Leibniz distinguished between esoteric and
exoteric modes of presentation in philosophy. He endorsed the
esoteric mode, which was modeled closely on the Geometrical model of
demonstration, as the ideal mode of presentation. Leibniz did
some important preparatory work for an esoteric presentation of his
metaphysics in the 1670's and 1680's, but he never
completed a work that was in strict accordance with the esoteric
ideal. Although he continued to regard the geometrical model of
demonstration as the ideal, he thought it would be a mistake to
introduce his philosophy to people in the form of an esoteric
treatise. This is because the content of his philosophy
was highly esoteric; it involved a range of abstract principles and
theses, many of which were far removed from received opinions. He
thought that if he were to present his philosophy in a strictly
esoteric manner people would misunderstand it and summarily reject
it. This is why exoteric texts were so important for
Leibniz. They were designed to serve as intellectual
stepping-stones that could help readers move from received opinions to
esoteric truth. In letters to trusted correspondents Leibniz
explicitly describes his journal articles and the Essais de
théodicée as exoteric works. But even
Leibniz's letters to trusted correspondents such as de Volder and
Des Bosses fall short of the esoteric ideal. All of
Leibniz's texts are exoteric to a certain degree, but some are
more so than others. They can be categorized as more or less
exoteric depending on the degree to which they approximate the esoteric
ideal in form and content. It is difficult to provide this
categorization given that Leibniz never completed a strictly esoteric
treatise. However, Leibniz's general comments about the
exoteric mode of presentation can help us locate the implicitly
exoteric features of his texts. We have seen that Leibniz
utilized a variety of complimentary exoteric techniques, including:
Selective omission:  he omits the features of
his philosophy that are furthest removed from received opinions. 
In some cases it is possible to infer the omitted views from a careful
reading of the exoteric text; in other cases a supplementary work is
required.
Surface reading vs. deep reading:  the text admits of
an intuitive surface reading that can make his views seem closer to
received opinions than they actually are. The texts are also
compatible with a more rigorous but less straightforward reading; it
may or may not be possible to grasp the deeper meaning on the basis of
the exoteric text alone. 
Familiar language:  he tailors his language to
his audience so that it will appear more familiar to them. For
example, he uses Cartesian language when he writes in the journals of
Paris and the language of the schools when he writes in the journals of
Leipzig.
Eclectic references:  he appeals to the claims of
well-regarded historical and contemporary figures to illustrate and
motivate his own theses. 
Hypothesis:  he presents a thesis as a
hypothesis rather than providing a strict demonstration of the thesis,
even if he is capable of providing the demonstration. He thinks
that in some cases a reader will be less hostile to a novel thesis if
it is presented as a hypothesis.
Sensible analogies, metaphors, imaginative thought
experiments, stories, and anecdotes: he utilizes these devices
because they allow readers that are accustomed to conceiving of things
by means of the senses and the imagination to attain an introductory
understanding of theses and principles that are abstract and distinctly
conceivable only through the intellect (not the senses or the
imagination). 
Some work identifying particular exoteric strategies has been done
in the secondary literature on Leibniz. However, much work
remains to be done. More detailed examinations of the exoteric
features of Leibniz's works will help us more adequately
determine which texts (if any) present his considered views and the
extent to which his philosophy is systematic. 