Leucippus is variously said to have been born in Elea, Abdera or
Miletus (DK 67A1). His dates are unknown, other than that he lived
during the fifth century BCE. Diogenes Laertius reports that he was a
student of Parmenides' follower Zeno (DK 67A1). Zeno is best known for
paradoxes suggesting that motion is impossible because a magnitude can
be divided into an infinite number of parts, each of which must be
traversed; the fact that atomism is thought to have been formulated in
response to these arguments may account for the story that Leucippus
was a student of Zeno. 
The extent of Leucippus' contribution to the developed atomist theory
is unknown. His relationship to Democritus, and even his very
existence, was a subject of considerable controversy in nineteenth
century scholarship (Graham 2008). Most reports on early Greek atomism
refer to the views of Democritus alone, or to both atomists together;
Epicurus seems even to have denied that there was a philosopher
Leucippus (DK 67A2). Aristotle certainly ascribes the foundation of
the atomist system to Leucippus. Leucippus is sometimes said to have
been the author of a work called the Great World-System; one
surviving quotation is said to have come from a work On Mind.
Leucippus is named by most sources as the originator of the theory
that the universe consists of two different elements, which he called
‘the full’ or ‘solid,’ and ‘the
empty’ or ‘void’. Both the void and the solid atoms
within it are thought to be infinite, and between them to constitute
the elements of everything. Because little is known of Leucippus'
views and his specific contributions to atomist theory, a fuller
discussion of the developed atomist doctrine is found in the entry for
Democritus.
Early Greek atomism is generally taken to have been formulated in
response to the Eleatic claim that ‘what is’ must be one
and unchanging, because any assertion of differentiation or change
within ‘what is’ involves the assertion of ‘what is
not,’ an unintelligible concept. While Parmenides' argument is
difficult to interpret, he was understood in antiquity to have forced
philosophers after him to explain how change is possible without
supposing that something comes from ‘what is not,’ i.e.
nothing. Aristotle tells us that Leucippus tried to formulate a theory
that is consistent with the evidence of the senses that change and
motion and a multiplicity of things exists in the world (DK 67A7). In
the atomist system, change only occurs at the level of appearances:
the real constituents of being persist unchanged, merely rearranging
themselves into new combinations that form the world of appearance.
Like Parmenidean Being, the atoms cannot change or disintegrate into
‘what is not’ and each is a solid unit; nonetheless, the
combinations of atoms that form the world of appearance continually
alter. Aristotle cites an analogy to the letters of the alphabet,
which can produce a multitude of different words from a few elements
in combinations; the differences all stem from the shape
(schêma) of the letters, as A differs from N; by their
arrangement (taxis), as AN differs from NA; and by their
positional orientation (thesis), as N differs from Z (DK
67A6).
Leucippus also reportedly accepted the Eleatic Melissus' argument that
void is necessary for motion, but took this to be evidence that, since
we experience motion, there must be void (DK 67A7). The reason for
positing smallest indivisible magnitudes is also reported to be a
response to Zeno's argument that, if every magnitude could be divided
to infinity, motion would be impossible (DK 29A22). Leucippus is
reported to hold that the atoms are always in motion (DK 67A18).
Aristotle criticizes him for not offering an account that says not
only why a particular atom is moving (because it collided with
another) but why there is motion at all. Because the atoms are
indestructible and unchangeable, their properties presumably stay the
same through all time.
As Diogenes Laertius reports Leucippus' cosmology, worlds or
kosmoi are formed when groups of atoms combine to form a cosmic
whirl, which causes the atoms to separate out and sort by like kind. A
sort of membrane of atoms forms out of the circling atoms, enclosing
others within it, and creating pressure by whirling. The outer
membrane continually acquires other atoms from outside when it
contacts them, which take fire as they revolve and form the stars,
with the sun in the outermost circle. Worlds are formed, grow and
perish, according to a kind of necessity (DK 67A1).
One direct quotation preserved from Leucippus says that nothing
happens in vain (matên) but everything from logos
and by necessity (DK 67B2). This has been found puzzling, since the
reference to logos might seem to suggest that things are ruled
by reason, an idea that Democritus' system excludes. Either Leucippus'
system is different in this respect from that of Democritus, or the
reference to logos here cannot be to a controlling mind. Barnes
takes there to be no grounds for preferring either interpretation
(Barnes 1984), but Taylor argues that Leucippus' position is that an
account (or logos) can be given of the causes of all
occurrences (Taylor 1999, p. 189). There is nothing in other reports
to suggest that Leucippus endorsed the idea of a universal
intelligence governing events.
Aristotle frequently pairs Leucippus and Democritus in his reports,
including his account of the motivation for positing atoms and void.
In particular, Aristotle associates Leucippus as well as Democritus
with the deliberately paradoxical assertion that ‘being is no
more than not-being,’ i.e., that void exists as much as the full
or solid (DK 67A6). Schofield (2002) has argued that the more careful
account in Simplicius shows that the ou mallon or ‘no
more’ doctrine is due to Democritus. Following this lead, Graham
(2008) suggests a new reading of Leucippus, wherein the distinction
between atom and void is actually based on a reading of Parmenides'
Doxa, his cosmological account. Rather than logical abstractions,
Being and Not-being, Leucippus' atoms would in essence be based on
Parmenides' cosomological contraries, night and light. If this line of
interpretation is followed, Leucippus' notion of atom and void might
have been rather different from Democritus', and Aristotle's tendency
to refer to the two in conjunction somewhat misleading.