When levels of organization are understood as belonging to the broader
category of hierarchical depictions of nature, their history can be
traced all the way back to the early days of western science and
philosophy. Aristotle suggested that living things could be arranged
in a graded scale, starting from plants at the bottom and ending with
humans at the top. This idea was further developed in Neoplatonism,
and in Medieval times, it transformed into the idea of “the
Great Chain of Being” (Lovejoy 1936). This Scala
Naturae conveyed a hierarchical conception of the world as
modeled after the perfection of the Deity: at the top, there is God,
and at lower rungs, angels, humans, animals, plants, and so on. After
the scientific revolution, more scientific classifications of nature
started to appear, the most famous ones being Linneaus’
taxonomical system and Auguste Comte’s hierarchy of the sciences
(Comte 1842 [1853]).
At the beginning of the 20th century, several notions of
“levels” began to circulate in the philosophical and
scientific literature. Prominent among these was the idea of
“levels of existence” (alternatively: “being”;
“complexity”) developed by philosophers Samuel Alexander
(1920: 3, 45) and Charles Dunbar Broad (1925), which figured
prominently in the emergentist and emergent evolution literature of
the 1920’s (Sellars 1926; McLaughlin 1992; Stephan 1999). This
introduced a number of themes that have become germane to general
levels-language. These themes include level-specific laws (Broad 1925:
77; cf. Woodger 1929) and the idea that ‘levels’ exhibit a
tendency in nature towards increasing complexity (Sellars 1917: 224;
cf. Needham 1937), Although most of these themes were severely
underdeveloped and divorced from the cutting-edge work in the life
sciences happening at the time (Needham 1937: 242 ff. 4), this
tradition has been an influential historical source for explicating
levels language in philosophy of mind (see the entries on
 emergent properties
 and
 supervenience;
 McLaughlin 1992; Beckermann et al. 1992; Kim 1999, 2002).
The roots of the contemporary notion of levels of organization and the
associated hierarchical thinking are best linked to the efforts of
organicist biologists of the early-mid 20th century (for
primers on the organicist movement, see Peterson 2014; Nicholson and
Gawne 2015). Particularly important to the introduction and
development of the levels concept were Joseph Woodger (1929, 1930),
Ludwig von Bertalanffy (1928 [1933], 1932), and Joseph Needham (1936,
1937). These individuals were in turn influenced by Alfred North
Whitehead’s philosophy (see, e.g., Whitehead 1929; Needham
1941).
Organicism (alternatively “organismal” or
“organismic” biology) did not designate a clearly-defined
group of people, but rather a loosely-threaded confluence of
scientists and philosophers distributed among many disciplines and
across Europe and the Americas. The organicists (like the
emergentists) were in part responding to the dispute between the
mechanists and the neovitalists of the early 20th century.
The mechanists held that biological phenomena were “nothing over
and above” their physico-chemical components, meaning that
biological phenomena can in principle, and eventually will, be
exhaustively accounted for in chemical or physical terms (Loeb 1912,
1916). They also argued that biological phenomena, though seemingly
complex, are fundamentally similar to machines (Loeb 1912, 1916; see
also Allen 2005: 264; Bechtel & Richardson 1993 [2010: 17];
Nicholson 2012: 160). Neovitalists such as Hans Driesch and Henri
Bergson rejected these ideas, arguing that living things cannot be
explained solely based on their physico-chemical components, and that
biological phenomena therefore must involve non-physical forces or
entities. The organicists sought to offer a “third way”
into the mechanist-vitalist dispute that served as a middle ground
between the austerity of the mechanists and the extravagance of the
neovitalists (Peterson 2014: 286; Nicholson & Gawne 2015:
358).
Three major tenets of organicism were particularly congenial to the
development of the levels concept. Firstly, the central preoccupation
of organicist thought with organization laid down a
foundation for levels thinking (cf. Nicholson & Gawne 2015: 364).
For the organicists, organization marked the decisive feature for
demarcating living phenomena from non-living physico-chemical
phenomena (e.g., Woodger 1929: 290–1; von Bertalanffy 1928
[1933: 48]; Needham 1936: ch. 1). Unlike the neovitalists, however,
the organicists (particularly during the 1930’s) did not hold
organization to be inscrutable, but rather an important explanandum of
biological study (Nicholson & Gawne 2015: 365). Moreover, living
organisms exhibited a hierarchical ordering among their
distinct parts (Woodger 1930: 8; von Bertalanffy 1932: 83; Needham
1936: ch. 5; see also Nicholson & Gawne 2015: 366). This combined
nicely with the focus on organization as the major explanandum of
biology in that the series of elements that compose different
organisms required specific and contextualized treatment. This in turn
complemented another main tenet of the organicists, namely the
autonomy of biology as a natural science and its phenomena from
physico-chemical phenomena (cf. Nicholson & Gawne 2015:
366–7).
The levels concept proved to be a linchpin of these main tenets.
Joseph Woodger, combining these features, thus expresses the basic
thinking behind levels of organization:
Two principal factors appear to have been responsible for the failure
to take organization seriously in biology. First there is the vague
belief that only atoms and molecules are ‘real’, and
secondly the incautious use of the notion of chemical composition.
Also the biological entities are found to be composite in the same
sense, and moreover, some of the relata in the relation of composition
in the physico-chemical objects are also relata in the biological
objects. But the analysis of organisms as carried out by
biologists reveal other relata in mutual relation of
composition in a different sense, i.e., not in
chemical composition, e.g., the organism is analysable
into organ-systems, organs, tissues, cells and cell-parts. There is a
hierarchy of composing parts or relata in a hierarchy of organizing
relations. These relations and relata can only be studied at
their own levels (cf. the quartz crystal) and not simply in
terms of the lower levels. (Woodger 1929: 292–293,
emphasis modified; cf. Bertalanffy 1932: 100–101; Needham 1937
[1943: 234])
Unlike the emergentists’ “levels of existence,” the
hierarchical view of the world expounded by the organicists emphasized
differentiating the many distinct classes of matter’s
possible forms to accommodate the diversity in biological entities.
This in turn led them to posit many more levels in the world than the
four ‘super levels’ of the emergentists (the physical the
chemical, the vital, and the mental), and also implied an increase in
complexity as more levels of organization were brought to bear on
treating living systems. Woodger again remarks:
If the parts [of an organism] were homogeneous then we should be able
to call them units and there would only be one level of organization.
But if each part were itself composed of parts forming in each an
organized system, then clearly we should have two levels of
organization and if the composing sub-parts of the first organization
were intrinsically only numerically different we could speak of two
homogeneous levels of organization. If, however, the sub-parts were
intrinsically different then the first-order parts would be different
and we should have a heterogeneous type of organization. By carrying
out this process of subdivision further we could obtain very complex
types of organization exhibiting a hierarchy of successive levels. And
if now we consider one of the higher living organisms it is evident at
once that its organization will belong to one of these heterogeneous
hierarchical types. (Woodger 1929: 298)
This idea that levels of organization of organization form
“nested” compositional hierarchies where there are wholes
at higher levels and their components at lower levels, and the
components themselves can be further decomposed into parts, remains
one of the core features of the notion of levels of organization up to
this day.
In the aftermath of organicism, development of the levels concept
splintered into different intellectual trajectories, with little
overall theoretical or conceptual coherence. One direction of
development flowed through the framework of general systems theory
(von Bertalanffy 1950, 1968), and particularly through so-called
hierarchy theory (Whyte et al. 1969; Weiss 1971; Pattee 1973). General
systems theory sought to construct isomorphisms between laws of
different scientific fields based on their generic system properties
(von Bertalanffy 1950: 136), but nonetheless continued to emphasize
the hierarchical structure of systems (von Bertalanffy 1968). ‘Levels of organization’ in
this tradition was ultimately given secondary consideration to the
articulation of system-generic properties and laws. Similarly, in
hierarchy theory, ‘levels’ tend to be treated as
derivative of the more general notion of a hierarchy, or the ordering
of a system into nested subsystems (Simon 1962 [1996: 184–5];
see also Weiss 1971). Hierarchy and levels alike continued to be
treated as generic structures of systems of all stripes (see also
Allen & Starr 1982; O’Neill et al. 1986). However, one important
distinction to come out of this tradition was the distinction between
levels of composition and levels of control (Simon 1962; Pattee 1973).
The former speaks to the nested compositionality typically identified
with levels of organization, while the latter refers to the idea that
higher levels impose constraints on the processes at lower levels, for
example by limiting the degrees of freedom of the system at a lower
level (Pattee 1973: 85).
Other early attempts at clarifying the concept of levels were carried
out by individual researchers working alone on similar or related
issues, such as reduction or multilevel selection. Mario Bunge (1960,
1977), Marjorie Grene (1969, 1987), and William Wimsatt (1976a, 1981, 1994) each
developed several ground-laying observations concerning levels. Bunge
(1960) remarks on the plethora of meanings the term can possess, then
offers a long taxonomy of nine different meanings of the term
“levels”, ranging from the innocuous (levels as degrees or
quantity, as in ‘levels of stress’) to the sense of nature
being ordered into an evolutionary series, with several corollary
senses of levels falling between (such as degrees of complexity). In
his 1977 paper, Bunge goes further, offering a set-theoretic treatment
of levels, and claiming that the leveled structure of the natural
world is what renders natural phenomena intelligible to us (Bunge
1977: R82). Grene (1969) also remarks on the polysemic nature of the
term “hierarchy”, noting that ‘levels’ has
distinct uses in different fields of sciences. Grene later (1987)
distinguishes between two notions of hierarchy, one falling under a
mixed notion of levels as composition and control, respectively, and
the other exemplifying phylogenetic ranks. Wimsatt’s work will
be considered in more detail below in section 2.3.
A recurring motif in the literature on levels of organization is to
lament the haphazard or unreflective way in which terms such as
‘hierarchy’ or ‘levels’ are applied, and to
call for more precise analyses (e.g., Beckner 1974; Bunge 1977; Grene
1987; Korn 2002; Valentine & May 1996). However, surprisingly few
philosophers or scientists have taken up the challenge of developing a
substantial theory or account of levels of organization. In this
section, we discuss three major accounts put forward in philosophy of
science to clarify or posit what exactly levels of organization are.
These are Paul Oppenheim and Hilary Putnam’s
“layer-cake” account, the mechanist account developed and
advocated by Carl Craver (2007: ch. 5, 2015) and William Bechtel
(2008: ch. 4), and William Wimsatt’s “local maxima”
account (1976a, 1994). After
these, we also go through recent skeptical approaches to the idea of
levels of organization.
The two most visible accounts in philosophy of science, the
“layer-cake” and “mechanistic” accounts, mark
polarized visions for the levels concept. The layer-cake account
comprises a comprehensive conception that posits exhaustive stepwise
compositional relations between all constituents of nature and strict
correspondence between each putative level and a primary scientific
discipline that studies the constituents occupying that level. The
mechanistic account proposes a contextualized conception of
ontological levels in nature that are defined in terms of constitutive
parthood within a mechanism (Craver 2007: 188–189; Kaplan 2015:
20). The third account, Wimsatt’s “local maxima”
account, has arguably received less mainstream attention in
philosophy, and posits a more overarching framework for
conceptualizing levels in science, covering both epistemic and
ontological aspects. Though general, Wimsatt’s account is not
comprehensive, admitting exceptions and multiple distinct criteria for
characterizing levels that are congenial to both local and global
conceptions.
In the classic paper “The Unity of Science as a Working
Hypothesis” (1958; see also the entry
 the unity of science),
 Oppenheim and Putnam (hereafter O&P) put forward a system of
levels that became very influential, and is still implicitly present
in most references to levels. This “layer-cake” model
comprises three components. First, their conception of levels was
comprehensive, meaning they wished to subsume all instances
of where one could talk of ‘levels’ into their account.
Second, O&P posited that levels are related via compositional
relations that are structured in a stepwise fashion. That is,
all constituents of the objects of study of one branch of science, or,
the branch’s “universe of discourse,” are
exhaustively related as wholes to the parts located at the next
adjacent lower level, and as themselves parts to the constituents
occurring at the next adjacent higher level. This component is
probably most responsible for the “layer-cake” moniker,
which continues to appear in discussions of levels even today.
Finally, O&P presumed a strict correspondence between the
constituents comprising a level and the predicates and theories linked
with these constituents, meaning that levels of science neatly map
onto levels of nature, so that for each level in nature there is
corresponding science or theory and vice versa (Craver 2007:
174–175; Brigandt 2010: 304–305).
O&P’s usage of ‘levels’ can be broken down into
two roles within their framework. The first concerns their use of
‘levels’ in their explication of reduction, i.e.,
microreduction, which in turn aided in articulating their thesis of
unity of science. O&P’s conception of reduction spans three
complementary notions:
Kemeny-Oppenheim reduction is understood as an indirect
relation between a reducing theory (or branch of science) T1 and
reduced theory (or branch) T2 relative to a set of observational data
such that (a) both theories contain different vocabulary, (b) T1
explains least as much observational data as T2, but (c) T1 also
“explains more” than T2 (1958: 5). The notion of a
potential microreducer supplements this by capturing the
part-whole coordination between the natural entities constituting the
universes of discourse of different scientific theories or branches
via exhaustive material compositional relations (1958: 6). This
essentially provides an empirical mapping between the two scientific
branches. Microreduction then combines these two, and thus
amounts to a Kemeny-Oppenheim reduction between two scientific
theories plus the fact that T1 is at a lower compositional level than
T2.
In this framework, O&P suggest ordering the branches of sciences
so that the major potential reductions standing between the current
situation and unified science can be identified. For this purpose,
they propose six “reductive levels” (1958: 9): Social
groups; (Multicellular) living things; Cells; Molecules; Atoms;
Elementary particles. The branch of science with the things of a given
level as its universe of discourse is a potential microreducer of a
branch with the things of the next higher level as its universe of
discourse (O&P 1958: 9).
O&P’s second use of levels concerns the justificatory role
the concept plays for their framework. This role is anticipated by
O&P’s ideas of microreduction and potential microreducer,
and requires positing ‘levels’ as existing independent of
the other elements of their framework. More precisely: The O&P
account of reduction essentially assumes the existence of certain
empirical facts captured by potential microreducers, which are then
accounted for, i.e., justified, by postulating the existence of
‘levels’. O&P considered this dual
epistemic-ontological importance of ‘levels’ to be a
significant contribution provided by their layer-cake account apart
from its role in explicating microreduction. Speaking to the epistemic
ordering of the sciences, they say:
The idea of reductive levels employed in our discussion suggests what
may plausibly be regarded as a natural order of sciences. For
this purpose, it suffices to take as ‘fundamental
disciplines’ the branches corresponding to our levels. It is
understandable that many of the well-known orderings of things have a
rough similarity to our reductive levels, and that corresponding
orderings of sciences are more or less similar to our order of 6
‘fundamental disciplines’. (O&P 1958: 28, emphasis
added)
This shows that O&P assumed that the structure of the sciences
follows the structure of nature. Though they acknowledge the numerous
precedents to this hierarchical ordering of the sciences (e.g.,
Comte’s pyramid of the sciences, 1958: 28), O&P considered
their layer-cake account to be superior to these other
“intuitive” senses of the order of sciences, since the
existence of levels themselves are grounded in the stepwise,
compositional continuity of nature: 
[I]t does not seem to have been realized that these orderings are
‘natural’ in a deeper sense, of being based on the
relation of potential micro-reducer obtaining between the branches of
science. (1958: 28)
The problems with the layer-cake account have been well-documented
(Craver 2007: 172–6; Eronen 2015; Kim 2002; Potochnik &
McGill 2012; Rueger & McGivern 2010). For one thing, if we look at
contemporary science, the strict correspondence between levels and
scientific fields breaks down immediately: Fields such as cognitive
neuroscience span multiple levels, and the level of multicellular
organisms is studied by a plethora of different scientific disciplines
(Craver 2005; Bechtel 2008: 145). Likewise, the exhaustive stepwise
condition on compositional relations between natural constituents,
requiring that entities at one level are composed of only entities at
the next lower level, is largely a caricature (e.g., Kim 2002): think
of blood, nominally a tissue-level phenomenon, which is directly
composed by molecular constituents such as vitamins and water without
adjacent-level constituents, e.g., cells, playing any intermediary
role (Brooks 2017). Finally, and most importantly, the layer-cake
account aspires to a comprehensive notion of ‘levels’ that
is wildly at odds with the way that ‘levels’ is actually
used in science. Scientists often operate with a much more limited
definition of the levels concept that either (a) is restricted to a
specific and local context (see section 2.2) or (b) makes room for
exceptions to what ‘levels’ expresses. Many biological
sources in fact are completely aware that levels do not capture a
completely uniform reality, and sometimes remark on important
exceptions to the rules that are laid down by the levels concept. This
is most prominently seen when referring to “organisms” in
a piecemeal way so as to capture both multicellular and unicellular
forms of life (Mader 2010: 2).
The account of “levels of mechanisms” introduced by Bill
Bechtel (2008) and Carl Craver (2007) has recently become the standard
view of levels in philosophy of neuroscience. The context of this
account is the paradigm of “new mechanism” that currently
dominates philosophy of neuroscience and large parts of philosophy of
science more generally (see the entry
 mechanisms in science).
 In levels of mechanisms, there are mechanisms at higher levels and
their components at lower levels. The mechanistic account proposes a
contextualized conception (as opposed to the comprehensive conception
of the layer-cake) that articulates levels in terms of constitutive
parthood within a mechanism (Craver 2007: 188–189; Kaplan 2015:
20; see also Cummins 1975 for an early expression of this idea). This
approach offers several advantages over the layer-cake account: For
one thing, it abandons the goal of providing a global or comprehensive
understanding of levels that applies homogeneously to all systems in
nature. Instead, the aim is to construe levels in a scientifically
informed manner whereby level demarcations only make sense on
case-based grounds (see also Love 2012 for a local approach to levels
that is not explicitly tied to the notion of a mechanism). The
mechanistic account also completely eschews any tidy correspondence
between the structure of the natural world and the structure of the
natural sciences: Levels of mechanisms are levels in nature,
and there is no straightforward mapping from these levels to theories
or fields of science (Craver 2007: 176). Finally, the mechanistic
account of levels supports a positive account of pluralistic,
multilevel explanation that emerges as a powerful alternative to
accounts of reductionism in biology (Craver 2005; cf. Brigandt 2010:
297).
More specifically, levels of mechanisms have been defined as
follows:
In levels of mechanisms, the relata are behaving mechanisms at higher
levels and their components at lower levels. … The interlevel
relationship is as follows: X’s Φ-ing is at a lower
mechanistic level than Ψ-ing if and only if X’s Φ-ing is
a component in the mechanism for S’s Ψ-ing. Lower level
components are organized together to form higher-level components.
(Craver 2007: 189)
Within a mechanism, the relevant parts are … working
parts—the parts that perform the operations that enable the
mechanism to realize the phenomenon of interest. These may be of
different sizes, but they are distinguished by the fact that they
figure in the functioning of the mechanism. It is the set of working
parts that are organized and whose operations are coordinated to
realize the phenomenon of interest that constitute a level. (Bechtel
2008: 146)
So far, these characterizations suggest that there are just two
levels, the level of the mechanism and the level of its components.
However, when we take into account that a component can also be
mechanism in itself, this picture is expanded into a multilevel
hierarchy: The components of that nested mechanism then form a third
level, which is two levels lower than the overall mechanism (Bechtel
2008: 147). This mechanistic decomposition can be repeated as many
times as necessary; there is no a priori limit to the number of levels
in a mechanism. 
The standard example of levels of mechanisms is the case of spatial
memory and long-term potentiation (LTP; Craver 2007: 165–170).
In the spatial memory mechanism, four levels of mechanisms can be
identified: the level of spatial memory, the level of spatial map
formation, the cellular-electrophysiological level, and finally the
molecular level. In this hierarchy, entities at each lower level are
components in the higher-level mechanism. For example, an NMDA
receptor at the molecular level is a component of the LTP mechanism at
the cellular level, and the LTP mechanism is in turn a component of
the hippocampal mechanism of memory consolidation (at the level of
spatial map formation). The hippocampal mechanism of memory
consolidation then contributes to the overall mechanism at the level
of spatial memory, which is the highest level and includes things such
as the mouse performing behavioral tasks (e.g., navigating a water
maze).
Levels of mechanisms share some key features with the more standard
accounts of levels of organization: They are by definition
compositional, entities at higher levels are typically larger than
entities at lower levels, and levels of mechanisms can potentially
amount to local peaks of regularity and predictability (Craver 2007:
190; see next section). However, levels of mechanisms are far more
limited and minimalistic than any other extant approaches to levels of
organization. First of all, as already mentioned, levels of mechanisms
can only be identified on a case-by-case basis, and different
mechanisms can have entirely different levels. For example, the set of
levels in the mechanism of protein folding is very different from the
levels in the spatial memory mechanism.
Moreover, even within one mechanism, the question whether two items
are at the same or different levels often has no well-defined answer.
This is due to the fact that levels are defined solely in terms of
direct part-whole (or component-mechanism) relationships. For example,
NMDA receptors and synaptic vesicles are components of the cellular
LTP mechanisms, and thus can be said to be at the same level. The
components of NMDA receptors in turn include things such as glutamate
binding sites and glutamate ions, whereas the components of synaptic
vesicles include things such as transport proteins. However, as
glutamate binding sites and transport proteins are neither components
of one another nor direct components in the same (sub)mechanism, they
are neither at the same level nor at different levels (Bechtel 2008:
147). The question how they are related levels-wise has no answer in
the mechanistic framework. What this means is that even within a
specific mechanism, levels of mechanisms do not form horizontal layers
that span across the mechanism, but rather small islands or spotlights
formed by the working parts of a (sub)mechanism. Another implication
is that even identical things (e.g., NMDA molecules) in the same
mechanism are often not at the same level (Eronen 2013). Recently
Craver (2015) has argued that the whole idea of being “at the
same level” is in fact unimportant or even meaningless in the
context of levels of mechanisms; it is sufficient that there is a
clear sense in which mechanisms are at a higher level relative to
their components (and the components are at a lower level relative to
the mechanism as a whole), and this does not require that the
components or mechanisms also form horizontal levels. 
A further problem that the mechanistic account shares with the
layer-cake account is that it is embedded within a conceptual
framework where ‘levels’ are defined in terms of other
technical terms that are more foundational in that framework (Brooks
2017). For instance, the layer-cake account was originally embedded in
Oppenheim and Putnam’s overarching project of arguing for the
unity of science, and their understanding of ‘levels’ was
originally in part conceived to explicate how microreduction works.
The mechanistic account for its part is embedded within the New
Mechanism’s program of explicating mechanistic explanation and
mechanisms; since “levels of mechanisms” largely overlap
with technical terms that define what a mechanism is, it is a
legitimate question what distinct notion of ‘levels’
results at all that is not directly derivable from the notion of a
mechanism (cf. Eronen 2013).
In this light, it is clear that levels of mechanisms are only
distantly related to earlier attempts at elucidating levels in the
life sciences, and have many features that we intuitively would not
associate with the idea of levels (Eronen 2013, 2015). However, there
is no doubt that the relationships of mechanistic composition that
levels of mechanisms track are as such crucially important for
understanding and explaining biological organization.
Marie Kaiser (2015) seeks to recover a more general notion of
‘levels’ along the lines of the mechanistic account in a
way that escapes the account’s restrictiveness. Kaiser’s
focus here is to relax the conditions under which we consider
something a level (2015: 183–185): First, instead of defining
levels in terms of working components of mechanisms, she suggests to
think of levels in terms of (biological) part-whole relations
generally, that is, in a way that is not derived from the
definition of a mechanism. Second, Kaiser suggests that a level can
also include things that belong to the same “general biological
kind” as some parts of the higher-level system in question
(2015: 183–185): In this way, levels expand beyond the
boundaries of an organism or mechanism. How this approach avoids the
problems of general levels of organization discussed below (section
2.4) has not been explicitly spelled out. For further attempts at
expanding or developing the notion of levels of mechanisms, see
Bertolaso & Buzzoni (2017) and Harbecke (2015).
Both the layer-cake and the mechanistic approach to levels aim at
defining levels in the sense of giving at least necessary conditions
for what constitutes a level. William Wimsatt (1976a, 1994) takes a different approach
and sets out to characterize the key features that levels of
organization typically (but not necessarily) exhibit across different
instances. His aim is to delineate major structural or organizational
features of nature, of which levels of organization are the most
salient ones. First, levels are compositional and form nested
hierarchical structures, so that wholes at lower levels function as
parts at higher levels. Second, levels of organization are a 
deep, non-arbitrary, and extremely important feature of the
ontological architecture of our natural world, and almost certainly of
any world which could produce, and be inhabited or understood by,
intelligent beings. (Wimsatt 1994 [2007: 203]) 
In other words, Wimsatt considers levels to be units that “cut
nature at its joints” (1976a: 237).
A further feature of levels of organization is that they are 
constituted by families of entities usually of comparable size and
dynamical properties, which characteristically interact primarily with
one another. (Wimsatt 1994 [2007: 204]) 
A helpful metaphor that Wimsatt uses to illustrate this is that we can
think of theories or models of specific levels as sieves of different
sizes that sift out things with the appropriate size and dynamical
properties (Wimsatt 1976a: 237). Thus, theories at the levels of
organisms sift out roughly organism-sized things that are capable of
reproduction and primarily interact with each other.
Finally, and perhaps most importantly, 
[l]evels of organization can be thought of as local maxima of
regularity and predictability in the phase space of alternative modes
of organization of matter. (1976a: 209; see also 1976a: 238) 
This point is “the closest that [Wimsatt] will come to a
definition” (1976a: 209), and requires some explanation. The
idea is roughly that patterns and regularities that can be used as a
basis for prediction and explanation are found clustered around
certain scales, and such clusters indicate levels of organization.
Thus, if we plot regularity and predictability against (size) scale,
then levels of organization will appear as peaks in the plot (see
Figure). The entities that we find at these “local maxima”
will exhibit stable regularities in virtue of the criteria (size,
rate, dynamic properties, etc.) with which they are grouped into
levels, and these regularities can also serve as the basis for
reliable predictability. Moreover, levels of organization comprise
“the most probable states of matter” (1976a:
239), meaning that if we could vary the initial conditions, under a
range of conditions natural selection or other selection processes
would result in the same levels (Wimsatt 1976a: 238–239). For
example, if the level of molecules is a level of organization in
Wimsatt’s sense, then there should be a peak in regularity and
predictability at the scale(s) where molecules are located, and
molecules should be the most probable mode of organization of matter
under a range of conditions. 
Figure. Wimsatt, created in 1973; used
with permission.
Wimsatt points out many other features that levels may have: For
example, processes at higher levels tend to happen at slower rates
than processes at lower levels, higher level properties are typically
multiply realized by lower level properties, and higher-level causal
relationships are dynamically autonomous in the sense of being largely
independent of what happens at lower-levels. What differentiates
different levels will also vary between instances, and may include
part-whole distinctions, the magnitudes of forces by which things
interact, or, pragmatically, considerations of size of different
constituents. Importantly, Wimsatt also argues that in contexts where
part-whole relationships become too complex, such as in the
organization of biological systems, levels of organization break down,
and in these cases a more appropriate organizational notion is
“perspective” (Wimsatt 1994 [2007: 227]). Perspectives are
(incomplete) accounts of systems based on a set of variables, and in
contrast to levels, need not have any part-whole structure. For
example, we can approach organisms from anatomical, physiological or
genetic perspectives, each perspective coming with a proprietary set of
variables.
By including so many caveats and possible but unnecessary
characteristics of levels, Wimsatt makes his account extremely
versatile and wide in scope, but at the same time open to charges of
vagueness or inconsistency (cf. Craver 2007: 182–183). It
contains a multitude of criteria that levels could but do not
necessarily have to satisfy, so that almost any set of entities that
are in some respect similar to one another could be said to form a
level. Moreover, the individual criteria as such also raise many
questions. For example, how should we understand the “local
maxima of regularity and predictability”? What kinds of
regularities should we include—only causal generalizations, or
also regularities describing associational or compositional relations
(Craver 2007: 182–183)? How do we count or
estimate the number of regularities on a given scale? How do these
peaks match with the other proposed criteria, such as the part-whole
organization of levels?
These worries are to some extent alleviated by taking into account an
important background idea in Wimsatt’s approach: Levels of
organization and the entities that occupy them should be
robust, meaning that they should be detectable, measurable,
derivable, definable, and so on, in a variety of independent
ways (1981 [2007: 63–4]; 1994 [2007: 210]). In other words, they
should exhibit redundancy between independent means of accessing,
detecting or defining them, and therefore should not depend on any
single criterion or defining feature. Thus, if levels of organization
are robust, the choice of criteria, or the problems of some individual
criterion, will not be crucial. However, the extent to which there are
such robust levels of organization in nature remains an open
question.
Despite the familiarity of scientists and philosophers with the levels
concept, calls for its dismissal or de-emphasis in the scientific
lexicon are increasingly common (Eronen 2013, 2015; Guttman 1976;
Ladyman & Ross 2007;
Potochnik & McGill 2012; Rueger & McGivern 2010; Thalos 2013;
for rebuttals see also DiFrisco 2017; Brooks 2017). For one thing,
nature may simply be too messy to fit any layer-cake style picture.
Consider as an illustration the putative level of
“organisms.” Blue whales and yeast cells are both clearly
organisms and thus should nominally be located at this level, but each
comprises radically different kinds of entities with radically
different properties (Potochnik & McGill 2012). This may still be
palatable, but when we consider the next lower level, namely the one
indicated by the components of these organisms, the picture of levels
as neat horizontal layers breaks down completely. The components of
blue whales include things such as organs, tissues and cells, whereas
yeast cells are composed of things like the cell membrane, nucleus and
mitochondria (cf. Potochnik & McGill 2012). Furthermore, the whale
is in part composed of various symbionts, including gut bacteria. Such
symbionts are at the same time components of the whale and organisms
in themselves. Thus, the components of different kinds organisms do
not form any homogeneous “level”.
These problems are not just due to the difficulties of defining what
an organism is. Similar issues arise when we consider the components
of cells, such as the cell membrane and mitochondria—their
subcomponents (e.g, lipid molecules and the outer mitochondrial
membrane respectively) also exhibit too much heterogeneity to form a
neat “level” (cf. Eronen 2013). Moreover, the same kinds
of things can be parts in very different higher-level wholes: For
example, hydrogen ions can be free-standing components in the
oxidative phosphorylation mechanism that involves the cell membrane as
a component, but they can also be components of the lipid molecules
that make up the cell membranes (Bechtel 2008: 147).
More generally, Potochnik and McGill (2012) argue that
‘levels’ imposes a radically false, rigid uniformity onto
nature:
The basic idea [behind ‘levels’] is that
higher-level entities are composed of (and only of)
lower-level entities, but the prevalent concept of hierarchical
organization involves stronger claims as well. The compositional
hierarchy is often taken to involve stratification into discrete
and universal levels of organization. It is also often assumed
that levels are nested, that is, that an entity at any level is
composed of aggregated entities at the next lower level.
(Potochnik & McGill 2012: 121; emphasis added)
This identifies these problem with the “basic idea” of the
levels concept itself. They continue:
Indeed, the very notion of stratified levels depends on not
only the ubiquity, but also the uniformity, of part-whole composition.
For strata to emerge, atoms must always compose molecules, populations
must always compose communities, and so forth. But the uniformity of
composition needed for stratified levels simply does not
exist. (2012: 126; emphasis added; see also Guttman 1976: 113;
Thalos 2013: 10)
This comprehensive, uniform rigidity in turn undermines other features
attributed to levels of organization. One of these features is the
supposed epistemic merit (or fault) inherently exhibited by natural
constituents due to their position at a particular level (Potochnik
& McGill 2012. 129–30). For instance, reductionists
frequently argue that molecular-level explanations are generally more
secure, more fundamental, or otherwise superior to explanations citing
higher-level structures like chromosomes or cells (and conversely,
anti-reductionists claim that higher-level constituents are often
necessary for producing adequate explanations). However, as has been
pointed out by many authors, blanket attributions of significance like
these are deeply misleading (e.g., Wimsatt 1976a; Jackson & Pettit
1992; cf. Potochnik & McGill 2012: 129; Noble 2012: 56; Craver
2007: 191). One reason for this is that particular levels exhibit
epistemic merit only in regard to what is being investigated. As such,
what is taken to be the relevant level will shift depending on what
structures or processes comprise the focus of scientists’
investigative tasks, and hence no level will have inherent or
principled epistemic superiority. Moreover, epistemic products like
explanations and theories in biology rarely exhibit a monolevel
structure, but rather include multiple levels simultaneously (e.g.,
Schaffner 1993: 97–8, 387; Mitchell 2003: 147; Craver 2007).
The basic conclusion that Potochnik and McGill and other levels
skeptics draw from this is the following. The levels concept precludes
a sophisticated discussion of philosophical and scientific issues by
imposing an overly simplistic representation of science and nature.
So, although perhaps no one would deny the attractiveness of
‘levels’ in seeking to make complex natural systems
tractable to analysis, depicting these systems using the concept seems
to do far more harm than good. Burton S. Guttman is very clear on
this, stating that “if it is stated in any but the sloppiest and
most general terms, [the concept of levels] is a useless and even
misleading concept” (Guttman 1976: 112). Similarly, Miriam
Thalos emphasizes “the conceit of levels” and argues that
“the notion of levels provides no useful philosophical ideas
whatever” (Thalos 2013: 13).
This levels-skepticism has also a more constructive side. Several
authors have suggested replacing or reinterpreting levels talk in
terms of other concepts, most importantly scale (Eronen 2013, 2015;
Noble 2012; Potochnik & McGill 2012; see also P.S. Churchland
& Sejnowski 1992; McCauley 2009; Rueger & McGivern 2010). The
motivation behind this is that the problems associated with levels of
organization can be avoided if more well-defined notions are applied
instead. For instance, the notion of scale arguably does not
lead to the same kinds of problems as the idea of levels of
organization. All that it is needed for arranging things on a scale is
measuring some quantitative property of those things. Scales also have
the advantage of being entirely continuous, while levels require
placing things at distinct and discrete positions in the hierarchy
(Eronen 2015; Potochnik & McGill 2012). The scale that is the most
obviously relevant one in this context is the size scale, which is
based on how big things are: Organisms are usually (though not always)
bigger than cells, which are bigger than molecules, which are bigger
than atoms, and so on. However, also the time scale (the rate at which
processes occur) is crucially important for understanding biological
organization (Simon 1962; DiFrisco 2017): Interactions between
organisms (e.g., sexual reproduction) take place at much slower rates
than interactions between cells (e.g., synaptic communication), which
again are slower than interactions between molecules (e.g., receptor
binding).
This “deflationary” approach (Eronen 2013, 2015), where
levels are reduced or deflated to more well-defined concepts, is also
consistent with the idea that at some scales we may find peaks of
regularity or predictability (Wimsatt 1994), or clusters of causal
relationships (Potochnik & McGill 2012). However, to what extent
such peaks or clusters can be discerned in biological systems is an
open question. It also remains to be seen whether the deflationary
approach is sufficient for accounting for the role of levels of
organization in biological theories and explanations.
Levels of organization figure into a number of perennial debates in
philosophy of science. Here we go through three broad topics where
levels traditionally have and continue to play a prominent role:
Reduction, antireductionism and pluralism, and downward causation.
Within these topics, we focus on issues and theories that directly
involve levels.
As we saw above, Oppenheim and Putnam introduced their highly
influential view of levels in the context of the reductive unity of
science. Since then, levels have also continued to play an important
role in debates on reductionism (see the entry
 reductionism in biology).
 Questions of reductionism are often explicitly formulated in terms of
levels: Do higher level properties, theories, or explanations reduce
to lower level ones?
In the classical Nagelian account (Nagel 1961), reduction amounts to
deriving a theory that is to be reduced from a more fundamental
reducing theory on the basis of two conditions: deducibility and
connectability (see the entry
 scientific reduction).
 The standard example is the reduction of thermodynamics to
statistical mechanics. Nagel thought that from the laws of statistical
mechanics one can derive the laws of thermodynamics (deducibility),
with the help of “bridge principles” that connect the
terms of these two theories (connectability; Nagel 1961: ch. 11;
Schaffner 1967). Nagel’s original approach to reduction has been
criticized from many angles, but in the present context, the most
relevant criticism is that the classical model ignores the distinction
between interlevel and intralevel reductions in
science (Wimsatt 1976a, 1976b; McCauley 1996). Intralevel (or
successional) settings involve competing theories within a particular
science and within a particular level, for example the phlogiston
theory and the caloric theory of heat. Interlevel settings, on the
other hand, involve theories at different levels of organization that
thereby have differing explananda, terminology and methodology: for
example, cognitive psychology and molecular neuroscience.
Nagel’s model in its classic form treats these different
contexts equally. Other shortcomings of the Nagelian account are that
it only applies to (formalized) theories, ignoring other products of
science, and that it fails to incorporate the fact that the reducing
theory often corrects the reduced theory (see, e.g., Walter &
Eronen 2011). For these and many other reasons, it is widely agreed
that the Nagelian model fails to reconstruct reductive relations as
they appear in actual science (Wimsatt 1976b, 1979), and that the model in
its original form is inapplicable to actual biological cases (Kaiser
2012).
Problems of the Nagelian model led to the development of alternative
accounts based on the same basic idea, which actively incorporated the
idea of levels into their framework (Hooker 1981; P.S. Churchland
1986; Schaffner 1993; Bickle 1998, 2003). This culminated in the
“New Wave” model of reduction, where intertheoretic
relations form a continuum ranging from complete elimination to
retentive Nagel-style reduction (Bickle 1998). For a summary of this
model, see the entry
 scientific reduction
 §2.6. In the present context, what is noteworthy is that the
cases that inspire the eliminativist aspirations of the New Wave model
encompass only intralevel, i.e., successive, relations, while
the conclusions they draw concern cases of the interlevel kind
(particularly the relationship between psychology and neuroscience;
McCauley 1996). Historical cases of elimination, such as the
replacement of the phlogiston theory with the caloric theory of heat,
have arguably all been cases where a theory is replaced by a successor
at roughly the same level of organization. Theories at different
levels of organization can coevolve and exert selective pressures on
each other’s terminology, practices, explanations, and such
(Wimsatt 1976b [2007: 252]; P.S. Churchland 1986: 363, 373), but this
rarely if ever results in elimination or replacement of one of the
theories.
Other accounts of reduction also countenance the levels concept,
albeit in different ways. In his “ruthless” account of
reductionism, Bickle (2003) abandons the idea of reduction progressing
stepwise from level to level, and argues that cellular and molecular
neuroscience can directly replace psychology. If one can intervene
onto the molecular level to change variables at the behavioral level,
then, Bickle contends, one has discovered the “genuine”
causal mechanism for those variables (Bickle 2003). Here ‘levels’
figure into ruthless reductionism as useful fictions, where
intermediary levels such as tissues, organs, and the like provide a
scaffolding for emerging molecular-level explanations. These
intermediary levels exhibit “merely” heuristic value, but
only in the service of constructing behavior-to-molecules reductions
(Bickle 2003: 130).
More recently, Hüttemann and Love (2011) note that part-whole
reduction in particular has become a widely-endorsed alternative to
the Nagelian framework (see also Brigandt 2013: 77). In documenting
some of the facets that this form of reduction has acquired in the
intervening years, they put forward as two aspects of reductive
explanation compositionality and causality
(Hüttemann & Love 2011: 4). In reductive contexts, both are
expressed in levels-laden language. Compositionality, for instance, is
couched in ‘levels’ in that the very notions of part and
whole in biological contexts correspond to respectively lower- and
higher-level status (cf. Kaiser 2015: 192; Winther 2006). This is
reflected in the issues they raise for identifying and evaluating
reductive explanations as reductive. One of these,
“intrinsicality”, refers to the constraint of a part that
it always be contained within, or inherent to, the whole to which it
belongs (Hüttemann & Love 2011: 9–10).
‘Levels’ offers one way of straightforwardly capturing
this feature of part-whole relations (cf. 2011: 5). Another feature is
“fundamentality,” which 
corresponds to the assumption that higher levels of organization are
reduced to lower levels of organization: parts are taken as more
fundamental than the compound. (2011: 5–6) 
As these features are applied to evaluate whether an explanation is
justifiably considered “reductive” or not, by extension
‘levels’ can be seen here as contributing to the criteria
of adequacy to the conceptual issue of reduction. Kaiser (2015) goes
further than this approach in claiming that a “lower-level
character” is a necessary condition for an explanation to even
be considered reductive (2015: 188).
The idea of levels has also figured prominently into arguments for
antireductionism and pluralism. In his classic treatise, Philip
Kitcher (1984) elevates the level concept to a centerpiece of the
antireductionist position. According to Kitcher, the reductionist
aspiration of reducing classical Mendelian to molecular genetics will
not pan out because molecular constituents do not capture the causal
relations between Mendelian constituents (e.g., chromosomes) and
heritable traits. The reason for this is that the cytological
processes that form the basis for Mendelian patterns of heredity (such
as meiosis) form a natural kind that cannot be delineated at the
molecular level (1984: 349; Brigandt 2013: 76). Importantly, Kitcher
grounds this in the structure of the world as captured by the levels
concept: 
Anti-reductionism construes the current division of biology not simply
as a temporary feature of our science stemming from our cognitive
imperfections but as the reflection of levels of organization in
nature. (1984: 371, emphasis modified; Rosenberg 1985: 119, makes
a similar statement) 
Elevating the levels concept even further, Kitcher makes levels
(albeit a layer-cake variety of the term) part of the conception of
antireductionism itself, concluding that 
to the extent that we can make sense of the present explanatory
structure within biology—that division of the field into
subfields corresponding to levels of organization in nature—we
can also understand the antireductionist doctrine. (Kitcher 1984:
373)
In a more recent defense of antireductionism, Robert McCauley (1996,
2007) expands on Wimsatt’s intra-interlevel distinction to plea
for a multilevel explanatory pluralism between higher- and lower-level
theories. McCauley targets the New Wave model where intertheory
relations result in a spectrum of consequences, ranging from identity
to elimination, for higher-level theories (P.M. Churchland 1979; P.M.
Churchland and P.S. Churchland 1990; and later Bickle 1998). He argues
that a single spectrum of reductive consequences misrepresents the
nature of intertheory coevolution. Intralevel reductions, focusing on
reduction in terms of replacement, do not capture the historical
dynamics involved in evaluating interlevel cases, and elimination is
virtually nonexistent in interlevel cases. Moreover, eliminating or
reducing higher-level theories would also undermine the status of
the higher-level’s scientific institutions. As this rarely
happens, and attributing epistemic, ontological, or methodological
superiority to the lower levels is at best a claim that needs to be
substantiated, reductions appear to be wildly at odds with actual
scientific practice. Instead, we observe intertheory coevolution,
which proceeds by exploiting the ontological, explanatory, and
methodological resources that each theory brings to the table.
Higher-level theories can offer lower-level theories criteria for
external coherency, novel problem solving strategies, and serve as
evidentiary sources for lower-level scientific efforts (McCauley 1996:
32, 35).
Other arguments for pluralism also take their start from levels of
organization. Sandra Mitchell (2003), for instance, argues that since
biological systems are typically multilevel, this dissipates locating
causes within the system from one single level into multiple
interacting causes that are simultaneously in effect at the different
levels (2003: 147; 2009: 114–5). Mitchell argues on this basis
for a broader integrative pluralism that takes itself to be
suggested by the multilevel and multicomponential “ontology of
complex systems” (2009: 109). The basic idea of integrative
pluralism falls out of the fact that biological systems evolve in a
contingent manner (2003: 58), thus setting the stage for multilevel
evolutionary scenarios (2003: 24, 31). This in turn highlights the
preponderance of ‘emergent properties’ in biological
systems, which appear at novel levels of organization out of the
interactions of simpler components. Both of these factors inflate the
overall number of explanatory sources that could contribute to
explaining a given phenomenon (2003: 6; 2009: 8). Consequently,
discovering unilateral causes for complex phenomena will not be
forthcoming (2003: 160). Likewise, Ingo Brigandt (2010, 2013) emphasizes the pursuance of
investigation at multiple levels of organization as a fact about
scientific practice (2010: 303), but also as cause to articulate the
localized significance of explanatory contributions to particular
problems, as in the case of evo-devo explanations (2010: 303). 
This kind of multilevel pluralism is also defended by the supporters
of the New Mechanism (Bechtel 2008; Craver 2005, 2007; Brigandt 2010:
297). As McCauley (2007) points out, mechanistic explanation can be
seen as explanatory pluralism “writ small”: In each
localized mechanistic context, several levels (understood as levels of
mechanisms) are needed to fully explain the phenomenon (see, however,
Fazekas and Kertész (2011) and Soom (2012), who argue that the
commitments of New Mechanism are incompatible with robust
antireductionism).
Levels of organization have traditionally provided the framework for
the debate on downward causation, where the question is whether
higher-level entities or properties can exert causal influence on
lower-level ones (e.g., Bechtel 2008; Campbell 1974; Emmeche et al.
1997, 2000; Kim 1992, 1999; Craver & Bechtel 2007). The idea of
downward causation is closely connected to emergentism, and is often
seen as one of its core tenets (Emmeche et al. 1997, 2000; Kim 1999).
Examples of putative downward causation include psychological states
causing physical behavior, the activity of an organism causing changes
in the tissues and cells of that organism, and cell-level processes
such as synaptic communication causing molecular changes. Downward
causation seems prima facie to be common or even ubiquitous
in experiments and explanations in the life sciences (Craver &
Bechtel 2007; Love 2012). However, in contemporary philosophy,
downward causation is often approached with skepticism. If it is
understood as higher-level things or properties exerting some kind of
physically measurable influence on lower-level things, there seems to
be no evidence for it (McLaughlin 1992). Downward causation also faces
metaphysical difficulties, most importantly the much-debated
causal exclusion argument (e.g., Kim 1992, 1999, 2005). To
put it very roughly, the core of this argument is that if we accept
the plausible assumption that all physical occurrences must have
sufficient physical causes, it is not clear how there could be room
for additional higher-level causes of lower-level physical effects.
For more on causal exclusion and downward causation, see the entries
 mental causation
 and
 emergent properties.
Although the discussion on downward causation relies heavily on the
notion of levels, this notion itself has not received much explicit
attention. However, recently the account of levels of mechanisms has
been put to use to provide a new take on the issue (Bechtel 2008;
Craver & Bechtel 2007; Craver 2015). The idea is that genuine
top-down or downward causation does not exist; there are just normal
same-level causal relationships that sometimes have
“mechanistically mediated” effects downward in the
mechanism. What is meant by “mechanistically mediated” is
that changes in the higher levels of the mechanism immediately result
in changes in the lower levels of the mechanisms due to the
constitutive relationship between the higher-level mechanism and its
lower-level components. Mechanistically mediated effects may have the
initial appearance of downward causation, but the relationship between
the mechanism and its components is constitutive, not causal, and
therefore mechanistically mediated effects are not causal.
To clarify this, consider the example of Hal’s glucose
metabolism (Craver & Bechtel 2007: 559–560). Hal is playing
tennis, and as he keeps running around and swinging the racket, the
cells in Hal’s body start taking in and using more glucose. It
seems that the cause of the increase in Hal’s glucose metabolism
at the cellular level is Hal playing tennis, which suggests causation
from a higher level (the level of the whole organism playing tennis)
to a lower level (the cellular level). However, in the framework of
Craver and Bechtel described above, what is really going on is just
regular same-level causal relationships at the cellular level: Nerve
signals to the muscle cells cause a cascade of events that results in
increased glucose metabolism. Hal’s tennis playing activity is
partly constituted by these cellular mechanisms, and this
constitutive relationship is responsible for the illusion of downward
causation. As Hal starts to play, there are changes in these
mechanisms, but only in virtue of them partly making up the tennis
playing activity.
This approach is appealing, but faces several challenges. First, it
has been argued that there are no clear methods of distinguishing
between causal and constitutive relationships in mechanisms (e.g.,
Leuridan 2011); if this is correct, there seems to be no reason to
posit that “mechanistically mediated” effects are
non-causal. Second, the idea of “normal” intralevel
causation is problematic in the framework of levels of mechanisms
(Eronen 2013). As we have seen in section 2.2, the idea of
“being at the same level” has little if any significance
in this framework, so same-level causation cannot be the default or
normal type of causation. The idea seems to be rather that there is no
causation from a mechanism as a whole to the components of that same
mechanism, but this is just one specific form of putative downward
causation, and how other forms should be treated is left open in this
account (Eronen 2013). Third, it is not clear whether higher-level
causal processes in mechanisms can be distinct from causal processes
at lower levels of the mechanism—if not, there are no
higher-level causal processes that could have mechanistically mediated
effects downwards in the mechanism to begin with (Fazekas &
Kertész 2011).
A different way of approaching downward causation in biology is to
explicate it in terms of higher-level constraints or boundary
conditions. The idea is that the behavior of lower-level things is
constrained by the higher-level whole that they are a part of, and
therefore explaining the behavior of these lower-level things is not
possible exclusively at the lower level, but requires appealing to
higher-level factors (e.g., Bishop 2008; Campbell 1974; Emmeche et al.
1997, 2000; Kistler 2009; Noble 2012; Sperry 1969). In a classic
article, Donald Campbell expressed this idea as follows:
“processes at the lower levels of a hierarchy are restrained by
and act in conformity to the laws of the higher level” (Campbell
1974: 180). For example, explaining protein folding (at the level of
molecules) seems to require appealing to factors in the environment at
the cellular level, such as the presence of chaperones (Love
2012).
It is widely agreed that downward or top-down explanation of this kind
is required in science. The controversial and unsettled question is
whether these cases also involve causation in a substantial sense, or
whether it would be more appropriate to just designate them as some
form of downward determination or explanation (see, e.g., Hulswit
2005). It should also be noted that both this approach and that of
Craver and Bechtel are largely silent on the issue of downward
causation understood as causation across levels of organization or
scales in a broader sense, for example, between a nerve cell and
molecules that are not part of that same nerve cell, or between
psychological states and behavior.
Besides the more philosophical debates discussed above, levels of
organization also play an important conceptual role in biological
research and theory. Interestingly, this growing body of literature on
levels in evolutionary biology is almost entirely disconnected from
the debates on levels in philosophy of science discussed above.
A prominent example is the issue of levels of selection. In this
debate, the hierarchical organization of nature into levels is an
important background assumption, as the aim is to find out at which
level(s) of the biological hierarchy natural selection is taking place
(Griesemer 2000; Okasha 2006). Although Darwin’s original
account was focused on evolution at the level of organisms, arguably
the conditions for natural selection can be formulated abstractly
without referring to any specific kinds of entities, which allows for
natural selection to operate at any level where the conditions are
satisfied (Griesemer 2000; Lewontin 1970). Since the 1970s, the debate
on levels of selection has kept on growing and extending to different
areas, though no precise consensus has been reached. Positions range
from the gene-centered view, where natural selection is taken to
operate almost exclusively at the level of genes (e.g., Dawkins 1976;
Williams 1966), to the pluralistic multilevel selection theory, which
allows for natural selection to operate on any level of the biological
hierarchy where we find the right kind of units (e.g., Sober &
Wilson 1998; Wilson & Wilson 2008).
One branch of the levels of selection debate that is particularly
interesting from the point of view of levels of organization is the
issue of evolutionary transitions. Here the focus is on the
emergence of new levels of organization through evolutionary
processes (Buss 1987: ch. 5; Griesemer 2000; Maynard Smith &
Szathmáry 1995; Okasha 2006). The background idea is that the
complex hierarchical organization of nature that we observe today must
itself be a result of evolution, and therefore requires an
evolutionary explanation. For example, somehow prokaryotes evolved to
eukaryotic cells, single-celled organisms evolved to multicellular
organisms, individual animals evolved to colonies, and so on. In their
highly influential book, Maynard Smith and Szathmáry (1995)
proposed that the characteristic feature of major evolutionary
transitions is that entities that were capable of replicating
independently before the transitions are only capable of replicating
as parts of higher-level wholes after the transitions (see also Buss
1987). For example, after a single-celled organism has evolved into a
multicellular organism, the cells of the organism can no longer
replicate independently of the organism as a whole. For more on levels
of selection and evolutionary transitions, see Okasha (2006) and the
entry
 units and levels of selection.
In these debates, the notion of levels of organization is typically
used as a primitive term that is assumed to be clear enough and is
therefore left undefined (Griesemer 2005). A notable exception is
Okasha (2006), who puts forward a proposal for understanding levels of
organization in natural selection, building on earlier work by McShea
(2001). The starting point is the part-whole relationship, which is
the standard definitive feature of levels of organization, but taken
alone is insufficient for defining levels of organization: A big heap
of sand is made up of smaller heaps of sands, but does not constitute
a higher level of organization. Therefore, Okasha (2006) and McShea
(2001) propose two further conditions: The parts that form
higher-level wholes must interact with each other, and they
must be homologous with organisms in a free-living state. For
example, the cells that compose organisms interact with each other and
are homologous to free-living unicellular organisms, and therefore
constitute a level of organization. On the other hand, candidates such
as heaps of sand are ruled out, as they do not significantly interact
with each other, nor are they homologous to free-living organisms.
Another context in biology where the nature of levels has received
explicit attention is the “hierarchy theory of evolution”
developed by Niles Eldredge and colleagues (Eldredge et al. 2016, Vrba
& Eldredge 1984). In this theoretical framework, levels and
hierarchies are taken to be fundamentally important ontological
features of nature: 
Biological evolutionary theory is ontologically committed to the
existence of nested hierarchies in nature and attempts to explain
natural phenomena as a product of complex dynamics of real
hierarchical systems. (Tëmkin & Eldredge 2015: 184) 
In the hierarchy theory of evolution, a distinction is made between
two types of hierarchies and the corresponding levels (Eldredge
1996; Vrba & Eldredge
1984): The ecological and the genealogical
hierarchy. In both kinds of hierarchies, higher-level things are
formed through specific interactions among lower-level things. In the
ecological hierarchy, these interactions are exchanges of matter and
energy, such as consuming and gathering resources, and in this
hierarchy, we find things such as cells, organisms, avatars and
ecosystems. In the genealogical hierarchy, the defining activity
through which levels are formed is the transmission of information
through replication, and the hierarchy includes things such as cells,
organisms, demes and species. Note that cells and organisms appear in
both hierarchies, but in the ecological hierarchy they are seen as
interactors, whereas in the genealogical hierarchy they are seen as
replicators.
Besides these theoretical debates, levels of organization also play an
important role in textbooks and other introductory texts in biology
(e.g., Begon, Townshend & Harper 2006; Lobo 2008; Mader 2010;
O’Neill et al. 1986). Depictions of levels are ubiquitous in
biological textbooks, often appearing in the first few pages and with
a prominent ‘centerfold’ illustration. In this capacity,
the levels concept serves as an organizational principle that aids in
imparting basic knowledge of the study of biology to novice scientists
early in their training. Some of the ideas that the levels concept is
used to introduce to students include (i) the apparent preponderance
of emergence in living systems, (ii) reductive and non-reductive
approaches to analyzing biological phenomena (oftentimes with an
antireductionist gloss), and (iii) the context-sensitivity of posing
biological problems. Apart from these introductory uses, levels are
also used throughout textbooks to introduce the basic layout of
multiple ideas and important phenomena that are themselves ubiquitous
to different areas of biological study. The hierarchical structure of
proteins, being comprised of primary, secondary, tertiary, and
quaternary structures is one important instance. Interestingly,
textbooks vary between global and local treatments of levels. On the
one hand, centerfold depictions often represent the canonical levels
of organization in biology; the series of
atoms-molecules-organelles-cells-tissues-organs-organisms-populations-communities-ecosystems-biosphere make up the basic idea of levels in
these contexts. On the other hand, depictions like protein structure
are strongly localized to only two classes of macromolecules (nucleic
acids and proteins), while excluding others (lipids, sugars) (Love
2012: 117).
Although ‘levels of organization’ has been a key concept
in biology and its philosophy since the early 20th century,
there is still no consensus on the nature and significance of the
concept. In different areas of philosophy and biology, we find
strongly varying ideas of levels, and none of the accounts put forward
has received wide acceptance. At the moment, the mechanistic approach
is perhaps the most promising and acclaimed account, but as we have
seen, it may be too minimalistic to fulfill the role that levels of
organization continue to play in biological theorizing. We have also
noted that there is a curious disconnect between the tradition ranging
from Oppenheim and Putman to Bechtel, Craver and Wimsatt on the one
hand, and the discussions of levels in evolutionary biology (e.g.,
Eldredge, McShea, Okasha) on the other. One important aim for future
research would be to bridge this gap.