“By definition,” Maurice Cranston says,
“a liberal is a man who believes in liberty” (1967:
459). In two ways, liberals accord liberty primacy as a
political value. 
(i) Liberals have typically maintained that humans
are naturally in “a State of perfect Freedom to order
their Actions…as they think fit…without asking leave, or
depending on the Will of any other Man” (Locke, 1960 [1689]:
287). Mill too argued that “the burden of proof is supposed to
be with those who are against liberty; who contend for any restriction
or prohibition…. The a priori assumption is in favour
of freedom…” (1963, vol. 21: 262). Recent liberal
thinkers such as as Joel Feinberg (1984: 9), Stanley Benn (1988: 87)
and John Rawls (2001: 44, 112) agree. This might be called the
Fundamental Liberal Principle (Gaus, 1996: 162–166): freedom
is normatively basic, and so the onus of justification is on those who
would use coercion to limit freedom. It follows from this that
political authority and law must be justified, as they limit the
liberty of citizens. Consequently, a central question of liberal
political theory is whether political authority can be justified, and
if so, how. For this reason, social contract theory, as developed by
Thomas Hobbes (1948 [1651]), John Locke (1960 [1689]), Jean-Jacques
Rousseau (1973 [1762]) and Immanuel Kant (1965 [1797]), is usually
viewed as liberal even though the actual political prescriptions of,
say, Hobbes and Rousseau, have distinctly illiberal features. Insofar
as they take as their starting point a state of nature in which humans
are free and equal, and so argue that any limitation of this freedom
and equality must be justified (i.e., by the social contract), the
social contract tradition expresses the Fundamental Liberal
Principle. The Fundamental Liberal Principle holds that restrictions
on liberty must be justified. Because he accepts this, we can
understand Hobbes as part of the liberal tradition.


(ii) That is to say, although no one classifies Hobbes as a liberal,
there is reason to regard Hobbes as an instigator of liberal
philosophy (see also Waldron 2001), for it was Hobbes who asked on
what grounds citizens owe allegiance to the sovereign. Implicit in
Hobbes’s question is a rejection of the presumption that
citizens are the king’s property; on the contrary, kings are
accountable to sovereign citizens. In the culture at large, this view
of the relation between citizen and king had been taking shape for
centuries. The Magna Carta was a series of agreements, beginning in
1215, arising out of disputes between the barons and King John. The
Magna Carta eventually settled that the king is bound by the rule of
law. In 1215, the Magna Carta was part of the beginning rather than
the end of the argument, but by the mid-1300s, concepts of individual
rights to trial by jury, due process, and equality before the law were
more firmly established. The Magna Carta was coming to be seen as
vesting sovereignty not only in nobles but in “the People”
as such. By the mid-1400s, John Fortescue, England’s Chief Justice
from 1442 to 1461, would write The Difference Between an Absolute
and Limited Monarchy, a plea for limited monarchy that arguably
represents the beginning of English political thought (Schmidtz and
Brennan, 2010: chap. 2). 

Hobbes generally is treated as one of the first and greatest social
contract thinkers. Typically, Hobbes also is seen as an advocate of
unlimited monarchy. On Hobbes’s theory, Leviathan’s authority is
almost absolute along a particular dimension: namely, Leviathan is
authorized to do whatever it takes to keep the peace.  This special
end justifies almost any means, including drastic limitations on
liberty. Yet, note the limitations implicit in the end
itself. Leviathan’s job is to keep the peace: not to do everything
worth doing, but simply to secure the peace. Hobbes, the famed
absolutist, in fact developed a model of government sharply limited in
this most important way.

Paradigmatic liberals such as Locke not only advocate the Fundamental
Liberal Principle, but also maintain that justified limitations on
liberty are fairly modest. Only a limited government can be justified;
indeed, the basic task of government is to protect the equal liberty
of citizens. Thus John Rawls’s paradigmatically liberal first
principle of justice: “Each person is to have an equal right to
the most extensive system of equal basic liberty compatible with a
similar system for all” (Rawls, 1999b: 220).
1.2 Negative Liberty

Liberals disagree, however, about the concept of liberty, and as a
result the liberal ideal of protecting individual liberty can lead to
different conceptions of the task of government. Isaiah Berlin
famously advocated a negative conception of liberty:
I am normally said to be free to the degree to which no man
or body of men interferes with my activity. Political liberty in this
sense is simply the area within which a man can act unobstructed by
others. If I am prevented by others from doing what I could otherwise
do, I am to that degree unfree; and if this area is contracted by other
men beyond a certain minimum, I can be described as being coerced, or,
it may be, enslaved. Coercion is not, however, a term that covers every
form of inability. If I say that I am unable to jump more than ten feet
in the air, or cannot read because I am blind…it would be
eccentric to say that I am to that degree enslaved or coerced. Coercion
implies the deliberate interference of other human beings within the
area in which I could otherwise act. You lack political liberty or
freedom only if you are prevented from attaining a goal by other human
beings (Berlin, 1969: 122).


For Berlin and those who follow him, then, the heart of liberty is the
absence of coercion by others; consequently, the liberal state’s
commitment to protecting liberty is, essentially, the job of ensuring
that citizens do not coerce each other without compelling
justification. So understood, negative liberty is an
opportunity-concept. Being free is a matter of what options
are left open to us, regardless of whether we exercise such options
(Taylor, 1979).
1.3 Positive Liberty


Many liberals have been attracted to more ‘positive’
conceptions of liberty. Although Rousseau (1973 [1762]) seemed to
advocate a positive conception of liberty, according to which one was
free when one acted according to one’s true will (the general will),
the positive conception was best developed by the British
neo-Hegelians of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries,
such as Thomas Hill Green and Bernard Bosanquet (2001 [1923]). Green
acknowledged that “…it must be of course admitted that
every usage of the term [i.e., ‘freedom’] to express
anything but a social and political relation of one man to other
involves a metaphor…It always implies…some exemption
from compulsion by another…”(1986 [1895]:
229). Nevertheless, Green went on to claim that a person can be unfree
if he is subject to an impulse or craving that cannot be
controlled. Such a person, Green argued, is “…in the
condition of a bondsman who is carrying out the will of another, not
his own” (1986 [1895]: 228). Just as a slave is not doing what
he really wants to do, one who is, say, an alcoholic, is
being led by a craving to look for satisfaction where it cannot,
ultimately, be found.


For Green, a person is free only if she is self-directed or
autonomous. Running throughout liberal political theory is an ideal of
a free person as one whose actions are in some sense
her own. In this sense, positive liberty is
an exercise-concept. One is free merely to the degree that
one has effectively determined oneself and the shape of one’s
life (Taylor, 1979).  Such a person is not subject to compulsions,
critically reflects on her ideals and so does not unreflectively
follow custom, and does not ignore her long-term interests for
short-term pleasures. This ideal of freedom as autonomy has its roots
not only in Rousseau’s and Kant’s political theory, but
also in John Stuart Mill’s On Liberty.  And today it is
a dominant strain in liberalism, as witnessed by the work of S.I.
Benn (1988), Gerald Dworkin (1988), and Joseph Raz (1986); see also
the essays in Christman and Anderson (2005).

Green’s autonomy-based conception of positive freedom is often run
together with a notion of ‘positive’ freedom: freedom as
effective power to act or to pursue one’s ends. In the words of the
British socialist R. H. Tawney, freedom thus understood is ‘the
ability to act’ (1931: 221; see also Gaus, 2000; ch. 5.) On this
positive conception, a person not prohibited from being a member of a
Country Club but too poor to afford membership is not free to be a
member: she lacks an effective power to act. Positive freedom
qua effective power to act closely ties freedom to material
resources. (Education, for example, should be easily available so that
all can develop their capacities.) It was this conception of positive
liberty that Hayek had in mind when he insisted that although
“freedom and wealth are both good things…they still
remain different” (1960: 17–18).
1.4 Republican Liberty


An older notion of liberty that has recently resurfaced is
the republican, or neo-Roman, conception of liberty, which has roots
in the writings of Cicero and Niccolo Machiavelli (1950
[1513]). According to Philip Pettit,
The contrary of the liber, or free, person in
Roman, republican usage was the servus, or slave, and up to
at least the beginning of the last century, the dominant connotation
of freedom, emphasized in the long republican tradition, was not
having to live in servitude to another: not being subject to the
arbitrary power of another.  (Pettit, 1996: 576)
On this view, the opposite of freedom is domination. To be unfree
is to be “subject to the potentially capricious will or the
potentially idiosyncratic judgement of another” (Pettit, 1997:
5). The ideal liberty-protecting government, then, ensures that no
agent, including itself, has arbitrary power over any citizen. This is
accomplished through an equal disbursement of power. Each person has
power that offsets the power of another to arbitrarily interfere with
her activities (Pettit, 1997: 67).


The republican conception of liberty is certainly distinct from both
Greenian positive and negative conceptions. Unlike Greenian positive
liberty, republican liberty is not primarily concerned with rational
autonomy, realizing one’s true nature, or becoming one’s
higher self. When all dominating power has been dispersed, republican
theorists are generally silent about these goals (Larmore
2001). Unlike negative liberty, republican liberty is primarily
focused upon “defenseless susceptibility to interference, rather
than actual interference” (Pettit, 1996: 577). Thus, in contrast
to the ordinary negative conception, on the republican conception the
mere possibility of arbitrary interference is a limitation of
liberty. Republican liberty thus seems to involve a modal claim about
the possibility of interference, and this is often cashed out in terms
of complex counterfactual claims. It is not clear whether these claims
can be adequately explicated (Gaus, 2003; cf. Larmore, 2004).


Some republican theorists, such as Quentin Skinner (1998: 113),
Maurizio Viroli (2002: 6) and Pettit (1997: 8–11), view republicanism
as an alternative to liberalism. When republican liberty is seen
as a basis for criticizing market liberty and market society, this is
plausible (Gaus, 2003b). However, when liberalism is understood more
expansively, and not so closely tied to either negative liberty or
market society, republicanism becomes indistinguishable from
liberalism (Ghosh, 2008; Rogers, 2008; Larmore, 2001; Dagger,
1997).
2. The Debate Between the ‘Old’ and the ‘New’
2.1 Classical Liberalism


Liberal political theory, then, fractures over the conception of
liberty. In practice, another crucial fault line concerns the moral
status of private property and the market order. For classical
liberals — ‘old’ liberals — liberty and
private property are intimately related. From the eighteenth century
right up to today, classical liberals have insisted that an economic
system based on private property is uniquely consistent with
individual liberty, allowing each to live her life —including
employing her labor and her capital — as she sees fit. Indeed,
classical liberals and libertarians have often asserted that in some
way liberty and property are really the same thing; it has been
argued, for example, that all rights, including liberty rights, are
forms of property; others have maintained that property is itself a
form of freedom (Gaus, 1994; Steiner, 1994). A market order based on
private property is thus seen as an embodiment of freedom
(Robbins, 1961: 104). Unless people are free to make contracts and
sell their labour, save and invest their incomes as they see fit, and
free to launch enterprises as they raise the capital, they are not
really free.


Classical liberals employ a second argument connecting liberty and
private property. Rather than insisting that the freedom to obtain and
employ private property is simply one aspect of people’s
liberty, this second argument insists that private property
effectively protects liberty, and no protection can be effective
without private property. Here the idea is that the dispersion of
power that results from a free market economy based on private
property protects the liberty of subjects against encroachments by the
state. As F.A. Hayek argues, “There can be no freedom of press
if the instruments of printing are under government control, no
freedom of assembly if the needed rooms are so controlled, no freedom
of movement if the means of transport are a government monopoly”
(1978: 149).


Although classical liberals agree on the fundamental importance of
private property to a free society, the classical liberal tradition
itself is a spectrum of views, from near-anarchist to those that
attribute a significant role to the state in economic and social
policy (on this spectrum, see Mack and Gaus, 2004). Towards the
extreme ‘libertarian’ end of the classical liberal
spectrum are views of justified states as legitimate monopolies that
may with justice charge for essential rights-protection services:
taxation is legitimate if necessary and sufficient for effective
protection of liberty and property. Further ‘leftward’ we
encounter classical liberal views that allow taxation for public
education in particular, and more generally for public goods and
social infrastructure. Moving yet further ‘left’, some
classical liberal views allow for a modest social minimum.(e.g.,
Hayek, 1976: 87). Most nineteenth century classical liberal economists
endorsed a variety of state policies, encompassing not only the
criminal law and enforcement of contracts, but the licensing of
professionals, health, safety and fire regulations, banking
regulations, commercial infrastructure (roads, harbors and canals) and
often encouraged unionization (Gaus, 1983b). Although classical
liberalism today often is associated with libertarianism, the broader
classical liberal tradition was centrally concerned with bettering the
lot of the working class, women, blacks, immigrants, and so on. The
aim, as Bentham put it, was to make the poor richer, not the rich
poorer (Bentham, 1952 [1795]: vol. 1, 226n). Consequently, classical
liberals treat the leveling of wealth and income as outside the
purview of legitimate aims of government coercion.
2.2 The ‘New Liberalism’


What has come to be known as ‘new’,
‘revisionist’, ‘welfare state’, or perhaps
best, ‘social justice’, liberalism challenges this
intimate connection between personal liberty and a private property
based market order (Freeden, 1978; Gaus, 1983b; Paul, Miller and Paul,
2007). Three factors help explain the rise of this revisionist
theory. First, the new liberalism arose in the late nineteenth and
early twentieth centuries, a period in which the ability of a free
market to sustain what Lord Beveridge (1944: 96) called a
‘prosperous equilibrium’ was being questioned. Believing
that a private property based market tended to be unstable, or could,
as Keynes argued (1973 [1936]), get stuck in an equilibrium with high
unemployment, new liberals came to doubt, initially in empirical
grounds, that classical liberalism was an adequate foundation for a
stable, free society. Here the second factor comes into play: just as
the new liberals were losing faith in the market, their faith in
government as a means of supervising economic life was
increasing. This was partly due to the experiences of the First World
War, in which government attempts at economic planning seemed to
succeed (Dewey, 1929: 551–60); more importantly, this reevaluation of
the state was spurred by the democratization of western states, and
the conviction that, for the first time, elected officials could truly
be, in J.A. Hobson’s phrase ‘representatives of the
community’ (1922: 49). As D.G. Ritchie proclaimed:
be it observed that arguments used against
‘government’ action, where the government is entirely or
mainly in the hands of a ruling class or caste, exercising wisely or
unwisely a paternal or grandmotherly authority — such arguments
lose their force just in proportion as the government becomes more and
more genuinely the government of the people by the people themselves
(1896: 64).


The third factor underlying the currency of the new liberalism was
probably the most fundamental: a growing conviction that, so far from
being ‘the guardian of every other right’ (Ely, 1992: 26),
property rights foster an unjust inequality of power. They entrench a
merely formal equality that in actual practice systematically fails to
secure the kind of equal positive liberty that matters on the ground
for the working class. This theme is central to what is now called
‘liberalism’ in American politics, combining a strong
endorsement of civil and personal liberties with indifference or even
hostility to private ownership. The seeds of this newer liberalism can
be found in Mill’s On Liberty. Although Mill insisted
that the ‘so-called doctrine of Free Trade’ rested on
‘equally solid’ grounds as did the ‘principle of
individual liberty’ (1963, vol. 18: 293), he nevertheless
insisted that the justifications of personal and economic liberty were
distinct. And in his
Principles of Political Economy Mill consistently emphasized
that it is an open question whether personal liberty can flourish
without private property (1963, vol. 2; 203–210), a view that Rawls
was to reassert over a century later (2001: Part IV).
2.3 Liberal Theories of Social Justice


One consequence of Rawls’s great work, A Theory of
Justice (1999 [first published in 1971]) is that the ‘new
liberalism’ has become focused on developing a theory of social
justice. Since the 1960s when Rawls began to publish the elements of
his emerging theory, liberal political philosophers have analyzed, and
disputed, his famous ‘difference principle’ according to
which a just basic structure of society arranges social and economic
inequalities such that they are to the greatest advantage of the least
well off representative group (1999b:266). For Rawls, the default is
an equal distribution of (basically) income and wealth; only
inequalities that best enhance the long-term prospects of the least
advantaged are just. As Rawls sees it, the difference principle
constitutes a public recognition of the principle of reciprocity: the
basic structure is to be arranged such that no social group advances
at the cost of another (2001: 122–24). Many followers of Rawls have
focused less on the ideal of reciprocity than on the commitment to
equality (Dworkin, 2000). Indeed, what was previously called
‘welfare state’ liberalism is now often described as
liberal egalitarianism. However, see Jan Narveson’s essay on
Hobbes’s seeming defense of the welfare state (in Courtland
2018) for historical reflections on the difference).

And in one way that is especially appropriate: in his later work Rawls
insists that welfare-state capitalism does not constitute a just basic
structure (2001: 137–38). If some version of capitalism is to be just
it must be a ‘property owning democracy’ with a wide
diffusion of ownership; a market socialist regime, in Rawls’s
view, is more just than welfare-state capitalism (2001: 135-38). Not
too surprisingly, classical liberals such as Hayek (1976) insist that
the contemporary liberal fixation on ‘the mirage of social
justice’ leads modern liberals to ignore the extent to which, as
a matter of historical observation, freedom depends on a decentralized
market based on private property, the overall results of which are
unpredictable.

Thus, Robert Nozick (1974: 160ff) famously classifies Rawls’s
difference principle as patterned but not historical: prescribing a
distribution while putting no moral weight on who produced the goods
being distributed. One stark difference that emerges from this is that
new liberalism’s theory of justice is a theory about how to treat the
pie while old liberalism’s theory of justice is a theory about how to
treat bakers (Schmidtz, 2017: 231). 

The problem with patterned principles is that, in Nozick’s words,
liberty upsets patterns.  “No end-state principle or distributional
patterned principle of justice can be continuously realized without
continuous interference with people’s lives.” To illustrate, Nozick
asks you to imagine that society achieves a pattern of perfect justice
by the lights of whatever principle you prefer. Then someone offers
Wilt Chamberlain a dollar for the privilege of watching Wilt play
basketball. Before we know it, thousands of people are paying Wilt a
dollar each, every time Wilt puts on a show. Wilt gets rich. The
distribution is no longer equal, and no one complains. Nozick’s
question: If justice is a pattern, achievable at a given moment, what
happens if you achieve perfection? Must you then prohibit
everything—no further consuming, creating, trading, or
even giving—so as not to upset the perfect pattern?
Notice: Nozick neither argues nor presumes people can do whatever they
want with their property. Nozick, recalling the focus on connecting
property rights to liberty that animated liberalism in its classical
form, notes that if there is anything at all people can do,
even if the only thing they are free to do is give a coin to an
entertainer, then even that tiniest of liberties will, over time,
disturb the favored pattern. Nozick is right that if we focus on time
slices, we focus on isolated moments, and take moments too seriously,
when what matters is not the pattern of holdings at a moment but the
pattern of how people treat each other over time.  Even tiny liberties
must upset the pattern of a static moment. By the same token, however,
there is no reason why liberty must upset an ongoing pattern of fair
treatment. A moral principle forbidding racial discrimination, for
example, prescribes no particular end-state.  Such a principle is what
Nozick calls weakly patterned, sensitive to history as well as to
pattern, and prescribing an ideal of how people should be treated
without prescribing an end-state distribution. It affects the
pattern without prescribing a pattern.  And if a principle
forbidding racial discrimination works its way into a society via
cultural progress rather than legal intervention, it need not involve
any interference whatsoever. So, although Nozick sometimes speaks as
if his critique applies to all patterns, we should take seriously his
concession that “weak” patterns are compatible with liberty.  Some may
promote liberty, depending on how they are introduced and
maintained. See Schmidtz and Brennan (2010: chap.6). For work by
modern liberals that resonates with Nozick’s dissection of the
dimensions of equality that plausibly can count as liberal, see also
Anderson (1999), Young (1990), and Sen (1992). 

Accordingly, even granting to Nozick that time-slice principles
license immense, constant, intolerable interference with everyday
life, there is some reason to doubt that Rawls intended to embrace any
such view.  In his first article, Rawls said, “we cannot determine the
justness of a situation by examining it at a single moment.” Years
later, Rawls added, “It is a mistake to focus attention on the varying
relative positions of individuals and to require that every change,
considered as a single transaction viewed in isolation, be in itself
just.  It is the arrangement of the basic structure which is to be
judged, and judged from a general point of view.” Thus, to Rawls,
basic structure’s job is not to make every transaction work to the
working class’s advantage, let alone to the advantage of each member
of the class.  Rawls was more realistic than that.  Instead, it is the
trend of a whole society over time that is supposed to benefit the
working class as a class.  To be sure, Rawls was a kind of
egalitarian, but the pattern Rawls meant to endorse was a pattern of
equal status, applying not so much to a distribution as to an ongoing
relationship. This is not to say that Nozick’s critique had no
point. Nozick showed what an alternative theory might look like,
portraying Wilt Chamberlain as a separate person in a more robust
sense (unencumbered by nebulous debts to society) than Rawls could
countenance. To Nozick, Wilt’s advantages are not what
Wilt finds on the table; Wilt’s advantages are what
Wilt brings to the table.  And respecting what Wilt brings to
the table is the exact essence of respecting him as a separate
person. In part due to Nozick, today’s egalitarians now acknowledge
that any equality worthy of aspiration will focus less on justice as a
property of a time-slice distribution and more on how people are
treated: how they are rewarded for their contributions
and enabled over time to make contributions worth
rewarding. (Schmidtz and Brennan, 2010: chap.6).
3. The Debate About the Comprehensiveness of Liberalism
3.1 Political Liberalism


As his work evolved, Rawls (1996: 5ff) insisted that his liberalism
was not a ‘comprehensive’ doctrine, that is, one which
includes an overall theory of value, an ethical theory, an
epistemology, or a controversial metaphysics of the person and
society. Our modern societies, characterized by a ‘reasonable
pluralism’, are already filled with such doctrines. The aim of
‘political liberalism’ is not to add yet another sectarian
doctrine, but to provide a political framework that is neutral between
such controversial comprehensive doctrines (Larmore, 1996: 121ff). If
it is to serve as the basis for public reasoning in our diverse
western societies, liberalism must be restricted to a core set of
political principles that are, or can be, the subject of consensus
among all reasonable citizens. Rawls’s notion of a purely political
conception of liberalism seems more austere than the traditional
liberal political theories discussed above, being largely restricted
to constitutional principles upholding basic civil liberties and the
democratic process.


As Gaus (2004) has argued, the distinction between
‘political’ and ‘comprehensive’ liberalism
misses a great deal. Liberal theories form a broad continuum, from
those that constitute full-blown philosophical systems, to those that
rely on a full theory of value and the good, to those that rely on a
theory of the right (but not the good), all the way to those that seek
to be purely political doctrines. Nevertheless, it is important to
appreciate that, though liberalism is primarily a political theory, it
has been associated with broader theories of ethics, value, and
society. Indeed, many believe that liberalism cannot rid itself of all
controversial metaphysical (Hampton, 1989) or epistemological (Raz,
1990) commitments.
3.2 Liberal Ethics


Following Wilhelm von Humboldt (1993 [1854]), in On Liberty
Mill argues that one basis for endorsing freedom (Mill
believes there are many), is the goodness of developing individuality
and cultivating capacities:
Individuality is the same thing with development,
and…it is only the cultivation of individuality which produces,
or can produce, well-developed human beings…what more can be
said of any condition of human affairs, than that it brings human
beings themselves nearer to the best thing they can be? or what worse
can be said of any obstruction to good, than that it prevents this?
(Mill, 1963, vol. 18: 267)


This is not just a theory about politics: it is a substantive,
perfectionist, moral theory about the good. On this view, the
right thing to do is to promote development or perfection, but only a
regime securing extensive liberty for each person can accomplish this
(Wall, 1998). This moral ideal of human perfection and development
dominated liberal thinking in the latter part of the nineteenth century, and
much of the twentieth: not only Mill, but T.H. Green,
L.T. Hobhouse, Bernard Bosanquet, John Dewey and even Rawls show
allegiance to variants of this perfectionist ethic and the claim that
it provides a foundation for endorsing a regime of liberal rights
(Gaus, 1983a). And it is fundamental to the proponents of liberal
autonomy discussed above, as well as ‘liberal virtue’
theorists such as William Galston (1980).  That the good life is
necessarily a freely chosen one in which a person develops his unique
capacities as part of a plan of life is probably the dominant liberal
ethic of the past century.


The main challenge to Millian perfectionism’s status as the
distinctly liberal ethic comes from moral contractualism, which can be
divided into what might very roughly be labeled ‘Kantian’
and ‘Hobbesian’ versions. According to Kantian
contractualism, “society, being composed of a plurality of
persons, each with his own aims, interests, and conceptions of the
good, is best arranged when it is governed by principles that do
not themselves presuppose any particular conception of the
good…” (Sandel, 1982: 1). On this view, respect for the
personhood of others demands that we refrain from imposing our view of
the good life on them. Only principles that can be justified to all
respect the personhood of each. We thus witness the tendency of recent
liberal theory (Reiman, 1990; Scanlon, 1998) to transform the social
contract from an account of the state to an overall justification of
morality, or at least a social morality. Basic to such ‘Kantian
contractualism’ is the idea that suitably idealized individuals
are motivated not by the pursuit of gain, but by a commitment or
desire to
 publicly justify
 the claims they
make on others (Reiman, 1990; Scanlon, 1982). A moral code
that could be the object of agreement among such individuals is
thus a publicly justified morality.


In contrast, distinctively Hobbesian contractualism supposes only
that individuals are self-interested and correctly perceive that each
person’s ability to effectively pursue her interests is enhanced by a
framework of norms that structure social life and divide the fruits of
social cooperation (Gauither, 1986; Hampton, 1986; Kavka,
1986). Morality, then, is a common framework that advances the
self-interest of each. The claim of Hobbesian contractualism to be a
distinctly liberal conception of morality stems from the importance of
individual freedom and property in such a common framework: only
systems of norms that allow each person great freedom to pursue her
interests as she sees fit could, it is argued, be the object of
consensus among self-interested agents (Courtland, 2008; Gaus 2003a:
chap. 3; Gaus, 2012; Ridge, 1998; Gauthier, 1995). The continuing problem for
Hobbesian contractualism is the apparent rationality of free-riding:
if everyone (or enough) complies with the terms of the contract, and
so social order is achieved, it would seem rational to defect, and act
immorally when one can gain by doing so. This is essentially the
argument of Hobbes’s ‘Foole’, and from Hobbes (1948
[1651]: 94ff) to Gauthier (1986: 160ff), Hobbesians have tried to
reply to it.
3.3 Liberal Theories of Value


Turning from rightness to goodness, we can identify three main
candidates for a liberal theory of value. We have already encountered
the first: perfectionism. Insofar as perfectionism is a theory of
right action, it can be understood as an account of
morality. Obviously, however, it is an account of rightness that
presupposes a theory of value or the good: the ultimate human value is
developed personality or an autonomous life. Competing with this
objectivist theory of value are two other liberal accounts: pluralism
and subjectivism.


In his famous defence of negative liberty, Berlin insisted that values
or ends are plural, and no interpersonally justifiable ranking among
these many ends is to be had. More than that, Berlin maintained that
the pursuit of one end necessarily implies that other ends will not be
achieved. In this sense ends collide. In economic terms, the pursuit
of one end entails opportunity costs: foregone pursuits which cannot
be impersonally shown to be less worthy. There is no interpersonally
justifiable way to rank the ends, and no way to achieve them all. Each
person must devote herself to some ends at the cost of ignoring
others. For the pluralist, then, autonomy, perfection or development
are not necessarily ranked higher than hedonistic pleasures,
environmental preservation or economic equality. All compete for our
allegiance, but because they are incommensurable, no choice can be
interpersonally justified.


The pluralist is not a subjectivist: that values are many, competing
and incommensurable does not imply that they are somehow dependent on
subjective experiences. But the claim that what a person values rests
on experiences that vary from person to person has long been a part of
the liberal tradition. To Hobbes, what one values depends on what one
desires (1948 [1651]: 48). Locke advances a ‘taste theory of
value’:
The Mind has a different relish, as well as the Palate; and
you will as fruitlessly endeavour to delight all Man with Riches or
Glory, (which yet some Men place their Happiness in,) as you would
satisfy all men’s Hunger with Cheese or Lobsters; which, though very
agreeable and delicious fare to some, are to others extremely nauseous
and offensive: And many People would with reason preferr [sic] the
griping of an hungry Belly, to those Dishes, which are a Feast to
others. Hence it was, I think, that the Philosophers of old did in vain
enquire, whether the Summum bonum consisted in Riches, or
bodily Delights, or Virtue, or Contemplation: And they might have as
reasonably disputed, whether the best Relish were to be found in
Apples, Plumbs or Nuts; and have divided themselves into Sects upon it.
For…pleasant Tastes depend not on the things themselves, but
their agreeableness to this or that particulare Palate, wherein there
is great variety…(1975 [1706]: 269).


The perfectionist, the pluralist and the subjectivist concur on the
crucial point: the nature of value is such that reasonable people
pursue different ways of living. To the perfectionist, this is because
each person has unique capacities, the development of which confers
value on her life; to the pluralist, it is because values are many and
conflicting, and no one life can include them all, or make the
interpersonally correct choice among them; and to the subjectivist, it
is because our ideas about what is valuable stem from our desires or
tastes, and these differ from one individual to another. All three
views, then, defend the basic liberal idea that people rationally
follow different ways of living. But in themselves, such notions of
the good are not full-fledged liberal ethics, for an additional
argument is required linking liberal value with norms of equal
liberty, and to the idea that other people command a certain respect
and a certain deference simply by virtue of having values of their
own. To be sure, Berlin seems to believe this is a very quick
argument: the inherent plurality of ends points to
the political preeminence of liberty (see, for example, Gray:
2006). Guaranteeing each a measure of negative liberty is, Berlin
argues, the most humane ideal, as it recognizes that ‘human
goals are many’, and no one can make a choice that is right for
all people (1969: 171). It is here that subjectivists and pluralists
alike sometimes rely on versions of moral contractualism. Those who
insist that liberalism is ultimately nihilistic can be interpreted as
arguing that this transition cannot be made successfully: liberals, on
their view, are stuck with a subjectivistic or pluralistic theory of
value, and no account of the right emerges from it.
3.4 The Metaphysics of Liberalism


Throughout the last century, liberalism has been beset by
controversies between, on the one hand, those broadly identified as
‘individualists’ and, on the other,
‘collectivists’, ‘communitarians’ or
‘organicists’ (for skepticism about this, though, see
Bird, 1999).  These vague and sweeping designations have been applied
to a wide array of disputes; we focus here on controversies concerning
(i) the nature of society; (ii) the nature of the self.


Liberalism is, of course, usually associated with individualist
analyses of society.  ‘Human beings in society’, Mill
claimed, ‘have no properties but those which are derived from,
and which may be resolved into, the laws of the nature of individual
men’ (1963, Vol. 8: 879; see also Bentham: 1970 [1823]: chap. I,
sec. 4). Herbert Spencer agreed: “the properties of the mass are
dependent upon the attributes of its component parts” (1995
[1851]: 1).  In the last years of the nineteenth century this
individualist view was increasingly subject to attack, especially by
those who were influenced by idealist philosophy.  D. G.  Ritche,
criticizing Spencer’s individualist liberalism, denies that
society is simply a ‘heap’ of individuals, insisting that
it is more akin to an organism, with a complex internal life (1896:
13).  Liberals such as L. T. Hobhouse and Dewey refused to adopt
radically collectivist views such as those advocated by Bernard
Bosanquet (2001), but they too rejected the radical individualism of
Bentham, Mill and Spencer.  Throughout most of the first half of the
twentieth century such ‘organic’ analyses of society held
sway in liberal theory, even in economics (see A.F Mummery and
J. A. Hobson, 1956: 106; J.M. Keynes, 1972: 275). 


During and after the Second World War the idea that liberalism was
based on inherently individualist analysis of humans-in-society arose
again. Karl Popper’s The Open Society and its Enemies (1945)
presented a sustained critique of Hegelian and Marxist theory and its
collectivist and historicist, and to Popper, inherently illiberal,
understanding of society.  The reemergence of economic analysis in
liberal theory brought to the fore a thoroughgoing methodological
individualism.  Writing in the early 1960s, James Buchanan and Gordon
Tullock adamantly defended the ‘individualistic postulate’
against all forms of ‘organicism’: “This
[organicist] approach or theory of the collectivity….is essentially
opposed to the Western philosophical tradition in which the human
individual is the primary philosophical entity” (1965:
11–12). Human beings, insisted Buchanan and Tullock, are the only real
choosers and decision-makers, and their preferences determine both
public and private actions.  The renascent individualism of
late-twentieth century liberalism was closely bound up with the
induction of Hobbes as a member of the liberal pantheon.  Hobbes’s
relentlessly individualistic account of society, and the manner in
which his analysis of the state of nature lent itself to
game-theoretical modeling, yielded a highly individualist, formal
analysis of the liberal state and liberal morality.


Of course, as is widely known, the last twenty-five years have
witnessed a renewed interest in collectivist analyses of liberal
society —though the term ‘collectivist’ is abjured
in favor of ‘communitarian’.  Writing in 1985, Amy Gutmann
observed that “we are witnessing a revival of communitarian
criticisms of liberal political theory. Like the critics of the 1960s,
those of the 1980s fault liberalism for being mistakenly and
irreparably individualistic” (1985: 308).  Starting with Michael
Sandel’s (1982) famous criticism of Rawls, a number of critics charge
that liberalism is necessarily premised on an abstract conception of
individual selves as pure choosers, whose commitments, values and
concerns are possessions of the self, but never constitute the self.
Although the ‘liberal-communitarian’ debate ultimately involved
wide-ranging moral, political and sociological disputes about the
nature of communities, and the rights and responsibilities of their
members, the heart of the debate was about the nature of liberal
selves. For Sandel the flaw at the heart of Rawls’s liberalism is its
implausibly abstract theory of the self, the pure autonomous chooser.
Rawls, he charges, ultimately assumes that it makes sense to identify
us with a pure capacity for choice, and that such pure choosers might
reject any or all of their attachments and values and yet retain their
identity. 


From the mid-1980s onwards various liberals sought to show how
liberalism may consistently advocate a theory of the self which finds
room for cultural membership and other non-chosen attachments and
commitments which at least partially constitute the self (Kymlicka,
1989). Much of liberal theory has became focused on the issue as to
how we can be social creatures, members of cultures and raised in
various traditions, while also being autonomous choosers who employ
our liberty to construct lives of our own.
4. The Debate About The Reach of Liberalism
4.1 Is Liberalism Justified in All Political Communities?


In On Liberty Mill argued that “Liberty, as a
principle, has no application to any state of things anterior to the
time when mankind have become capable of being improved by free and
equal discussion” (1963, vol. 18: 224). Thus “Despotism is
a legitimate form of government in dealing with barbarians, provided
the end be their improvement…” (1963, vol. 18: 224). This
passage — infused with the spirit of nineteenth century
imperialism (and perhaps, as some maintain, latent racism) — is
often ignored by defenders of Mill as an embarrassment (Parekh, 1994;
Parekh, 1995; Mehta, 1999; Pitts, 2005).This is not to say that such
Millian passages are without thoughtful defenders. See, for example,
Inder Marawah (2011). Nevertheless, it raises a question that still
divides liberals: are liberal political principles justified for all
political communities? In The Law of Peoples Rawls argues
that they are not. According to Rawls there can be a ‘decent
hierarchical society’ which is not based on the liberal
conception of all persons as free and equal, but instead views persons
as “responsible and cooperating members of their respective
groups” but not inherently equal (1999a: 66).  Given this, the
full liberal conception of justice cannot be constructed out of shared
ideas of this ‘people’, though basic human rights,
implicit in the very idea of a social cooperative structure, apply to
all peoples. David Miller (2002) develops a different defense of this
anti-universalistic position, while those such as Thomas Pogge (2002:
ch. 4) and Martha Nussbaum (2002) reject Rawls’s position,
instead advocating versions of moral universalism: they claim that
liberal moral principles apply to all states.
4.2 Is Liberalism a Cosmopolitan or a State-centered Theory?


The debate about whether liberal principles apply to all political
communities should not be confused with the debate as to whether
liberalism is a state-centered theory, or whether, at least ideally,
it is a cosmopolitan political theory for the community of all
humankind. Immanuel Kant — a moral universalist if ever there
was one — argued that all states should respect the dignity of
their citizens as free and equal persons, yet denied that humanity
forms one political community. Thus he rejected the ideal of a
universal cosmopolitan liberal political community in favor of a world
of states, all with internally just constitutions, and united in a
confederation to assure peace (1970 [1795]).


On a classical liberal theory, the difference between a world of
liberal communities and a world liberal community is not of
fundamental importance. Since the aim of government in a community is
to assure the basic liberty and property rights of its citizens,
borders are not of great moral significance in classical liberalism
(Lomasky, 2007). In contrast under the
‘new’ liberalism, which stresses redistributive programs
to achieve social justice, it matters a great deal who is included
within the political or moral community. If liberal principles require
significant redistribution, then it is crucially important whether
these principles apply only within particular communities, or whether
their reach is global. Thus a fundamental debate between Rawls and
many of his followers is whether the difference principle should only
be applied within a liberal state such as the United States (where the
least well off are the least well off Americans), or whether it should
be applied globally (where the least well off are the least well off
in the world) (Rawls, 1999a: 113ff; Beitz, 1973: 143ff; Pogge, 1989:
Part Three).
4.3 Liberal Interaction with Non-Liberal Groups: International


Liberal political theory also fractures concerning the appropriate
response to groups (cultural, religious, etc.) which endorse illiberal
policies and values. These groups may deny education to some of their
members, advocate female genital mutilation, restrict religious
freedom, maintain an inequitable caste system, and so on. When, if
ever, should a liberal group interfere with the
internal governance of an illiberal group?
 

Suppose first that the illiberal group is another political community
or state. Can liberals intervene in the affairs of non-liberal states?
Mill provides a complicated answer in his 1859 essay ‘A Few
Words on Non-Intervention’. Reiterating his claim from On
Liberty that civilized and non-civilized countries are to be
treated differently, he insists that “barbarians have no rights
as a nation, except a right to such treatment as may, at the
earliest possible period, fit them for becoming one. The only moral
laws for the relation between a civilized and a barbarous government,
are the universal rules of morality between man and man” (1963,
vol. 21: 119). Although this strikes us today as simply a case for an
objectionable paternalistic imperialism (and it certainly was such a
case), Mill’s argument for the conclusion is more complex, including a
claim that, since international morality depends on reciprocity,
‘barbarous’ governments that cannot be counted on to
engage in reciprocal behavior have no rights qua
governments. In any event, when Mill turns to interventions among
‘civilized’ peoples he develops an altogether more
sophisticated account as to when one state can intervene in the
affairs of another to protect liberal principles. Here Mill is
generally against intervention. “The reason is, that there can
seldom be anything approaching to assurance that intervention, even if
successful, would be for the good of the people themselves. The only
test possessing any real value, of a people’s having become fit for
popular institutions, is that they, or a sufficient proportion of them
to prevail in the contest, are willing to brave labour and danger for
their liberation” (1963, vol. 21: 122).


In addition to questions of efficacy, to the extent that peoples or
groups have rights to collective self-determination, intervention by a
liberal group to induce a non-liberal community to adopt liberal
principles will be morally objectionable. As with individuals,
liberals may think that peoples or groups have freedom to make
mistakes in managing their collective affairs. If people’s
self-conceptions are based on their participation in such groups, even
those whose liberties are denied may object to, and perhaps in some
way harmed by, the imposition of liberal principles (Margalit and Raz,
1990; Tamir, 1993). Thus rather than proposing a doctrine of
intervention many liberals propose various principles of
toleration which specify to what extent liberals must tolerate
non-liberal peoples and cultures. As is usual, Rawls’s discussion is
subtle and enlightening. In his account of the foreign affairs of
liberal peoples, Rawls argues that liberal peoples must distinguish
‘decent’ non-liberal societies from ‘outlaw’
and other states; the former have a claim on liberal peoples to
tolerance while the latter do not (1999a: 59–61). Decent peoples,
argues Rawls, ‘simply do not tolerate’ outlaw states which
ignore human rights: such states may be subject to ‘forceful
sanctions and even to intervention’ (1999a: 81). In contrast,
Rawls insists that “liberal peoples must try to encourage
[non-liberal] decent peoples and not frustrate their vitality by
coercively insisting that all societies be liberal” (1999a:
62). Chandran Kukathas (2003) — whose liberalism derives from
the classical tradition — is inclined to almost complete
toleration of non-liberal peoples, with the non-trivial proviso that there must be
exit rights.
4.4 Liberal Interaction with Non-Liberal Groups: Domestic


The status of non-liberal groups within liberal societies has
increasingly become a subject of debate, especially with respect to
some citizens of faith.  We should distinguish two questions: (i) to
what extent should non-liberal cultural and religious communities be
exempt from the requirements of the liberal state? and, (ii) to what
extent can they be allowed to participate in decision-making in the
liberal state?


Turning to (i), liberalism has a long history of seeking to
accommodate religious groups that have deep objections to certain
public policies, such as the Quakers, Mennonites or Sikhs. The most
difficult issues in this regard arise in relation to children and
education (see Galston, 2003; Fowler, 2010; Andersson, 2011) Mill, for
example, writes:
Consider … the case of education. Is it not almost
a self-evident axiom, that the State should require and compel the
education, up to a certain standard, of every human being who is born
its citizen? Yet who is there that is not afraid to recognize and
assert this truth? Hardly any one indeed will deny that it is one of
the most sacred duties of the parents (or, as law and usage now stand,
the father), after summoning a human being into the world, to give to
that being an education fitting him to perform his part well in life
towards others and towards himself … . that to bring a child
into existence without a fair prospect of being able, not only to
provide food for its body, but instruction and training for its mind,
is a moral crime, both against the unfortunate offspring and against
society … . (1963, vol. 18)

Over the last thirty years, there has been a particular case that is
at the core of this debate — Wisconsin vs. Yoder: [406
U.S. 205 (1972)].  In this case, the United States Supreme Court
upheld the right of Amish parents to avoid compulsory schooling laws
and remove their children from school at the age of 14 — thus,
according to the Amish, avoiding secular influences that might
undermine the traditional Amish way of life. Because cultural and
religious communities raise and educate children, they cannot be seen
as purely voluntary opt-outs from the liberal state: they exercise
coercive power over children, and so basic liberal principles about
protecting the innocent from unjustified coercion come into play. Some
have maintained that liberal principles require that the state should
intervene (against groups like the Amish) in order to [1] provide the
children with an effective right of exit that would otherwise be
denied via a lack of education (Okin, 2002), [2] to protect the
children’s right to an autonomous and ‘open future’
(Feinberg, 1980) and/or [3] to insure that children will have the
cognitive tools to prepare them for their future role as citizens
(Galston, 1995: p. 529; Macedo, 1995: pp. 285–6). Other liberal
theorists, on the other hand, have argued that the state should not
intervene because it might undermine the inculcation of certain values
that are necessary for the continued existence of certain
comprehensive doctrines (Galston, 1995: p. 533; Stolzenberg, 1993: pp.
582–3). Moreover, some such as Harry Brighouse (1998) have argued that
the inculcation of liberal values through compulsory education might
undermine the legitimacy of liberal states because children would not
(due to possible indoctrination) be free to consent to such
institutions.

 
Question (ii) — the extent to which non-liberal beliefs and
values may be employed in liberal political discussion— has
become the subject of sustained debate in the years following Rawls’s
Political Liberalism. According to Rawls’s liberalism —
and what we might call ‘public reason liberalism’ more
generally — because our societies are characterized by
‘reasonable pluralism’, coercion cannot be justified on
the basis of comprehensive moral or religious systems of belief. But
many friends of religion (e.g., Eberle, 2002; Perry, 1993) argue that
this is objectionably ‘exclusionary’: conscientious
believers are barred from voting on their deepest convictions. Again
liberals diverge in their responses. Some such as Stephen Macedo take
a pretty hard-nosed attitude: ‘if some people…feel
“silenced” or “marginalized” by the fact that
some of us believe that it is wrong to shape basic liberties on the
basis of religious or metaphysical claims, I can only say “grow
up!”’ (2000: 35). Rawls, in contrast, seeks to be more
accommodating, allowing that arguments based on religious
comprehensive doctrines may enter into liberal politics on issues of
basic justice “provided that, in due course, we give properly
public reasons to support the principles and policies that our
comprehensive doctrine is said to support” (1999a: 144). Thus
Rawls allows the legitimacy of religious-based arguments against
slavery and in favor of the United States civil rights movement,
because ultimately such arguments were supported by public reasons.
Others (e.g., Greenawalt, 1995) hold that even this is too
restrictive: it is difficult for liberals to justify a moral
prohibition on a religious citizen from voicing her view in liberal
political debate. Gaus and Vallier seek to ameliorate such tensions,
in part, by acknowledging an asymmetry between the ‘reasons
to justify to another a law’ and the ‘reasons
to reject’ a law (2009: 54). They argue that although
“a secular rationale is necessary in our society for a publicly
justified law, it can be defeated by a reasonable religious conviction
without secular backing” (2009: 63). Thus, citizens of faith
would be able to preserve their religious integrity, all the while
remaining unable to coerce others via unshared religious reasons.
5. Conclusion


Given that liberalism fractures on so many issues — the nature
of liberty, the place of property and democracy in a just society, the
comprehensiveness and the reach of the liberal ideal — one might
wonder whether there is any point in talking of
‘liberalism’ at all. It is not, though, an unimportant or
trivial thing that all these theories take liberty to be the grounding
political value. Radical democrats assert the overriding value of
equality, communitarians maintain that the demands of belongingness
trump freedom, and conservatives complain that the liberal devotion to
freedom undermines traditional values and virtues and so social order
itself. Intramural disputes aside, liberals join in rejecting these
conceptions of political right.
(ii) That is to say, although no one classifies Hobbes as a liberal,
there is reason to regard Hobbes as an instigator of liberal
philosophy (see also Waldron 2001), for it was Hobbes who asked on
what grounds citizens owe allegiance to the sovereign. Implicit in
Hobbes’s question is a rejection of the presumption that
citizens are the king’s property; on the contrary, kings are
accountable to sovereign citizens. In the culture at large, this view
of the relation between citizen and king had been taking shape for
centuries. The Magna Carta was a series of agreements, beginning in
1215, arising out of disputes between the barons and King John. The
Magna Carta eventually settled that the king is bound by the rule of
law. In 1215, the Magna Carta was part of the beginning rather than
the end of the argument, but by the mid-1300s, concepts of individual
rights to trial by jury, due process, and equality before the law were
more firmly established. The Magna Carta was coming to be seen as
vesting sovereignty not only in nobles but in “the People”
as such. By the mid-1400s, John Fortescue, England’s Chief Justice
from 1442 to 1461, would write The Difference Between an Absolute
and Limited Monarchy, a plea for limited monarchy that arguably
represents the beginning of English political thought (Schmidtz and
Brennan, 2010: chap. 2). 
Hobbes generally is treated as one of the first and greatest social
contract thinkers. Typically, Hobbes also is seen as an advocate of
unlimited monarchy. On Hobbes’s theory, Leviathan’s authority is
almost absolute along a particular dimension: namely, Leviathan is
authorized to do whatever it takes to keep the peace.  This special
end justifies almost any means, including drastic limitations on
liberty. Yet, note the limitations implicit in the end
itself. Leviathan’s job is to keep the peace: not to do everything
worth doing, but simply to secure the peace. Hobbes, the famed
absolutist, in fact developed a model of government sharply limited in
this most important way.
Paradigmatic liberals such as Locke not only advocate the Fundamental
Liberal Principle, but also maintain that justified limitations on
liberty are fairly modest. Only a limited government can be justified;
indeed, the basic task of government is to protect the equal liberty
of citizens. Thus John Rawls’s paradigmatically liberal first
principle of justice: “Each person is to have an equal right to
the most extensive system of equal basic liberty compatible with a
similar system for all” (Rawls, 1999b: 220).
Liberals disagree, however, about the concept of liberty, and as a
result the liberal ideal of protecting individual liberty can lead to
different conceptions of the task of government. Isaiah Berlin
famously advocated a negative conception of liberty:
For Berlin and those who follow him, then, the heart of liberty is the
absence of coercion by others; consequently, the liberal state’s
commitment to protecting liberty is, essentially, the job of ensuring
that citizens do not coerce each other without compelling
justification. So understood, negative liberty is an
opportunity-concept. Being free is a matter of what options
are left open to us, regardless of whether we exercise such options
(Taylor, 1979).
Many liberals have been attracted to more ‘positive’
conceptions of liberty. Although Rousseau (1973 [1762]) seemed to
advocate a positive conception of liberty, according to which one was
free when one acted according to one’s true will (the general will),
the positive conception was best developed by the British
neo-Hegelians of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries,
such as Thomas Hill Green and Bernard Bosanquet (2001 [1923]). Green
acknowledged that “…it must be of course admitted that
every usage of the term [i.e., ‘freedom’] to express
anything but a social and political relation of one man to other
involves a metaphor…It always implies…some exemption
from compulsion by another…”(1986 [1895]:
229). Nevertheless, Green went on to claim that a person can be unfree
if he is subject to an impulse or craving that cannot be
controlled. Such a person, Green argued, is “…in the
condition of a bondsman who is carrying out the will of another, not
his own” (1986 [1895]: 228). Just as a slave is not doing what
he really wants to do, one who is, say, an alcoholic, is
being led by a craving to look for satisfaction where it cannot,
ultimately, be found.
For Green, a person is free only if she is self-directed or
autonomous. Running throughout liberal political theory is an ideal of
a free person as one whose actions are in some sense
her own. In this sense, positive liberty is
an exercise-concept. One is free merely to the degree that
one has effectively determined oneself and the shape of one’s
life (Taylor, 1979).  Such a person is not subject to compulsions,
critically reflects on her ideals and so does not unreflectively
follow custom, and does not ignore her long-term interests for
short-term pleasures. This ideal of freedom as autonomy has its roots
not only in Rousseau’s and Kant’s political theory, but
also in John Stuart Mill’s On Liberty.  And today it is
a dominant strain in liberalism, as witnessed by the work of S.I.
Benn (1988), Gerald Dworkin (1988), and Joseph Raz (1986); see also
the essays in Christman and Anderson (2005).
Green’s autonomy-based conception of positive freedom is often run
together with a notion of ‘positive’ freedom: freedom as
effective power to act or to pursue one’s ends. In the words of the
British socialist R. H. Tawney, freedom thus understood is ‘the
ability to act’ (1931: 221; see also Gaus, 2000; ch. 5.) On this
positive conception, a person not prohibited from being a member of a
Country Club but too poor to afford membership is not free to be a
member: she lacks an effective power to act. Positive freedom
qua effective power to act closely ties freedom to material
resources. (Education, for example, should be easily available so that
all can develop their capacities.) It was this conception of positive
liberty that Hayek had in mind when he insisted that although
“freedom and wealth are both good things…they still
remain different” (1960: 17–18).
An older notion of liberty that has recently resurfaced is
the republican, or neo-Roman, conception of liberty, which has roots
in the writings of Cicero and Niccolo Machiavelli (1950
[1513]). According to Philip Pettit,
On this view, the opposite of freedom is domination. To be unfree
is to be “subject to the potentially capricious will or the
potentially idiosyncratic judgement of another” (Pettit, 1997:
5). The ideal liberty-protecting government, then, ensures that no
agent, including itself, has arbitrary power over any citizen. This is
accomplished through an equal disbursement of power. Each person has
power that offsets the power of another to arbitrarily interfere with
her activities (Pettit, 1997: 67).
The republican conception of liberty is certainly distinct from both
Greenian positive and negative conceptions. Unlike Greenian positive
liberty, republican liberty is not primarily concerned with rational
autonomy, realizing one’s true nature, or becoming one’s
higher self. When all dominating power has been dispersed, republican
theorists are generally silent about these goals (Larmore
2001). Unlike negative liberty, republican liberty is primarily
focused upon “defenseless susceptibility to interference, rather
than actual interference” (Pettit, 1996: 577). Thus, in contrast
to the ordinary negative conception, on the republican conception the
mere possibility of arbitrary interference is a limitation of
liberty. Republican liberty thus seems to involve a modal claim about
the possibility of interference, and this is often cashed out in terms
of complex counterfactual claims. It is not clear whether these claims
can be adequately explicated (Gaus, 2003; cf. Larmore, 2004).
Some republican theorists, such as Quentin Skinner (1998: 113),
Maurizio Viroli (2002: 6) and Pettit (1997: 8–11), view republicanism
as an alternative to liberalism. When republican liberty is seen
as a basis for criticizing market liberty and market society, this is
plausible (Gaus, 2003b). However, when liberalism is understood more
expansively, and not so closely tied to either negative liberty or
market society, republicanism becomes indistinguishable from
liberalism (Ghosh, 2008; Rogers, 2008; Larmore, 2001; Dagger,
1997).
Liberal political theory, then, fractures over the conception of
liberty. In practice, another crucial fault line concerns the moral
status of private property and the market order. For classical
liberals — ‘old’ liberals — liberty and
private property are intimately related. From the eighteenth century
right up to today, classical liberals have insisted that an economic
system based on private property is uniquely consistent with
individual liberty, allowing each to live her life —including
employing her labor and her capital — as she sees fit. Indeed,
classical liberals and libertarians have often asserted that in some
way liberty and property are really the same thing; it has been
argued, for example, that all rights, including liberty rights, are
forms of property; others have maintained that property is itself a
form of freedom (Gaus, 1994; Steiner, 1994). A market order based on
private property is thus seen as an embodiment of freedom
(Robbins, 1961: 104). Unless people are free to make contracts and
sell their labour, save and invest their incomes as they see fit, and
free to launch enterprises as they raise the capital, they are not
really free.
Classical liberals employ a second argument connecting liberty and
private property. Rather than insisting that the freedom to obtain and
employ private property is simply one aspect of people’s
liberty, this second argument insists that private property
effectively protects liberty, and no protection can be effective
without private property. Here the idea is that the dispersion of
power that results from a free market economy based on private
property protects the liberty of subjects against encroachments by the
state. As F.A. Hayek argues, “There can be no freedom of press
if the instruments of printing are under government control, no
freedom of assembly if the needed rooms are so controlled, no freedom
of movement if the means of transport are a government monopoly”
(1978: 149).
Although classical liberals agree on the fundamental importance of
private property to a free society, the classical liberal tradition
itself is a spectrum of views, from near-anarchist to those that
attribute a significant role to the state in economic and social
policy (on this spectrum, see Mack and Gaus, 2004). Towards the
extreme ‘libertarian’ end of the classical liberal
spectrum are views of justified states as legitimate monopolies that
may with justice charge for essential rights-protection services:
taxation is legitimate if necessary and sufficient for effective
protection of liberty and property. Further ‘leftward’ we
encounter classical liberal views that allow taxation for public
education in particular, and more generally for public goods and
social infrastructure. Moving yet further ‘left’, some
classical liberal views allow for a modest social minimum.(e.g.,
Hayek, 1976: 87). Most nineteenth century classical liberal economists
endorsed a variety of state policies, encompassing not only the
criminal law and enforcement of contracts, but the licensing of
professionals, health, safety and fire regulations, banking
regulations, commercial infrastructure (roads, harbors and canals) and
often encouraged unionization (Gaus, 1983b). Although classical
liberalism today often is associated with libertarianism, the broader
classical liberal tradition was centrally concerned with bettering the
lot of the working class, women, blacks, immigrants, and so on. The
aim, as Bentham put it, was to make the poor richer, not the rich
poorer (Bentham, 1952 [1795]: vol. 1, 226n). Consequently, classical
liberals treat the leveling of wealth and income as outside the
purview of legitimate aims of government coercion.
What has come to be known as ‘new’,
‘revisionist’, ‘welfare state’, or perhaps
best, ‘social justice’, liberalism challenges this
intimate connection between personal liberty and a private property
based market order (Freeden, 1978; Gaus, 1983b; Paul, Miller and Paul,
2007). Three factors help explain the rise of this revisionist
theory. First, the new liberalism arose in the late nineteenth and
early twentieth centuries, a period in which the ability of a free
market to sustain what Lord Beveridge (1944: 96) called a
‘prosperous equilibrium’ was being questioned. Believing
that a private property based market tended to be unstable, or could,
as Keynes argued (1973 [1936]), get stuck in an equilibrium with high
unemployment, new liberals came to doubt, initially in empirical
grounds, that classical liberalism was an adequate foundation for a
stable, free society. Here the second factor comes into play: just as
the new liberals were losing faith in the market, their faith in
government as a means of supervising economic life was
increasing. This was partly due to the experiences of the First World
War, in which government attempts at economic planning seemed to
succeed (Dewey, 1929: 551–60); more importantly, this reevaluation of
the state was spurred by the democratization of western states, and
the conviction that, for the first time, elected officials could truly
be, in J.A. Hobson’s phrase ‘representatives of the
community’ (1922: 49). As D.G. Ritchie proclaimed:
The third factor underlying the currency of the new liberalism was
probably the most fundamental: a growing conviction that, so far from
being ‘the guardian of every other right’ (Ely, 1992: 26),
property rights foster an unjust inequality of power. They entrench a
merely formal equality that in actual practice systematically fails to
secure the kind of equal positive liberty that matters on the ground
for the working class. This theme is central to what is now called
‘liberalism’ in American politics, combining a strong
endorsement of civil and personal liberties with indifference or even
hostility to private ownership. The seeds of this newer liberalism can
be found in Mill’s On Liberty. Although Mill insisted
that the ‘so-called doctrine of Free Trade’ rested on
‘equally solid’ grounds as did the ‘principle of
individual liberty’ (1963, vol. 18: 293), he nevertheless
insisted that the justifications of personal and economic liberty were
distinct. And in his
Principles of Political Economy Mill consistently emphasized
that it is an open question whether personal liberty can flourish
without private property (1963, vol. 2; 203–210), a view that Rawls
was to reassert over a century later (2001: Part IV).
One consequence of Rawls’s great work, A Theory of
Justice (1999 [first published in 1971]) is that the ‘new
liberalism’ has become focused on developing a theory of social
justice. Since the 1960s when Rawls began to publish the elements of
his emerging theory, liberal political philosophers have analyzed, and
disputed, his famous ‘difference principle’ according to
which a just basic structure of society arranges social and economic
inequalities such that they are to the greatest advantage of the least
well off representative group (1999b:266). For Rawls, the default is
an equal distribution of (basically) income and wealth; only
inequalities that best enhance the long-term prospects of the least
advantaged are just. As Rawls sees it, the difference principle
constitutes a public recognition of the principle of reciprocity: the
basic structure is to be arranged such that no social group advances
at the cost of another (2001: 122–24). Many followers of Rawls have
focused less on the ideal of reciprocity than on the commitment to
equality (Dworkin, 2000). Indeed, what was previously called
‘welfare state’ liberalism is now often described as
liberal egalitarianism. However, see Jan Narveson’s essay on
Hobbes’s seeming defense of the welfare state (in Courtland
2018) for historical reflections on the difference).
And in one way that is especially appropriate: in his later work Rawls
insists that welfare-state capitalism does not constitute a just basic
structure (2001: 137–38). If some version of capitalism is to be just
it must be a ‘property owning democracy’ with a wide
diffusion of ownership; a market socialist regime, in Rawls’s
view, is more just than welfare-state capitalism (2001: 135-38). Not
too surprisingly, classical liberals such as Hayek (1976) insist that
the contemporary liberal fixation on ‘the mirage of social
justice’ leads modern liberals to ignore the extent to which, as
a matter of historical observation, freedom depends on a decentralized
market based on private property, the overall results of which are
unpredictable.
Thus, Robert Nozick (1974: 160ff) famously classifies Rawls’s
difference principle as patterned but not historical: prescribing a
distribution while putting no moral weight on who produced the goods
being distributed. One stark difference that emerges from this is that
new liberalism’s theory of justice is a theory about how to treat the
pie while old liberalism’s theory of justice is a theory about how to
treat bakers (Schmidtz, 2017: 231). 
The problem with patterned principles is that, in Nozick’s words,
liberty upsets patterns.  “No end-state principle or distributional
patterned principle of justice can be continuously realized without
continuous interference with people’s lives.” To illustrate, Nozick
asks you to imagine that society achieves a pattern of perfect justice
by the lights of whatever principle you prefer. Then someone offers
Wilt Chamberlain a dollar for the privilege of watching Wilt play
basketball. Before we know it, thousands of people are paying Wilt a
dollar each, every time Wilt puts on a show. Wilt gets rich. The
distribution is no longer equal, and no one complains. Nozick’s
question: If justice is a pattern, achievable at a given moment, what
happens if you achieve perfection? Must you then prohibit
everything—no further consuming, creating, trading, or
even giving—so as not to upset the perfect pattern?
Notice: Nozick neither argues nor presumes people can do whatever they
want with their property. Nozick, recalling the focus on connecting
property rights to liberty that animated liberalism in its classical
form, notes that if there is anything at all people can do,
even if the only thing they are free to do is give a coin to an
entertainer, then even that tiniest of liberties will, over time,
disturb the favored pattern. Nozick is right that if we focus on time
slices, we focus on isolated moments, and take moments too seriously,
when what matters is not the pattern of holdings at a moment but the
pattern of how people treat each other over time.  Even tiny liberties
must upset the pattern of a static moment. By the same token, however,
there is no reason why liberty must upset an ongoing pattern of fair
treatment. A moral principle forbidding racial discrimination, for
example, prescribes no particular end-state.  Such a principle is what
Nozick calls weakly patterned, sensitive to history as well as to
pattern, and prescribing an ideal of how people should be treated
without prescribing an end-state distribution. It affects the
pattern without prescribing a pattern.  And if a principle
forbidding racial discrimination works its way into a society via
cultural progress rather than legal intervention, it need not involve
any interference whatsoever. So, although Nozick sometimes speaks as
if his critique applies to all patterns, we should take seriously his
concession that “weak” patterns are compatible with liberty.  Some may
promote liberty, depending on how they are introduced and
maintained. See Schmidtz and Brennan (2010: chap.6). For work by
modern liberals that resonates with Nozick’s dissection of the
dimensions of equality that plausibly can count as liberal, see also
Anderson (1999), Young (1990), and Sen (1992). 
Accordingly, even granting to Nozick that time-slice principles
license immense, constant, intolerable interference with everyday
life, there is some reason to doubt that Rawls intended to embrace any
such view.  In his first article, Rawls said, “we cannot determine the
justness of a situation by examining it at a single moment.” Years
later, Rawls added, “It is a mistake to focus attention on the varying
relative positions of individuals and to require that every change,
considered as a single transaction viewed in isolation, be in itself
just.  It is the arrangement of the basic structure which is to be
judged, and judged from a general point of view.” Thus, to Rawls,
basic structure’s job is not to make every transaction work to the
working class’s advantage, let alone to the advantage of each member
of the class.  Rawls was more realistic than that.  Instead, it is the
trend of a whole society over time that is supposed to benefit the
working class as a class.  To be sure, Rawls was a kind of
egalitarian, but the pattern Rawls meant to endorse was a pattern of
equal status, applying not so much to a distribution as to an ongoing
relationship. This is not to say that Nozick’s critique had no
point. Nozick showed what an alternative theory might look like,
portraying Wilt Chamberlain as a separate person in a more robust
sense (unencumbered by nebulous debts to society) than Rawls could
countenance. To Nozick, Wilt’s advantages are not what
Wilt finds on the table; Wilt’s advantages are what
Wilt brings to the table.  And respecting what Wilt brings to
the table is the exact essence of respecting him as a separate
person. In part due to Nozick, today’s egalitarians now acknowledge
that any equality worthy of aspiration will focus less on justice as a
property of a time-slice distribution and more on how people are
treated: how they are rewarded for their contributions
and enabled over time to make contributions worth
rewarding. (Schmidtz and Brennan, 2010: chap.6).
As his work evolved, Rawls (1996: 5ff) insisted that his liberalism
was not a ‘comprehensive’ doctrine, that is, one which
includes an overall theory of value, an ethical theory, an
epistemology, or a controversial metaphysics of the person and
society. Our modern societies, characterized by a ‘reasonable
pluralism’, are already filled with such doctrines. The aim of
‘political liberalism’ is not to add yet another sectarian
doctrine, but to provide a political framework that is neutral between
such controversial comprehensive doctrines (Larmore, 1996: 121ff). If
it is to serve as the basis for public reasoning in our diverse
western societies, liberalism must be restricted to a core set of
political principles that are, or can be, the subject of consensus
among all reasonable citizens. Rawls’s notion of a purely political
conception of liberalism seems more austere than the traditional
liberal political theories discussed above, being largely restricted
to constitutional principles upholding basic civil liberties and the
democratic process.
As Gaus (2004) has argued, the distinction between
‘political’ and ‘comprehensive’ liberalism
misses a great deal. Liberal theories form a broad continuum, from
those that constitute full-blown philosophical systems, to those that
rely on a full theory of value and the good, to those that rely on a
theory of the right (but not the good), all the way to those that seek
to be purely political doctrines. Nevertheless, it is important to
appreciate that, though liberalism is primarily a political theory, it
has been associated with broader theories of ethics, value, and
society. Indeed, many believe that liberalism cannot rid itself of all
controversial metaphysical (Hampton, 1989) or epistemological (Raz,
1990) commitments.
Following Wilhelm von Humboldt (1993 [1854]), in On Liberty
Mill argues that one basis for endorsing freedom (Mill
believes there are many), is the goodness of developing individuality
and cultivating capacities:
This is not just a theory about politics: it is a substantive,
perfectionist, moral theory about the good. On this view, the
right thing to do is to promote development or perfection, but only a
regime securing extensive liberty for each person can accomplish this
(Wall, 1998). This moral ideal of human perfection and development
dominated liberal thinking in the latter part of the nineteenth century, and
much of the twentieth: not only Mill, but T.H. Green,
L.T. Hobhouse, Bernard Bosanquet, John Dewey and even Rawls show
allegiance to variants of this perfectionist ethic and the claim that
it provides a foundation for endorsing a regime of liberal rights
(Gaus, 1983a). And it is fundamental to the proponents of liberal
autonomy discussed above, as well as ‘liberal virtue’
theorists such as William Galston (1980).  That the good life is
necessarily a freely chosen one in which a person develops his unique
capacities as part of a plan of life is probably the dominant liberal
ethic of the past century.
The main challenge to Millian perfectionism’s status as the
distinctly liberal ethic comes from moral contractualism, which can be
divided into what might very roughly be labeled ‘Kantian’
and ‘Hobbesian’ versions. According to Kantian
contractualism, “society, being composed of a plurality of
persons, each with his own aims, interests, and conceptions of the
good, is best arranged when it is governed by principles that do
not themselves presuppose any particular conception of the
good…” (Sandel, 1982: 1). On this view, respect for the
personhood of others demands that we refrain from imposing our view of
the good life on them. Only principles that can be justified to all
respect the personhood of each. We thus witness the tendency of recent
liberal theory (Reiman, 1990; Scanlon, 1998) to transform the social
contract from an account of the state to an overall justification of
morality, or at least a social morality. Basic to such ‘Kantian
contractualism’ is the idea that suitably idealized individuals
are motivated not by the pursuit of gain, but by a commitment or
desire to
 publicly justify
 the claims they
make on others (Reiman, 1990; Scanlon, 1982). A moral code
that could be the object of agreement among such individuals is
thus a publicly justified morality.
In contrast, distinctively Hobbesian contractualism supposes only
that individuals are self-interested and correctly perceive that each
person’s ability to effectively pursue her interests is enhanced by a
framework of norms that structure social life and divide the fruits of
social cooperation (Gauither, 1986; Hampton, 1986; Kavka,
1986). Morality, then, is a common framework that advances the
self-interest of each. The claim of Hobbesian contractualism to be a
distinctly liberal conception of morality stems from the importance of
individual freedom and property in such a common framework: only
systems of norms that allow each person great freedom to pursue her
interests as she sees fit could, it is argued, be the object of
consensus among self-interested agents (Courtland, 2008; Gaus 2003a:
chap. 3; Gaus, 2012; Ridge, 1998; Gauthier, 1995). The continuing problem for
Hobbesian contractualism is the apparent rationality of free-riding:
if everyone (or enough) complies with the terms of the contract, and
so social order is achieved, it would seem rational to defect, and act
immorally when one can gain by doing so. This is essentially the
argument of Hobbes’s ‘Foole’, and from Hobbes (1948
[1651]: 94ff) to Gauthier (1986: 160ff), Hobbesians have tried to
reply to it.
Turning from rightness to goodness, we can identify three main
candidates for a liberal theory of value. We have already encountered
the first: perfectionism. Insofar as perfectionism is a theory of
right action, it can be understood as an account of
morality. Obviously, however, it is an account of rightness that
presupposes a theory of value or the good: the ultimate human value is
developed personality or an autonomous life. Competing with this
objectivist theory of value are two other liberal accounts: pluralism
and subjectivism.
In his famous defence of negative liberty, Berlin insisted that values
or ends are plural, and no interpersonally justifiable ranking among
these many ends is to be had. More than that, Berlin maintained that
the pursuit of one end necessarily implies that other ends will not be
achieved. In this sense ends collide. In economic terms, the pursuit
of one end entails opportunity costs: foregone pursuits which cannot
be impersonally shown to be less worthy. There is no interpersonally
justifiable way to rank the ends, and no way to achieve them all. Each
person must devote herself to some ends at the cost of ignoring
others. For the pluralist, then, autonomy, perfection or development
are not necessarily ranked higher than hedonistic pleasures,
environmental preservation or economic equality. All compete for our
allegiance, but because they are incommensurable, no choice can be
interpersonally justified.
The pluralist is not a subjectivist: that values are many, competing
and incommensurable does not imply that they are somehow dependent on
subjective experiences. But the claim that what a person values rests
on experiences that vary from person to person has long been a part of
the liberal tradition. To Hobbes, what one values depends on what one
desires (1948 [1651]: 48). Locke advances a ‘taste theory of
value’:
The perfectionist, the pluralist and the subjectivist concur on the
crucial point: the nature of value is such that reasonable people
pursue different ways of living. To the perfectionist, this is because
each person has unique capacities, the development of which confers
value on her life; to the pluralist, it is because values are many and
conflicting, and no one life can include them all, or make the
interpersonally correct choice among them; and to the subjectivist, it
is because our ideas about what is valuable stem from our desires or
tastes, and these differ from one individual to another. All three
views, then, defend the basic liberal idea that people rationally
follow different ways of living. But in themselves, such notions of
the good are not full-fledged liberal ethics, for an additional
argument is required linking liberal value with norms of equal
liberty, and to the idea that other people command a certain respect
and a certain deference simply by virtue of having values of their
own. To be sure, Berlin seems to believe this is a very quick
argument: the inherent plurality of ends points to
the political preeminence of liberty (see, for example, Gray:
2006). Guaranteeing each a measure of negative liberty is, Berlin
argues, the most humane ideal, as it recognizes that ‘human
goals are many’, and no one can make a choice that is right for
all people (1969: 171). It is here that subjectivists and pluralists
alike sometimes rely on versions of moral contractualism. Those who
insist that liberalism is ultimately nihilistic can be interpreted as
arguing that this transition cannot be made successfully: liberals, on
their view, are stuck with a subjectivistic or pluralistic theory of
value, and no account of the right emerges from it.
Throughout the last century, liberalism has been beset by
controversies between, on the one hand, those broadly identified as
‘individualists’ and, on the other,
‘collectivists’, ‘communitarians’ or
‘organicists’ (for skepticism about this, though, see
Bird, 1999).  These vague and sweeping designations have been applied
to a wide array of disputes; we focus here on controversies concerning
(i) the nature of society; (ii) the nature of the self.
Liberalism is, of course, usually associated with individualist
analyses of society.  ‘Human beings in society’, Mill
claimed, ‘have no properties but those which are derived from,
and which may be resolved into, the laws of the nature of individual
men’ (1963, Vol. 8: 879; see also Bentham: 1970 [1823]: chap. I,
sec. 4). Herbert Spencer agreed: “the properties of the mass are
dependent upon the attributes of its component parts” (1995
[1851]: 1).  In the last years of the nineteenth century this
individualist view was increasingly subject to attack, especially by
those who were influenced by idealist philosophy.  D. G.  Ritche,
criticizing Spencer’s individualist liberalism, denies that
society is simply a ‘heap’ of individuals, insisting that
it is more akin to an organism, with a complex internal life (1896:
13).  Liberals such as L. T. Hobhouse and Dewey refused to adopt
radically collectivist views such as those advocated by Bernard
Bosanquet (2001), but they too rejected the radical individualism of
Bentham, Mill and Spencer.  Throughout most of the first half of the
twentieth century such ‘organic’ analyses of society held
sway in liberal theory, even in economics (see A.F Mummery and
J. A. Hobson, 1956: 106; J.M. Keynes, 1972: 275). 
During and after the Second World War the idea that liberalism was
based on inherently individualist analysis of humans-in-society arose
again. Karl Popper’s The Open Society and its Enemies (1945)
presented a sustained critique of Hegelian and Marxist theory and its
collectivist and historicist, and to Popper, inherently illiberal,
understanding of society.  The reemergence of economic analysis in
liberal theory brought to the fore a thoroughgoing methodological
individualism.  Writing in the early 1960s, James Buchanan and Gordon
Tullock adamantly defended the ‘individualistic postulate’
against all forms of ‘organicism’: “This
[organicist] approach or theory of the collectivity….is essentially
opposed to the Western philosophical tradition in which the human
individual is the primary philosophical entity” (1965:
11–12). Human beings, insisted Buchanan and Tullock, are the only real
choosers and decision-makers, and their preferences determine both
public and private actions.  The renascent individualism of
late-twentieth century liberalism was closely bound up with the
induction of Hobbes as a member of the liberal pantheon.  Hobbes’s
relentlessly individualistic account of society, and the manner in
which his analysis of the state of nature lent itself to
game-theoretical modeling, yielded a highly individualist, formal
analysis of the liberal state and liberal morality.
Of course, as is widely known, the last twenty-five years have
witnessed a renewed interest in collectivist analyses of liberal
society —though the term ‘collectivist’ is abjured
in favor of ‘communitarian’.  Writing in 1985, Amy Gutmann
observed that “we are witnessing a revival of communitarian
criticisms of liberal political theory. Like the critics of the 1960s,
those of the 1980s fault liberalism for being mistakenly and
irreparably individualistic” (1985: 308).  Starting with Michael
Sandel’s (1982) famous criticism of Rawls, a number of critics charge
that liberalism is necessarily premised on an abstract conception of
individual selves as pure choosers, whose commitments, values and
concerns are possessions of the self, but never constitute the self.
Although the ‘liberal-communitarian’ debate ultimately involved
wide-ranging moral, political and sociological disputes about the
nature of communities, and the rights and responsibilities of their
members, the heart of the debate was about the nature of liberal
selves. For Sandel the flaw at the heart of Rawls’s liberalism is its
implausibly abstract theory of the self, the pure autonomous chooser.
Rawls, he charges, ultimately assumes that it makes sense to identify
us with a pure capacity for choice, and that such pure choosers might
reject any or all of their attachments and values and yet retain their
identity. 
From the mid-1980s onwards various liberals sought to show how
liberalism may consistently advocate a theory of the self which finds
room for cultural membership and other non-chosen attachments and
commitments which at least partially constitute the self (Kymlicka,
1989). Much of liberal theory has became focused on the issue as to
how we can be social creatures, members of cultures and raised in
various traditions, while also being autonomous choosers who employ
our liberty to construct lives of our own.
In On Liberty Mill argued that “Liberty, as a
principle, has no application to any state of things anterior to the
time when mankind have become capable of being improved by free and
equal discussion” (1963, vol. 18: 224). Thus “Despotism is
a legitimate form of government in dealing with barbarians, provided
the end be their improvement…” (1963, vol. 18: 224). This
passage — infused with the spirit of nineteenth century
imperialism (and perhaps, as some maintain, latent racism) — is
often ignored by defenders of Mill as an embarrassment (Parekh, 1994;
Parekh, 1995; Mehta, 1999; Pitts, 2005).This is not to say that such
Millian passages are without thoughtful defenders. See, for example,
Inder Marawah (2011). Nevertheless, it raises a question that still
divides liberals: are liberal political principles justified for all
political communities? In The Law of Peoples Rawls argues
that they are not. According to Rawls there can be a ‘decent
hierarchical society’ which is not based on the liberal
conception of all persons as free and equal, but instead views persons
as “responsible and cooperating members of their respective
groups” but not inherently equal (1999a: 66).  Given this, the
full liberal conception of justice cannot be constructed out of shared
ideas of this ‘people’, though basic human rights,
implicit in the very idea of a social cooperative structure, apply to
all peoples. David Miller (2002) develops a different defense of this
anti-universalistic position, while those such as Thomas Pogge (2002:
ch. 4) and Martha Nussbaum (2002) reject Rawls’s position,
instead advocating versions of moral universalism: they claim that
liberal moral principles apply to all states.
The debate about whether liberal principles apply to all political
communities should not be confused with the debate as to whether
liberalism is a state-centered theory, or whether, at least ideally,
it is a cosmopolitan political theory for the community of all
humankind. Immanuel Kant — a moral universalist if ever there
was one — argued that all states should respect the dignity of
their citizens as free and equal persons, yet denied that humanity
forms one political community. Thus he rejected the ideal of a
universal cosmopolitan liberal political community in favor of a world
of states, all with internally just constitutions, and united in a
confederation to assure peace (1970 [1795]).
On a classical liberal theory, the difference between a world of
liberal communities and a world liberal community is not of
fundamental importance. Since the aim of government in a community is
to assure the basic liberty and property rights of its citizens,
borders are not of great moral significance in classical liberalism
(Lomasky, 2007). In contrast under the
‘new’ liberalism, which stresses redistributive programs
to achieve social justice, it matters a great deal who is included
within the political or moral community. If liberal principles require
significant redistribution, then it is crucially important whether
these principles apply only within particular communities, or whether
their reach is global. Thus a fundamental debate between Rawls and
many of his followers is whether the difference principle should only
be applied within a liberal state such as the United States (where the
least well off are the least well off Americans), or whether it should
be applied globally (where the least well off are the least well off
in the world) (Rawls, 1999a: 113ff; Beitz, 1973: 143ff; Pogge, 1989:
Part Three).
Liberal political theory also fractures concerning the appropriate
response to groups (cultural, religious, etc.) which endorse illiberal
policies and values. These groups may deny education to some of their
members, advocate female genital mutilation, restrict religious
freedom, maintain an inequitable caste system, and so on. When, if
ever, should a liberal group interfere with the
internal governance of an illiberal group?
 

Suppose first that the illiberal group is another political community
or state. Can liberals intervene in the affairs of non-liberal states?
Mill provides a complicated answer in his 1859 essay ‘A Few
Words on Non-Intervention’. Reiterating his claim from On
Liberty that civilized and non-civilized countries are to be
treated differently, he insists that “barbarians have no rights
as a nation, except a right to such treatment as may, at the
earliest possible period, fit them for becoming one. The only moral
laws for the relation between a civilized and a barbarous government,
are the universal rules of morality between man and man” (1963,
vol. 21: 119). Although this strikes us today as simply a case for an
objectionable paternalistic imperialism (and it certainly was such a
case), Mill’s argument for the conclusion is more complex, including a
claim that, since international morality depends on reciprocity,
‘barbarous’ governments that cannot be counted on to
engage in reciprocal behavior have no rights qua
governments. In any event, when Mill turns to interventions among
‘civilized’ peoples he develops an altogether more
sophisticated account as to when one state can intervene in the
affairs of another to protect liberal principles. Here Mill is
generally against intervention. “The reason is, that there can
seldom be anything approaching to assurance that intervention, even if
successful, would be for the good of the people themselves. The only
test possessing any real value, of a people’s having become fit for
popular institutions, is that they, or a sufficient proportion of them
to prevail in the contest, are willing to brave labour and danger for
their liberation” (1963, vol. 21: 122).
In addition to questions of efficacy, to the extent that peoples or
groups have rights to collective self-determination, intervention by a
liberal group to induce a non-liberal community to adopt liberal
principles will be morally objectionable. As with individuals,
liberals may think that peoples or groups have freedom to make
mistakes in managing their collective affairs. If people’s
self-conceptions are based on their participation in such groups, even
those whose liberties are denied may object to, and perhaps in some
way harmed by, the imposition of liberal principles (Margalit and Raz,
1990; Tamir, 1993). Thus rather than proposing a doctrine of
intervention many liberals propose various principles of
toleration which specify to what extent liberals must tolerate
non-liberal peoples and cultures. As is usual, Rawls’s discussion is
subtle and enlightening. In his account of the foreign affairs of
liberal peoples, Rawls argues that liberal peoples must distinguish
‘decent’ non-liberal societies from ‘outlaw’
and other states; the former have a claim on liberal peoples to
tolerance while the latter do not (1999a: 59–61). Decent peoples,
argues Rawls, ‘simply do not tolerate’ outlaw states which
ignore human rights: such states may be subject to ‘forceful
sanctions and even to intervention’ (1999a: 81). In contrast,
Rawls insists that “liberal peoples must try to encourage
[non-liberal] decent peoples and not frustrate their vitality by
coercively insisting that all societies be liberal” (1999a:
62). Chandran Kukathas (2003) — whose liberalism derives from
the classical tradition — is inclined to almost complete
toleration of non-liberal peoples, with the non-trivial proviso that there must be
exit rights.
The status of non-liberal groups within liberal societies has
increasingly become a subject of debate, especially with respect to
some citizens of faith.  We should distinguish two questions: (i) to
what extent should non-liberal cultural and religious communities be
exempt from the requirements of the liberal state? and, (ii) to what
extent can they be allowed to participate in decision-making in the
liberal state?
Turning to (i), liberalism has a long history of seeking to
accommodate religious groups that have deep objections to certain
public policies, such as the Quakers, Mennonites or Sikhs. The most
difficult issues in this regard arise in relation to children and
education (see Galston, 2003; Fowler, 2010; Andersson, 2011) Mill, for
example, writes:
Over the last thirty years, there has been a particular case that is
at the core of this debate — Wisconsin vs. Yoder: [406
U.S. 205 (1972)].  In this case, the United States Supreme Court
upheld the right of Amish parents to avoid compulsory schooling laws
and remove their children from school at the age of 14 — thus,
according to the Amish, avoiding secular influences that might
undermine the traditional Amish way of life. Because cultural and
religious communities raise and educate children, they cannot be seen
as purely voluntary opt-outs from the liberal state: they exercise
coercive power over children, and so basic liberal principles about
protecting the innocent from unjustified coercion come into play. Some
have maintained that liberal principles require that the state should
intervene (against groups like the Amish) in order to [1] provide the
children with an effective right of exit that would otherwise be
denied via a lack of education (Okin, 2002), [2] to protect the
children’s right to an autonomous and ‘open future’
(Feinberg, 1980) and/or [3] to insure that children will have the
cognitive tools to prepare them for their future role as citizens
(Galston, 1995: p. 529; Macedo, 1995: pp. 285–6). Other liberal
theorists, on the other hand, have argued that the state should not
intervene because it might undermine the inculcation of certain values
that are necessary for the continued existence of certain
comprehensive doctrines (Galston, 1995: p. 533; Stolzenberg, 1993: pp.
582–3). Moreover, some such as Harry Brighouse (1998) have argued that
the inculcation of liberal values through compulsory education might
undermine the legitimacy of liberal states because children would not
(due to possible indoctrination) be free to consent to such
institutions.
 
Question (ii) — the extent to which non-liberal beliefs and
values may be employed in liberal political discussion— has
become the subject of sustained debate in the years following Rawls’s
Political Liberalism. According to Rawls’s liberalism —
and what we might call ‘public reason liberalism’ more
generally — because our societies are characterized by
‘reasonable pluralism’, coercion cannot be justified on
the basis of comprehensive moral or religious systems of belief. But
many friends of religion (e.g., Eberle, 2002; Perry, 1993) argue that
this is objectionably ‘exclusionary’: conscientious
believers are barred from voting on their deepest convictions. Again
liberals diverge in their responses. Some such as Stephen Macedo take
a pretty hard-nosed attitude: ‘if some people…feel
“silenced” or “marginalized” by the fact that
some of us believe that it is wrong to shape basic liberties on the
basis of religious or metaphysical claims, I can only say “grow
up!”’ (2000: 35). Rawls, in contrast, seeks to be more
accommodating, allowing that arguments based on religious
comprehensive doctrines may enter into liberal politics on issues of
basic justice “provided that, in due course, we give properly
public reasons to support the principles and policies that our
comprehensive doctrine is said to support” (1999a: 144). Thus
Rawls allows the legitimacy of religious-based arguments against
slavery and in favor of the United States civil rights movement,
because ultimately such arguments were supported by public reasons.
Others (e.g., Greenawalt, 1995) hold that even this is too
restrictive: it is difficult for liberals to justify a moral
prohibition on a religious citizen from voicing her view in liberal
political debate. Gaus and Vallier seek to ameliorate such tensions,
in part, by acknowledging an asymmetry between the ‘reasons
to justify to another a law’ and the ‘reasons
to reject’ a law (2009: 54). They argue that although
“a secular rationale is necessary in our society for a publicly
justified law, it can be defeated by a reasonable religious conviction
without secular backing” (2009: 63). Thus, citizens of faith
would be able to preserve their religious integrity, all the while
remaining unable to coerce others via unshared religious reasons.
Given that liberalism fractures on so many issues — the nature
of liberty, the place of property and democracy in a just society, the
comprehensiveness and the reach of the liberal ideal — one might
wonder whether there is any point in talking of
‘liberalism’ at all. It is not, though, an unimportant or
trivial thing that all these theories take liberty to be the grounding
political value. Radical democrats assert the overriding value of
equality, communitarians maintain that the demands of belongingness
trump freedom, and conservatives complain that the liberal devotion to
freedom undermines traditional values and virtues and so social order
itself. Intramural disputes aside, liberals join in rejecting these
conceptions of political right.