The family of views making up libertarianism includes many different
members. Philosophically most distinctive, perhaps, offers a
particular moral theory. This theory is organized around the view that
agents initially fully own themselves and have certain moral powers to
acquire property rights in external things. This theory sees
libertarian policy conclusions as the result of not merely empirical
truths or real-world feasibility constraints, but as following from
the only defensible (and restrictive) moral principles.
Some libertarians of this kind consider freedom the paramount value.
They hold, for example, that each person has a right to maximum equal
negative liberty, which is understood as the absence of forcible
interference from other agents (e.g., Narveson 1988; Steiner 1994;
Narveson & Sterba 2010). This is sometimes called
“Spencerian Libertarianism” (after Herbert Spencer).
Most, however, focus more on the idea of self-ownership. Famously,
this view is attributed to Robert Nozick (Cohen 1995; but see the
discussion below). On this view, the key libertarian starting point is
that people have a very stringent (perhaps the most stringent
possible) set of rights over their persons, giving them the kind of
control over themselves that one might have over possessions they own.
This includes (1) rights to control the use of the entity: including a
liberty-right to use it as well as a claim-right that others not use
it without one's consent, (2) rights to transfer these rights to
others (by sale, rental, gift, or loan), (3) immunities to the
non-consensual loss of these rights, (4) compensation rights in case
others use the entity without one’s consent, and (5) enforcement
rights (e.g. rights to restrain persons about to violate these
rights).
The idea of self-ownership is attractive for many reasons. We
recognize people as self-owners when we recognize that there are
things that may not be done to a person without their consent, but
which may be done with consent. Thus, we consider rape wrong because
it involves a body being used against the will of the person to whom
it belongs, but not because there’s something inherently wrong
with sexual intercourse. We consider assault wrong for similar
reasons, but allow voluntary boxing matches. There are also more
theoretical reasons for self-ownership’s attraction. The
principle is a strong endorsement of the moral importance and
sovereignty of the individual, and it expresses the refusal to treat
people as mere things to use or trade off against each other.
Some libertarians hold that people enjoy full self-ownership. We can
define full self-ownership as a logically strongest set of ownership
rights one might have over oneself. The notion has some indeterminacy,
as there can be more than one strongest set of such rights. Still,
there is a determinate core set of rights. Central to this idea are
full control rights, the right to determine the use of one’s
person. Control rights are central to self-ownership in order to
distinguish between certain things (like physical contact) that may be
done to a person with, and may not be done to a person without her
consent. Full-self ownership, in other words, offers protections
against others doing things to us against our will.
Obviously, full self-ownership offers the strongest possible version
of the benefits of self-ownership more generally. And in many
contexts, this is highly attractive. Full self-ownership, for
instance, offers a straightforward and unequivocal defense of
women’s rights over their bodies, including the right to
terminate unwanted pregnancies. It explains why it’s wrong to
sacrifice the rights and freedoms of minorities (even a minority of
one) for the sake of protecting the interests of the majority. It
offers a principled objection to clearly objectionable forms of
paternalism or legal moralism. And so on.
At the same time, full self-ownership does can out other moral
considerations, including ones that are often thought relevant to
justice. Consider the view, made famous (or infamous) by Robert Nozick
(1974), that people have a right against being forced to assist
others, except as a result of their agreement or wrongdoing. Such a
view rules out redistributive taxation aimed at reducing material
inequality or raising the standards of living for the poor. Since
taxation siphons off part of people’s earnings, which represent
people’s labor, and people initially have the right not to be
forced to work for certain ends, Nozick argued, redistributive
taxation is morally on a par with forced labor.
Nozick’s point was that theories of justice face a choice. One
can (a) respect people as the primary controllers of their lives,
labor, and bodies. But in that case, people must also be free to work,
and not work, as they choose (so long as they don’t violate the
rights of others). This means working for whomever they want, on the
terms they want, and keeping the gains. Recognizing this leaves little
room for redistributive taxation. Or one can (b) endorse the
enforcement of certain distributions. But in that case, the theory
must endorse taking what people innocently produce through their own
labor, redirecting their work to purposes they did not freely choose.
This latter option is unacceptable to anyone endorsing the idea of
full self-ownership. As Nozick wrote, it involves claiming a kind of
control over the lives of others that is similar to a claim of
ownership in them. And this is unacceptable (1974, p. 172).
In part because it seems to lead to conclusions like these, the idea
of full self-ownership is very controversial. And it’s
undeniable that full self-ownership has counter-intuitive
implications. A related, but different, worry concerns not duties of
assistance, but cases in which a person in extreme need can be greatly
benefitted as a result of using another person. Even if one has no
duty to assist in those cases, may others use one’s person,
without consent, to assist someone in need? Suppose, to use an extreme
example, we can save ten innocent lives by gently pushing an innocent
person to the ground. Full self-ownership asserts that this would not
be permissible. Again, the idea is roughly that since individuals are
normatively separate, they cannot permissibly be used to benefit
others without their consent.
A third worry is that full self-ownership may permit voluntary
enslavement. Just as people have, on this view, the right to control
uses of their persons, they also have the right to transfer their
rights over their persons to others, for example through sale or git.
However, this is controversial among libertarians, some of whom deny
that these kinds of transfers are possible because it's morally
impossible for others to control one’s will (Rothbard 1982;
Barnett 1998, pp. 78–82), because such transfers undermine our
autonomy (Grunebaum 1987), or because of theological reasons (Locke
1690). Theorists who endorse the possibility usually argue that
libertarian self-ownership is about giving people control over the
permissible uses of their person, not about the necessity of some
psychological capacity to control their person. As a result, the right
to exercise one’s autonomy is what matters here, even if one
exercises it in (otherwise) problematic ways, not the protection or
promotion of autonomy. (See e.g. Vallentyne 1998; Steiner 1994.)
A fourth concern about the counter-intuitive nature of full
self-ownership points out its restrictive implications. Full
self-ownership might seem to condemn as wrongful even very minor
infringements of the personal sphere, such as when tiny bits of
pollution fall upon an unconsenting person. Prohibiting all acts that
can lead to such minor infringements poses an unacceptable limit to
our liberty. But from the point of view of self-ownership, there is no
principled difference between minor infringements and major
infringements. Thus, this objection goes, self-ownership theory must
be rejected (Railton 2003; Sobel
 2012).[1]
This objection, however, is of dubious force as it presupposes an
(even more) implausible conception of full self-ownership than its
defenders have reason to endorse. Suppose we understand the moral
benefits that self-ownership confers along two dimensions: protections
from unwanted uses of our bodies, and liberties to use our bodies. As
the objection points out, it is not possible to simultaneously
maximize the value of both dimensions: our protections restrict our
liberties by restricting the possible uses of one’s body, and
vice versa. Since maximizing the protection-dimension implausibly
restricts the use-dimension, the correct response is not to reject
self-ownership, but rather to loosen the protection-dimension somewhat
in order to enhance the use-dimension. Doing this would allow minor
infringements for the sake of self-ownership. As Eric Mack (2015) puts
it, a good theory of self-ownership offers people some “elbow
room.” (For more discussion, see Brennan & Van der Vossen
2017)
Nevertheless, many libertarians do reject full self-ownership.
It’s possible to weaken the principle along any of the
dimensions above in order to avoid the objections, while holding on to
the general spirit of the self-ownership view. Thus, one could accept
limited non-consensual duties of assistance, say, and accept some
reduction in the control-dimension of self-ownership. Others, as we
have already seen, reject the idea that self-owners have the power of
transfer themselves into (voluntary) slavery. Either way, the result
will not be a theory of full self-ownership, but one that approximates
that idea.
Weakened conceptions of self-ownership, however, raise important
questions. For one, if self-ownership turns out to have multiple
dimensions that can be weakened in light of competing considerations,
it loses some of its theoretic appeal. After all, part of that appeal
was the idea’s relative simplicity, which seemed to make it a
good starting point for a theory of justice. Once we start trading off
the idea against other considerations, those considerations are
thereby admitted into the libertarian moral universe. This raises
complicated questions about their relative weights, appropriate
trade-off rules, and so on.
Moreover, if trade-offs are possible between these dimensions, we will
want to know why we should sacrifice one in favor of the other. And in
order to answer that question, we may need to invoke some further,
underlying value. This threatens the status of self-ownership as a
foundational principle in libertarian theory. Presumably, foundational
principles are not based on underlying values. For many libertarians,
this is not much of a concession, however. If few endorse full
self-ownership, even fewer endorse it as a foundational principle.
Such a move would also avoid a final kind of objection, this one more
theoretical in nature. This objection holds that, upon inspection, the
idea of self-ownership is neither as simple nor as clear-cut as it
initially appeared. One version of this objection points to the
indeterminacy of the idea of ownership. Positive law recognizes a wide
variety of ownership arrangements, including ones that consist of very
different kinds of rights than the self-ownership theorist defends.
There may be no clear general notion of ownership to which one can
appeal to defend self-ownership. Instead, ownership claims may be
conclusions of intricate moral (or legal) arguments (Fried 2004,
2005). However, if self-ownership is understood to be importantly
analogous to ownership in general, this poses no objection. Instead,
it shows a more fruitful way for theorizing our rights over our
persons are more fruitfully (Russell 2018).
While Nozick (1974) is typically read as someone who treats full
self-ownership as a premise or foundational principle (see especially
the influential discussion in Cohen 1995), it is far from clear that
this is correct. One obvious problem is that Nozick invokes the idea
of self-ownership only once in Anarchy, State, and Utopia. And while
that passage is oft-quoted, in terms of his arguments, the idea as
such does little work in the book. Part II of Anarchy, State, and
Utopia develops a large number of arguments against redistributive
conceptions of justice which do not invoke or rely on the idea of full
self-ownership.
Nozick also invoked ideas that contradict reading him as a proponent
of full self-ownership as a foundational principle. He argued that
self-ownership is an expression of the Kantian requirement that we
treat people only as ends in themselves (suggesting that the Kantian
idea, and not self-ownership as such, is foundational). And he
didn’t wish to rule out that any plausible theory of rights must
allow that they can be overridden in order to prevent
“catastrophic moral horror” (Nozick 1974, p. 30). It
seems, then, that self-ownership is the view at which Nozick arrives,
on the combined strength of all the arguments that he provides
(Brennan & Van der Vossen 2017).
That said, it’s important to note that not all libertarians
accept that the idea of full self-ownership should be weakened or
treated as non- foundational. Some remain committed to the idea and
have offered responses to all the objections above. For one prominent
reply to worries about indeterminacy and related theoretical
objections, see Vallentyne, Steiner, & Otsuka 2005.
Just as Nozick may have seen libertarianism as the best way to express
a host of moral considerations in the realm of justice, so too many
other libertarians embrace different principles as the foundation of
their theories. Such authors seek to honor people as rights-holders or
sovereign individuals, whom we need to treat as the primary claimants
of their lives and bodies. But they also seek to avoid some of the
implausible elements of full self-ownership. Views like this treat
self-ownership neither as necessary maximally strong, nor as
self-evident or foundational.
Libertarian theory can thus be defended in many different ways. This
is true both of theories that give pride of place to self-ownership
and of theories that don’t. Examples of the former include Eric
Mack (2002, 2010) who sees self-ownership rights as among several
natural rights grounded in our nature as purposive beings. In
Mack’s view, the protections and freedoms offered by the idea
are justified in order to grant to all individuals a separate sphere
in which they can act in accordance to their self-chosen purposes.
Similarly, Loren Lomasky (1987) derives rights from a related,
although slightly different, conception of people as project pursuers.
John Tomasi (2012) argues that strong rights over our bodies are
required by the ideal of democratic legitimacy. According to Daniel
Russell (2018), self-ownership rights provide the only way that people
who live together can all genuinely live their own lives.
Many libertarian theories invoke insights from economics. An
influential strand of thinking in this tradition, closely related to
F. A. Hayek and Ludwig von Mises, argues that libertarian or classical
liberal political conclusions follow from human epistemic limitations.
Free societies, and in particular free market systems, best utilize
the available information in society by allowing and incentivizing
individuals to act on the partial information they possess, including
information about their local circumstances, needs, and desires, as
well as their productive abilities and the trade-offs that those might
present. Any society that wants to deviate from the decentralized
decision-making represented by market exchange, the argument goes,
will have to collect, process, and fully understand all this dispersed
and complex information, aggregate it into some kind of social welfare
function, and assign goods accordingly. This latter process is simply
beyond our capabilities. Free societies thus will predictably
outperform other societies on important metrics (Hayek 1960, 1973; Von
Mises 1949).
Another example follows the work of Adam Smith, claiming that
libertarian ideas are inherent in our ordinary moral psychology. Smith
famously considered justice to be strictly negative in nature:
something we satisfy simply through abstaining from theft, coercion,
and other violations of libertarian rights. Thus, in The Theory of
Moral Sentiments, Smith wrote that the rules that “call loudest
for vengeance and punishment are the laws which guard the life and
person of our neighbour; the next are those which guard his property
and possessions; and last of all come those which guard what are
called his personal rights, or what is due to him from the promises of
others” (Smith 1759 [1976], p. 84). These are the only acts that
are generally disapproved of in a way calling for punishment (1759
[1976], p. 78). Human rule following of this kind is desirable because
it’s conducive to the stability and effectiveness of society
(1976 [1759], p. 86).
None of this means that people don’t have obligations to assist
others. Smith grounds his view in a deeply social view of moral
psychology. Thus, benevolence along with justice is a pillar of
society. However, we cannot expect or force people to care for distant
strangers in the same way as they care for themselves. And trying to
organize a society along these lines would lead to disaster. Smith was
extremely skeptical about government officials, writing about how they
seek fame and power, think themselves morally superior, and are more
than willing to serve their own interests and those of well-connected
businessmen rather than the public good (Smith 1776 [1976], pp.
266–7). And, perhaps foreshadowing Hayek, Smith argued that
governments are generally incapable of knowing enough to guide large
numbers of people. Human beings make their own decisions and respond
to circumstances, thus thwarting any systematic plans the government
might lay out for them. Thus, as a rule, it’s more promising to
appeal to people’s self-interest through market exchange than to
use state coercion.
Libertarian arguments of this kind cast the state as an arbitrator, an
impartial agent that makes fair and productive cooperation between
citizens possible, much like a referee enables fair play by
administering the rules of the game. It’s crucial, then, for the
state to remain impartial and not choose sides in society or the
economy. Once governments begin benefiting one party over another,
whether this be certain groups in society or business interests, such
involvement is in principle off-limits and likely to backfire as it
will favor whoever is politically well-connected or favored at the
time. The minimal state, then, is the only state capable of
structuring complex and deeply interdependent societies in ways that
are mutually beneficial.
Of course, this discussion still omits many other members of the
libertarian or classical liberal family of views. Some theorists
depart from consequentialist or teleological principles, which they
see as best served by these policies (Epstein 1995, 1998; Friedman
1962; Rasmussen & Den Uyl 2005; Shapiro 2007). Others adopt a
Rawlsian framework, either claiming that the spirit of John
Rawls’ theory of justice (particularly a concern for the least
well off) calls for a far greater respect for individual freedom than
is usually thought (Tomasi 2012). Yet others see classically liberal
requirements flowing from a public reason or justificatory approach
(Gaus 2010,
 2012).[2]
Libertarian and classical liberal theories conceive of distributive
justice as largely (sometimes exclusively) historical in nature. To
ask whether justice obtains in the world is mainly to ask whether
people have been justly treated, principally whether their rights to
their persons and possessions have been respected. Even though
distributional issues can be relevant for assessing the justice of a
society (see the next section), libertarians generally see
people’s rightful possessions as whatever they acquired in
legitimate (i.e., rights-respecting) ways. As a result, they reject
theories that look merely at outcomes or end-state distributions.
The most common mode of just acquisition is through the legitimate
transfer of prior just holdings. This is why libertarians generally
defend noncoerced, nondeceptive market relations as just. Of course,
not all modes of legitimate acquisition can depend on prior just
holdings—there must be a starting point, an original
acquisition. In Nozick’s “entitlement theory”
distributive justice consists entirely of these two modes of
acquisition and a principle of rectification for their violation.
The broader point is that libertarians generally accept that
individuals can carry out such acts of original acquisition. More
precisely, they accept that individuals can acquire unowned goods
unilaterally, without having to ask the consent of approval of other
people, some governing body, or anything else. The argument for not
needing the permission of others to use and appropriate the external
world is relatively straightforward. The moral benefits of private
ownership are important, and if there is a good justification for
having a system of private property, it should be possible to derive a
justification for acts that begin to bring about such rights as well.
Any view that would require the consent of others, or some kind of
government legitimation, creates barriers to acquisition and thus
threatens these moral benefits (Van der Vossen 2009, 2015; Mack
2010).
The most famous account of how unilateral original acquisition is
possible remains Locke’s labor theory. According to Locke, when
people work on previously unowned objects, subject to certain
provisos, they turn those objects into their private property. The
precise nature of Locke’s argument, the relation between labor
and acquisition, as well as the nature of the provisos, are hotly
contested. The most famous interpretation, again, seeks to ground
property in the (prior) rights of self-ownership. On this view, when
people labor they quite literally extend their claims of
self-ownership over external objects, thus drawing them into their
rights-protected sphere. As Locke (1690 [1988], chapter V) put it,
since laboring mixes one’s labor, which one owns, with something
that is unowned, the previously unowned thing becomes owned.
This argument suffers from well-known problems. For instance, since
laboring is an activity, the idea of mixing it with an object seems at
best a metaphor for something else. But in that case, the argument is
incomplete: we still need to know what really grounds property rights
(Waldron 1988). More importantly, it simply is not true that mixing
something owned with something unowned is sufficient for
appropriation. As Nozick pointed out, if I pour a can of tomato juice
that I own into the unowned ocean, I lose my tomato juice—I do
not gain an ocean (Nozick 1974, pp. 174–5). Third, if
labor-mixing really were sufficient for generating claims in objects,
why should this be restricted to unowned goods? Why not say that
mixing my labor with something already owned generates a claim of
coownership (Thomson 1990, pp. 326–327)?
In light of these and other objections, many have offered different
defenses of private property. These justifications depend neither on
accepting a prior thesis of self-ownership, nor on the affiliated
thesis that self-ownership rights can be extended outwardly through
labor. Instead, these arguments point to the moral importance of
people having security over external resources, whether this is
understood in terms of support for political and civil liberties (Gaus
2010), our ability to be project pursuers or purposive agents (Lomasky
1987; Mack 2010), or the ability to be the authors of our lives
(Tomasi 2012).
An influential line of argument ties the justification of property to
the material prosperity and well-being that it brings about. Rights of
private property serve to divide the external world into a number of
discrete, individual parts, each exclusively controlled by its
particular owner. Organizing the social world in this way is
preferable to collective use or ownership because it helps avoid
collective action problems. When things remain held in open-access
commons, we all have an incentive to use as much as we can, leading to
a general pattern of use that ends up depleting the resource, to
everyone’s detriment. Rights to private property not only avoid
such a “tragedy of the commons,” they also incentivize
people to preserve their parts, increase their productivity, and
exchange what they own with others on mutually beneficial terms
(Schmidtz 1994; Buchanan 1993).
Since these justifications of property do not rest on a prior
principle of self-ownership, they are not committed to seeing property
rights as in any way absolute, immune to just regulation, or even
precluding any and all forms of taxation. Despite what is sometimes
suggested (Freeman 2001), virtually all libertarians that reject
self-ownership as a starting point also accept that property rights
need specification, can be instantiated in quite different, yet
morally acceptable forms, and might be overridden by other moral
considerations. Such views do not entail the impossibility of
unilateral original appropriation either.
Libertarians and their critics are concerned with the issue of
original appropriation primarily because it demarcates a major fault
line in political philosophy. The libertarian’s historical
conception of justice, and the accompanying insistence that
governments refrain from redistributive projects, require that
property rights do not depend on the government, positive law, or the
consent of others for their moral validity. Such a view is viable if
one can establish the possibility of unilateral appropriation, without
essential reference to the existence of the state or law.
Libertarianism is committed to a strong guarantee of basic liberty of
action. However, even views that endorse the strongest possible form
of self-ownership do not guarantee such liberty. For if the rest of
the world (natural resources and artifacts) is fully owned by others,
one is not permitted to do anything without their consent—since
that would involve the use of their property. Since agents must use
natural resources (occupy space, breathe air, etc.), free people
require rights to use parts of the external world.
The question arises, then, what constraints (if any) exist on
ownership and appropriation. Libertarian theories can be put on a
continuum from right-libertarianism to left-libertarianism, depending
on the stance taken on how natural resources can be owned. Simply
stated, a libertarian theory moves from “right” to
“left” the more it insists on constraints aimed at
preserving some kind of equality.
At one end of the spectrum sits the maximally permissive view of
original appropriation. This view denies there are any constraints on
use or appropriation (Rothbard 1978, 1982; Narveson 1988, ch. 7, 1999;
Feser 2005). Thus, agents may appropriate, use, or even destroy
whatever resources they want (assuming, of course, that they violate
no one’s self-ownership in the process). As a result, this view
sees natural resources as initially unprotected. However, this is not
a very popular view, as it simply ignores the problem above: property
relations can threaten people’s liberty and even self-ownership,
irrespective of their own voluntary choices or wrongdoing. Such a
theory does not live up to libertarian ideals very well.
Most libertarians, then, accept something like what’s come to be
known as the Lockean proviso. This proviso holds that appropriation is
permissible if “enough and as good” be left for others.
There’s an extensive debate over how exactly this proviso is to
be understood. Nozick interprets the proviso to require that no one
can be made worse off as a result of use or appropriation, compared
with a baseline of non-use or non-appropriation. But this
interpretation is problematic for at least two reasons. First, this
such a welfare-based constraint on the exercise of people’s
natural right to appropriate seems ill-motivated within Nozick’s
theory. In general, the exercise of our rights isn’t usually
constrained by a non-worsening requirement. Second, Nozick’s
proviso is vulnerable to the objection (raised by Cohen 1995) that, as
long as property owners compensate non-owners only slightly over the
pre-appropriation baseline (which is likely quite low), non-owners are
not wronged. This would be true even if the owners extracted almost
all of the benefits of cooperation, and that seems unfair.
Others interpret the Lockean proviso as requiring something like a
sufficientarian requirement, such that people must have access to an
adequate share of natural resources (Lomasky 1987; Wendt 2017). This
view might invoke differing conceptions of adequacy, such as
well-being or the ability to be self-governing (as in Simmons 1992,
1993). Or one might see the proviso as ensuring the ability to
exercise one’s rights of self-ownership (Mack 1995).
At the other end of the spectrum, left-libertarians think it
implausible that people who first use or claim natural resources
thereby become entitled to unequal benefits. Since natural resources
are not created or produced as such, left-libertarians claim that the
value of these resources belongs in some sense to everyone, This
common ownership of the world supports some egalitarian constraints on
appropriation and use.
What we might call equal share left-libertarianism—advocated by
Henry George (1879) and Hillel Steiner (1994), for
example—interprets the Lockean proviso as requiring equally
valuable shares of natural resources for everyone. Thus, while
individuals are morally free to use or appropriate natural resources,
those who thereby acquire more than their share (understood in terms
of per capita value) owe compensation to others. This constraint is
enduring significance. It applies at the moment of appropriation, and
encumbers subsequent through time. Others claim that the equality
requirement is supposed to also compensate for disadvantages that
result from different natural abilities (such as the effects of
genetic differences). Thus, Otsuka (2003) claims that the Lockean
proviso prohibits appropriations that diminish the opportunities of
others for well-being beyond the opportunity obtained by appropriating
or using a natural resource.
As an interpretation of Locke’s requirement that appropriators
leave “enough and as good”, however, left-libertarian
views are implausible. In his discussion of appropriation, Locke
invokes the idea of distributive shares only three times (sections 31,
37, and 46). All appear in the context of the (quite different)
prohibition on letting things spoil. In these cases, and in these
cases alone, Locke sees appropriation as taking what belongs to
others. His point is clear: when we take but don’t use, we
remove things for others to take and use—which was the point of
allowing unilateral appropriation in the first place.
At this point, left-libertarians often claim intuitive support for an
egalitarian proviso. When multiple people are presented with a
previously undivided resource, equal division is the intuitively fair
approach. An objection, however, is that such intuitions apply only to
circumstances that ignore relevant conditions. For instance, while
Otsuka (2018) is correct to claim that if two persons are stranded
together on an island, equal division is the intuitive solution, this
may not be true if one person arrived earlier, already cultivated,
say, two-thirds of the island, while leaving more than enough for the
second person to independently make a living, is willing to cooperate,
trade, and so on. In that case, the latecomer insisting that she has a
right to half the island is not only counter-intuitive, but probably
just wrong. The intuition of equal division becomes even less
appealing if we imagine more than two parties, capable of production,
trade, and cooperation, arriving at different times. It remains true,
of course, that such latecomers will be entitled to something like an
equally good shot at making use of the world’s resources. What
such an equally good shot comes to, however, is much less clear.
Whatever interpretation of the proviso one accepts, however,
libertarians left and right agree that once persons enjoy legitimate
rights over their property, these are more or less immune to other
claims of distributive justice. There is little room in the theory for
thinking that certain distributions or material outcomes are morally
significant as such. To the libertarian, concerns such as material
equality are inconsistent with an appropriate concern for
people’s equality. (See, e.g., Schmidtz 2006.) Thus, Nozick
(1974) argues in his famous discussion How Liberty Upsets Patterns
that because any system of property must allow gifts and other
voluntary transfers, and because these will significantly upset
whatever distribution is put in place, there is very limited room for
concerns with distributional equality. Since treating people as moral
equals means respecting them as the holders of these rights, and since
such rights will be exercised in ways that will not equalize material
outcomes, forced redistribution counts as unjust.
None of this is to say that libertarians are not concerned with
outcomes at all. John Tomasi (2012, p. 127) argues that many
libertarians and classical liberals are committed to a kind of
distributive condition requiring that societies must be expected to
work to the benefit of the least well-off. This seems to overstate the
matter considerably, but it is certainly true that many libertarians
see their policies as promoting the general good, and this plays an
important role in their justification. Hence, libertarians are wont to
point out that being poor in a free society is much better than being
poor elsewhere, that markets in general do not work to the detriment
of the poor, and so on.
Libertarians are highly skeptical of political authority and state
legitimacy. Since people are, quite simply, independent and equal
beings, with none naturally subordinated to any other, states (like
all other agents) ought to respect the moral rights of individuals,
including their rights over their persons and their legitimate
possessions. For this reason, libertarians typically require something
like voluntary consent or acceptance for legitimate state authority.
Unfortunately, all states fail to satisfy this requirement for many of
their subjects. As a result, they use massive amounts of force in ways
that are morally impermissible. States violate the rights of citizens
by punishing people for self-regarding conduct (e.g. taking drugs,
refusing to purchase health insurance, or engaging in consensual sex
in private). Similarly, states violate the rights of their subjects by
forcibly transferring their legitimate possessions to preferred others
(e.g. to bail out large companies, to provide for pensions, or pay for
public parks). States violate the rights of citizens when they
forcibly prevent them from innocently contracting and associating with
others, exercising their religion, occupy certain professions because
of their ethnic background, gender, or sexual orientation, and much,
much more.
A standard objection here is that, since so much of modern life seems
to require a state, libertarianism’s anarchist stance is
problematic. In reply, libertarians typically argue that many of the
effects of states are extremely negative. States wage devastating wars
abroad, restrict migration with devastating results for the
world’s poor, and oppress and violate the rights of many of
their own citizens. Moreover, many of the positive effects that states
can bring about can also be obtained through voluntary mechanisms.
Libertarians tend to be more hopeful about the possibility of anarchic
provision of order, public goods, as well as charitable giving. (See,
e.g., Huemer 2012; Chartier 2012.)
Even though libertarians are generally quite hostile to state
authority, this does not mean that the state cannot permissibly
undertake certain minimal activities. This includes most obviously the
enforcement of individual rights and freedoms. These activities do not
presuppose state authority since such activities are permissible with
or without people’s prior consent (unless, of course, such
activities involve the violation of rights themselves).
Some theorists, such as Hayek (1960), argue that it can be permissible
for people to be forced to pay for basic police services. But this
argument seems problematic within libertarian theory. If people do not
agree to their legitimate possessions being used for these purposes,
it would be unjust to force them to pay for these services, even if
they clearly benefit a benefit as a result. After all, libertarians
generally deny that merely receiving a benefit suffices to justify
enforceable requirements to pay.
Some left-libertarians endorse further “state-like”
activities for the state, which other libertarians would reject. Since
most left-libertarians recognize enforceable duties to compensate
others in proportion to the value of the natural resources they
possess, the state might forcibly collect and disburse these payments.
Some hold that even various public goods can be forcibly provided,
including basic police services, national defense, a basic system of
roads, etc. The underlying justification here is that the provision of
these public goods will increase the value of natural resources,
making the taxed amounts a case of self-financing. (Vallentyne
2007)
One popular argument for state authority holds that states can be
legitimate if they are democratic. Libertarians tend to be very
skeptical about this view. A large body of empirical findings has
shown that voters tend to be radically uninformed, ignorant, and
indeed biased about political issues. And democratic deliberation does
little, if anything, to improve this. Indeed, it seems like it is
rational for people to remain ignorant about politics. Given that
one’s causal influence on the quality of political decisions is
negligible, and it is costly in terms of time and effort to become
informed, it is rational for people to remain ignorant. Most people
thus vote in ways that have more to do with signaling their
ideological allegiance or virtues, and less with the merits of the
issues (Caplan 2008; Somin 2016; Brennan 2016; Pincione &
Tesón 2011).
In addition to voter ignorance, many libertarians fear the more
general dynamics of state power. Public choice theory points out that
since the best way to understand the behavior of political agents is
along roughly maximizing lines, there is little reason to think that
the state will generally behave in the public interest (Tullock &
Buchanan 1962). Thus, many government policies impose widely dispersed
costs on the populace to confer localized benefits on a few, often
politically well-connected elites. Examples include the large-scale
bailouts of financial companies and agricultural subsidies.