Liberal ideas first became widespread in Latin American due to the
influence of the 1812 liberal Cadiz constitution which was in force in
the Spanish empire for two years until the reestablishment of absolute
rule. At the beginning of the century, “liberalism” in
this context primarily meant what Spanish liberals meant by it in the
debates that took place in the Cadiz Courts, which met as a sovereign
national assembly in response to the Napoleonic invasion of the
Iberian peninsula in 1808. It was in this setting that the term
“liberal” was for the first time employed in a political
sense to refer to a political group (Breña 2012). Since the
Cadiz constitution was, in turn, heavily influenced by the political
ideas of the French Revolution, the first liberal ideas in Latin
America had likewise primarily this origin. Ideas such as popular
sovereignty, civil equality, individual representation, the
conventional nature of political authority, freedom of thought and of
the press, and a division of powers that privileges the legislative
became central to early Latin American liberalism. The latter was by
no means identical to Spanish liberalism or to the political ideas of
the French revolution, but these two are its main initial sources.
The crisis of the Spanish and Portuguese monarchies upon the
Napoleonic invasion set off the process of independence in of most of
Latin America and opened the way for the free circulation, for the
first time, of modern political ideas in the region (the Spanish and
Portuguese inquisitions had prohibited freedom of thought and of the
press). Though the Cadiz constitution was influential in both Hispanic
and Portuguese Americas, liberalism developed in quite different
directions in these two regions. The reason for this lies in the two
quite different ways in which the Spanish and Portuguese monarchies
responded to the French invasion. While the flight of the Spanish king
tossed the empire into a political crisis, the Portuguese were able to
maintain political stability by transferring the capital of the empire
to Brazil. Thus, questions about the source of legitimate political
authority became pressing in Hispanic America, but were not as
critical Brazil. Although the initial answers that Hispanic Americans
offered were framed in terms of traditional scholastic political
thinking, they soon began to appeal to the political ideas of the
French revolution, specifically to the idea of popular sovereignty.
According to the scholastic traditional view, sovereign authority
rested on a pact between the king and its people, and in the absence
of the king, sovereignty returned to the people. On this traditional
view, the sovereign authority of the king was limited by natural,
divine, and teleological (i.e., common good) considerations. The
transition to the modern conception of unlimited and indivisible
popular sovereignty marked a radical break in the political thinking
in the Spanish colonies. Similarly new and revolutionary was the
related conception of individual representation in a constituent
assembly, as opposed to the traditional corporate representation
before the king, to which the American subjects were never
entitled.
The end result of this political process was the independence of all
Hispanic America (with the exception of Cuba and Puerto Rico) within
two decades of the Napoleonic invasion through armed revolt. Brazil,
by contrast, obtained independence in the same period but without
bloodshed when the Portuguese prince-regent proclaimed it. This
difference in the sequence of political events accounts for the fact
that the liberal ideology in Hispanic America was deeply committed to
carrying out a radical break with the colonial past while a salient
feature of Brazilian liberalism is the continuity of monarchical rule.
While liberals in Hispanic American uniformly rejected monarchism and
embraced a republican form of government, Brazilian liberalism
remained monarchical until the closing decades of the century. The
egalitarianism implicit in republicanism favored the abolition of
slavery in the new republics. By mid-century slavery had been
abolished in all of them. Brazilian liberals, by contrast, supported
slavery, which was only abolished in 1888.
After having embraced the doctrine of popular sovereignty and the
natural rights language of the French revolution, most liberals
followed Benjamin Constant in his critique of the doctrine of popular
sovereignty and his defense of a limited government. His writings in
constitutionalism were closely followed in the design of Latin
American constitutions, both liberal and conservative. Though French
liberalism exerted the greatest influence overall, some Latin American
liberals were also much influenced by British parliamentarism. Most of
them also admired the North American republican experience.
Montesquieu and Jeremy Bentham were, along with Constant, among the
most cited European authors in the first half of the century (Safford
1987: 68). From Montesquieu, liberals took the idea of separation of
powers and his critique of despotism. Though they did not adopt an
explicitly utilitarian language, they admired and followed
Bentham’s rationalistic approach to legislation (Jaramillo 2001:
120). In the mid-century, the political problem that came into focus
and that gave liberals an identity against the conservative opposition
was the religious one. The question was how to deal with a powerful
Church that, in some regions, posed the most powerful internal
challenge to the authority of the newly established republics.
Liberals demanded freedom of religious worship and, in some cases, the
separation of church and state. At this point in time, they had for
the most part distanced themselves from the natural rights discourse
and from contractualism in light of the criticisms by the British
utilitarians (especially Bentham) and the French doctrinaires
(Constant, Pierre Royer-Collard, and François Guizot). They
turned their attention to the German historical school of law
(Friedrich Karl von Savigny and his French follower Eugène
Lerminier) and, above all, to Auguste Comte’s positivism, which
became the most influential philosophical doctrine (Hale 1984) along
with Herbert Spencer’s evolutionism. After decades of civil
unrest, a doctrine that emphasized the maintenance of order in
combination with progress appeared highly attractive. Liberalism had
ceased to be an ideology in combat against an enemy, either foreign
(Spain) or internal (the conservative political faction), and had
become the triumphant ideology of national building (Hale 1984). In
the closing decades of the century, positivism displaced liberalism in
Brazil, while some Hispanic American liberals carried out a synthesis
of liberal ideas and positivism that has often been considered the
decline of liberalism.
In the early twentieth century, Hispanic American liberalism became
the subject of strong criticisms. Critics argued that Hispanic
American societies had not been successfully transformed according to
liberal ideas because the former provided a hostile ground for the
latter. On this view, liberalism was a foreign ideology that was not
adequate for Hispanic American realities. This is a criticism against
nineteenth century liberalism that has remained forceful to this date.
By mid-twentieth century liberalism had been displaced by the
emergence of alternative political movements and ideologies:
socialist, Marxist, indigenous, agrarian, and populist. In the late
twentieth and early twenty-first centuries, liberalism has experienced
a modest revival in political discourse in Latin America. This is
manifest in the discourse that affirms the pluralism of forms of life
and the demands for protection of the rights of minorities. In the
sphere of academia, the works by English speaking liberal scholars,
such as John Rawls, Ronald Dworkin, and Joseph Raz, have received much
attention and have been amply discussed in academic publications.
However, Latin American scholars have so far not related their current
endorsement of recent Anglo-American liberalism to the nineteenth
century Latin American liberal discourse (a notable exception is
Gargarella 2010 & 2013). For the most part there is a sharp divide
between current work by historians on nineteenth century Latin
American liberalism, on the one hand, and systematic reflection by
philosophers and political theorists on recent Anglo-American
liberalism, on the other.
In response to the French invasion in 1808, Spanish liberalism
developed as an ideology of liberation against a foreign invader. This
was the first powerful liberal movement in the Spanish empire and the
very first serious questioning of absolute rule. In a society that had
almost no experience in political representation, liberals sought to
end despotic rule by replacing it with a parliamentary monarchy. They
denied sovereign authority to the King and declared it to lie in the
nation, which, in turn, was conceived of as having the faculty to make
and remake its own fundamental laws. Traditionally, representation in
the Courts was corporate (nobility, clergy and the municipalities),
while liberals stood for individualistic representation. Against
despotism, liberals also favored a division of powers and an
independent judiciary. Spanish liberalism was a revolutionary ideology
that marked a radical break with the monarchical status quo. Liberals
sought to end a corporate society and to create an individualistic one
by abolishing corporate privileges and immunities and by replacing
them with legal equality and economic freedom. The liberal position
was expressed in the 1812 Constitution.
The most important philosophical influence that shaped the liberal
position was the political ideas of the French Revolution and, more
specifically, the 1791 Constitution (Varela 1995). The 1812
Constitution exhibited the influence of Enlightenment rationalism, the
rationalist natural rights discourse, and the political ideas of
Montesquieu and Rousseau, to name the most salient referred to authors
(Varela 1987). The liberal deputies embraced the idea of individual
rights that were natural and inalienable. They also affirmed the
natural equality of all men and the doctrine of national sovereignty.
Following the French model, the Spanish constitution established a
division of powers that privileged the legislative as the power that
represented the nation. The constitution established a unicameral
legislature in which there were no special provisions for the
traditional preeminence of the clergy and the nobility. While the
monarch, as the executive, was subordinate to the legislative, the
judiciary was held to be independent, echoing Locke and Montesquieu
(Varela 1983).
However, there are two crucial features that notably distinguish the
Cadiz constitution from the French model. The former, by contrast with
the latter, was grounded in an appeal to history and it exhibited the
weight of Catholicism. As regards the first feature, the 1812
Constitution presented itself in its preamble as in continuity with
fundamental old Spanish legislation that had allegedly been subverted
by despotism. According to the traditional view, the authority of the
monarch rested on a pact with its people from which pact followed the
fundamental laws of the monarchy that the king had to observe. The
liberal appeal to historical legitimacy was clearly at odds with the
doctrine of national sovereignty according to which sovereign
authority is unlimited—the ultimate source of authority. In
fact, liberals introduced a conventional conception of political power
that subverted the traditional scholastic one according to which
political power was natural and historical. Nevertheless, the
presentation of the Constitution as in continuity with fundamental
legislation tempered the break with the past (Varela 1987).
As regards the second feature, the 1812 Constitution continued the
imperial protection of the Catholic religion to the exclusion of all
others despite the fact that it also ended some privileges and
immunities that the Catholic Church had traditionally enjoyed. It has
been argued, however, that religious intolerance was not a feature of
Spanish liberalism, but a concession that liberals had to make to
traditionalist political forces in the Courts (Varela 1987).
Nevertheless, the religious language that pervades the constitutional
text reveals the influence of Spanish scholasticism according to which
there are exterior limits to sovereignty (natural, divine, historical,
and teleological). This influence was even stronger in Spanish America
since the intellectual elite around the time of independence had been
educated in Spanish scholasticism. Religious toleration was a matter
of bitter disputes even among Latin American liberals themselves and
the religious language continued to be present in legal documents
throughout the nineteenth century.
Early Latin American liberalism must be seen through the influence of
the Spanish liberalism that developed in this political context,
although the former’s two strands developed in different
directions. While the Hispanic American strand was firmly committed to
a radical break with the colonial past, the Brazilian one was marked
by crucial points of continuity. Let us consider the Hispanic strand
first. The mark of the Cadiz constitution was evident in most Hispanic
American constitutions in the first half of the century (Safford 1987:
62). All of them claimed sovereign authority to lie in the people or
the nation and protected some basic individual rights (such as freedom
of thought and of the press) that were considered natural. They all
maintained protection of the Catholic religion as the official one as
well as most of the corporate privileges of the Catholic Church. They
also established a separation of powers and departed from the Spanish
model by creating bicameral systems. However, there are at least two
important points of contrast between Spanish and Hispanic American
liberals. The first one is that Hispanic American liberals could not
buttress their constitutionalism with appeals to historical
legitimacy. They could not present the constitutions that they
produced in continuity with the fundamental medieval laws of the
Spanish monarchy. Independence from Spain pushed, after three
centuries of colonialism, to conceive of the liberal institutions as
something completely new that lacked any historical precedent. By
contrast with Spanish liberals who looked both to the future and to
the past, the Hispanic American ones made a break with the past and
looked only to the future where emancipation and progress lied.
Liberal constitutions held the promise of a society fully transformed
away from the colonial structures and in accordance with the
protection of individual freedoms and legal equality. When Hispanic
American liberalism emerged as the ideology of a political group in
the mid-century, its identity was importantly centered in this forward
looking attitude.
The second point of contrast is that Hispanic American liberalism was
more radically egalitarian. Hispanic American liberals rejected a
monarchical option and very early abolished slavery and noble titles.
By mid-century slavery had been abolished in all independent
countries. Hispanic American liberalism became synonymous with
republican government, which meant a commitment to legal equality,
representation, and the rejection of monarchism. After three centuries
of despotic monarchical rule, Hispanic Americans associated monarchism
with despotism. They feared that one-person rule, even when limited
by a parliament, would inevitably become despotic—as it in fact
happened in the short lived monarchy in Mexico right after
independence. This egalitarianism, however, did not translate into the
establishment of a rule of law that guaranteed equal legal treatment
to all citizens. Nor did the egalitarian discourse translate into the
democratic inclusion of all citizens in the exercise of political
rights. Most Hispanic American liberals firmly believed in the need of
property qualifications for voting and for running for public office.
They were consistently skeptical about extending political rights to a
population that they regarded as incapable for republican
citizenship.
While early Hispanic American liberalism defined itself by its
rejection of the colonial heritage, Brazilian liberalism, by contrast,
acquired its identity in the internal confrontation with the advocates
of monarchical absolutism. Brazilian liberals did not challenge
monarchism. Instead, they sought to establish parliamentary limits to
monarchical authority (Cyril 2012), thus favoring a representative
monarchy. Though absolutists and liberals agreed on the need for a
written constitution, the protection of some fundamental liberties
(such as freedom of the press), and a legislative body that
represented the nation, the differences between them turned on the
extent and limits of the executive authority. Liberals sought to
subordinate the king to the legislative authority, while absolutists
pushed for the opposite balance of forces. Brazilian liberalism became
strongly identified with economic freedom, whereas absolutists favored
governmental intervention in the economy along the lines of the late
eighteenth century reformist absolutism. While liberals wished to
emulate North American federalism, absolutists were firmly committed
to political centralism and, hence, to the political control of the
entire nation by the monarch. Ironically, it was absolutists who
sought to end slavery, whereas liberals were committed to its
maintenance during most of the century.
The liberal discourse inherited from the French Revolution via the
Cadiz constitution provided the language in which political actors
demanded emancipation from colonial rule in the early nineteenth
century. This is why liberalism, though a diffuse ideology with no
clear contours, commanded the assent of many of those in favor of
independence. The discourse of liberation appealed to the notion of
popular sovereignty in order to justify emancipation from colonial
rule (Palti 2007: ch. 2). Representation and legal equality were
heartfelt demands in a region that had had no experience in political
representation while a colony, except for the brief interval during
which the Cadiz constitution was in force from 1812 through 1814
(Palti 2007: ch. 4). The natural rights to freedom of thought and of
the press were considered fundamental after centuries of tight
control by the Catholic inquisition, which had curtailed the free
circulation of ideas. A republican form of government with a division
of powers was considered an antidote against one-person despotic rule
and a clear sign of emancipation from monarchical absolutism. Some of
those who were later considered “conservatives”, such as
Lucas Alamán in México, or “republicans”,
such as Simón Bolívar in Venezuela, shared in this early
liberal consensus. Both of them affirmed, at least initially, the core
ideas of popular sovereignty, some natural rights, and a republican
form of government with a division of powers. Conservative
constitutions, such as the Chilean one from 1833, affirmed these core
ideas as well. Liberal ideas thus provided a shared perspective in
relation to which the various political positions that were to develop
later defined themselves.
The philosophical sources of this early liberalism are quite diverse
since public intellectuals referred to all sorts of authorities that
could support their own positions. Though the list is long, the most
widely referred to authors were Rousseau, Montesquieu, Constant, and
Bentham (Safford 1987: 68). From Montesquieu they took the defense of
a division of powers and the critique of despotism; from Rousseau the
idea of popular sovereignty, the social contract, and the natural
equality of men; from Constant the critique of popular sovereignty and
the defense of a limited government; from Bentham the rationalistic
approach to legislation. It should be noted, however, that the
influence of these authorities was not limited to those who
consistently subscribed to liberal views. Such an influence also
extended across a political spectrum that acquired more definite
contours in later decades. The echoes of Rousseau are apparent among
those who advocated an egalitarian strand of liberalism that demanded
equal political rights for all males, as in the 1814 Apatzingán
Constitution in México, which was never in force. This
constitution mentions the need for a virtuous citizenry, who, when in
disagreement with specific laws, must submit to them as a
“sacrifice of particular intelligence to the general
will”. But Rousseau was also highly influential among those who
defended clearly authoritarian forms of governance, such as
Bolívar, who established a lifetime executive in the 1826
Bolivian Constitution. The same holds for Constant, who was an
authority for liberal intellectuals, such as José María
Luis Mora in Mexico, but also for some of those who designed
“conservative” constitutions, such as the Mexican
constitution of 1836. This indicates that intellectuals often drew
from the same philosophical sources in order to develop political
positions that were, in fact, quite different from each other.
At this early stage, Hispanic American partisans of liberal ideas
usually did not call themselves “liberals”. Part of the
reason for this is that in the early nineteenth century the political
usage of the term was not yet well established in the region. The term
“liberal” still carried with it its original moral meaning
associated with noble qualities of generosity and magnanimity, which,
in the Hispanic-Portuguese Catholic tradition, were virtues that the
monarch had to have (Fernández Sebastián 2009:
703–4). In this moral sense, “liberal” was opposed
to tyranny and despotism. From the perspective afforded by this
widespread moral usage of the term, it became extremely difficult for
Hispanic Americans political actors to identify themselves as
“liberals” along the lines of Spanish liberalism. Although
this may seem paradoxical, the reason is that the liberal Spanish
Courts came to be seen as “illiberal” since they had
grudgingly granted representation rights to as few American deputies
as possible. This led some Hispanic American liberals to claim
distance from Spanish liberalism despite the fact that the greatest
impulse for the spread of liberal ideas in Latin America was the Cadiz
constitution. According to their own self-perception, for instance,
Colombian liberals owed nothing to the latter. It was only in the
twentieth century that historians have demonstrated the inaccuracy of
this self-conception (Martínez 2006).
The moral meaning of the term “liberal” provided a
perspective from which Hispanic American liberals construed their
vision of the Spanish monarchy as a paradigm of tyranny and despotism.
From the point of view of liberal ideas, more broadly, they came to
see the colonial past as an age of obscurantism, ignorance, and
backwardness (Lastarria 1844; Samper 1861; for discussion see Collier
1967: ch. 5). This negative conception of the Spanish heritage became
a constant feature of the Hispanic American liberal frame of mind. In
light of their abhorrence of the colonial past, liberals insisted on
the need to construe completely new political institutions and to
instill a new political mentality in the population. They were also
prone to blame the colonial heritage for the great difficulties that
they faced in carrying out these purposes. To be sure, this dismissive
attitude towards the colonial past was not exclusive of liberals since
it was Bolívar who famously blamed the ills of Hispanic America
on the colonial past. In his Jamaica Letter he claimed that,
as a consequence of the colonial heritage, “institutions which
are wholly representative are not suited to our character, customs,
and present knowledge” (Bolívar 1815). As some
conservatives often complained, the repudiation of the Spanish
heritage prevented liberals from positively valuing aspects of their
society that could help build stable political institutions, such as
the unifying force of Catholicism.
In light of this view of the character and customs inherited from the
colonial times, the liberal faith in the capacity of written
constitutions to fully transform their societies away from the
colonial structures and in the direction of progress went hand in hand
with strong pessimism about the capacity of the majority of the people to
live up to the demands of such institutions. Since the majority of the
population shared the moral values of the colonial society and lacked
even the basic skills of reading and writing, the elite judged them to
be backward and ignorant. Most liberals indeed deemed the majority of
the people to be unfit for republican citizenship. To be sure, the
latter was a widely shared view among European liberals who also
advocated a limited franchise. Most Hispanic American liberals
endorsed the French doctrinaire’s argument that most of the
population lacked the needed independence of judgment to exercise
political rights either because of lack of instruction or because of
their subservience to masters, or both, which was usually the case. A
notable exception to this dominant view was the short lived liberal
Colombian constitution of 1853 which granted universal male suffrage
following the French example after the 1848 revolution (Bushnell 1993:
108). By contrast with their European counterparts, however, the
Hispanic American liberals’ conviction about the political
incapacity of the masses was compounded by their belief that the
cultural practices inherited from colonial times were a formidable
obstacle for the realization of liberal political ideas. This
perception motivated the disenchanted conclusion that liberal
institutions were not suitable for Hispanic American societies, as
Bolívar put it, and as many other conservatives repeatedly
complained against partisans of liberalism.
In the aftermath of independence, most Hispanic American nations
produced written constitutions as early as 1811 in Venezuela, New
Granada (former Colombia), and Chile. At the time, political actors
shared the belief that a written code of law had the power to
transform their societies in the direction of liberal ideas. They
believed that good legislation was the way to promote individual
liberties and economic progress. According to this, former subjects of
a colonial regime would come to see themselves as the bearers of
individual rights and liberties as soon as the latter were
constitutionally protected. Likewise, on this optimistic view,
economic progress would naturally develop as soon as individuals were
granted the economic freedoms to work, to contract, and to accumulate
wealth. This initial constitutionalism did indeed bring great changes
with it: the constitutional protection of freedom of thought and of
the press ended the traditional limits on the free circulation of
printed materials and allowed for an explosion in the number of
periodical publications in which people for the first time openly
discussed political issues. Nevertheless, the liberal legislation also
faced strong opposition by established social forces (such as the
Catholic Church), the new republics were marked by great political
instability (regimes were often overthrown), and economic progress did
not materialize. By mid-century this initial constitutional optimism
had waned and political actors looked for alternative solutions. The
two most salient liberal proposed alternatives were quite different
from each other. According to the first one, it was necessary to
transform social practices first in order to prepare society for
republican institutions. According to the second proposal, by
contrast, it was necessary to go beyond constitutionalism and to
engage the State in the task of social and economic reform. While the
former alternative seeks to produce social transformation from below
(in civil society), the latter deepens the strategy of producing
social change from above (by the State). Juan Bautista Alberdi
advocated the first kind of strategy as suitable for the specific
situation of Argentina. In México, José María
Luis Mora affirmed the second alternative (section 6).
Juan Bautista Alberdi (1810–1884) was a public intellectual, a
legal theorist, and a diplomat. He laid the theoretical foundations
for the Argentinian constitution of 1853, which is the most long
lasting liberal constitution of the period. His proposal for
constitutional reform in Bases and starting points for the
political organization of the Argentine republic (Bases y
puntos de partida para la organización política de la
República Argentina, 1852) turns on two central ideas. The
first one is that the South American republics should lower their
aspirations: instead of a “true” democratic republic, they
should aim for a “possible” one that would pave the way
towards the former. The second idea is that for a true democratic
republic to have any chance of success, society must be ready for it.
On his view, the transformation of civil society must take place
before granting political rights to the totality of the male adult
population. Alberdi claimed that the much needed social transformation
could take place through the interaction of the local population with
northern European immigrants who would bring with them the habits of
order, discipline, and industry that were necessary for economic
progress and republican citizenship. Strongly influenced by the
effects of massive immigration in California, Alberdi maintained that
South America could become civilized through the transplantation of
Northern European culture in American soil. Thus, his proposed
solution was to promote massive immigration from northern Europe in a
nation that was for the most part sparsely inhabited. Hence his famous
claim that “to govern is to populate”.
Alberdi’s thinking was importantly influenced by the German
historical school of law (Friedrich Karl von Savigny and his French
follower Eugène Lerminier) that repudiated both natural law and
the widely held idea that a society could be transformed on the basis
of legislation that did not reflect its own state of civilization
(Alberdi 1837). His distinction between a “possible” and a
“true” republic is based on the idea that political
organization must not be oriented by high and utopian ideals, but must
be grounded in historical reality. In his view, law has to be adequate
to the society that receives it. Since he also held that an
examination of the situation of the South American republicans shows
that they are not civilized enough to govern themselves through
democratic institutions, he maintained that a possible republic should
not grant equal political rights to all citizens. He favored a sort of
government that was republican in form, but highly authoritarian in
practice. This, he thought, was apt in light of what he considered the
historical reality of Hispanic America. He famously referred
approvingly to Bolívar’s dictum that “The new
states of formerly Spanish America need kings with the name of
president” (Alberdi 1852: 415). In the end, he favored a
combination of federalism with political centralism: a certain degree
of autonomy to the provinces combined with a strong executive, since,
on his view, both federalism and centralism had important historical
roots in South America.
According to Alberdi, the goals that should guide the political
organization of a possible South American Republic must be responsive
to the latter’s history and state of civilization, which
establish the limits of political possibility. In his view, the most
important goal of a possible republic is to educate the population for
representative democracy. By “education” he meant the
improvement of the local population’s level of civilization up
to the level required for a true republic. He advocated two main means
of civilization: the promotion of commerce and industry, on the one
hand, and massive European immigration, on the other. Alberdi opposed
the idea that the population could be made fit for democracy through
formal schooling, as many other liberals indeed maintained. Domingo
Sarmiento, the other dominant intellectual and political figure in
Argentina at the time, favored formal schooling as the main means of
civilization (Sarmiento 1849; Botana 1997). By contrast with
Sarmiento, however, Alberdi held that the best means of moralization
were industrious work and the constant interaction with people who
already had the habits of order, discipline, and industry. In passages
that evince the influence of Adam Smith, he maintained that social
prosperity was not the work of governments, but a spontaneous result.
He was completely skeptical about the possibility of civilizing the
local population without the interaction with people who were already
civilized. He summarily remarked that “whatever is not European
in America is barbaric.”
Alberdi’s diagnosis about the best means for preparing the
population for a true republic guides his recommendations for
legislation. At the heart of his liberalism is his strong defense of
free trade and industry. Such a defense was grounded on both economic
and moral considerations: he regarded freedom of trade and industry as
instrumental for material progress and for the improvement of the
morals of the local population. Crucially, freedom of trade and
industry was also indispensable in order to attract the desired sort
of European immigrants. The protection of civil rights and liberties
to everyone was part of his conception of a possible republic but also
instrumental for promoting immigration. In particular, he favored
religious toleration in order to attract non-Catholic Europeans. At
the same time, however, he maintained that Catholicism should remain
the official religion. On this point, he differed from most Hispanic
American liberals who not only advocated the end of the official
recognition of Catholicism but also, in some cases, a strict
separation between Church and state. Again, Alberdi’s views were
grounded on the realities of the Argentinian nation where the Catholic
Church was relatively weak and did not pose a political threat to the
republic in the making as it was the case in Mexico or New
Granada.
What gave Latin American liberals and liberalism a clear identity
around the mid-nineteenth century was their opposition to an
adversary. In most of the region there emerged a
“conservative” reaction against the dominant liberal tide.
Though liberals and conservatives shared some political ground, they
held opposing views regarding the pace of social change and the place
of Catholicism and of the Catholic Church in society. Liberals and
conservatives agreed on the need for a written constitution, the
conventional nature of political authority, individual representation,
and the separation of powers, among other ideas. By contrast with
liberals, however, conservatives favored a strong and centralized rule
that could maintain peace and political stability, opposed the full
protection of freedom of the press, and also favored the maintenance
of some of the privileges traditionally enjoyed by the Catholic
Church. Liberals, on the other hand, advocated a more rapid pace of
social change, the full protection of individual freedoms, which
especially included freedom of worship and of the press, the
dismantling of the privileges traditionally enjoyed by the Catholic
Church, and most of the time, but not always, federalism. Though the
difference between liberals and conservatives was often not clear cut,
the only issue that consistently placed them at opposite sides was the
religious one (Bushnell 1996: 288–289). This opposition was more
or less salient depending on the power that the local Catholic Church
enjoyed in each national context. The liberal identity was
correspondingly less clearly defined in those places where the
religious problem was less divisive, such as Chile or Argentina, where
liberals rallied around the defense of individual liberties and some
degree of federalism against authoritarian and centralist rule (Jaksic
& Serrano 2011, Halperín 1988). In New Granada, where the
church had deeper roots, the liberal identity centered on a
combination of marked anti-clericalism with a defense of federalism
against a conservative regime that was pro-clerical, authoritarian,
and centralist. While the liberal forces of secularization had won out
in most of the region by the end of the century, the confrontation
between liberals and conservatives over the religious problem played
out in Colombia until the end of the twentieth (Bushnell 1993).
The religious problem in Hispanic America was, in some regions,
primarily about religious toleration, where the liberal position
regarding religion centered on the demand to allow for religious
worship. This was the case in Argentina where the local Catholic
Church was relatively weak. In some other regions, such as Mexico or
New Granada, where the church was much stronger, the religious problem
was more complex insofar as the church was powerful enough to
destabilize the new republican governments and to challenge their
legitimacy. In the second half of the nineteenth century, the Catholic
Church had condemned liberalism, secularism, freedom of thought and
toleration, among other “evils” in Pope Pius IX’s
Syllabus of Errors published in 1864. Where it had the power
to do so, the church sought to mobilize the moral religious
sensibilities of the majority of the population against the attempted
liberal reforms. The church opposed civil equality in order to protect
its own legal privileges and immunities, rejected the freedoms of
thought and of the press as threats to religious morality and clerical
authority, fought against economic reforms that endangered its
position as the largest landowner and wealthiest corporation, favored
a form of government that mirrored its own hierarchical structure
(i.e., absolute monarchism), and sought to maintain official
recognition and support by the state. The challenge posed by the
church to the new liberal republics combined claims to political and
economic power with the defense of morality and religion. In sum, the
church opposed all aspects of liberal ideology in the name of the
religion of the vast majority.
Though liberals and conservatives could agree on the need to protect
freedom of religious worship, as sometimes they did, they held
opposing views regarding the sorts of institutional supports, if any,
that the State should provide the dominant Catholic Church. While
liberals usually pushed for disestablishment, conservatives favored
the opposite. Liberals favored the abolition of the church’s
privileges and immunities in the name of legal equality, various
degrees of exclusion of the church from official schooling, the
establishment of a civil registry and civil matrimony, the possibility
of divorce, and the secularization of hospitals and cemeteries. In the
name of economic progress and freedom, liberals sometimes advocated
the confiscation of all of the church’s property not directly
related to religious worship in order to make it available for in the
market. In places where the conflict with the church was most profound
liberals pushed for the complete separation between church and state
as well as the “neutrality” of the state in religious
matters. The latter meant that the state should not explicitly favor
or disfavor religion as such. This liberal position, though clearly
anti-clerical, did not necessarily entail hostility to religion.
Though some liberals undoubtedly held anti-Catholic sentiments, the
attack against the church was political insofar as it aimed to place
the latter under the authority of the state. Conservatives, in turn,
defended the privileges traditionally enjoyed by the church, which
included establishment and the church’s alleged duty to spread
religious morality through official schooling. They also opposed the
confiscation of the church’s property. Though some conservatives
favored the church from authentic conviction (such as Miguel Antonio
Caro in New Granada, the most prominent conservative intellectual
there), many of them did so from instrumental considerations.
Conservatives did not wish to antagonize what could be a useful ally
in the maintenance of order. This pragmatic view was Diego
Portales’, the architect of Chilean political stability (Collier
2003), and also Lucas Alamán’s, who famously referred to
Catholicism as “the only link that binds all Mexicans when all
others have been broken” (Safford 1987: 100). In the long run,
those regimes that contemporized with the church indeed proved to be
more stable than the liberal ones that antagonized it. 
The place where the confrontation between liberals and conservatives
over the religious problem was most violent was Mexico, where the
colonial church had been the most powerful. The first confrontation
with the church took place in 1833, but the decisive blow to the
church came with the “Reform Laws” in 1855–1863,
which, among other measures, nationalized most of its property and
established a separation between church and State. The political
challenge that the church posed to the liberal regimes pushed some
Mexican liberals to move beyond their constitutionalism and to
advocate the need for social and economic reform. This was the case of
José María Luis Mora (1794–1850), the most
prominent Mexican liberal and whose liberal identity came to be
centered on his anti-clericalism. He was a historian, politician,
legislator, and a priest. His liberalism was strongly influenced by
his admiration of the 1812 Cadiz constitution, the writings of
Montesquieu and Constant, and by the course of political events that
led him to assume anticlerical views. Mora began his career as a
liberal intellectual as a partisan of constitutionalism. A constant
theme in his writings is the defense of the “absolute”
liberty of opinion and the criticism of any limits to freedom of the
press. He argued that it is impossible to limit the freedom to think
and to have opinions since men cannot divest themselves from their
opinions through external force. Thus, he claimed, it is neither just
nor convenient to prevent them from expressing their thoughts. The
crucial point for public order, in his view, is that men observe the
law regardless of the opinions that they may hold. He maintained that
no principle of justice can ground the prohibition of doctrines
considered false since men are fallible and the best or only means for
arriving at knowledge of the truth is to subject doctrines to
examination in a free discussion. The amendment of wrong opinions
cannot be attained through prohibition but through the free
circulation of ideas (Mora 1837: 491–5). Following Montesquieu,
Mora placed great emphasis on the security of the person and affirmed
the conception of civil freedom as the faculty of doing everything
that the law does not expressly prohibit (Mora 1837: 504–6).
As an admirer of the Cadiz constitution, Mora espoused the idea of
popular sovereignty but, following Constant, claimed that the latter
was not unlimited. In his engagement with Rousseau, Constant had
affirmed the notion of the general will as the source of legitimate
political authority, but had denied the unlimited authority of society
over the individual. According to Constant, individual rights are the
limits that the political authority must not trespass. Mora warned
that any unlimited authority was essentially tyrannical and, following
Montesquieu, characterized despotism as the lawless, absolute, and
unlimited use of political power regardless of the hands in which it
falls and the particular form of government that it takes (Mora 1837:
475). According to Mora, individual rights and liberties limit the
exercise of political power lest it become despotic. As was
conventional wisdom in nineteenth century French liberalism, Mora
argued for a franchise limited to proprietors who, in his view, were
the only members of society capable of exerting an independent
judgment, of displaying true civic virtues, and of caring for the
public good (Mora 1837: 633–4). At the same time, however, he
strove for the improvement of “the moral condition of popular
classes” through various forms of education. However, Mora
departed from the conventional wisdom of nineteenth century French
liberalism in various ways. First, he rejected monarchism, continued
to regard individual rights as natural, and subscribed to the doctrine
of the social contract. He held that men’s purpose in
establishing society is the preservation of their “liberty,
security, equality and properties” (Mora 1837: 475). Second,
Mora explicitly rejected Constant’s defense of a
“conservative power”, which was one of the latter’s
most popular conceptions in Hispanic America, though not among
liberals (Mora 1837: 681). Constant had conceived of the
constitutional monarch as neutral power that could moderate conflicts
among the executive, the legislative, and the judicial branches.
The third way in which Mora departed from French liberalism was his
anticlericalism, which was motivated by local political events.
Despite his admiration for the 1812 Cadiz constitution, Mora
criticized the fact that it did not abolish the special privileges
enjoyed by the military and the church. With respect to the latter in
particular, Mora reacted against the church’s opposition to the
establishment of republican values and came to regard it as a power
capable of destabilizing the republic, to subvert its laws, and to
turn the mass of the population against it (Mora 1837: 66). He
regarded the church as having a esprit des corps that was
opposed to both the national spirit and the representative system
insofar as the church sought to maintain special privileges and
immunities that were contrary to civil equality. He emphasized the
church’s refusal to submit to civil and criminal law, its
opposition to freedom of worship as well as to freedom of thought and
of the press. In his view, the church opposed these freedoms because
their exercise threatened the former’s rule over consciences. In
the same vein, Mora regarded the church as an obstacle to public
education insofar as education was instrumental to the masses’
emancipation from priestly power (Mora 1837: 63). He also considered
the church as an obstacle to colonization of scarcely populated
territories in virtue of its opposition to freedom of worship. He even
criticized the clergy’s celibacy, which, on his view, isolates
its members from society insofar as family ties are the “primary
link that binds men to society” (Mora 1837: 61). Mora advocated
the confiscation of the church’s property on the grounds that
the clergy was not a productive class and lacked an inclination to
industrious work. In Mexico, the church was indeed the wealthiest
financial agent and the largest single proprietor in the nineteenth
century until most of its property was nationalized in 1859.
Despite his multifaceted condemnation of the church, Mora’s
anticlericalism did not entail hostility to religion. He held that the
church should be free to devote itself to its spiritual mission since
“religious beliefs and principles of conscience are man’s
most sacred property considered as an individual” (Mora 1837:
74). His concern was to argue for the separation between the religious
and the political “principles.” He maintained that the
church should have no share in the exercise of political power, nor
should it have any power to coerce citizens either in the form of
forced economic contributions or punishments that are not solely
spiritual. He warned that the religious principle degenerates when it
is not kept separate from the political one. By contrast with the
Argentinian Alberdi, who did not have to deal with a comparatively
powerful Catholic Church, Mora advocated a strong reformist state
capable of curbing the opposition to liberal values by established
social powers. According to Mora, a reformist state had to create the
conditions for citizen’s freedom and equality. This was a
position that was contrary to Alberdi’s commitment to classical
liberalism.
In the closing decades of the nineteenth century, there took place a
fusion of liberalism with positivism in some parts of Latin America.
“Positivism” was the name for a scientific approach to the
solution of social and political problems that was based on experience
and observation. As developed by Auguste Comte in his Course of
Positive Philosophy, positivism claimed that it was possible to
uncover the laws of social phenomena and to organize society according
to them. Comte’s thesis that it was possible to combine liberty
with order and progress exerted great influence in Latin America along
with Herbert Spencer’s evolutionism. While some liberals, such
as Victorino Lastarria in Chile, sought to reconcile individual
freedom with positivist philosophy, some others, such as Justo Sierra
in México, frankly subordinated individual liberty to the
maintenance of social order. Comtean philosophy was most influential
in the field of higher education, where social reformers introduced
new curricula that privileged the study of the empirical sciences.
Such innovations were intended for the education of the elites.
Educators believed, following Comte, that the key to bringing about
the end of social disorder was mental order: education was
instrumental to ending mental anarchy by emancipating individuals from
prejudice and introducing them to “a common reservoir of
truths” (Zea 1968: 125). At the same time, Hispanic American
educators inspired by Comte shunned his religion of humanity. The
latter had the greatest impact in Brazil, where positivism displaced
liberalism.
José Victorino Lastarria (1817–1888) was the most
prominent Chilean liberal in the nineteenth century. He was a public
intellectual, a central literary figure, and a politician. In addition
to Comte’s writings, his thinking was importantly influenced by
John Stuart Mill’s rendering of positivist philosophy in his
Auguste Comte and Positivism, and by Émile
Littré, who popularized Comte’s positivism.
Lastarria’s most important theoretical work is Lessons in
Positivist Politics (Lecciones de política
positiva) published in 1875. The influence of positivism is
manifest in this work. By contrast with Comte, however, Lastarria was
a thorough individualist who extolled the perfection of the individual
and the value of individual liberty. He refused to subordinate
individual liberty to social order and maintained throughout his
political writings that society should protect the full exercise of
individual liberty. The central idea that Lastarria took from Comte is
the thesis that modern societies need to be guided by experience and
scientific observation. According to this, politics must be an
experimental science based on experience and observation, which are
the only solid basis for social organization. Following Comte,
Lastarria maintained that it is possible to comprehend society’s
progressive movement by uncovering the laws that govern social
phenomena. On his view, in order to examine a particular form of
social organization, it is necessary first to determine the laws that
govern humanity’s progress. The most fundamental law that
Lastarria identifies and that, according to him, impulses humanity
forward, is “moral liberty”: the tendency to augment and
develop all of our faculties (Lecciones, 3rd
Lesson). Social progress, on his view, is a product of this
development. This is a perfectionist conception of the human person
according to which perfection is not only an individual end but also
the most important social end.
Lastarria conceived of his own epoch as one of painful transition
towards the triumph of liberty. Following Comte, he subscribed to the
view that society progresses through three stages: theological,
metaphysical, and positive. At the theological stage, society is
subject to the authority of spiritual dogmas and is governed by force.
According to him, this is the most vicious state because it is
contrary to man’s moral nature and stops social development. He
associates the metaphysical stage with the French spirit and
criticizes it for its anarchy and confusion. In particular, Lastarria
criticizes the revolutionary conception of liberty as popular
sovereignty which he regards as an absolute power incompatible with
the rights of man, properly understood. The attack against the old
theological order and the anarchy in the ideas characterize the epoch
of transition towards a third, positive, stage. He identifies the
latter as “liberal” insofar as it is founded on human
liberty, which, on his view, is ideally exercised in what he calls
“semecracia” (self-government). By the latter he not only
means individual self-government but also government of the people by
the people, which he saw realized in the North American republic that
he greatly admired.
Lastarria maintained that liberty consists in the exercise of various
rights: the right to make decisions about one’s own person
(personal liberty), the right to exercise one’s own intelligence
and to examine received beliefs, the right to work and to acquire
property, the right to associate with others, and the right to demand
equality before the law (Lecciones, 5th Lesson).
He was particularly concerned with freedom of religious worship. He
held religion to be a fundamental idea in society but also an intimate
and private one. Following the example of North America, he advocated
the separation of church and State both in order to maintain the
independence of the church in the carrying out of its spiritual
mission and the neutrality of the State with respect to religious
dogma. As many other Hispanic American liberals, Lastarria established
a connection between freedom of thought and freedom of teaching: on
his view, just as the State should abstain from favoring any religious
doctrine in particular, the State should also refrain from imposing
any political doctrine through official schooling. Though this view
pushes towards the disappearance of official schooling, he granted
that the State had a duty to finance basic schooling but should leave
all other instruction in private hands.
Lastarria’s individualism was an exception among those Hispanic
American liberals who subscribed to positivist philosophy. The latter
came to see society as an organism, of which the individual is a part,
subject to fixed laws that determine its development. In their defense
of a scientific approach to social problems that was based on
observation and experience, they claimed that law had to be adjusted
to social reality, not the other way around. They thus rejected the
“utopias” of earlier liberals and came to regard the
“old” defense of natural rights and popular sovereignty as
metaphysical abstractions that were out of touch with reality. In the
extreme, positivist liberals sided with the defense of authoritarian
governments in the name of order and progress. In México,
positivist philosophy became the official creed of the governing
elite, the so called “scientists”, who did not repudiate
their liberal credentials. Their positivist version of liberalism,
which they called “conservative” liberalism, served as the
ideological framework for the justification of dictatorial rule
(Aguilar 2011).
After having been the triumphant ideology of nation building in most
of Latin America in the late nineteenth century, liberalism entered a
phase of decline in the early twentieth. In fact, liberalism’s
demise began with the positivist subordination of constitutional
rights and liberties to the maintenance of social order. The
positivist critique of what came to be called
“doctrinaire” (constitutional) liberalism constituted a
frontal attack against the latter’s classical version, which
emphasized the protection of individual liberties. At the turn of the
century, this critique was sometimes combined with a growing
skepticism regarding the aptness of liberal ideas and values for
Hispanic American societies. In Mexico, this skepticism emerged from
within the liberal establishment insofar as the late nineteenth
century liberal regime had been dictatorial and failed to protect
constitutional rights and liberties (Rabasa 1912). On this view,
liberalism had subverted itself because it lacked the adequate social
conditions to flourish. In Venezuela, by contrast, the idea that
liberalism is not adequate for Hispanic American societies refers back
to Bolívar’s early skepticism mentioned earlier (section
3). Laureano Vallenilla, a Venezuelan positivist sociologist, famously
argued that authoritarian forms of governance are more suitable for
Hispanic American societies (Vallenilla 1919). The idea that liberal
reformers failed because liberal ideas were “imported” and
not adequate for Latin American societies has not ceased to occupy
interpreters ever since (Jaksic and Posada 2011a). A notable exception
to this dominant view is the reconstruction, by an official ideologue,
of Mexican liberalism as the official and triumphant ideology of the
political regimes emanated from the 1910 revolution (Reyes Heroles
1957). Though professional historians are divided among those who
claim that Latin American societies were indeed hostile ground for
liberalism (Hale 1984) and those who more sympathetically present
Latin American liberalism as a political movement that was responsive
to local problems (Bushnell 1996), there is a growing tendency to
abandon the “failure” view of liberalism and to focus on
the reconstruction of what nineteenth century liberals aimed and
accomplished, as a recent collection of essays shows (Jaksic and
Posada 2011b). Whatever one may think about the “failure”
view, however, it is certainly true that liberalism receded throughout
Latin America in the first half of the twentieth century. An important
reason for this is that alternative ideologies became prominent. Early
in the century, positivism was condemned as utilitarian and
materialist from the perspective of a new idealist mentality that
developed among intellectual elites. By mid-century, socialist,
Marxist, indigenous, agrarian, and populist political movements and
ideologies had become dominant and displaced liberalism.
The late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries have seen a modest
revival of a liberal political discourse that is partly due to the
decline of socialist and Marxist political movements and ideologies.
Two salient instances of this revival in political discourse are the
recognition of the pluralism of forms of life and the demands for
protection of the rights of minorities. In the sphere of academia,
many scholars have enthusiastically welcomed the influence of
Anglo-American contemporary liberalism. The works by John Rawls,
Ronald Dworkin, Joseph Raz, and many others have received much
attention and have been amply discussed in academic publications. It
is interesting to notice, however, that there is a sharp separation
between the reconstruction of nineteenth century Latin American
liberalism, which continues to be the province of historians, on the
one hand, and systematic reflection on liberal ideas and values by
professional philosophers and political theorists, on the other.
Little effort has been made to relate current work on liberal ideas
and values inspired by Anglo-American authors to the nineteenth
century Latin American tradition (a notable exception is Gargarella
2010 & 2013).