Two features of Locke’s intellectual landscape are most salient
for understanding his philosophy of science, one concerning the new
science’s methodology, and the other concerning its
content. First, then, is the new methodological approach to
understanding the natural world, accompanied by profound shifts in
conceptions of induction and scientific knowledge, and in disciplinary
boundaries. Locke’s reaction is for the most part progressive.
Impressed by experimental methods and cognizant of their poor fit with
the Aristotelian ideal, he defines a distinct kind of knowledge, one
inferior to genuine scientific knowledge but appropriate to human
sensory capacities.  In so doing, he develops an epistemological basis
for the new, experimental philosophy. Yet his reaction also has its
conservative aspect, one that some see as having limited him in the
face of the new science’s evolving methodology. He retains as an
ideal the notion that scientific knowledge is demonstrative and
certain, an ideal he shares with the two main targets of
his Essay, the speculative systems of the Aristotelians and
the Cartesians. 
The second salient feature is the dominant scientific theory of his
day, the new science’s corpuscular hypothesis. As defined for the purposes of this
article, the corpuscular hypothesis (i) takes observable bodies to be
composed of material particles or corpuscles, (ii) takes impulse
(action by surface impact) to be the primary if not the sole means of
communicating motion, and (iii) attempts to reduce qualities at the
level of observable bodies, such as color, to the primary, that is,
inherent properties of the particles composing those observable
bodies. In what may be called its orthodox version (“pure
mechanism”, as Ayers (1981, p. 212) calls it) the corpuscular
hypothesis restricts those inherent properties to size, shape, number,
and motion, and holds that all other qualities and operations are
explicable in terms of that restricted set of properties.  The orthodox version thus 
implies a proviso of contact action—that bodies
causally interact only locally, by impact, such that unmediated action at a
distance is denied. (Although a number of commentators use the terms
‘corpuscular hypothesis’ and ‘mechanism’
interchangeably, distinguishing them has certain benefits. For
instance, it permits us to classify Newton as a corpuscularian
theorist of some stripe, and to do so without engaging the debate
about whether he adhered to the contact action proviso. The
definitions given here also agree largely with those in
the entry on 
 John Locke.) Plenist and atomist
versions of the corpuscular hypothesis may be distinguished. Plenist
theorists deny the void and assert a plenum of matter, as Descartes
does by identifying matter with extension. Such theorists may speak of
particles, but their particles are not atoms, being infinitely or at
least indefinitely divisible. Atomist theorists, by contrast, accept
the void and take the particles or corpuscles comprising compound
bodies to be indivisible, or at least probably so. Since Locke’s
sympathies are clearly with the atomist version, the term
‘corpuscular hypothesis’ shall refer to that version
throughout this article, unless indication is given otherwise. Central
theses of the Essay are developed in close conjunction with
the corpuscular hypothesis—most notably, the distinction between
real and nominal essences, which is developed in connection with the
distinction between primary and secondary qualities associated with
corpuscular theorists, including Locke’s mentor, Robert Boyle. Yet
since Locke often treats the hypothesis with skepticism, its status
and purpose are a source of controversy.
This article examines questions connected with the two salient
features noted, and in connection with the first, it also examines
Locke’s relationship to Newton, a figure instrumental to the changing
conceptions of scientific knowledge. Section 2 addresses questions
connected to those changing conceptions. What does Locke take science
(scientia) or scientific knowledge to be generally, why does
he think that
scientia in natural philosophy is beyond the reach of human
beings, and what characterizes the conception of human knowledge in
natural philosophy that he develops? Section 3 addresses the
question provoked by Locke’s apparently conflicting treatments of
the corpuscular hypothesis. Does he accept or defend the
corpuscular hypothesis? If not, what is its role in his thought,
and what explains its close connection to key theses of the
Essay? Since a scholarly debate has arisen about the
status of the corpuscular hypothesis for Locke, Section 3 reviews some
main positions in that debate. Section 4 considers the
relationship between Locke’s thought and Newton’s.
All citations of An Essay Concerning Human Understanding are
indicated by ‘E’, followed by the book and section
numbers. Page numbers referring to the Nidditch edition are also
provided.
Locke’s great epistemological contribution to philosophy is a
conception of human knowledge suitable for the experimental science of
his day, one that in natural philosophy at least will replace the old,
Aristotelian conception. According to the Aristotelian conception,
scientific knowledge—scientia—is certain
knowledge of necessary truths, which can in principle be expressed in
syllogistic form, the conclusion following from self-evident
premises. In the domain of natural philosophy, it is certain knowledge
of real essences. Although Locke does not seriously entertain a
radical skepticism—finding “a very manifest difference
between dreaming of being in the Fire, and being actually in it”
(E IV.ii.14, pp.537–538)—he recognizes that the demands
of scientia are too stringent for the new, experimental
science.  Nevertheless, the concept of scientia plays an
important role as he develops his conception of the probabilistic sort
of knowledge that is possible for humans in the domain of natural
philosophy: he uses it as a foil when explaining why humans must
settle for probabilistic knowledge there, scientia remaining
always out of reach. Scientia can serve as that foil because
it is attainable for human beings in certain domains; however Locke
thinks that for nobler spirits, such as angels, it is also attainable
within natural philosophy.
This section begins by reviewing the history of the concept
of scientia and the factors that, by undermining it, provide
the impetus for Locke’s conception of human knowledge in natural
philosophy. This section also explains what Locke
thinks scientia in natural philosophy would amount to, the
obstacles that prevent human beings from achieving it, and the lesser
human knowledge that must serve us in its place.
The conception of genuine scientific knowledge that Locke inherits
and in some manner retains, scientia, has its roots in
Aristotle, as set out at the beginning of Book I, §2 of the
Posterior Analytics. For Aristotle, only necessary
truths are the objects of scientific knowledge, and since scientific
knowledge requires knowledge of causes, it also requires knowing that
the fact is necessary by knowing its necessary relations to its
causes. Among Aristotle’s manifold causes, the main one in
question here is the formal cause—the nature or essence—as
Aristotle indicates
 elsewhere.[2]
The knower’s epistemic stance toward the necessary truth and
its relation to causes is one of certainty, and the certain fact is
demonstrable via a syllogism, specifically, one in which the premises
are self-evident, requiring no demonstration themselves.
The stipulation that the premises of a scientific demonstration must
be indemonstrable, that is, self-evident, leads to a prima
facie difficulty. This conception of scientific knowledge is
intended to encompass not only conceptual propositions, but also
propositions about the real natures or essences of substances, which is
to say propositions about the world. As with any other
demonstration, a demonstration in natural philosophy must have premises
that are self-evident, since otherwise a regress would ensue.
Yet it is not clear, at least from a contemporary perspective, how the
premises can be self-evident, since they must be
experience-based.
Now, it would be overstating matters to say that this problem
appears only from a contemporary perspective; there was some
recognition of it in the ancient and medieval
 periods.[3]
Still, before the advent of
the experimental science, the problem was not strongly felt because
experience was understood in a different way. For one thing, the notion
of an experiment—an artificially constructed, single event or
series of events designed to test for a predicted outcome—did not
exist. Moreover, among the scholastic Aristotelians, a single,
naturally occurring event could not by itself be regarded as revealing
of natural processes, because it might be a
“monster”—it might be an event that went against
nature rather than being produced by and thus revealing of
 nature.[4]
Events
as generally experienced, however, were regarded as being revealing of
nature, and so they could provide the universal truths needed as
premises in the
 syllogism.[5]
How was the gap between events as usually
experienced—which still amounts to a limited sample of
evidence—and the universal claim derived from them bridged?
It is only from the modern and contemporary perspectives that such a
gap exists to be bridged. For Aristotle and the medievals, human
faculties are so constituted as to be able to apprehend nature, that
is, to discern the essences of
 substances.[6]
In short, then, because the
internal essences that form the content of natural philosophy are real,
and because our faculties are so constituted as to apprehend those real
essences, natural philosophy can be a science, a domain in which
certain, demonstrative knowledge can be had, despite its dependence
upon experience.
The exemplars of scientific knowledge, to be sure, are conceptual
disciplines, not only geometry, but also rational theology, the latter
being the quintessential science for the
 medievals.[7]
Yet for the most part,
natural philosophy stands side by side with conceptual disciplines,
even into the modern period. Bacon, though associated with
induction, accepts the demonstrative conception of scientific
knowledge, and so does Galileo, who uses experiments to reveal fundamental
principles (though also using them in other
 ways).[8]
As empirical methods are refined and more
widely applied, the belief that natural philosophy can stand under the
umbrella of scientia comes under increasing
 pressure.[9]
Some thinkers
resist the pressure, most notably Descartes, who derives his laws of
nature by an a priori reflection upon God’s nature, and, placing
confidence in these rationalist methods, denies that his third law of
nature is undermined by conflicting observations of colliding
 bodies.[10]
Yet for the experimentalists themselves, including Locke’s
mentor, Boyle, observations and experiments are the primary vehicle to
knowledge.  (It should be noted, however, that most advocates of
experimentalism did not consider speculation wholly illegitimate,
instead insisting that it be delayed until considerable experimental
and observational evidence had been amassed; see Anstey (2011,
pp. 4,5).) It is this approach that puts natural philosophy on the
path to Hume’s problem of induction, and that most influences
Locke.[11]
As indicated earlier, scientia serves as the backdrop
against which Locke develops the conception of the knowledge that is
possible in natural philosophy for human beings. Having retained
the ideal of scientia, as exemplified by geometry, yet having
also absorbed the import of Boyle’s experimental method, Locke is
driven to his characteristic pessimism about the kind and extent of
knowledge possible for us in natural philosophy. “The meanest,
and most obvious Things that come in our way, have dark sides, that the
quickest Sight cannot penetrate into” (E IV.iii.22, p.
553). Due to the weakness of our faculties, Locke suspects,
“natural Philosophy is not capable of being made a
Science.” (E IV.xii.10, p. 645). This section considers
Locke’s general notion of scientia, what would be
required for scientia in natural philosophy, and the obstacles
that prevent human beings from attaining scientia in natural
philosophy.
Locke takes knowledge generally to consist in “the perception
of the connexion and agreement, or disagreement and repugnancy of any
of our Ideas” (E IV.i.1–2, p. 525), and among the three kinds of
knowledge that he distinguishes, intuitive, demonstrative, and
sensitive, the former two are kinds of certain knowledge.
Intuitive and demonstrative knowledge differ in the number of
intuitions involved, and consequently, differ in their degree of
certainty (E IV.ii.14, pp.537–538). Intuitive knowledge is the
most certain because the truth is grasped immediately. There are no
intermediate steps, and doubt is impossible because the mind can no
more avoid recognizing the truth than the open, functioning eye could
avoid seeing light when turned toward the sun (E See IV.ii.1, p. 531).
Demonstrative knowledge, though also qualifying as certain, is less so
because it involves intermediate steps. We cannot grasp
immediately that the three angles of any triangle are equal to two
right triangles, and must instead construct the steps of a proof.
Upon doing so, and upon grasping the connections between the steps of
the proof, we have demonstrative knowledge (E IV.ii.2–3,
p.531–532). Intuitive and demonstrative knowledge are forms of
scientia, then. Locke defines that as “certain
universal Knowledge”(E IV.iii.29, p. 559), and mere
“particular matters of fact” (E IV.iii.25, pp. 555–56) do
not qualify.
To understand Locke’s notion of scientia, we must
consider its objects: real essences and the necessary connections that
flow from them. Denying the Aristotelian view that a single
essence both grounds the properties of a thing, making it what it is,
and provides the basis for classifying it, Locke draws a distinction
between real and nominal
 essences.[12]
Whereas the nominal essence consists in
the set of observable qualities we use to classify a thing (which
implies that the nominal essence could vary across time or
communities), the real essence (or real or internal constitution,
as Locke sometimes writes) is that which makes a thing what it is.
Discussion of real essence often focuses upon the real essences of
material substances, and in that case we say that the real essence is
the causal ground of the substance’s perceivable
properties. As will be discussed in a subsequent section, many
commentators interpret Locke as identifying a material
substance’s real essence with some subset of its constituent
corpuscles’ primary qualities, an identification presuming that
Locke accepts the corpuscular hypothesis (e.g., Osler 1970, p. 12;
Mandelbaum 1964, p.1). According to another interpretation, the
real-nominal essence distinction is metaphysical, and thus more
fundamental than the primary-secondary quality distinction, which is a
physical distinction, belonging as it does to a particular physical
theory, the corpuscular hypothesis. Yet leaving that debate aside
for the moment, we may note from the first sentence of the above-quoted
passage that Locke does not restrict the notion of real essence to
substances. This means that we can speak of, say, the real essence of a
triangle, understanding it as that which grounds the triangle’s
qualities, making it what it is.
We have scientific knowledge of something when we know its real
essence and, since its qualities flow from that real essence, when we
know the necessary connections between the essence and its other
qualities. Geometry serves as an exemplar, as it did for so many
of Locke’s predecessors. In knowing what a triangle is, we
cannot conceive things being otherwise than that the sum of its three
angles equal the sum of two right angles.
Scientia is possible in another conceptual domain also:
morality. Morality is characterized by discernible necessary
connections, and Locke is adamant that we can have the same level of
certainty there as in geometry.
What would be required for scientia in natural
philosophy? Since scientia generally concerns real
essences, and since natural philosophy for Locke concerns material
substances and their powers, scientia in natural philosophy
would be knowledge of material substances’ real essences and
their necessary connections to qualities flowing from them.
If we could have scientia in natural philosophy, we could
know a substance’s qualities without making observations or
experiments. To take one of Locke’s frequent examples, if
we could know gold’s real essence, we would then know its
qualities, even if not a single sample of gold existed.
Which qualities exactly would we be able to deduce? We would
be able to deduce a substance’s tertiary qualities, that is, its
powers to produce certain effects in other
 substances.[13]
If we knew the real
essences of opium, and of hemlock, then just as though we were
performing a geometric deduction, or just as a locksmith understands
why a given key will open one lock but not another, we could deduce
that opium produces sleep, that hemlock causes death, and we would
understand why each substance produces its effects.
Knowing real essences would enable us to deduce tertiary qualities,
then, but what about secondary qualities?  Here matters are initially
less clear, since Locke seems to be saying both that more acute senses
would not do away with the secondary quality of sound, but might do
away with the secondary quality of color. In one passage, Locke
imagines our having very acute senses, including “microscopical
eyes”, and he clearly assumes that we would still experience the
secondary quality of sound: “If our Sense of Hearing were but
1000 times quicker than it is, how would a perpetual noise distract
us” (E II.xxiii.12, pp. 302–303). Yet in a preceding
passage, he had suggested that if our faculties were designed for
detecting real essences, we would not experience color at all:
Reflecting upon these examples, however, suggests that he is not, or
not always, imagining that microscopical eyes would do away with color
altogether; rather, it might in some cases enable us to view tinier
particles having different colors than that we perceive for the
aggregate object.  For in the example he gives, blood as an aggregate
body appears uniformly red, but under a microscope, some parts of it
appear translucent while only the globules appear red.  Once the
microscope is used, color is not eliminated from the experience of
seeing blood, but is instead seen as being differently distributed.  A
pixilated painting provides a rough analogy; a shape seen from afar
may appear uniformly green, but up close is seen as comprising tiny
blue and yellow dots.
Scientia in natural philosophy would require knowledge both
of real essences and of their necessary connections among qualities,
yet neither is possible for human beings, Locke concludes. One
obstacle to scientia, then, is that real essences escape
us. God has given us sensory capacities that are suitable for finding our way
to the “market and exchange” and other practical needs,
but are not suitable, as the “microscopical eyes” passage indicates,
for detecting the minute parts of bodies.
Another obstacle is that we are almost entirely unable to discern the
necessary causal connections among the qualities of substances. (And
Locke does take those connections to be necessary--but does he
construe them in terms of nomological or logical necessity?  Given his
view that demonstrative knowledge in natural philosophy is possible
for immortals and serves as an ideal for mortals, he seems to be
thinking in terms of logical necessity, much like the Aristotelians he
was reacting against, a point made by Ott (2009, p. 13).) Locke does
find two instances in which we can discern necessary connections
between qualities of bodies: “Some few of the primary Qualities
have a necessary dependence, and visible connexion one with another,
as Figure necessarily presupposes Extension, receiving or
communicating Motion by impulse, supposes Solidity.” (E
IV.iii.14, p. 546) Apart from these two exceptions, however, necessary
connections escape us. In part, this is due to the first obstacle, our
inability to discover real essences, due to the minuteness of
particles. It is also due, however, to the remoteness of so many
bodies, those which lie “beyond this our Earth and
Atmosphere…even beyond the Sun, or remotest Star our Eyes have
yet discovered” (E IV.vi.11, p.586–87, and IV.vi.12,
p.587). For according to Locke’s speculations, all things might be
causally interconnected in complex ways, such that we could not know
one without knowing all of the others with which it is causally
connected.
But while human beings cannot attain scientia in natural
philosophy, there are other epistemic agents who can. One is, of
course, God, who certainly knows real essences (E III.vi.3, p.
440), and “’tis possible Angels have” ideas of real
essences as well (E III.vi.3, p. 440).
That Locke finds it natural to speak in the same breath of matter
and spirits marks him as belonging to the age of natural philosophy
rather than of science. It is because knowledge of necessary
connections can be referred to these higher epistemic agents that
scientia persists so strongly as an ideal, even while he
recognizes the need for a quite different conception of knowledge.
The conclusion that no intuitive or demonstrative knowledge of
substances is possible for us, their real essences and necessary
connections being out of reach, places Locke at a crossroads. One path
is skepticism, the view that without certainty, no knowledge of
substances is possible at all. He rejects that path, denying that
hyperbolic doubt could be genuine for either the self (E IV.ix.2,
pp. 619–20) or for external objects (E IV.xi.3, p. 631). The
other path, the one he follows, involves lowering the bar by admitting
a third kind of knowledge, one that lacks certainty: sensitive
knowledge. (A recent, in-depth examination of how justified Locke is,
both in avoiding skepticism and in his position on sensitive
knowledge, may be found in Priselac 2016.)
Sensitive knowledge is knowledge of the “effects [that] come
every day within the notice of our Senses”, without an
understanding of their causes; “we must be content to be ignorant
of” those causes (E IV.iii.29, pp. 559–560). Instead
of knowing real essences, the causal basis of the properties we
perceive, we know only those perceived properties, from which we
construct nominal essences. Instead of employing deduction, we
are forced to rely upon “trials”—observations and
induction. Instead of knowing the necessary connections holding
between a substance’s real essence and its other qualities,
including its tertiary qualities (which might include, recall, causal
connections with substances beyond the remotest star), we know only the
co-existences of properties. And from the mere, regular
co-existence of properties found in observed cases, Locke observes, we
could not know with certainty that the same set will be found
co-existing in the next case.
Yet our discoveries about co-existences of properties—though
they are merely contingent particulars, or, insofar as they are applied
beyond the particular cases we have actually observed, are mere
probability—can yet qualify as real knowledge. To do so,
our ideas must meet certain conditions. The complex idea that we
refer to a substance must comprise all and only those simple ideas that
we have found to co-exist in nature. Here Locke is concerned to
show that sensitive knowledge deserves its appellation, since it can be
distinguished from arbitrary or otherwise poorly grounded claims (e.g.,
that fluidity has been found to co-exist with brittleness, in a single
substance and at a single given
 temperature.[14])
Sensitive knowledge is
far less than scientia, but far more than ungrounded
opinion.
As for general claims about substances based upon observed
particular matters of fact, these too can qualify as real
knowledge. Admittedly, it is only probable that, when four of the
five properties previously found co-existing together occur again, the
fifth will be present too. Yet we can still form an abstract idea
of gold, as a substance having all five properties, and call this
general claim knowledge, on the grounds that “whatever have once
had an union in Nature, may be united again” (E IV.iv.12, p.
568).
Has contemporary science enabled us to go beyond sensitive
knowledge—have discoveries about compounds, elements, and
subatomic particles provided us with knowledge of real essences?
Much of the force of this question derives, to paraphrase Nicholas
Jolley, from the fact that many of those discoveries about
matter’s structure were not conceived empirically, but only
confirmed empirically; they were initially conceived as possibilities
by employing the hypothetico-deductive model, and the predictions
deduced from the models were then compared to empirical data (Jolley
2002, p. 69). Yet as Jolley also points out, these commentators may have
missed the full import of Locke’s geometric model; in a passage
quoted earlier, Locke tells us explicitly that if we knew the real
essence of gold, we could deduce its qualities even if gold did
not
 exist.[15]
So while the predictions of any model developed via the
hypothetico-deductive model must survive the test of observations,
observations in Locke’s scientia are wholly
unnecessary. To put the point another way, Locke takes
natural philosophy to be an empirical domain only for human beings,
with their impoverished faculties. For nobler spirits, it would
more resemble geometry.
The last few decades have seen a lively debate about the role of the
corpuscular hypothesis in Locke’s Essay. This
section examines the sources of that debate and reviews some of the
main positions figuring in it.
As we have seen, Locke develops some central theses of his
Essay in connection with the corpuscular hypothesis. In
his theory of ideas, corpuscles provide at least a structural basis for
simple ideas, and depending upon one’s interpretation, there may
be a causal relationship as well. Further, and of particular
interest here, Locke often appears to identify a material
substance’s real essence with the set or some subset of its
component particles’ primary qualities. In the following
well-known passage, for instance, he points to the primary qualities of
a body’s parts—their bulk or solidity, motion, and
shape—as the causal ground of the qualities we
perceive.
He similarly seems to identify the real essence of bodies with primary
qualities when he suggests, just prior to the “microscopical
eyes” passage, that instead of seeing colors (or instead of
seeing them as we currently do), we could discover bodies’ internal
constitutions, if only we knew the ”texture and motion of the
minute Parts of corporeal things“ (E II.xxiii.12,
pp. 302–303). And a commitment to the corpuscular hypothesis is
again suggested when he despairs of understanding the production of
secondary qualities: even if “we could discover the size,
figure, or motion of those invisible parts, which immediately produce
them [secondary qualities],” we still cannot discover any
“undoubted Rules” concerning their production or
connection, nor “conceive how any
size, figure, or motion of any Particles, can possibly produce
in us the Idea of any Colour, Taste, or
Sound” (E IV.iii.13, p. 545). Here he appears to
despair of understanding how secondary qualities are produced by
primary ones; he appears to take the corpuscular hypothesis’
reductionist claim to be true, but he despairs of our understanding
how the reduction works.
His discussion of tertiary qualities is similar. If we knew
the “Figure, Size, Texture, and Motion of the minute Constituent
parts of any two Bodies”, we would then be able to derive
tertiary qualities; we would be able to deduce that opium causes sleep,
and we would understand why (E IV.iii.25, pp. 555–56; see also E
IV.iii.13, p. 545). In all of these passages, then, and in many
similar ones, Locke at least appears to accept at least some components
of the corpuscular hypothesis—that material bodies are compounded
from minute particles, and that certain observable qualities are
reducible to the particles’ primary qualities of size, shape, and
motion. This tendency to speak as though the corpuscular
hypothesis is true, either in whole or in part, has been termed
Locke’s “dogmatic” side (Downing 2007).
In apparent tension with this so-called dogmatic side is what has
been termed his “agnostic” or “skeptical”
side. The following features of his discussion seem to suggest
that he has reasons either for remaining agnostic about whether the
corpuscular hypothesis is true, or more seriously, for believing that
it is wholly unable to explain the phenomena it purports to explain and
therefore cannot be true.
First, he refers to the
corpuscular hypothesis as such, a hypothesis, one that falls well short
of providing us with scientific knowledge; and further, he remarks that
it is not his aim to adjudicate among competing hypotheses.
The hypothetical status of all physical theories is underscored also
in Some Thoughts Concerning Education: “The systems
of natural philosophy…are to be read, more to know
the hypotheses…than with hopes to gain thereby a
comprehensive, scientifical, and satisfactory knowledge of the works
of nature.”(Locke, quoted in Rogers 1982, p. 230.) But even
though all physical theories ultimately be hypotheses, it is useful to
bear in mind Peter Anstey’s remarks about the genesis of the
corpuscular hypothesis.  Although the hypothesis originated among
theorists championing an experimental method over a purely speculative
one, that should not seem so ironic in light of the following.
Instead of excluding speculation entirely, these theorists allowed it,
so long as it played a limited and secondary role, by waiting to begin
until observation and experiment had already established a solid
foundation.  Furthermore, the corpuscular hypothesis had credibility
among hypotheses, insofar as it adhered to their prohibition against
questions they thought could never be answered experimentally, by
avoiding the question about matter’s infinite divisibility.(See
Anstey, 2011, pp. 4–5.)  
Second, if Locke indeed identifies material bodies’ real
essences with the primary qualities of their constituent corpuscles,
then that view of real essence, together with his pessimism about the
possibility of ever discovering real essences, implies pessimism about the
corpuscular hypothesis—specifically, about the claims that bodies
are made of corpuscles and that their observable qualities are
reducible to the corpuscles’ qualities. In the same
passages in which Locke seems to accept or assume these central tenets
of the corpuscular hypothesis—that observable bodies are made up
of corpuscles and that those corpuscles have a restricted set of
inherent properties—he simultaneously appears very skeptical
about the hypothesis’ promise to reduce observable properties
such as color and taste to that restricted set of primary
properties.
Third, Locke arguably takes the corpuscular hypothesis to have
limitations or shortcomings so serious that they amount to fatal flaws,
an interpretation that Margaret Wilson (1979) was perhaps the first to
defend. Wilson develops her line of argument mainly in connection
with difficulties Locke raises about the corpuscular hypothesis’
purported ability to explain sensation and more generally, the relation
between thought and
 matter,[16]
but some other phenomena are
troublesome as well. Locke appears to consider such phenomena to
be so obscure that we can attempt to understand them only by
attributing them to God’s direct action.
Elsewhere, Locke will use the term ‘superaddition’ to
refer to God’s role. Roughly speaking, superadded
properties are those properties specifically added by God.
This section examines the phenomena that Locke seems to consider too
obscure for the corpuscular hypothesis to illuminate. These are
the three phenomena mentioned in the above-quoted passage, the
production of sensation, the communication of motion,
 cohesion,[17]
and a fourth,
gravity, which Locke discusses directly only outside the
Essay. A subsequent section reviews some of the main
positions that have been taken in the debate about the status of the
corpuscular hypothesis for Locke, and that same section considers
various interpretations of superaddition, since any interpretation of
that concept is logically tied to one’s view about Locke’s
stance toward the corpuscular hypothesis.
As we saw in passages discussed earlier, in connection with the
impossibility of scientia, Locke finds the production of
sensation to be utterly obscure. One side of the difficulty is,
of course, the nature of the mind. In all probability, it is
immaterial. However, Locke allows, it is possible that God has
superadded the power of thought directly to matter. The other
side of the difficulty concerns the nature of secondary qualities as
powers to produce sensations. The appeal of
the corpuscular hypothesis lay largely in its reductive promise.
Secondary qualities in particular, such as colors and sounds, but also
ideas of macrolevel primary qualities, including visual sensations of
shapes and sizes, and tertiary qualities were to be reduced to the
primary qualities of corpuscles, interacting with one another and/or
with perceptual systems.
One part of the corpuscular hypothesis’ purported explanation
is conceivable, namely, the interactions among the primary
qualities of bodies, which are supposed to be part of the causal basis
of our sensations:
Indeed, we are able to discern necessary connections in two
instances, as noted earlier. (One case involves only primary
qualities— “Figure necessarily presupposes Extension”
(E IV.iii.14, p. 546)—and the other involves tertiary and primary
qualities—“receiving or communicating Motion by impulse,
supposes Solidity” (E IV.iii.14, p. 546).) If we knew more
about the primary qualities of bodies, we might multiply such
instances: “And if we knew these primary Qualities of
Bodies…we might be able to know a great deal more of these
Operations of them one upon another.” That is, if we
knew real essences, we could derive more necessary connections,
knowing, for instance, the causal relation between opium and sleep, and
as certainly as we now know that impulse requires solidity.
Yet knowing real essences would not give us any genuine knowledge of
how sensations are produced by primary qualities.
While corpuscular theorists such as Galileo (The Assayer)
sketched a reductive account of our sensations of taste in terms of
particles striking our tongues, Locke suggests that any attempt to
discover the process’s details will be foiled. For as far
as we can imagine, a body, by striking other bodies, is able to produce
“nothing but Motion”
 [18]
(E IV.iii.6, pp. 540–541), and motion
may itself be hopelessly obscure, as indicated below. As for
shape and size, we can no more imagine how they could figure in the
production of sensations than we can imagine how motion could.
Although Locke mentions only secondary qualities here, his point
presumably applies to all sensations, including our sensations of
macrolevel primary qualities, such as the shape and size of a snowball
or lump of gold. For again, genuine knowledge is knowledge of
necessary connections, with the conceptual relations in geometry being
the model, and it does not seem possible to discover such connections
between any sensation and the sizes, shapes, and textures that are
supposed to cause them. Despite the resemblance of macrolevel
primary qualities to microlevel ones, both being of the same
 type,[19]
the idea
of a quality is nonetheless a very different thing than the quality
itself.
Locke finds that our only way of understanding the production of
sensation is to attribute the process to God. If we try to understand
how motion could produce a color, sound, or taste, “we are fain
to quit our Reason, go beyond our Ideas, and attribute it
wholly to the good pleasure of our Maker.” (E IV.iii.6, p.
540–541; see also IV.iii.28, p. 559.)
With the publication of Newton’s Principia, implying
as it did the possibility of unmediated action at a distance, gravity becomes the
most nettlesome phenomenon for the orthodox version of the corpuscular
hypothesis, which includes a proviso of contact action. Locke
is initially sympathetic to the proviso, writing in the first
three editions of his Essay, “How bodies operate one
upon another…is manifestly by impulse and nothing else. It
being impossible to conceive that body should operate on what it
does not touch.” (E II.viii.11, editions
1–3) Yet for the fourth edition, he replaces that claim about how
bodies do operate with one about how we can conceive of them operating:
“How Bodies produce ideas in us is manifestly by
impulse, [this being] the only way which we can conceive Bodies
[to] operate.”(E II.viii.11, edition 4). He also omits a
clause appearing in II.viii.12 of previous editions that denied unmediated action
at a
 distance.[20]
These subtle emendations reflect
a dramatic shift, one expressed directly in his correspondence with
Stillingfleet.
The phenomenon of gravity—as explained by
“Mr. Newton’s incomparable
book”(ibid.)—has apparently led Locke to abandon
the contact action proviso and to attribute to matter the power of
acting distantly, even though the process by which such interactions
could occur is so obscure that he is driven to invoking
superaddition. This is the prevailing interpretation of Locke (given
by Leibniz for one, who targeted Locke for it in Against Barbaric
Physics), though not all commentators agree, as indicated in a
subsequent section.
Locke takes the notion of impulse, in which bodies communicate
motion to one another by surface impact, to be, along with extension
and cohesion, fundamental to our concept of
 body.[21]
Indeed, regardless of
how motion may in fact be communicated, impulse is the only means by
which we can conceive of its being communicated, a view of our
conceptual abilities that Locke maintains, as we saw, despite his
changing thoughts about gravity. Impulse is also fundamental to the
corpuscular hypothesis’ explanation of phenomena, being either
the exclusive means of interaction among bodies, as adherents of the
contact action proviso hold, or the means of at least many
interactions. Yet how exactly does a moving body communicate motion to
a resting one simply by impacting it? When we attempt to discover the
precise nature of the process, Locke suggests, we find that it is just
as mysterious as the process by which the mind moves the body.
Since the corpuscular hypothesis holds impulse to be the primary if
not the sole means by which bodies causally interact, then any
phenomenon that the corpuscular hypothesis purports to explain by
impulse is obscure if impulse itself is obscure. All of the
hypothesis’ reductions of observable primary qualities, of
secondary qualities, and of tertiary qualities, would inherit
impulse’s obscurity; thus Locke appears to be suggesting here
that the corpuscular hypothesis cannot fulfill its promise of
explaining and reducing those properties and powers.
Since the claim that observable bodies are made up of particles is
central to the corpuscular hypothesis, an immediate question for its
proponents asks how the particles cohere into compound bodies.
Plenists have some resources for answering that question, though those
resources may introduce worse difficulties. Descartes, for instance,
though he speaks in terms of particles, understands an individual body
as an area of extension moving as one with respect to surrounding
areas. It is not possible for any particle to move away into empty
space, there being no such thing as empty space once matter is
identified with extension; with every bit of matter pressed from all
sides by other matter, there is no problem about cohesion per se,
though there is certainly a problem about individuating bodies from
one another. In the same vein, Malebranche can invoke the pressure of
the air to explain the coherence of bodies, and then invoke the
pressure of an aether to explain the coherence of air particles. Locke
objects that this explanation fails because it leaves us with the
question of what causes the particles of the aether to cohere (E
II.xxiii.23, p, 308). The objection reveals Locke’s atomist
sympathies, drawing its power from the presumption that there is such
a thing as empty space into which the aether particles could move. The
problem for atomist versions of the corpuscular hypothesis is that the
restricted set of properties that they allow the particles
—size, shape, and motion—provides no obvious resources for
explaining how the particles cohere with one another to form compound
bodies. In various forms, the problem about cohesion has dogged
atomists since ancient times.
The problem arises in two forms, which, to borrow James Hill’s
terminology (Hill 2004), may be called the limited and the
foundational problems. The limited problem, arising for those who
take corpuscles to be genuine atoms, that is, to be indivisible, is the
problem of explaining how those indivisible corpuscles cohere with one
another. This is the problem one finds in Newton’s
writings. Although Rule 3 of the Principia allows the
possibility that the least parts of matter could turn out to be
divisible, his atomist sympathies are evident throughout his
writings. He speculates in Query 31 that in all probability,
bodies are made up of hard particles that only God could divide, and in
the body of the Opticks (Book II, Part III, Proposition VII)
he suggests that more powerful microscopes might permit us to see the
larger particles. In answer to the problem of how those naturally
indivisible particles cohere, he rejects the ancient solution of hooked
particles as begging the question, proposing instead some short-range
forces modeled on the gravitational force (Query 31).
Newton’s speculations about such forces are driven by an absence
of any resolution to the problem about cohesion within the corpuscular
theory itself.
The foundational problem pushes the question about cohesion into the
corpuscles themselves. The problem was raised by Joseph Glanvill:
“If it be pretended…that the parts of solid bodies are
held together by hooks, and angulous involutions; I
say, this comes not home: For the coherence of the parts of
these hooks…will be of as difficult a conception, as
the former.”(Glanvill, The Vanity of Dogmatizing, p. 18,
quoted in Hill 2004, p. 616) Without any grounds for asserting
that the divisibility of matter bottoms out in indivisible corpuscles,
then, the question arises of how the parts of a corpuscle could cohere,
how the parts of those parts could cohere, and so on, ending in the
question of how extended bodies are possible at all.
Whatever his ultimate view of the corpuscular hypothesis, Locke
inevitably faces the atomist’s problem about cohesion, accepting
as he does void space (see II.xiii.11, 12–14, 21–23), and holding that
our ideas of body depend fundamentally upon cohesion. One of the
ideas “proper and peculiar” to body, he writes, is
“the cohesion of solid, and consequently separable
parts” (E II.xxiii.17, p. 306), and the extension of
body, as opposed to the extension of space, is “nothing, but the
cohesion or continuity of solid, separable, moveable Parts”(E
II.iv.5, p. 126). Yet we have no understanding of cohesion, and
so our idea of body does not rest on any genuine understanding of
it. In trying to understand how bodies are extended, we are as
much in the dark as when we try to understand how the soul thinks.
One scholarly debate about cohesion concerns the question of whether
Locke acknowledged only the limited problem, as one would expect from
commentators who read him as accepting atomism (e.g. Mandelbaum 1964,
p. 1), or whether he looked further, to the more serious, foundational
problem, as Hill argues (2004). A related controversy, to
be discussed in the next section, concerns the questions of whether
Locke concludes that the corpuscular hypothesis simply cannot resolve
the problem (e.g., Hill 2004; Downing 2007, p. 408), or whether he
remains agnostic on the issue (e.g., McCann in Chappell 1998, p.
244).
The four problematic phenomena winnow away the components of the
corpuscular hypothesis, as defined at the outset of this article.  The
problem about sensation threatens the corpuscular hypothesis’ promise
of reducing secondary, tertiary, and macrolevel primary qualities to
microlevel primary qualities. Newton’s results about gravitational
phenomena cast grave doubts upon the contact action proviso, and
according to some commentators, those results lead Locke to abandon
the belief that impulse is the only means of causal interaction. A
corpuscular theorist might hope to preserve some part of the theory by
insisting that impulse is still the means by which most other causal
interactions are effected; but this runs up against the problem about
impulse, in that the process by which motion is communicated seems
utterly obscure. Finally, even the core claim that observable bodies
are composed of tiny corpuscles is threatened by the problem of
cohesion. This last problem threatens to be the most serious of four
phenomena, for as James Hill has pointed out (2004, p. 628), the
problems about gravity, sensation, and motion arise subsequent to our
having conceived of body, whereas the problem about cohesion may
thwart our very ability to conceive clearly of body.
This section considers some main responses to the tension between
Locke’s seeming acceptance of the corpuscular hypothesis, most
notable in his apparent identification of a material substance’s
real essence with the size, shape, and texture of its insensible parts,
and his pessimism about the hypothesis’ explanatory power, most
notable in his remarks about the four phenomena discussed
above.
One approach to the tension is to understand it as a genuine
inconsistency. Margaret Wilson has defended such an
interpretation, though in the 1979 paper that launched the debate, her
intent is to show how acutely Locke understood the explanatory
limitations of “Boylean mechanism”. Specifically,
Wilson argues, the inconsistency reveals Locke’s recognition
“that some presumed properties of matter cannot be
conceived as ‘natural’ consequences of Boylean primary
qualities” (Wilson 1979, p. 197). Thus our ignorance about
bodies has more profound causes than our ignorance about the primary
qualities of a body’s constituent corpuscles. In accordance
with her view that Locke’s agnostic tendencies (just like his
dogmatic ones) are genuine, Wilson interprets Locke’s concept of
superaddition robustly, as a sort of divine action that goes beyond the
corpuscular hypothesis. According to this
“non-essentialist” or “divine annexation”
reading, Locke understands superadded properties as properties that God
has annexed to matter by fiat, and that bear no intrinsic connection to
matter’s real essence. This reading implies a distinction
in etiology for superadded qualities. Whereas the other qualities
of matter are either given initially, as those qualities constituting
the real essence, or else flow from the real essence, superadded
qualities are added on after the fact, such that the substance could
have been complete without them.
Some other interpretations absolve Locke of inconsistency, either by
emphasizing his so-called dogmatic side while downplaying or
reinterpreting his agnostic tendencies, or emphasizing his agnosticism
while downplaying his dogmatism. One line of interpretation, then,
reads Locke as in some manner accepting the corpuscular
hypothesis (Mandelbaum 1964, chapter 1; Osler 1970, p. 12; Ayers
1975; McCann 1994, §1 and p. 85; McCann 2002, pp. 354–355).
According to weaker versions of this reading, Locke’s project is the
naturalistic one of pursuing the philosophical implications of the
best available scientific theory, and developing an epistemological
basis for it. McCann, for example, reads Locke as defending the
atomist version of the corpuscular philosophy over its Cartesian
competitor by providing an epistemology for it. While Descartes had
provided an epistemology for his plenist version, there was nothing
comparable for the atomist version associated with Gassendi and Boyle
until Locke supplied it (McCann 2002, pp. 354–355). According to
Ayers’ stronger interpretation, Locke accepts “pure
mechanism”, that is, the orthodox version of the corpuscular
hypothesis, which includes the contact action proviso.  According
to this view, all of matter’s qualities flow from its real essence
(Ayers 1981).
Since this line of interpretation seeks to downplay Locke’s
agnostic tendencies, one challenge is to account for Locke’s
pessimism about the possibility of our knowing real essences.
Mandelbaum meets the challenge by confining Locke’s pessimism to
the real essences of particular material substances; we are able to
know “the general properties possessed by all material
substances”, and are ignorant only of the “particular
sizes, shapes, number, or motions of the particles which go to make up
any specific object”(Mandelbaum 1964, p. 54). A related
challenge is to account for Locke’s appeals to superaddition,
since prima facie, Locke’s reason for invoking God is
that he thinks the corpuscular hypothesis has no resources for
explaining the four problematic phenomena. Ayers responds by
rejecting Wilson’s divine annexation interpretation of
superaddition in favor of a deflationary one. According to
Ayers’ “divine architect” interpretation, Locke makes
no distinction in etiology by calling a property superadded; he means
only that God selected the property with particular care when first
creating matter. To diffuse the effect of Locke’s remarks
to Stillingfleet, in which Locke appears to embrace action at a
distance, Ayers points to Locke’s late manuscript, “The
Elements of Natural Philosophy”, interpreting certain passages as
referring gravitational effects to an undetectable medium (Ayers 1981,
pp. 212–214). This move has been challenged by Stuart.
Claiming that the manuscript was probably written for the education of
a child, Stuart denies that it could trump Locke’s remarks to
Stillingfleet (see Stuart 1998, pp. 378–379).
Another way to absolve Locke of inconsistency is to emphasize his
agnosticism or skepticism, while downplaying or reinterpreting
passages that appear to commit him to the corpuscular hypothesis.
Interpretations in this vein tend to emphasize Locke’s pessimism about
our ability to know real essences, to discern necessary connections,
and consequently, to have scientia in natural
philosophy. Commentators pursuing this line include Jolley and Downing
(and more recently Connolly (2015), who argues for an even greater
epistemic humility, one extending to real essences, along with
superaddition, mentioned briefly below). 
The central challenge facing such interpretations is to account for
the passages in which Locke speaks as though he accepts the corpuscular
hypothesis, most notably those in which he appears to identify the real
essences of material substances with the corpuscles’ primary
qualities. Jolley (2002) accounts for Locke’s so-called
dogmatic tendency in strategic terms. Locke’s
Essay targets both Aristotelians and Cartesians, and though
agnosticism, which targets the Cartesians, is ultimately the dominant
tendency in his thought, Locke emphasizes the explanatory power of the
corpuscular hypothesis whenever he has the Aristotelians in his
sights. Downing (1998, 2007), meanwhile, interprets Locke’s
Essay as developing metaphysical distinctions that constrain
physical theory, and then downplays his dogmatic side by taking the
corpuscular hypothesis to be truly only a hypothesis for him, and
denying that real essence can be identified with primary
qualities. Properly understood, Downing argues, the distinction
between real and nominal essence is a metaphysical distinction.
It is thus more fundamental than the distinction between primary and
secondary qualities, which belongs to a particular physical theory, the
corpuscular hypothesis. To be worth its salt, a physical
theory must meet the metaphysical constraint provided by the
real-nominal essence distinction. That is, the physical theory
must provide some way of making sense of the notion that material
bodies have an internal constitution that is inaccessible to us but
that produces those qualities that are accessible. Locke explains
his metaphysical distinction using one physical theory, the corpuscular
hypothesis, as an illustration, and he often appears to accept or even
defend that hypothesis. Still, this is only an appearance, an
appearance due to a certain advantage that the corpuscular hypothesis
has over other physical hypotheses: it is the theory best suited to our
sensory capacities and understanding. Despite its unique status,
Locke sees it as only a hypothesis, one crippled by the explanatory
limitations evidenced by the problematic phenomena discussed
earlier. For Downing, then, Locke’s dogmatic tendencies
disappear, leaving only his agnostic side.
Taking a different approach to the situation, Jacovides (2017) has
recently treated Locke’s descriptions of what we perceive,
intuit, and are capable of conceiving as providing a case for testing
some Kuhnian theses; as the normal science of his day, the
corpuscularian hypothesis sets limits upon what Locke can
conceive.
Locke and Newton probably first met in 1689 (though the exact date is
not known; Westfall 1980, p. 488; Rogers 1982, p. 219), and their main
works were written independently of one another;
Locke’s Essay,though published subsequently, was
essentially complete by the time he read the Principia.  A
noticeable intellectual affinity may nevertheless be seen in those
works, and the opportunity for mutual influence followed as they
established a friendship, exchanging views on a wide variety of
subjects, not least certain unorthodox theological convictions (see
Westfall 1980, 490–91).  The influence did not run in one
direction alone; in a draft passage probably penned shortly after
the Principia’s second edition, for example, Newton
adopts a Lockean tone as he denies that any ideas are
innate.[22] As
for Newton’s influence upon Locke, the best known example
concerns action at a distance, as noted below, though there are deeper
questions about methodology.
A good deal of resemblance to Locke’s epistemological approach
can be seen in Newton, who holds that, revelation apart, we must
gather what knowledge we can from our perceptions, and anything like a
real essence eludes us.  In the early manuscript, De
Gravitatione, for instance, Newton denies knowing the
“essential and metaphysical constitution” of matter
(Newton, 2004, p. 27). He reiterates this position in later texts,
including the 1713 General Scholium: “We certainly do not know
what is the substance of any thing. We see only the shapes and colors
of bodies, we hear only their sounds, we touch only their external
surfaces….But there is no direct sense and there are no
indirect reflected actions by which we know innermost
substances”(Principia, 942).
Locke and Newton also share the problem of an evidentiary deficit,
insofar as they subscribe to corpuscularianism. Thinkers who did
subscribe tended to rely on transduction (also called
transdiction)--an inductive inference that is empirical insofar as it
relies upon observed cases, but which generalizes not only to
unobserved cases but to ones that are
unobservable.[23])
 Newton’s Rule 3 licensed such
inferences, from the Principia’s second edition onward,
for qualities of invariable intensity, i.e., extension,
impenetrability, hardness, mobility, and the vis
inertiae. The rule is explicit in permitting inferences to the
realm of the unobservable: “Because the hardness of the whole
arises from the hardness of the parts, we justly infer from this not
only the hardness of the undivided particles of bodies that are
accessible to our senses, but also of all other
bodies.”(Principia, Book 3,
p. 795.[24] ) As
for Locke and the problem of transduction, how serious it is for him
depends largely upon the status of the corpuscular hypothesis. If he
takes an agnostic or skeptical stance toward it, then he owes no
solution to the problem.
Although the endeavors of Locke and Newton are often considered
complementary, there are questions about how Locke responded to
the Principia, both in terms of its methodology and its
epistemological implications.  With regard to the former, how far did
Locke go in absorbing or incorporating the methodology that Newton had
forged?  As a number of commentators have emphasized, the new science
was itself in flux at this time, with natural history being gradually
sidelined by Newton’s approach, an experimentalism that was
theoretical and mathematical (see, e.g., Anstey 2011; Roux, 2013).
Given that Locke had had Boyle as his mentor, but was greatly
impressed by Newton’s Principia, it is natural to ask
whether a similar shift was occurring in Locke’s own
thought. Although Locke was clearly influenced by Newton, his
allegiances to certain older ideas ran deep. Graciela De Pierris
(2006) explains Locke’s failure to adopt the method of inductive
proof in terms of his devotion to the ideal of demonstrative
knowledge, as combined with a belief in hidden primary qualities. 
With regard to its epistemological implications, what
precisely did Locke take the Principia to have achieved?  
To pose the question in the starkest possible terms, might
Newton’s Principia have tempted Locke to retreat from his
belief that natural philosophy cannot be made a science (much as it
led him to retreat from the contact action proviso)? Perhaps Locke
categorized Newton’s epistemological achievement in natural philosophy
as a contribution to sensitive knowledge alone.  That is, perhaps he
saw Newton’s “mighty Designs in advancing the Sciences”
(Essay, Epistle to the Reader, pp. 9–10) as confined to
providing a firm basis for natural philosophy through his experimental
method. But did he perhaps instead take Newton’s mathematical methods
as offering the demonstrations needed to push natural philosophy into
the domain of demonstrative knowledge and hence scientia?
Commentators interpreting Locke as seeing Newton’s contribution in
terms of sensitive knowledge alone include Yolton (1969); Woolhouse
(1994); and Downing (1997, see especially pp. 292–93).  Kenneth
Winkler (2008), however, reads Locke’s correspondence with
Stillingfleet and other writings from the 1690’s as a defense of
Newton’s mathematical physics, and one that draws from his
mathematical demonstrations a greater optimism about the possibility
of certain knowledge in natural philosophy. This move has been
contested by Domski (2012), who argues that Locke advocated Newton’s
mathematical methods only in connection with astronomy, whose objects
are unavailable for experimentation; and that Locke maintained his
emphasis upon natural historical methods for questions about
terrestrial bodies.
Locke and Newton accept similar ontologies. Although both (quite
independently of one another) are characteristically circumspect about
the nature of mind, they may be considered substance dualists. Newton,
though indicating in the early manuscript
De Gravitatione that he does not pretend to know the
substantial foundation of minds, consistently presents God and minds
as immaterial, lacking certain characteristics of body, namely,
hardness, impenetrability and resistance. Similarly, Locke, though he
explicitly allows the possibility of thinking matter in his
Essay and discusses it at length with Stillingfleet,
emphasizes that in all probability, the soul is immaterial (E
IV.iii.6, pp. 540–541). But while Newton takes even immaterial spirits
to be spatially extended, such that a mind can co-occupy place with a
body and God with all bodies, it is not clear that Locke agrees.
Agreement might be claimed on the basis of the several passages in the
Essay. At E II xxvii.2 (p. 329 ), he locates spirits
spatially: “Finite spirits having had each its determinate time
and place of beginning to exist, the relation to that time and place
will always determine to each of them its identity, as long as it
exists.” And as the passage continues, he seems to echo
Newton’s suggestion that substances of different kinds might
share place; although substances of the same kind exclude one another
out of the same place, he writes, “these three sorts of
substances, as we term them, do not exclude one another out of the
same place”. Yet a Cartesian interpretation does not seem
impossible here, especially in light of remarks elsewhere; in
discussing the possibility of thinking matter, the immaterial soul
against which he contrasts it is
 unextended.[25]
As for the concept of body, their views are again similar, without
being identical. Both confront the problem of a substratum or
substance in general, one that Locke notoriously finds
 vexing.[26]
Newton
dispenses with the problem more easily. In De
Gravitatione, he eliminates the unintelligible notion of prime matter
by associating perceived properties with determined regions
of
 extension.[27]
Both also attack Descartes’
identification of matter with extension, instead defending the void and
showing strong sympathy for atomism. As indicated just above,
Newton does not confine the quality of extension to body and space, whereas Locke
may do so. Further, Newton’s list in Rule 3 of body’s universal qualities 
includes not only extension, hardness, impenetrability, and mobility,
but also the vis inertiae—the inherent force or power of
resisting (Principia, Definition 3), which some commentators
take Newton to identify with
 mass.[28]
Locke’s concept, however, emphasizes
extension, mobility, and solidity, without mentioning mass.
Still, since Locke explicates solidity in terms of impenetrability,
which arises from resistance (E II.iv.1) there may be grounds for
holding that his concept does after all include mass, a position
defended by Woolhouse
 (2005).[29]
At the least, Locke’s discussion
of action by impulse presupposes mass, as Stein has noted. And
yet presupposing the concept may not amount to including it in the
concept of body, since as Stein points out, mass for Locke
“cannot be construed to correspond to a simple idea, but can only
be understood as a power ‘mediately perceivable.’”
(Stein 1990, p. 36)
There is also the question about gravity’s relation to body, for
both thinkers a persistent source of
controversy.[30]
One point of clarity and consensus is that neither Locke nor Newton
considers the power of gravitational attraction to be essential to
matter.  Newton consistently denies that it is essential (for instance
in his explanatory remarks following Rule 3 of the Principia)
and Locke refers to it only as power superadded or endowed by God.
Locke’s concept of superaddition is controversial of course, as
noted earlier, but he does appear to embrace action at a distance in
his letter to Stillingfleet. Newton’s writings contain no such
dramatic pronouncements. So while a few commentators interpret Newton
as accepting action at a distance, grounded either in a superadded
property (Henry 1994) or in a relational quality of matter (Schliesser
2011), his more favorable remarks are at best indirect. Most
commentators interpret him as at least having very grave misgivings
about distant action, so perhaps Locke was wise to credit his change
of heart about gravity to “Mr. Newton’s incomparable
book”, rather than to Newton himself.