The canonical definition of the real essences is given in
III.iii.15, where Locke contrasts his ‘real essences’ with
what he calls ‘nominal essences’:
First, Essence may be taken for the very being of any thing,
whereby it is, what it is. And thus the real internal, but generally in
Substances,   unknown Constitution
of Things, whereon their discoverable Qualities depend, may be called
their Essence…Secondly,…it being
evident, that Things are ranked under Names into sorts or
Species, only as they agree to certain abstract
Ideas, to which we have annexed those Names, the 
Essence of each Genus, or Sort, comes to
be nothing but that abstract Idea, which the General, or
Sortal (if I may have leave so to call it from
Sort, as I do General from
Genus,) Name stands for. And this we shall find to be
that, which the Word Essence imports, in its most familiar
use.   These two sorts of
Essences, I suppose, may not unfitly be termed, the one the
Real, the other the Nominal Essence.
Real essences are the submicroscopic constitutions which cause the
observable qualities of substances, and the nominal essences are the
abstract ideas that constitute the definitions of species or
genera. To flesh this out a little more clearly we must define a
few more terms.
Locke defines the ‘quality’ of any substance as
“the Power to produce any Idea in our mind”
(II.viii.8). There are three categories of qualities according to
the mechanical natural philosophy. Primary qualities are
the inseparable features of a body, e.g., its size, shape, solidity,
mobility, texture, weight, etc. (II.viii.9). Secondary
qualities are the colors, sounds, smells, tastes, etc., of any
object. These are secondary because these features of
objects do not exist in the objects themselves, but rather are nothing
but the power of the primary qualities of the object to produce an idea
in us of a certain kind (II.viii.10). So, for example, the color of the
table is not in the table, rather, it is part of how the matter and
texture of the table (i.e., its primary qualities), as it reflects,
absorbs and refracts light, has the power to produce ideas in us of
that color. Finally, the tertiary qualities of a body
are those powers in it that, by virtue of its primary qualities, give
it the power to produce observable changes in the primary qualities of
other bodies, e.g., the power of the sun to melt wax is a tertiary
quality of the sun (II.viii.23).
When one creates a nominal essence, one is cobbling together a
collection of particular qualities—from among these three kinds
of qualities—that one observes together in a substance and making
that collection definitive of a species or genus. Having said
that, I should point out that when Locke thinks of a species
or genus, he is not thinking of these terms as applying
exclusively in the biological realm, but rather as applying generally
to any possible classification scheme we create when we organize our
world through naming. So, for example, gold is as much a
species of the genus metal as human is a species of
the genus animal.
The term ‘nominal’ refers to names or naming, and is
used by Locke to indicate that classifying substances based on their
similar qualities is an exercise in naming. For example, the
nominal essence of gold is the abstract idea that constitutes our
definition of ‘gold’, i.e., yellowish, heavy, malleable
metal that can be dissolved in Aqua Regia, but not in
sulfuric acid, etc. According to Locke, the nominal essence
contains the properties that give meaning to the name
‘gold’ and allow us to know what gold is wherever we find
it. What makes the nominal essence an essence is that it
contains both the necessary and sufficient conditions for something to
belong to its species or genus. Because of how gold is defined,
every yellowish, heavy, malleable metal that dissolves in water and
hydrochloric acid and not in sulfuric acid, is gold.
In this way, nominal essences are created by human choice: we decide
what we want to include in our definitions of species or genera.
To borrow from Locke, species are “the workmanship of the
understanding”, not of nature.
 I
would not here be thought to forget, much less to deny, that Nature in
the Production of Things, makes several of them alike: there is nothing
 more obvious, especially in the Races of Animals, and all Things
propagated by Seed. But yet, I think, we may say, the sorting
of them under Names, is the Workmanship of the Understanding,
taking occasion from the similitude it observes amongst them, to
make abstract general Ideas,
 and set them up in the
mind, with Names annexed to them, as Patterns, or Forms, (for in that
sence the word Form has a very proper signification,) to which, as
particular Things existing are found to agree, so they come to be of
that Species, have that Denomination, or are put   into that
Classis. (III.iii.13)
Nature provides us with similarities and we create definitions of
species and genera. However, no matter how dependent general names are
on our definitions, we are answerable to nature and must keep our
definitions as close as we can to what nature provides. It is in
this sense that species and genera are the workmanship of the human
understanding; we take what nature gives us and we create our own
definitions and taxonomical categories.
On the other hand, a real essence is an essence
because it makes the object to be what it is. It is real
in that it does not include human choice for it to be what it is,
rather, it is precisely as nature made it. In the case of a piece
of gold, the real essence is that collection of particles that make up
that particular piece of gold and give it its qualities of color,
weight, electrical conductivity, malleability, etc..
Locke’s above definition of real and nominal essences is given
as a critical response to the Aristotelian influenced Scholasticism of
the late medieval and early renaissance natural philosophy.
Locke’s distinction between real and nominal essences appears to
be in reference to the Aristotelian distinction between real and
nominal definitions. A real definition, according to the
Aristotelian tradition, is one that accords with the natural hierarchy
and identifies the essence of the species or genus being studied, e.g.,
‘man is the rational animal’ (reason being the
essence of the species, animal being the genus). A
nominal definition, by contrast, is a pseudo-definition that identifies
the members of the species or genus, but fails to capture the essence,
e.g., ‘man is the featherless biped’. A science of
nature, for Aristotle and the Scholastics, consists of real definitions
and not mere nominal ones. While Locke agrees that a science
requires knowledge of essences, and thus of species, he differs from
the Aristotelians by arguing that there are no real definitions of
substances, but there are of moral and mathematical concepts (see
Ayers 1996, Locke, vol. II, pp. 18–30).
According to the Scholastic way of understanding the term
‘essence’, it refers to what makes a thing what it is:
Concerning the real Essences of corporeal Substances, (to mention those
only,) there are, if I mistake not, two Opinions. The one is of those,
who   using the Word Essence, for they know not what,
suppose a certain number of those Essences, according to which, all
natural things are made,   and wherein they do exactly every
one of them partake, and so become of this or that Species.
(III.iii.17)
The Scholastic concept of essence, or what is more properly called a
‘substantial form’, is of an imperceptible, immaterial
essence that imposes order onto the matter that it is joined with and
makes it a member of a natural species or genus, imbuing it with all of
its relevant characteristics, i.e., its essential properties.
Essential properties are those features that tell us to what species or
genus an object belongs, e.g., being warm blooded is an essential
property of mammals, being rational is an essential property of humans,
being yellowish and heavy are essential properties of gold. Each
of these essential properties is caused by the substantial form that is
conjoined with the matter of the substance to make it what it is.
In this way, then, the substantial form of any object in the
Scholastic theory plays two roles: it (a) tells us to what species the
substance belongs; and (b) it causes the observable qualities and
properties of the substance. For example, according to the
Scholastic theory, a lump of gold is an instance of gold
because its matter possesses the substantial form of gold which causes
all of the properties of gold, e.g., malleability, yellowish color,
heaviness, etc..
By contrast, however, Locke does not think of the essence of a
physical object as an immaterial substantial form, nor does he think
that a single entity can play both roles of determining the species or
genus membership of a substance and be the unobservable
underlying cause of the qualities of the substance. Instead,
Locke divides up the concept of essence into two different concepts
playing two distinct roles. First, he defines the real
essence of physical objects as the internal constitution of the
substance that is the cause of the observable qualities of the
object. He then argues that this internal constitution is not
what answers the ‘what is it?’ question because the species
membership of physical beings is only determined by their outward
appearance, i.e., by their nominal essences. Second, he defines
the nominal essence as that collection of observable qualities that are
included in the definition of the species or genus. This process
has three stages; we create an abstract idea based on similarities
among objects, we then give a name to that abstract idea, and finally
we classify objects that fit our abstract idea into the same species or
genus. So, for Locke, the real essence plays role (b), that is,
the causal and explanatory role of being the physical cause of the
properties and qualities of each substance; but only the nominal
essence plays role (a), that is, the nominal essence alone determines
its species or genus membership. The chart below illustrates this
division of labor:
One of Locke’s main purposes in making this distinction is to
deploy it in his criticisms of the Scholastic account of (a), the
species of natural substances. However, when criticizing the
Scholastic account of (b), the explanation of the qualities of bodies,
Locke typically refrains from invoking the concept of ‘real
essence’ and instead talks about the primary, secondary and
tertiary qualities of bodies (see, for example II.viii.10–26).
So, at a minimum, it seems that Locke invoked this distinction between
real and nominal essences in order to prove a negative point: real
essences are not relevant to role (a).
As noted above, according to the Scholastics, species and genera are
created by nature; every natural substance is a combination of matter
and substantial form. Matter, on its own, is inert and does not
cause anything. By contrast, the substantial form of any
substance is its species essence, which is an immaterial entity that
makes the object what it is, makes it a member of a particular species
and genus and causes its characteristic properties. So, for the
Scholastics, all natural substances belong to a determinate species by
nature, independently of any human naming activities. On this
view then, if we know what qualities a substance possesses, and we know
that all qualities are produced by a substantial form, then it is a
simple matter to determine its species simply by noting the qualities
the substance exhibits. For example, if what makes a particular
object a piece of gold is the possession of the substantial form of
gold, then whatever exhibits the properties of gold has the substantial
form of gold, and so we know the species to which it belongs is
gold. Creating a taxonomy for the Scholastics is
attempting to discover how nature has already classified substances
into species and genera by looking for similarities among their
persistent qualities (qualities that tend to remain even when the
circumstances or conditions of the object change) that reveal the
deeper similarity of sharing substantial forms.
By distinguishing between real and nominal essences, Locke can
deploy these new concepts in a sustained critique of the Scholastic
theory of species. Locke offers three main arguments
against the Scholastic view.
First, he deploys the corpuscularian hypothesis against the
Scholastics to argue that ‘borderline cases’ create a
serious challenge to their doctrine of substantial forms, but which are
allowed for, and even explained by, corpuscularian principles. By
his lights, if we assume that nature produces substances by imposing a
substantial form (what Locke mockingly calls ‘moulds and forms’),
or species essence onto them, then the existence of entities that do
not fit into any single species shows us at least that not all beings
are produced according to natural moulds and forms:
[The opinion] which supposes these Essences, as a certain
number of Forms or Molds, wherein all natural Things, that exist, are
cast, and do   equally partake, has,
I imagine, very much perplexed the Knowledge of natural Things. The
frequent Productions of Monsters, in all the Species
 of Animals, and
of Changelings, and other strange Issues of humane Birth, carry with
them difficulties, not possible to consist with this 
Hypothesis: Since it is as impossible, that two Things,
partaking exactly of the same real Essence, should have
different Properties, as that two Figures partaking in the same real
Essence of a Circle, should have different Properties.
(III.iii.17)
If nature made species or genera by giving all members of the same
kind the same form or mould (or, he seems to suggest above, real
essence), then there would be no way to explain generative variation in
nature (he reiterates this kind of argument in III.vi.15–17) or the
differences between samples of the same species of chemicals or
minerals. On the other hand, if nature makes real essences, which
are material structures that cause the observable qualities of each
substance, then these kinds of variations can be explained by
variations among the physical structures of the bodies (see Jolley 1999,
pp. 144–50).
Secondly, as we saw above, Locke adduces the semantic point that our
general terms (and their corresponding ideas), being human constructs
via the process of abstraction, constitute the (nominal)
essences of things, not some immaterial substantial form:
“Whereby it is evident, that the Essences of the
sorts, or (if the Latin word pleases better) Species
of Things, are nothing else but these abstract Ideas”
(III.iii.12). Abstract ideas are formed when we take a set of objects
and mentally strip away enough particular ideas to reveal what
properties they all have in common. The resulting ideas are
purely mental constructions; the putative substantial forms of the
objects are irrelevant to this process. Therefore, essences and
species are human constructs, not the products of nature, i.e., they
are purely nominal.
Locke’s third argument rests on the Scholastic’s
assumption that nature produces many things alike. The natural
production of physically similar entities, however, is a double-edged
sword. Nature not only produces similarities among objects, but
it produces far too many similarities. That is, among the vast
array of similar qualities that objects share we must select those few
which we take to be important enough to constitute the meaning of the
general term and thereby constitute the species or genus. This
selection process is not something that nature can do, only we can
decide which qualities are important enough to count as part of the
definition of a species or genus.
By introducing the distinction between real and nominal essences and
thereby dividing their roles, Locke has provided himself with a number
of resources to criticize the Scholastic theory of species.
While the concept and definition of ‘real essence’ is
original with Locke, at least a generation before him there were
Englishmen who defended non-Scholastic taxonomical theories that
employed material structures, either atomic or corpuscularian
structures, to play both roles (a) and (b), and therefore serve as the
essences of physical substances. One notable example is from Sir
Francis Bacon.
In Book II §§i–vii of The New Organon (1620),
Bacon seems to give a version of corpuscular natural kinds by
redefining the concept of ‘formal cause’ as both the
material structure of bodies and the laws that govern the natural
effects of these structures that accounts for their species and genus
membership. For example, in II.ii he says,
For though
nothing exists in nature except individual bodies which exhibit pure
individual acts [powers] in accordance with law…It is this law
and its clauses which we understand by the term Forms….
(Bacon 1620, 103)
And later in II.iii: “But he who knows forms comprehends the
unity of nature in very different materials” (Bacon 1620,
103). These Baconian forms, as they constitute the powers of material
bodies, divide nature into two classes of material structures: the
elements (what he calls ‘major associations’) and the
genera and species of natural bodies (his ‘minor
associations’):
We want elements to be understood in the sense not of the prime
qualities of things, but of the major constituents of natural
bodies. For the nature of things is so distributed that the
quantity or mass of certain bodies is very great, because their
structure requires the texture of an easy and common
material…But the quantity of certain other bodies in the
universe is small and occurs rarely, because the texture of their
matter is very different, very subtle and for the most part delimited
and organic; such are the species of natural things, metals, plants,
animals. (Bacon 1620, 226)
According to Bacon, more general material structures convene to
create larger—and more sparse—bodies, and given the laws of
nature that correlate powers to these structures, these bodies have
their natures and belong to a species or genus due to the structures
and causal powers of their constituent parts. Baconian forms
exhibit the two features of what me might call ‘corpuscular
forms’: material structures plus the laws of nature combine to
cause and explain the properties of bodies and determine their
species
 membership.[2]
Similarly, in the Origine of Formes and Qualities,
Robert Boyle employs the concept of a material essence when he argues
for the existence of corpuscular forms that do all the same
philosophical and explanatory work as both the real and nominal
essences:
…why may we not say, that the Form of a Body, being made up
of those Qualities united in one Subject, doth likewise consist in such
a Convention of those newly nam’d Mechanical Affections of
Matter, as is necessary to constitute a Body of that Determinate
kind. And so, though I shall for brevities sake retain the word
Forme, yet I would be understood to mean by it, not a Real
Substance distinct from Matter, but onely the Matter it self
of a Natural Body, consider’d with its peculiar manner of Existence
[corpuscular structure], which I think may not inconveniently be
call’d either its Specifical or its Denominating
State, or its Essential Modification, or, if you would
have me express it in one word, its Stamp: for such a
Convention of Accidents is sufficient to perform the Offices that are
necessarily requir’d in what Men call a Forme, since it makes
the body such as it is, making it appertain to this or that
Determinate Species of Bodies, and discriminating it from all other
Species of Bodies whatsoever…. (Boyle 1666, p. 324.)
That is, Boylean corpuscular forms both cause and explain the
qualities of bodies and sort natural bodies into species based on the
structure of the matter and the laws binding qualities to the
specific
 structures.[3]
So, we see that there are corpuscular versions of natural kind
realism afoot in early seventeenth-century England where both roles of
determining the species or genus membership and of causing and
explaining the observable qualities are played by the same entity:
corpuscular structure. The degree to which Locke agrees with,
rejects or even engages with these views is a matter of scholarly
controversy.
Nevertheless, we can say that, just as with the Scholastic natural
philosophy, there were adherents to the mechanical natural philosophy
who postulated a single entity to play both the causal and
classificatory roles; we can call these philosophers ‘corpuscular
realists’ and we may say that they argue for the existence of
what we might call ‘corpuscular species’, i.e., species
created by nature by corpuscular forms. By contrast, again, Locke
objects to this general approach for the creation of a scientific
taxonomy:
Nor indeed can we rank, and sort Things, and
consequently (which is the end of sorting) denominate them by their
real Essences, because we 
know them not. Our Faculties carry us no farther towards the knowledge
and distinction of Substances, than a Collection of those sensible
Ideas, which we observe in them; which however made with the
greatest diligence and exactness, we are capable of, yet is more remote
from the true internal Constitution, from which those Qualities flow,
than, as I said, a Countryman’s Idea is from the inward
contrivance of that famous Clock   at Strasburg, whereof
he only sees the outward Figure and Motions. (III.vi.9)
If we have no knowledge of real essences, then there is no way to
use real essences in our sorting practice. Moreover, as he
alludes at the end of the quotation, in order for a general inference
about the internal constitutions of substances to be justified, we
would have to know a lot more about the causal connections between the
internal constitution and what we observe than we do:
 …it
is impossible for us to know, that this or that quality or
Idea has a necessary connexion with a real Essence, of which
we have no Idea at all, whatever Species that supposed real
Essence may be imagined to constitute. (IV.vi.5)
The differences between Locke and the natural kind realists from
among the ranks of the corpuscularians can be illustrated by the
following chart:
There are Locke scholars who (though this is controversial) argue
that Locke uses this distinction between real and nominal essences to
criticize the taxonomical theories of both the Scholastics and those
mechanistic natural philosophers who invoke corpuscular species forms
(see Jones 2010, pp. 147–172).
It is universally agreed that Locke thinks that we sort things into
species and genera based on nominal essences and species and genera are
a kind of human linguistic categorization process. On the other
hand, one might think, Locke has no reason to reject natural kinds
(which concern the metaphysics of nature, and not the meanings of
names) simply because our sorting process is arbitrary. In other
words, there are those who argue that Locke was a natural kind realist,
even though he was convinced that taxonomies are the workmanship of the
understanding. Whether Locke thinks that there are natural kinds,
i.e., types of real essences independently of human sorting activities,
is an interpretive issue we shall address in
 4.3 below.
In this section, I discuss four main areas of interpretive dispute
concerning real essences: (i) relativized real essences; (ii)
individual real essences; (iii) real essences and natural kinds; and
(iv) real essences, internal constitutions and substance.
There are two main interpretations of real essences in the
literature: the relativized real essence thesis, according to which a
real essence just is whatever microstructure causes the nominally
essential qualities of the object; and (for lack of a better name) the
unrelativized real essence thesis, whereby the real essences consist of
the total microstructure of the substance, not just the features
causally responsible for the nominal essence. Textual evidence
for the relativized real essence thesis comes from III.vi.6:
By this real Essence, I mean, that real constitution of any
Thing, which is the foundation of all those Properties, that are
combined in, and are constantly found to co-exist with the nominal
Essence; that particular constitution, which every Thing has
within it self, without any relation to any thing without it. But
Essence, even in this sense, relates to a Sort, and
supposes a Species: For being that real Constitution, on which
the Properties depend, it necessarily supposes a sort of Things,
Properties belonging only to Species, and not to
Individuals…Here are Essences and Properties,
but all upon supposition of a Sort, or general abstract Idea,
which is considered as immutable: but there is no individual parcel of
Matter, to which any of these Qualities are so annexed, as to be
essential to it, or inseparable from it. That which is
essential, belongs to it as a Condition, whereby it is of this
or that Sort: But take away the consideration of its being ranked under
the name of some abstract Idea, and then there is nothing
necessary to it, nothing inseparable from it.
 [4]
Some Locke scholars take this to imply that the real essence is
always relativized to the nominal essence for Locke. If
properties belong only to species—not to individuals—and
real essences are defined as the real constitution of a thing that is
the foundation of its properties, then it seems to follow that the real
essence of a thing is defined in relation to the species to which the
thing belongs.
Critics of the relativized real essence interpretation of the Essay
will point out that if real essences are only for sorted substances,
then Locke ought to consistently use the term ‘real
essence’ whenever referring to the submicroscopic structure of
sorted individuals. However, in II.xxiii.37 Locke uses
‘internal constitution,’ not ‘real essence’ to
refer to the causal ground of the nominally essential qualities of
gold:
…the greatest part of the Ideas, that make our complex
Idea of Gold, are Yellowness, great Weight,
Ductility, Fusibility, and Solubility, in Aqua
 Regia, etc. all united together in an unknown Substratum; all which
Ideas, are nothing else, but so many relations to other
Substances; and are 
not really in the Gold, considered barely in it self, though they
depend on those real, and primary Qualities of its internal
constitution, whereby it   has
a fitness, differently to operate, and be operated on by several other
Substances.
These powers he lists are nominally essential properties of gold,
but since Locke refers to their causal ground as an ‘internal
constitution’ and not as a ‘real essence,’ one might
argue, it seems that ‘real essence’ is not uniquely
employed to designate the submicroscopic foundation of the powers
included within the nominal essence.
Moreover, critics of the relativized real essence interpretation
will likely focus on the part of (III.vi.6) that seems to bracket off
all nominally essential qualities from a real essence: “By
this real Essence, I mean, that real constitution of any
Thing…which every Thing has within it self, without any relation
to any thing without it.” That is, one might argue that if
we can consider a real essence all by itself, independently of any
relations to other objects or observers, then real essences are not
relativized to nominal essences because we can consider a real essence
without reference to “any relation to anything without it”
and nominally essential qualities require relations to observers.
There are important issues here that a consistent and plausible
interpretation of Locke on real essences must take into account.
How one does so will impact what one may say with respect to the
possibility of real essences for individual objects in Locke.
A related, but importantly distinct issue, concerns the possibility
of real essences for individuals. On the one hand, if every
object has an underlying physical constitution, then there seems to be
no problem with thinking of individuals has possessing real
essences. On the other hand, if real essences are only for sorted
individuals, then there are no real essences for individuals until we
have classified them by a nominal essence; until an individual is
sorted, it only has an internal constitution, not a real essence.
If one adopts the relativized real essence interpretation of the
Essay, then there are no real essences for unsorted
individuals. If, however, one adopts the unrelativized real
essence interpretation, then it appears possible that Locke could think
that unsorted individuals have a real essence and not just an internal
constitution.
Of course, in III.vi.4 Locke famously denies that anything is
essential to a particular:
‘Tis necessary for me to be as I am; GOD and Nature has made me
so: But there is nothing I have, is essential to me. An Accident, or
Disease, may very much alter my Colour, or Shape; a Fever, or Fall,
may take away my Reason, or Memory, or both; and an Apoplexy leave
neither Sense, nor Understanding, no nor Life…None of these are
essential to the one, or the other, or to any Individual whatsoever,
till the Mind refers it to some Sort or Species of things;
and then presently, according to the abstract Idea of that
sort, something is found
essential. Let any one
examine his own Thoughts, and he will find, that as soon as he supposes or
speaks of Essential, the consideration of some
Species, or the
complex Idea, signified by some general name, comes into his Mind: And
‘tis in reference to that, that this or that Quality is said to be
essential.  So that if it be asked, whether it
be essential to me, or any other particular corporeal Being
to have Reason? I say no; no more than it is essential to
this white thing I write on, to have words in it. But if that
particular Being, be to be counted of the sort Man, and to
have the name Man given it, then Reason is essential
to it, supposing Reason to be a part of the complex Idea the
name Man stands for….
However, one might argue that in this section Locke is only
considering nominally essential qualities and saying that none of the
candidates for nominally essential qualities are essential to a being,
qua species or genus member, until it has been sorted.
Moreover, the second sentence of III.vi.6, where he inserts the
clarification that a real essence is “…that particular
constitution, which every Thing has within it self, without any
relation to any thing without it,” appears to say that there can
be real essences of unsorted individuals. If a real essence is
definable as a corpuscular structure cum causal powers that a
body has independently of anything else, then it seems to
follow that there are individual real essences independently of how we
sort them. That is, if every natural substance has some
submicroscopic corpuscular constitution on which its observable
qualities depend, then it seems to follow that unsorted individuals
have a real
 essence (see Owen 1991 and Vienne
 1993).[5]
It is possible that Locke was not always clear and consistent in his
use of the term ‘real essence’ and that these puzzles are
impossible to resolve. However, it is also possible that when
Locke was focusing on the precise meanings of terms that he was indeed
careful, and there is a consistent interpretation of his views on this
issue. Either way, any interpretation of Locke on real essences
must determine whether there are real essences for only sorted
individuals or not.
Another important exegetical issue that arises in the Essay
is whether Locke thought that there are natural kinds based on real
essences. Scientific disciplines categorize the objects they
study into kinds. To say that a kind is natural
is to say that a grouping of similar individuals exists independently
of human decisions. The hope of each scientific discipline is to
identify as many natural kinds as possible within their domain and to
determine their properties accurately. To this end, we create
scientific taxonomies, like the periodic table of elements, the
phylogenetic tree, etc., to organize the kinds we have identified and
to study their properties. On the face of it, the question of
whether there are natural kinds in Locke seems to be the same as the
question of whether there are species, and as we saw above (in
§§1–3) Locke denies that there are natural species.
However, it is possible to distinguish between a species (a
classification humans make based on observed similarities) and a
natural kind (a grouping that occurs naturally and independently of
human naming practices). Locke is clearly aware of this
distinction, so it is possible that what he has said about sorting and
nominal essences only reveals what he thinks about nominal essences and
our practice of sorting, which is a semantic issue, not about the
metaphysics of nature.
To be sure, there are passages in the Essay that seem to
indicate that Locke was a natural kind realist even if he was a
conventionalist about taxonomical practices. For example:
The other, and more rational Opinion, is of those, who look on all
natural Things to have a real, but unknown Constitution of their
insensible Parts, from which flow those sensible Qualities, which
serve us to distinguish them one from another, according as we have
Occasion to rank them into sorts, under common
Denominations. (III.iii.17)
In other words, one might argue, if real essences cause the
observable qualities of bodies, and we sort things into species based
on observable similarities, then if we assume that similarities among
the real essences always results in similar observable qualities, and
similar observable qualities are always caused by similar real
essences, there is reason to think that Locke assumed that our nominal
essences track, at least to some degree, real kinds in nature.
There are places in the Essay where Locke seems to think
along these lines. In III.vi.36 he says “Nature makes
many particular Things, which do agree one with another, in many
sensible Qualities, and probably too, in their internal frame and
Constitution.” In a letter to Molyneux, Locke says:
I hope I have no where said, there is no such sort of creatures in
nature as birds; if I have, it is both contrary to the truth and to my
opinion. This I do say, that there are real constitutions in things
from whence these simple ideas flow, which we observ’d combined in
them. And this I farther say, that there are real distinctions and
differences in those real constitutions one from another; whereby they
are distinguished one from another, whether we think of them or name
them or no. (Locke, Works, vol. IV, pp. 305–6)
Indeed, there are passages where Locke speaks of the
“imperfection” of our species ideas and the need to make
them better conform to nature. For example, in III.xi.24 he says
that:
And therefore in Substances, we are not always to rest in the ordinary
complex Idea, commonly received as the signification of that
Word, but must go a little farther, and enquire into the Nature and
Properties of the Things themselves, and thereby perfect, as much as
we can, our Ideas of their distinct Species…
There is no reason, so one may argue, to suspect that our species
ideas could be either perfected or imperfect if there is no natural
kind archetype. On the other hand, there is some evidence that
Locke anticipated this kind of account and rejected it. For
example, he says:
…That we find many of the Individuals that are ranked into one
Sort, called by one common Name, and so received as being of one
Species, have yet Qualities depending on their real
Constitutions, as far different one from another, as from others, from
which they are accounted to differ
specifically. This, as it is easy to be observed by all, who
have to do with natural Bodies; so Chymists especially are often, by
sad Experience, convinced of it, when they, sometimes in vain, seek
for the same Qualities in one parcel of Sulphur, Antimony, or Vitriol,
which they have found in others. For though they are Bodies of the
same Species, having the same nominal Essence, under
the same Name; yet do they often, upon severe ways of examination,
betray Qualities so different one from another, as to frustrate the
Expectation and Labour of very wary Chymists.  But if Things were
distinguished into Species, according to their real Essences,
it would be as impossible to find different Properties in any two
individual Substances of the same Species, as it is to find
different Properties in two Circles, or two equilateral
Triangles. (III.vi.8)
This argument is a modus tollens: if the members of a
nominally defined species had the same type of real essence, then they
should all exhibit the same qualities (including those not included in
the nominal essence), but they do not exhibit all of the same
qualities, therefore they do not all have the same type of real
essence.
This question of whether real essences could be the
foundation of natural kinds for Locke is as old as the Essay
itself. Both Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz and Edward Stillingfleet,
Lord Bishop of Worcester, point out that Locke’s position on real
essences seems to entail that there are natural kinds based on
similarities among the real essences. As Leibniz put it in his
critique of the Essay entitled New Essays on Human
Understanding (1704), 
 [i]t is true that we cannot define a species in terms
of something which is unknown to us [e.g., real essences]; but the
outer features serve in place of it…. (Leibniz 1704, p. 311)
Again later, he reiterates this point: 
[when] I think of a body
which is at once yellow, fusible and resistant to cupellation, I am
thinking of a body whose specific essence, though hidden from me within
it, gives rise to these qualities and reveals itself, at least
confusedly, through them. (Leibniz 1704, p. 405) 
Locke died before Leibniz’s New Essays on Human Understanding
were published (they were not published until 1765, sixty-one years
after Locke’s death and nearly fifty years after Leibniz’s death), so
we do not have Locke’s response to Leibniz’s arguments, nevertheless,
Stillingfleet gave a similar argument and we have Locke’s replies to
him.
Like Leibniz, Stillingfleet appeals to the concept of real
essence as a “natural kind” concept, claiming that there
are types of real essences, and belonging to the same natural kind is a
function of possessing the same kind of real essence:
But in this one sun there is a real essence, and not a mere nominal or
abstracted essence; but suppose there were more suns; would not each
of them have the real essence of the sun? For what is it makes the
second sun to be a true sun, but having the same real essence with the
first? If it were but a nominal essence, then the second would have
nothing but the name.  (Locke, Works, vol. IV, p. 83. Here
Locke is quoting from Stillingfleet’s Discourse in Vindication of
the Doctrine of the Trinity, where the latter criticizes
Locke’s Essay.)
Locke’s response is to turn the whole discussion away
from real essences and back onto the nominal essences:
Your lordship’s proof here brought out of my Essay,
concerning the sun, I humbly conceive will not reach it; because what
is said there, does not at all concern the real, but nominal essence;
as is evident from hence, that the idea I speak of there, is a complex
idea; but we have no complex idea of the internal constitution, or
real essence of the sun. Besides, I say expressly, that our
distinguishing substances into species by names, is not at all founded
on their real essences. So that the sun being one of these substances,
I cannot, in the place quoted by your lordship, be supposed to mean by
essence of the sun, the real essence of the sun, unless I had so
expressed it. But all this argument will be at an end, when your
lordship shall have explained what you mean by these words,
“true sun.” In my sense of them, any thing will be a true
sun, to which the name sun may be truly and properly applied; and to
that substance or thing, the name sun may be truly and properly
applied, which has united in it that combination of sensible
qualities, by which any thing else that is called sun is distinguished
from other substances, i.e. by the nominal
essence…. (Locke, Works, vol. IV, pp. 83–4)
Although this is controversial exegetical territory, it
appears that Locke is aware of this ‘real essence’ version
of natural kinds, but it further appears that he is unwilling to
discuss it; his response was to steer clear of the metaphysical claim
and return to the semantic issue of nominal essences.
As natural as it is to interpret Locke as a natural kind realist,
there are problematic passages for that interpretation.  With respect
to the similarities among real essences, which was the main concern of
Leibniz and Stillingfleet, in IV.vi.4 Locke argues that the assumption
that species are determined by real essences fails to tell us what
would count as a member of any species. That is, because we have no
knowledge of real essences, no general claims about species would be
justified and no individual would obviously belong to a particular
species. So the assumption that Leibniz and Stillingfleet propose
appears to be theoretically unmotivated.  Moreover, as Locke’s
argument in III.vi.39 suggests, similarities in structure of the real
essences, even if known, would still require us to decide which
similarities (not to mention what degrees of similarity) would amount
to similar enough to belong together in the same class:
For what is sufficient in the inward Contrivance, to make a new
Species? There are some Watches, that are made with
four Wheels, others with 
five: Is this a specifick difference to the Workman? Some have Strings
and Physies, and others none; some have the Balance loose, and others
regulated by a spiral Spring, and others by Hogs Bristles: Are any, or
all of these enough to make a specifick difference to the Workman, that
knows each of these, and several other
different contrivances, in the internal Constitutions of
Watches? ‘Tis certain, each of these hath a real
difference from the rest: But whether it be an essential, a specifick
difference or no, relates only to the complex Idea, to which
the name Watch is
given: as long as they all agree in the Idea which that name
stands for, and that name does not as a generical name comprehend
different Species   under it, they are
not essentially nor specifically different. (III.vi.39)
Of course, this view has been challenged recently. Allison Kuklok
(2018) argues that this watch passage does not show that Locke took
our sorting practices (at either the phenomenal or microphysical
level) to be arbitrary. For her, a mistake that interpreters of Locke
make is to claim that the watch passage asserts that there is no fact
of the matter about how things should be classified, and therefore,
our classifications are arbitrary. According to her, this watch
analogy is intended to show the irrelevance of hidden internal
differences to species whose boundaries are antecedently drawn at the
phenomenal level by our natural sorting practices. By her lights, once
we acknowledge that passages like the watch analogy do not concern
classification, we see that Locke never argued that classification is
arbitrary.
On her reading, Locke thinks that species are made by the vulgar prior
to our theorizing about internal constitutions, and these species
cannot plausibly be understood as the result of arbitrary
choice. According to Kuklok, the naturalness of our classifications
stems from the fact that Locke holds that humans have a natural
disposition toward species realism, and the fact that nature presents
us with clusters of ‘leading qualities’ that appear as
patterns or standards. Given the vulgar realism and the leading
patterns in nature, the vulgar classify based on non-arbitrary natural
similarities.
However, those who interpret the watch passage as implying
arbitrariness in classification (see Uzgalis (1988) and Jones (2010))
would have at least two replies. First, that ‘arbitrary’
does not mean ‘random’ or that all qualities are equally
adequate as differentia. The vulgar have good empirical
reasons for their taxonomies, however, there are lots of similarly
good and natural reasons for different taxonomies. That does not imply
that every taxonomy is equally as acceptable. Moreover, given the
background of corpuscularians who appeal to corpuscular forms as a
ground for natural kind realism, and given that Locke’s focus is
the internal structure and arrangement of objects, it is plausible to
see the watch passage as insisting that real essences are not an
adequate foundation for a theory of natural kinds.
As we can see, whether, in fact, Locke employed real essences as the
foundations of natural kinds is currently one of the hottest debates
among Locke scholars, and there have been a number of good studies
written in recent years.
Throughout the Essay, Locke discusses real essences,
internal constitutions and substratum, and getting clear on each
concept is required in order to produce a consistent and accurate
interpretation of Locke on real essences. While it is not
possible to do justice to any of the subjects here, it is important to
give some background before proceeding. When Locke defines the
‘real essence’, he often describes it as “that
Constitution, whereon the Properties of these several things
depended” (III.iii.19). On occasion he even connects
internal constitutions with essences as if they were synonymous:
“[collections of simple ideas] are therefore supposed to flow
from the particular internal Constitution, or unknown Essence of that
Substance” (II.xxiii.3). Similarly, the concept of
‘substance’ or ‘substratum’, i.e., pure
substance in general, is conceived as an underlying ‘thing’
which supports, or upholds, the properties of bodies:
The Idea then we have, to which we give the general name
Substance, being nothing, but the supposed, but unknown support of
those Qualities, we find existing, which we imagine cannot
subsist, sine re substante, without something to support
them, we call that Support Substantia; which, according to
the true import of the Word, is in
plain English, standing under,
or upholding. (II.xxiii.2)
The fact that the Essay uses internal constitutions,
substance, and real essences as the underlying ground of the qualities
of physical objects has led to some debate over the way Locke
understands the relationship between the three concepts.
Regarding the relationship between real essences and substance in
general, Michael Ayers has argued that Locke uses the terms
‘substance’ and ‘real essence’ as extensionally
equivalent, but not intensionally equivalent. That is, both terms
refer to the same objects, but convey a very different meaning.
For Ayers, Locke’s use of ‘substance’ conveys the
idea of a thing that supports properties, whereas ‘real
essence’ conveys the idea of a submicroscopic material structure
that causes the powers of the object; these are different meanings, but
both terms refer to only one
 object.[6]
On the other hand, some Locke scholars interpret the concepts of
‘substance’ (in the sense of pure substance in general, or
‘substratum’) and ‘real essence’ as both
intensionally and extensionally distinct because they play very
different philosophical roles. For example, according to Nicholas
Jolley, Locke employs the concept of a real essence when he is
addressing issues of scientific explanation and he appeals to
substratum when he is discussing the general concept of what it is to
be a thing (as opposed to a property or mode) (see
Jolley 1999, pp. 70–78).
On the relationship between real essences and internal
constitutions, one view is that Locke uses the terms ‘real
essence’ and ‘internal constitution’
interchangeably. For example, in II.xxxi.6 he says “its
real Essence, or internal Constitution, on which these Qualities
depend, can be nothing but the Figure, Size, and Connexion of its solid
Parts.” Again in III.iii.19 he uses ‘real
essence’ as if it were synonymous with ‘internal
constitution’: “In all which, and the like Changes, ‘tis
evident, their real Essence, i.e. that Constitution, whereon
the Properties of these several things depended, is destroy’d,
and perishes with them.”
By contrast, Susanna Goodin (1998) argues that ‘real essence’
and ‘internal constitution’ cannot be synonymous because,
according to Locke, real essences are unknowable (IV.vi.5 &
12), but internal constitutions are knowable (II.xxiii.12). One
way to distinguish them is, as we saw above, to adopt the relativized
view and interpret the real essence as the internal constitution that
underlies the nominally essential properties, whereas the internal
constitution of a substance is simply its physical make-up,
independently of considerations of its nominal essence. So, on
this view, Locke’s uses of ‘real essence’ and
‘internal constitution’ are non-synonymous technical
terms.
P. Kyle Stanford (1998), on the other hand, distinguishes real essences
from internal constitutions by arguing that real essences, by
definition, include the causal powers of the body, whereas the internal
constitution is simply its material components. Thus, for
Stanford, a real essence “consists of those features of an entity
from which all of its observable or experienceable properties can be
logically deduced” (Stanford 1998, p. 80). By contrast, knowledge of the
internal constitution, qua mere material components, entails
no such deducibility. For example, in IV.vi.11 he says that
knowledge of the real essence of an object entails knowledge of all of
its powers, but knowledge of mere material structure cannot entail that
kind of knowledge. Moreover, in all the quotations where Locke
talks about real essences, he does not just define them as a material
structure, but also as the causal grounds of the observable qualities
of the body, indicating that the powers are included in the
definition.
One of Locke’s epistemological projects is to distinguish
metaphysics and natural philosophy from ethics and mathematics, and one
way he does that is to distinguish their subject matters.
Metaphysics and natural philosophy are concerned with substances,
whereas mathematics and ethics are concerned with modes. For
Locke, since an essence accounts for the existence and nature of any
being, i.e., “Essence may be taken for the very being of
anything, whereby it is what it is”, it follows that the concepts
of real and nominal essences apply outside the realm of metaphysics and
natural philosophy as well. By his lights, both simple ideas and
modes have real and nominal essences. To see this, some
definitions are in order.
By ‘simple idea’, Locke means a single, uniform concept
or appearance that cannot be analyzed into more basic parts:
The coldness and hardness, which a Man feels in a piece of
Ice, being as distinct Ideas in the Mind, as the
Smell and Whiteness of a Lily; or as   the taste of Sugar,
and smell of a Rose: And there is nothing can be plainer to a Man, than
the clear and distinct Perception he has of those simple 
Ideas; which being each in it self uncompounded, contains in
it nothing but one uniform Appearance, or Conception in the
mind, and is not 
distinguishable into different Ideas. (II.ii.1)
Our complex idea of gold might include its color, heaviness,
solidity, etc., but each of these ideas can be set aside and considered
all on its own as a simple idea. One simple idea, e.g., that of
the yellowness of the lump of gold, is simple because it is a single,
uniform appearance of that particular shade and not a collection of
more basic appearances. The same goes for our idea of its
hardness and heaviness. We can mentally separate the color from
the hardness or heaviness and think of it all on its own.
By ‘mode’, Locke means complex ideas of qualities that
depend upon substances for their existence: 
First,
Modes I call such complex Ideas, which however
compounded, contain not in them the supposition of subsisting by
themselves, but are considered as Dependences on, or Affections of
Substances; such are the Ideas signified by the Words
Triangle, Gratitude, Murther, etc.
(II.xii.4) 
So, for example, gratitude does not exist on its own,
rather it requires a thing that is grateful in order to
exist. Mixed modes are,
the Complex Ideas, we mark by the names Obligation,
Drunkenness, a Lye, etc. which consisting of several
Combinations of simple Ideas of   different kinds,
I have called Mixed Modes, to distinguish them from the more
simple Modes, which consist only of simple Ideas of the same
 kind. These mixed Modes being also such Combinations of simple
Ideas, as are not looked upon to be the characteristical Marks
of any real   Beings that have a steady existence, but
scattered and independent Ideas, put together by the Mind, are
thereby distinguished from the complex Ideas of Substances.
(II.xxii.1)
Given that there are real and nominal essences for modes and that a
general knowledge consists in knowledge of essences, then Locke needs
some way to distinguish the essences of modes from those of
substances.
According to Locke, one of the main differences between substances
on the one hand and simple ideas and modes on the other is that the
real essences of substances are distinct from their nominal essences,
whereas for simple ideas and modes, they are the same.
Essences being thus distinguished into Nominal and
Real, we may farther observe, that in the Species of
simple Ideas and Modes, they are always the
same: But in Substances, always quite different. Thus a
Figure including a Space between three Lines, is the real, as well as
nominal Essence of a Triangle; it being not only the
abstract Idea to which the general Name is annexed, but the
very Essentia, or Being, of the thing it self, that
Foundation from which all its Properties flow, and to which they are
all inseparably annexed. But it is far otherwise concerning that
parcel of Matter, which makes the Ring on my Finger, wherein these
two Essences are apparently different. For it is the real
Constitution of its insensible Parts, on which depend all those
properties of Colour, Weight, Fusibility, Fixedness, etc.
which are to be found in it. Which Constitution we know not; and so
having no particular
Idea of, have no Name that is the Sign of it. But yet it is
its Colour, Weight, Fusibility, and Fixedness, etc.
 which makes it to be
Gold, or gives it a right to that Name, which is therefore its
nominal Essence. (III.iii.18)
So the real essences of a triangle, or gratitude, or murder, or
yellow, or sweet, etc., are exactly the same as their nominal
essences. There is nothing more to being a triangle than being a
plane, closed three-sided figure. Similarly, there is nothing
more to being a particular ‘species’ or shade of yellow
than the nominal
 definition.[7]
While it is clear that Locke envisioned some analogy between the
real and nominal essences of substances with those of modes, it is
unclear, however, just how that analogy should be cashed out. For
example, Roger Woolhouse  argues that it is a mistake for Locke to say
that mode ideas have a real essence at all because there is nothing
like a corpuscular structure that is analogous to the definition of a
concept like triangle or lying. Moreover, there is, according to
Woolhouse, nothing that binds the nominally essential qualities of
modes together, whereas, for substances there is an underlying physical
structure (see Woolhouse 1971, pp. 125–128). Indeed it is quite
difficult to see how a mode could have a real essence if the model for
what a real essence is comes from corpuscular structures. If
Woolhouse is right, then Locke has no way to make good on his intended
analogy and he is unable to adequately differentiate modes from
substances.
P. Kyle Stanford (1998), on the other hand, suggests that the analogy
between real and nominal essences was intended to be based in their
entailment relations. Stanford argues that, just as every
property of a substance flows from the real essence with geometrical
necessity (IV.vi.11), so too does every property of a triangle follow
from its definition with geometrical necessity. And this fact is
what all real and nominal essences have in common for Locke. By
his way of thinking, even though the connection between the real
essence of a piece of gold is the causal ground of the
nominally essential properties of gold, and the real essence of a
triangle is the logical ground for the nominally essential
properties of a triangle, they are alike in that all nominally
essential properties can be deduced from the idea of the real essence;
if we knew the real essence of a triangle, then we could deduce from it
any of the properties of a triangle. To make this analogy work,
Stanford argues that the real essence of a substance is more than a
corpuscular structure, it must also include the causal powers that
produce the observable qualities of the substance; in like fashion, the
real essence of modes includes the logical ground from which the
nominally essential properties of the term flow. If Stanford is
correct, then there is a possible analogy between the real and nominal
essences of modes and substances that yields an interesting
interpretation of the real essences of both modes and substances.
On either reading, however, it appears that Locke is saddled with
the view that in cases of simple ideas, ideas of modes and mixed modes,
if we understand the meanings of the words, we know all that there is
to know regarding those concepts. Moral and mathematical concepts
and ideas are mere trifling propositions, analytic truths and
uninformative. However, it will be difficult for many moral
philosophers to accept that all they are doing is cashing out the
definitions of terms and dealing with uninformative analytic truths;
asserting that lying is wrong seems to be more than a trifling
opinion. Moreover, it is unclear how Locke thinks moral terms can
be normative, i.e., how they can constitute commands we ought to
obey—if his position is correct.
In a similar vein, since many mixed modes, which include all moral
concepts, are arbitrary mental constructs, it follows that we create
moral concepts by producing their definitions. Since the real and
nominal essences of mixed modes are the same, it follows that if we
know the real essence of lying (knowingly and falsely asserting that
‘p’ with the intention to mislead someone whom we
ought not to mislead, etc.), we can deduce from that idea all the
components of lying, and so there is nothing more to know about lying
than the ideas contained within its definition. A problem with Locke’s
account here is that, as John Mackie points out, social scientists
seek out the real essences of social phenomena such as adultery,
incest, jealousy, lying and suicide, but understanding these complex
phenomena involves more than simply understanding the meaning of the
word.  If we are to understand why people lie, we must know more than
a definition of lying. Of course, it is possible for Locke to argue
that once we understand all that is included in lying, we have
uncovered its real essence, why people lie, and the many ways they do
so, however, are separate questions that we cannot expect to be
decided by a semantic theory. It is unclear how he would solve the
normative problem (see Mackie 1976, pp. 90–91; see also Jolley
1999, pp.  155–161).