Humans reason: that is, taking some things to be true, they conclude
therefrom that other things are also true. If this is done in thought,
one performs an inference; and if this is done in speech, one makes an
argument. Indeed, inference and argument are but two sides of the same
coin: an argument can be thought, and hence become an inference; an
inference can be expressed, and hence become an argument.
Logic, at least as traditionally conceived, seeks to distinguish good
reasoning from bad. More particularly, it seeks to identify the
general conditions under which what one concludes is true, having
taken other things to be true. These conditions can be sought in the
nature of things. One asks, then, under what conditions do certain
facts require some other fact. This perspective on reasoning is an
ontic perspective. Next, insofar as facts are grasped in thought, one
can also ask under what conditions does knowledge of some facts permit
knowledge of another fact. Such conditions, once identified, would
distinguish good inferences from bad inferences. This perspective on
reasoning is an epistemic one. A third perspective is a dialectic one.
Here one asks under what conditions does the acceptance by someone of
some stated facts require him or her to accept some other stated fact.
Such conditions distinguish good arguments from bad arguments.
Finally, since an argument is an expression of an inference, and to
that extent, expressed in a language, it is natural to use the forms
of linguistic expressions to identify forms of inferences and
arguments, thereby distinguishing forms of good inferences and
arguments from forms of bad inferences and arguments. This perspective
is a linguistic one. The study of reasoning in India has been from the
ontic, epistemic and dialectic perspective, and not from the
linguistic perspective, the perspective best known to modern
thinkers.
The fact that humans reason is no guarantee that those who do reflect
on which reasoning is good and which is bad. Clearly, the activity of
reasoning, on the one hand, and the activity of reflecting on which
reasoning is good and which is not, on the other, are distinct, though
naturally they are intimately related. The exposition here, while
reporting primarily on what is explicit, will also report on what is
implicit. In looking at the origins of reasoning in India, it is
natural to begin with the practices in which reasoning played a role
and which, as a result, were likely candidates for reflection. The
obvious starting points for such practices are all forms of rational
inquiry.
Rational inquiry comprises the search for reasons for publicly
accepted facts, subject to public and rational scrutiny. This activity
involves people both severally and collectively. It involves people
severally insofar as people, individually, are the locus of inference.
It involves people collectively insofar as arguments, the public
manifestation of inferences, are sharpened by the scrutiny of
others.
Though the origins in India of public debate (pariṣad),
one form of rational inquiry, are not clear, we know that public
debates were common in preclassical India, for they are frequently
alluded to in various Upaniṣads and in the early
Buddhist literature. Public debate is not the only form of public
deliberations in preclassical India. Assemblies
(pariṣad or sabhā) of various sorts,
comprising relevant experts, were regularly convened to deliberate on
a variety of matters, including administrative, legal and religious
matters. As reported by Solomon (1976 ch. 3), much of the legal
vocabulary for such deliberations includes the well-known terms of
debate and argument found in the philosophical literature. (See also
Preisendanz 2009.)
By the fifth century bce, rational inquiry
into a wide range of topics was under way, including agriculture,
architecture, astronomy, grammar, law, logic, mathematics, medicine,
phonology and statecraft. Aside from the world’s earliest extant
grammar, Pāṇini’s
Aṣṭādhyāyı̄, however, no
works devoted to these topics actually date from this preclassical
period. Nonetheless, scholars agree that incipient versions of the
first extant texts on these topics were being formulated and early
versions of them were redacted by the beginning of the common era.
They include such texts as
Kṛṣi-śāstra (Treatise on
agriculture), Śilpa-śāstra
(Treatise on architecture),
Jyotiṣa-śāstra (Treatise on
astronomy), Dharma-śāstra (Treatise on
law), Caraka-saṃhitā (Caraka’s
collection), a treatise on medicine, and
Artha-śāstra (Treatise on wealth), a
treatise on politics.
Two texts from this period which are especially noteworthy for the
study of the history of reasoning in India are
Kathā-vatthu (Points of controversy),
attributed to Moggaliputta Tissa, and Milinda-pañha
(Questions of King Milinda). These texts date from around the
third century bce. The latter text comprises a
dialogue between the Greek Bactrian king Menander (Pali: Milinda),
and the Buddhist monk Nāgasena. In it, King Milinda puts
questions to Nāgasena concerning various aspects of Buddhist
doctrine. The answers typically employ analogies, some very elaborate.
In some cases, the king adduces pairs of statements of Buddhist
doctrine which, he says, contradict each other. The monk typically
replies by trying to show the alleged contradictions to be merely
apparent. In a few cases, one or the other party makes an argument,
typically an analogical one.
In contrast, Kathā-vatthu is filled with arguments
designed to show the inconsistency of some two hundred propositions
which are at odds with the views of the Sthaviravādins, a school
of Buddhist thought. For example, in the passage below, the
Sthaviravādin questions his opponent, here a Pudgalavādin,
about whether or not the soul is known truly and ultimately.
One easily abstracts from this the following form,
Indeed, this form is repeatedly instantiated throughout Book 1,
Chapter 1.
Three features of this text are important to note from the point of
view of the history of logic. First, as the schema above shows,
arguments are put into a canonical form. While we have no record that
semantic ascent had taken place, there is no doubt from the arguments
are intended to satisfy a certain form. Second, the sentences of the
argument are logically related. The author takes for granted that the
sentences assented to are inconsistent, corresponding to an instance
of the following inconsistent propositional schemata of \(\alpha\),
\(\neg \beta\), \(\alpha \rightarrow \beta\). He also takes it for
granted that it is wrong to hold inconsistent propositions. And he
finally presupposes that, if a sentence corresponding to propositional
schema \(\alpha \rightarrow \beta\) is true, then the sentence
corresponding to the propositional schema \(\neg \beta \rightarrow
\neg \alpha\) is also true; that is, he presupposes the natural
language counterpart to one direction of the equivalence of a
conditional and its contrapositive. (See Ganeri 2001 for the most
recent attempt to explicate the dialectic implicit in the text.)
The first five hundred years of the common era also saw the redaction
of philosophical treatises in which proponents of diverse
philosophical and religious traditions put forth systematic versions
of their world views. These latter works bear witness, in a number of
different ways, to the intense interest in argumentation during this
period. Among the diverse forms of argument from this period, one
emerges as a canonical one. In this section, we first review the texts
relevant to the development of logic from the end this preclassical
period. We then turn our attention to surveying the emergence of a
canonical argument form. Finally, we conclude with a very brief
overview of the treatment of fallacies in arguments and of missteps in
debate.
The texts relevant to the study of the development of logic during
this period may be divided into three kinds: those which have
arguments but which do not mention or discuss either argument or
inference as such, those which mention or discuss inference as such
but do not mention or discuss arguments as such, and those which
mention or discuss arguments and possibly also mention or discuss
inference, and may even provide illustrations of either.
During this period polemical texts, which consist almost entirely of
arguments, start to appear. The earliest among these are texts
attributed to Nāgārjuna (2nd century ce).
They include
Mūla-madhyamaka-kārikā (Basic verses on
the middle way), Vigraha-vyāvartanı̄
(Exclusion of disputes) and Vaidalya-prakaraṇa
(Tract on pulverization). Then comes a text extant only in
Chinese, Bǎi lùn (百論), a
translation of the Sanskrit text entitled
Śataka-śāstra (Treatise in one
hundred verses) by Āryadeva (c. 3rd century ce),
a student of Nāgārjuna. Many of the
arguments in these texts are arguments by analogy; those which are not
are often enthymemes whose omitted premisses are patently false.
The simpler arguments by analogy are of two kinds: ones based on
similarity (sādharmya; sārūpya)
and others based on dissimilarity (vaidharmya;
vairūpya). Such simple arguments involve two things,
call them p and d, and two properties, call them H and S. An argument
by analogy based on similarity is one where, if p and d are similar
with respect to property H and d has property S, then p has property
S. This gives rise to this argument schema:
(The names for the statements have been added for ease of comparison
with later developments to be discussed below.) Notice that, if p and
d are not distinct, the argument is circular.
An argument by analogy based on dissimilarity is one where, if p and d
are dissimilar with respect to property H and d has property S, then p
does not have property S. Here is its argument schema:
Here the ontic version of the law of non-contradiction guarantees that
p and d are distinct.
The terms similarity and dissimilarity become
technical terms in Indian logic. It is useful to bear in mind some
syntactic and semantic features shared by both the Sanskrit terms and
their English translations. These words express a three place
relation, namely the relation of a thing similar to, or dissimilar
from, another thing in some respect. When these terms are used either
in English or in Sanskrit, the complement referring to the respect in
which things are similar or dissimilar may be left unexpressed. It is
this omissibility which accounts for the fact that the following two
sentences are not contradictory: Devadatta is similar to
Yajñadatta and Devadatta is dissimilar to
Yajñadatta. After all, two people might be similar to one
another, say, in temperament, but dissimilar to one another, say, in
appearance. When the respect of similarity or dissimilarity is not
expressed in a sentence, it must be gathered from the context.
A pair of related terms with the same syntactic and semantic features,
which also become technical terms in Indian logic, are the terms
subject-like (sa-pakṣa), or similar to the
subject, and subject-unlike (vi-pakṣa),
or dissimilar to the subject. The Sanskrit prefixes,
sa- and vi-, and the English adjectives,
like and unlike, which are also English
prepositions, express the relation of similarity and dissimilarity
respectively.
Two early texts which discuss inference (anumāna), but
not argument (sādhana), are
Ṣaṣṭi-tantra (Sixty doctrines),
attributed Vārṣagaṇya (4th century ce),
and Vaiśeṣika-sūtra
(Aphorisms on individuation), a treatise of speculative
ontology attributed to Kaṇāda (c. 1st century ce).
Ṣaṣṭi-tantra, which survives only in
fragments, first collected by Frauwallner (1958), later expanded by
Steinkellner (2017 Appendix 1), defines inference
(anumāna) as follows: To infer is to establish
something in the remainder, on the basis of a relation and something
perceptible . One of the text’s fragments lists six relations as
ones which underpin an acceptable inference: the master servant
relation (sva-svāmi-bhāva-saṃbandha), the matter alteration relation (prakṛti-vikāra-saṃbandha),
the part whole relation (kārya-kāraṇa-saṃbandha), the cause effect relation (nimitta-naimittika-saṃbandha), the source product relation (mātrā-mātrika-saṃbandha), the
association relation (sahacāri-saṃbandha) and the incompatibility relation (vadhya-ghātaka-saṃbandha).Though each of the relations is illustrated, no example of an inference using them is found.
Vaiśeṣika-sūtra (Aphorisms on
individuation) also has passages which allude to inferences
whereby one thing is inferred on the basis of something observable
which bears one of five relations to the thing inferred (VS 9.18;
Jambuvijaya (ed.) 1961 p. 69; cp. VS 3.1.8), though no examples are
given. Nonetheless, in the case of both texts, it is clear from the
description that the inferences would have the following form:
The best known text from this period is the Brahmanical treatise
Nyāya-sūtra (Aphorisms on logic) by
Gautama, also known as Akṣapāda (c. 2nd ce),
the actual redaction of which is thought by
some to date to the third century ce. This
work, which comprises five books, each with two chapters, addresses
primarily questions pertaining to epistemology and debate, though it
also touches on other topics. A few aphorisms found in the first
chapter of the first and second books speak of inference, but much
more attention is devoted to debate, essentially all of both chapters
of Book 5, the entirety of the second chapter of Book 1, and several
aphorisms in the first chapter of Book 1. Unfortunately, the laconic
style of the aphorisms makes it hard to get a clear idea of what is
intended.
Some light is shed on this work by a contemporaneous Buddhist work,
the Vaidalya-prakaraṇa (Tract on
pulverization), attributed to Nāgārjuna. It is
organized around the key terms listed in the first aphorism of the
Nyāya-sūtra (NS 1.1.1). However, it does not
explain the terms nor does it illustrate them. Instead, it sets out
for each term arguments intended to show its incoherence. It is
therefore rich in arguments, most of which are analogical. The author
also judges a number of counter arguments as fallacious, pointing out
either that they are circular or that they lead to an infinite
regress.
Not all Buddhist texts from this period are hostile to argumentation.
Two works contain short passages with lists and classificatory
definitions of terms pertaining to debate. One is the
Saṃdhi-nirmocana-sūtra (Aphorisms on release
from bondage), of unknown authorship, whose original Sanskrit has
been lost, but whose translations into Tibetan and Chinese have been
preserved. (See Yoshimizu 2010.) The other is the
Abhidharma-samuccaya (Compendium of the higher
teachings), a text usually attributed to the Buddhist thinker,
Asaṅga (5th century ce), whose fifth
chapter has a section, its seventh, often referred to as
Vāda-viniścaya (Settling on what debate
is), also devoted to debate.
In contrast, five other texts from this period not only mention and
sometimes discuss terms pertinent to inference and debate but also
provide illustrations of the terms. The earliest texts are two
passages in the earliest medical work, the
Caraka-saṃhitā, conjectured by some to have been
redacted in its current form at the beginning of first century 
ce.
Another important passage occurs in the
Yogācāra-bhūmi-śāstra
(Treatise on the stages of the practice of yoga), a work
traditionally attributed to Asaṅga, but now generally thought to
be by a number of authors. The passage, usually referred to as
Hetu-vidyā (Science of reasons), provides some
fifty examples of simple common sense inferences, all of which are
easily recast in the form of the inferential syllogism given above.
The inferences are divided into five categories. While relation words
are used for each category, the logical force of these relations is
not made clear. The inferences provided include ones such as the
inference of fire from smoke, of the presence of a lion from its roar,
of being sick from unusual eating practices, as well as inferences
more closely connected with Buddhist doctrine.
The first work devoted entirely to argument and inference is the
Fāng biàn xı̄n lùn
(方便心論), or Treatise on the heart of
means, translated into Chinese in 472 ce
without attribution, though it later came to be attributed to
Nāgārjuna. This text, translated into Sanskrit by G. Tucci
(1929), is commonly known by scholars by the translation of its title
by Tucci as Upāya-hṛdaya.
Shortly after Asaṅga, Vasubandhu (c. 5th century ce),
another Buddhist idealist, thought to be the
younger brother of the Asaṅga, wrote at least three works on
debate: Vāda-hṛdaya (Heart of debate),
Vāda-vidhāna (Precepts of debate) and
Vāda-vidhi (Rules of debate). These texts have
been lost, though fragments of the latter two, some in Sanskrit, many
in Tibetan, have been collected (Frauwallner 1933, 1957; Ono 2020).
Another work, ascribed to Vasubandhu, which survives only in Chinese,
is the Rúshı́ lùn
(如實論), Treatise on truth. G. Tucci
(1929), translating it back into Sanskrit, gave it the Sanskrit title
Tarka-śāstra, by which it is now generally
known. However, as has been shown recently by Ono Motoi (Ono 2020
§1), this rendition is not correct.
There are two other works which have passages pertinent to the study
of the history of reasoning in India, both works attributed to
Asaṅga. The first is the Xiǎn chàng shèng
jiào lùn
(顯揚聖教論), or Treatise which
reveals and disseminates the wise teachings, which is a condensed
version of the
Yogācāra-bhūmi-śāstra, and the
Shùn zhōng lùn
(順中論), or Treatise on following the middle
way, which seems to be a commentary on the introductory verse of
Nāgārjuna’s
Mūla-madhyamaka-kārikā (Katsura 1985 p.
166).
Having surveyed the texts from the late preclassical period pertinent
to the study of the development of logic, we now turn to the emergence
of a canonical Indian syllogism.
The earliest known example of the canonical Indian syllogism is found
in the Caraka-saṃhitā. The argument is clearly an
analogical one. The earliest known deductive version of the syllogism
is found in the Fāng biàn xı̄n
lùn, or Upāya-hṛdaya; and the
earliest known discussion of a deductive version of the syllogism is
found in the Rúshı́ lùn, usually
referred to as the Tarka-śāstra. A concise
version of the the deductive version is found in Vasubandhu’s
Vāda-vidhi.
The Caraka-saṃhitā (CS 3.8.31), like the
Nyāya-sūtra (NS 1.1.32), takes the syllogism to
have five parts, the names for four of the five parts being identical;
however, unlike the Nyāya-sūtra, the
Caraka-saṃhitā provides an illustration.
Observe that the first three statements in the syllogism have the form
of the analogical syllogism using similarity as discussed above: p, the
soul, has S, the property of being eternal, because p, the soul, has
H, the property of being unproduced; as d, or space, has H, the
property of being unproduced, and d, space, has S, the property of
being eternal. However, the argument here adds two more statements:
the first spells out the analogy between the subject of the
proposition and the example, using the correlative expression
as (yathā) \(\ldots\) so
(tathā) \(\ldots\); the second restates the
argument’s proposition.
While Caraka-saṃhitā provides only one
illustration of its canonical syllogism, the earliest extant
commentary on the Nyāya-sūtra, called the
Nyāya-bhāṣya (Commentary on
logic), has passages in its commentary on NS 1.1.33–39,
which permit the reconstruction of two analogical syllogisms,
corresponding to those using similarity and using dissimilarity
discussed above. The commentary, attributed to Vātsyāyana
(fifth ce), also known as
Pakṣilasvāmin, explicitly distinguishes the syllogisms as
one based on similarity (sādharmya) and the other based
on dissimilarity (vaidharmya) discussed earlier. (For
details, see Gillon 2020.) The analogical syllogism based on
similarity differs but slightly from the syllogism found in the
Caraka-saṃhitā.
The Fāng biàn xı̄n lùn, or
Upāya-hṛdaya, purports to be a primer on argument
and reasoning, listing and defining many terms. It also contains many
arguments, several of which are analogical arguments both through
similarity and through dissimilarity. The author of the text neither
states what an argument is nor what its parts are. Yet, in the first
chapter, he speaks of excessive and deficient statements and says that
there are three kinds: deficiency of reason, deficiency of proposition
and deficiency of example. (T1632 24.3.14–18; Gillon and Katsura
2017 p. 215). Arguments which are not deficient in any of these ways
is said to be complete. From the illustrations, it is clear that a
nondeficient argument has the form: p has S, because of having H, like
d, where d is assumed to have both H and S. In other words, a complete
argument could be spelled out in the form whose explicit counterpart
would be that of an analogical syllogism using similarity of the kind
found in the polemical texts discussed earlier.
The only argument to appear in a form with five parts is given in the
fourth, or last, chapter (T1632 28.1.4–6). Here is the argument
as it occurs with the labels for the parts supplied for ease
comparison. Though the Chinese equivalent of proposition,
reason and example appear in the text, the
equivalents of application and conclusion do
not.
Note that example statement comprises two sentences: the first
restates what is expressed in the proposition and reason statements,
the second affirms a universal proposition, everything which is
not perceptible by senses is eternal. The example statement
comprises a deductively valid argument, as does the second sentence
together with the reason and proposition statements. Surprisingly, the
author rejects the syllogism as a bad one. The rejection is justified
by an argument by analogy through dissimilarity.
When we turn to the Rúshı́ lùn,
customarily referred to as the Tarka-śāstra, we
find the logical situation has changed. A deductive syllogism similar
to the one just set out is endorsed. Moreover, analogical syllogisms
are explicitly rejected. For example, the text rejects the following
analogical syllogism (T1633 30.3.2–4).
That the syllogism is analogical is made clear by the formulation of
the example and application statements.
What the text’s author advocates instead are syllogisms which
are in fact deductively valid, similar to the syllogism cited and
rejected in the Fāng biàn xı̄n
lùn. Here is one example (T1633 30.3.7–10).
This argument, like the one rejected in Fāng biàn
xı̄n lùn, is deductively valid. The example
statement also comprises two sentences: the first, however, affirms a
universal proposition, If a thing is eternal, (then) it does not
arise due to an effort, and the second states an instance of the
universal proposition, which is distinct from the subject of the
argument. The proposition and reason statements, together with the
first sentence of the example statement, comprise a deductively valid
argument.
Moreover, we know that the author is fully aware of the
syllogism’s logical force, for he states the three conditions,
or three forms (tri-rūpa), which a reason must satisfy
for the argument in which it occurs to be sound.
three forms  (T1633 30.3.18–26):

The reason you set forth is not definite because eternality and
non-eternality appear throughout it. The reason I set forth has the
three marks. (1) The (reason) is a property of the subject, (2) it is
included in things similar and (3) it is excluded from things
dissimilar. Therefore, the reason I set forth succeeds in not
deviating, your reason does not. Therefore, your objection is
confused. If the reason you set forth were like my reason (in this
respect), your objection would succeed in being a proper
objection.
As noted by H. Ui 1929 (reported in Katsura 1985 p. 166), the earliest
mention of the three forms appears in a brief passage in a non-logical
text, Shùn zhōng lùn (T1565 42a12,22ff).
However, the author of this text, said to be Asaṅga, rejects the
criterion, a criterion thought to be of a non-Buddhist origin.
Finally we come to Vasubandhu’s Vāda-vidhi. Here
the endorsed argument retains the proposition and the reason, abandons
the application and the conclusion and simplifies the example, so that
the resulting syllogism has this form:
It harks back to the form of the inferential syllogism mentioned
earlier in our discussion of the
Ṣaṣṭi-tantra and the
Vaiśeṣika-sūtra. However, there is one
crucial difference: Vasubandhu is absolutely clear that the example
statement expresses an indispensability relation
(a-vinā-bhāva: lit. not existing
without, or sine qua non). As is clear, instances of
this schema are deductively valid arguments.
The obverse side of identifying a proper argument is identifying
fallacious arguments. Fallacious arguments include, on the one hand,
syllogisms whose reasons have been identified as specious and, on the
other hand, counter arguments, or rejoinders, identified as
defective.
The Caraka-saṁhitā (CS 3.8.57) identifies
and illustrates three kinds of arguments as defective. The first
chapter of the fifth book of the Nyāya-sūtra (NS
5.1) lists and briefly describes 24 arguments, which it designates as
fallacious rejoinders (jāti). The fourth chapter of the
Fāng biàn xı̄n lùn lists and
describes twenty such arguments, which are either the same as, or
similar to, the arguments identified as fallacious rejoinders in the
chapter of the Nyāya-sūtra just mentioned.
Surprisingly, the Fāng biàn xı̄n
lùn treats these arguments as good rejoinders, as noted by
Kajiyama (1989 p. 108). The most interesting treatments of fallacious
rejoinders are those found in the Rúshı́
lùn and in the Vāda-vidhi, where many of
fallacious rejoinders have names which are the same as those
exemplified in the
Nyāya-sūtra (Ono 2020 §3.2 and §3.5).
(See also Randle 1930 ch. 6.2 and Solomon 1976 ch. 5.)
The Vaiśeṣika-sūtra (VS 3.1.10–11)
and the Nyāya-sūtra (NS 1.2.4–9) name kinds
of specious reasons (hetvābhāsa), but give
neither examples nor explanations of what they are. Three kinds are
listed, and even briefly discussed, in the
Caraka-saṃhitā (CS 3.8.57). The Fāng
biàn xı̄n lùn merely lists eight kinds.
Three kinds are exemplified and briefly discussed both in the
Vāda-vidhi and in the Rúshı́
lùn. (See Randle 1930 ch. 3.5 and Solomon 1976 ch. 7.)
Besides identifying fallacious syllogisms and rejoinders, some of
these texts also have either extended passages or entire chapters
devoted to the identification of behavior in debates which, when
displayed by someone, warrants his being deemed to have lost. These
missteps, known as grounds for defeat
(nigraha-sthāna), range from making fallacious
arguments to infringing the rules of debate procedure. The second
chapter of the fifth book Nyāya-sūtra (NS 5.2)
sets out 22 cases, as does the third chapter of the
Rúshı́ lùn. An extended passage of
the Caraka-saṁhı̄ta (CS 3.8.50–65)
lists 14 cases. Asaṅga’s Hetu-vidyā has an
extended passage which classifies them into three kinds and provides
cases of each. (See Randle 1930 ch. 6.3 and Solomon 1976 ch. 6.)
The Buddhist thinker, Dignāga (c. 5th – 6th century ce),
consolidates the insights into the canonical
deductively valid syllogism of his predecessors, and in particular
those of his teacher, Vasubandhu, as well as deepens them. He is, in
fact, a pivotal figure in the history of Indian logic. This section is
divided into two parts: the first devoted to Dignāga’s
contributions to Indian logic, especially the canonical syllogism, the
second part summarizing other contributions from his contemporaries
and successors, both Buddhist and non-Buddhist.
Dignāga wrote three works pertaining to reasoning and argument.
Unfortunately, in each case, the original Sanskrit text is not
available. One, the Nyāya-mukha (Introduction to
logic), is extant in Chinese translation and a Sanskrit
manuscript is known to exist in Tibet. The remaining two are extant
only in Tibetan translation: Hetu-cakra-ḍamaru (The
drum wheel of reason) and his magnum opus,
Pramāṇa-samuccaya (Compendium on epistemic
means of cognition), four of whose six chapters are devoted to
inference or argument.
One idea which is particularly clear in Dignāga’s work is
his explicit recognition that arguments which are expressed as
syllogisms are expressions of inferences. This is reflected in his
terms inference for oneself
(svārtha-anumāna), which refers to the cognitive
process expressible as a syllogism, and inference for another
(parārtha-anumāna), which refers to the verbal
expression of the syllogistic inference. These terms are also the
titles of the second and third chapters of his
Pramāṇa-samuccaya.
Dignāga apparently enlarges the form of Vasubandhu’s
canonical syllogism. Even though the texts just mentioned are not
extant in Sanskrit, some of their commentaries are and some of these
texts’ passages are found cited in existing Sanskrit works.
Availing himself of these works, S. Katsura (2004a p. 143) has
identified the following as an argument instantiating what
Dignāga considers the canonical form of a good syllogism.
Before discussing the syllogism, we must take notice of the word
pakṣa (thesis), which Dignāga uses
instead of pratijñā (proposition). The
word is used both for the statement, previously called a proposition
and now called a thesis, as well as for the factual situation it
expresses. It is also used to refer to the grammatical subject of the
thesis statement as well as to the thing denoted by the grammatical
subject. (See Staal 1973 for a lucid exposition of this and other
ambiguities in the technical terms of classical Indian logic.)
Dignāga’s canonical syllogism, like that of Vasubandhu,
has neither an application statement nor a conclusion statement.
However, unlike that of Vasubandhu, it has two example statements.
Each example statement comprises a universal statement and a phrase
naming something. In the case of the statement of similarity example,
the universal statement asserts that whatever has the property adduced
as a reason (hetu) has the property to be established
(sādhya-dharma), which is mentioned in the
syllogism’s thesis, while the phrase names something, distinct
from the subject (pakṣa), yet similar to it with
respect to the property to be established
(sādhya-dharma), and has the property adduced as the
reason. The example named is said to be subject-like
(sa-pakṣa). In the case of the statement of
dissimilarity example, the universal statement asserts that whatever
does not have the property to be established
(sādhya-dharma) does not have the property adduced as a
reason (hetu) and the phrase names something dissimilar to
subject with respect to the property to be established and not having
the property adduced as the reason. The example named here is said to
be subject-unlike (vi-pakṣa). Finally, Dignāga
seems to have added a word to the formulation of the universal
statement, namely, the word observed
(dṛṣṭa), the past passive participle of the
verb to see (dṛś), which means not only
to see but also to observe, to notice and even to know. Hereafter, we
shall refer to a syllogism’s reason statement as its minor
premiss and the universal statement in its example statement as its
major premiss.
Perhaps most original in Dignāga’s work on argument and
inference is what he called the wheel of reasons
(hetu-cakra), an equivalent alternative to the three forms of
reason (tri-rūpa-hetu). It comprises a three by three
matrix, which distinguishes a proper from an improper reason. It
specifies, on the one hand, the three cases of the reason
(hetu) occurring in some, none, or all of subject-like things
(sa-pakṣa), and, on the other, the three cases of the
reason (hetu) occurring in some, none, or all of
subject-unlike things (vi-pakṣa). Letting H be the
reason, S the subject-like things and \(\bar{\mbox{S}}\) the
subject-unlike things, we obtain the following table.
Dignāga identified the syllogisms corresponding to the top and
bottom cases of the middle column as good syllogisms and those
corresponding to the other cases as bad.
These developments have led to a rather lively debate among scholars
of the development of logic in early classical India. A very succinct,
but somewhat misleading, way to put the question at the center of the
debate is whether or not Dignāga’s canonical syllogism is
inductive or deductive. A more cumbersome, but more precise, way to
put the question is this: Is there a choice of a subject, of a
property adduced as a reason, and of a property to be established
which Dignāga would accept as constituting a good syllogism but
which fails to satisfy the form corresponding to the canonical
syllogism given above?
Let us now consider those aspects of Dignāga’s treatment
of the syllogism which are at the center of this debate. One reason to
think that Dignāga would accept as a good syllogism one failing
to be deductively valid might be his inclusion of the word
observed (dṛṣṭa) in the example
statement. In other words, one might think that Dignāga would
accept as a good syllogism one in which, even though it is not the
case that whatever has H has S, it is the case that whatever is
observed to have H has S: that is to say, the major premiss pertains
only to observed cases of H, and not for every case of H. However, no
such syllogisms are accepted by Dignāga. Indeed, the addition of
the word observed (dṛṣṭa) does not
permit attributing such an idea to Dignāga, for the word is
added, not to the major premiss’s subordinate, relative clause,
but to its main clause. Thus, what the major premiss says is not that
every observed instance of the reason (H) is an instance of the
property to be established (S), but rather that every instance of the
reason (H) is observed to be an instance of the property to be
established (S). Moreover, if the word observed
(dṛṣṭa) has a factive sense, that is, a
sense which presupposes the truth of the clause into which the word is
inserted, as do several of its English translations, for example,
noticed, known, then the word in the statement
leaves the truth conditions of major premiss unaffected.
A further reason which has prompted scholars to think that included
among the syllogisms Dignāga would accept as good ones are ones
which might not be deductively valid is the fact that he has retained
an example phrase in example statements, for such phrases have no
bearing on the deductive validity of Dignāga’s canonical
syllogism. This doubt is re-enforced by the fact that example
statements, stripped of their example phrases, are contrapositives of
one another. Thus, one being logically equivalent to the other is also
logically superfluous with respect to it. Yet, Dignāga seems to
be aware of the equivalence, for he acknowledges in his commentarial
discussion of the three forms (PS 2.5) that the second and third forms
are equivalent (Katsura 2000 p. 245; Katsura 2004b pp. 121–124),
from which it follows that any two statements, one of which satisfies
the second form and the other of which satisfies the third form are
equivalent.
That said, it is nonetheless perfectly reasonable to exclude some deductively valid
syllogisms as good syllogisms. Consider, for example, a syllogism
whose conclusion is identical with one of its premisses. It is a
deductively valid syllogism, though it is utterly unpersuasive.
Dignāga, like any rational thinker, would not, and did not,
accept as a good syllogism any syllogism in which the reason (H) and
the property to be established (S) are the same property, even if such
syllogisms have the same form as the canonical syllogism above.
Excluding such circular syllogisms is fully consistent with the view
that the syllogisms accepted by Dignāga are only deductively
valid ones. (For extensive scholarly discussion of the role of
examples in Buddhist arguments, see the collection of articles in
Katsura and Steinkellner (eds) 2004.)
A good reason for Dignāga to retain an example phrase in the
example statements of his canonical syllogism would be to exclude
syllogisms which are patently unpersuasive, even though, like circular
syllogisms, they are deductively valid. Consider the following
argument:
This syllogism, rejected as a bad syllogism by Dignāga, was put
forth by a school of Brahmanical thinkers who held, for doctrinal
reasons, that sound is eternal. To maintain this claim in the face of
observation to the contrary, these thinkers maintained instead that
what is transitory is the revelation of sound, not sound itself.
According to them, in other words, sound is constantly present, but we
hear it only when its presence is revealed.
Their syllogism as stated above, though deductively valid, is utterly
unpersuasive. The reason is that the instances of audibility (H), are
coextensive with sound (p). Thus, there is no independent empirical
evidence to support the universal statement that whatever is audible
is eternal. Requiring that there be at least some thing different from
sound which is both audible and eternal is an obvious and plausible
way to eliminate such patently unpersuasive syllogisms. Dignāga,
therefore, rules out the syllogism as a bad syllogism, rather than, as
we would, accept it as a valid syllogism with an unpersuasive premiss.
(See also Tillemans 1990.)
But this cannot be the entire explanation of why Dignāga appears
to insist on example phrases in example statements, for nowhere does
he rule out as a good syllogism one which, though valid, is
unpersuasive for want of some subject-unlike thing.
Because of the doubts just discussed, some scholars think that
Dignāga was not striving to work out a deductive form of
reasoning and argument. Rather, according to some, such as Hayes
(1980; 1988 ch. 4.2), Dignāga was seeking to develop an
inductive form of reasoning and argument. According to others, such as
Oetke (1994; 1996), Dignāga and some of his predecessors and
contemporaries were striving to spell out a defeasible form of
reasoning and argument. (See Taber 2004 for a critical assessment of
Oetke’s view.)
A final contribution by Dignāga is found in the sixth and final
chapter of his Pramāṇa-samuccaya, where he
addresses fourteen fallacious rejoinders (jāti), each
bearing the same name as one of the fourteen treated in
Vasubandhu’s Vāda-vidhi, though sometimes the
argument associated with a particular name in the
Pramāṇa-samuccaya is different from the one
associated with the name in the Vāda-vidhi. His
treatment is often different from, and critical of, the treatment
found in this earlier work.
However much scholars may disagree about Dignāga’s aim in
the formulation of the canonical syllogism, all agree that his works
set the framework within which subsequent Buddhist thinkers addressed
philosophical issues pertaining to inference and debate. Thus,
Śaṇkarasvāmin (c. 6th century ce),
a pupil of Dignāga (Frauwallner 1961,
140), wrote a brief manual of inference for Buddhists, called the
Nyāya-praveśa (Beginning logic), based
directly on Dignāga’s work. Not long thereafter,
Dharmakı̄rti (c. 7th century ce),
the great Buddhist metaphysician, also elaborated his views on
inference and debate within the framework found in Dignāga.
The canonical syllogism, treated as an inference, is that whereby one
who knows the truth of its premisses may also come to know the truth
of its conclusion. While the truth of a particular statement is
thought to be known either through perception or through inference,
how is the truth of a universal statement, such as the major premiss
of a canonical syllogism, known? To know its truth would seem to
require that one know of each thing which has H, whether or not it
also has S. Yet if one knew that, one would already know by perception
the canonical syllogism’s conclusion. As a result, inference
would be a superfluous means of knowledge.
The earliest classical Indian philosopher thought to have recognized
the problem of how one comes to know the truth of a universal
statement seems to have been Īśvarasena (Steinkellner
1997 p. 638). He appears to have thought that knowledge of the major
premiss is grounded in non-perception (anupalabdhi). That is,
according to Īśvarasena, knowledge that whatever has H
has S comes from the simple failure to perceive something which has H
but which does not have S. (See Steinkellner 1993, where he draws on
Steinkellner 1966.)
However, this suggestion does not solve the problem, for reasons laid
out in detail by Dharmakı̄rti (c. 7th century ce).
His extensive writing on epistemology in
general and on reason and argument in particular formed a watershed in
classical India philosophy. Besides his magnum opus,
Pramāṇa-vārttika (Gloss on the means of
epistemic cognition), one of whose four chapters is devoted to
inference (svārtha-anumāna), comprising 340
verses and a commentary by him to it, and another devoted to argument
(parārtha-anumāna), which comprises 285 verses,
he wrote several smaller works, including
Pramāṇa-viniścaya (Settling on what
the epistemic means of cognition are), Nyāya-bindu
(Drop of logic), Hetu-bindu (Drop of
reason) and Vāda-nyāya (Logic of
debate). As he makes abundantly clear in verses 13–25 and
his commentary thereto of the chapter on inference
(svārtha-anumāna) of his
Pramāṇa-vārttika, the simple failure to
perceive something which has H but which does not have S is no
guarantee that whatever has H has S; after all, while one has never
encountered something which has H and does not have S, what guarantee
is there that something which has H and does not have S is not among
the things which one has yet to encounter?
Dharmakı̄rti’s answer was that the truth of the first
premiss is guaranteed by either of two relations obtaining between
properties: the causation relation (tadutpatti) and the
identity relation (tādātmya). Unfortunately, as
one might suspect, Dharmakı̄rti’s solution does not
work. (See Gillon 1991; see Steinkellner 2015 for a dissenting
view.)
Starting with Dignāga, those interested in logic started to add
the particle eva to the various clauses of the three forms of
reason (tri-rūpa-hetu) (Katsura 1986).
Dignāga’s formulation of the three forms came in for
criticism at the hands of the Nyāya thinker, Uddyotakara (c.
late 6th century ce), which was, in turn,
addressed by Dharmakı̄rti, who uses the particle to express
each of the three conditions (NB 2.5).
Unfortunately, the precision hoped for is undermined by the ambiguity
in the meaning of the particle eva. The particle eva
has two principal uses: one emphatic, the other restrictive. What it
emphasizes or restricts depends on the word after which it is placed.
The particle in the statement of the first form applies to the
abstract noun existence and, in its emphatic use, is well
translated by definite or actual. The particle in
the statement of the third form applies to the negative abstract noun
non-existence and, in its emphatic use with negation, is best
translated by utter or at all. (Some scholars
translate the particle in these statements as necessary.
There is, however, no philological justification for such a
translation.) The particle in the second form applies to a concrete
noun. Though here the particle could have either an emphatic or a
restrictive use, only the restrictive use fits the context. A problem
arises from the word subject-like (sa-pakṣa).
It can be construed in two ways: either as including or as excluding
the subject. If subject-like is construed as inclusive and
the particle eva is taken as restrictive, then the second and
third forms are logically equivalent; but the statement of the three
forms has the rhetorical blemish of containing a logically superfluous
form. If subject-like is taken as exclusive and the particle
is taken as restrictive, then the three forms are inconsistent, for in
that case the second form entails the contradictory of the first form.
(For details, see Gillon 1999.)
Ideas on the nature of reasoning and argumentation very similar to
those of Dignāga’s are found in the
Padārtha-dharma-saṃgraha (Summary of
categories and properties), a work better known as
Praśastapāda-bhāṣya
(Praśastapāda’s commentary, customarily
regarded as a commentary on the
Vaiśeṣika-sūtra). Its author,
Praśastapāda (c. 6th century ce),
is a near contemporary of Dignāga. Like Dignāga,
Praśastapāda uses the expression inference for
another (parārtha-anumāna) to refer to
arguments cast in a syllogistic form, thereby making clear his
recognition that inferences, or cognitive processes, and arguments, or
verbal expressions, are two sides of the same coin. Also like
Dignāga, Praśastapāda adopts as a canonical
syllogism an argument whose core is the same deductively valid
argument as Dignāga’s. However, unlike Dignāga, he
retains the five members for the syllogism, in keeping with the five
members of the analogical syllogism set out by Vātsyāyana,
though some of the names for the members are different. The following
syllogism is reassembled from Praśastapāda’s
treatment of inference. (See Randle 1930 p. 176.)
(The numbers above in square brackets refer to the paragraph numbers
of the passages containing the relevant sentences in Bronkhorst and
Ramseier (eds) 1994.) Again, like Dignāga,
Praśastapāda appeals to the same three conditions to
define a proper reason as those used in the three forms of a reason.
And finally, he identifies and classifies specious reasons in terms of
the failure of a reason to satisfy one or other of the three
forms.
The question of whether the deductively valid canonical syllogism
spread from Dignāga to Praśastapāda, or from
Praśastapāda to Dignāga, or from some other person
to the two of them both has yet to be decided. Whatever the answer is
to this question, it is clear that a deductively valid version of the
canonical syllogism came to be adopted virtually by every classical
Indian thinker and that it made its way to China, Korea and Japan
through the spread of Buddhism.
It was not long before the ideas pertaining to the canonical syllogism
became generally accepted not only by other non-Brahmanical thinkers,
such as the Jains, but also by Brahmanical thinkers. For example, the
Jain thinker, Jinabhadra (6th ce), a junior
contemporary of Dignāga, wrote a commentary on the Jain thinker
Bhadrabāhu where he took claims in the latter’s work and
recast them in the form of the canonical argument as found in
Dignāga’s work (Uno 2009). In addition, one finds that the
Mı̄māṁsā thinker Kumārila
Bhaṭṭa (c. early 7th century ce)
adopted, without special comment, a deductively valid version of the
canonical syllogism. His thoughts on the matter are developed at
length in the one hundred eighty-eight verses of his
Śloka-vārttika’s (Gloss in
verses) Anumāna-pariccheda (Section on
inference). At the same time, though the Nyāya thinker
Uddyotakara argued vigorously against many of Dignāga’s
views, he nonetheless advocated a version of the canonical syllogism
which is deductively valid.
In spite of the metaphysical differences which distinguished the
various schools of thought, both Buddhist and Brahmanical, all
thinkers came to use a naive realist’s ontology to specify the
states of affairs in connection with the canonical syllogism.
According to this view, the world consists of individual substances,
or things (dravya), universals (sāmānya)
and relations between them. The fundamental relation is the one of
occurrence (vṛtti). The relata of this relation are
known as substratum (dharmin) and superstratum
(dharma) respectively. The relation has two forms: contact
(saṃyoga) and inherence (samavāya). So,
for example, one individual substance, a pot, may occur on another,
say the reason, by the relation of contact. In this case, the pot is
the superstratum and the reason is the substratum. Or, a universal,
say treeness, may occur in an individual substance, say an individual
tree, by the relation of inherence. Here, treeness, the superstratum,
inheres in the individual tree, the substratum. The converse of the
relation of occurrence is the relation of possession. In addition, the
relation of pervasion (vyāpti), or what had also been
referred to as the relation of indispensability
(a-vinā-bhāva), can also be defined in terms of
the occurrence relation: one superstratum pervades another just in
case wherever the second occurs the first occurs. The converse of the
pervasion relation is the concomitance relation (anvaya) and
its contrapositive is exclusion (vyatireka). As a result of
these relations, the world embodies a structure: if one superstratum,
designated as H, is concomitant with another superstratum, designated
as S, and if a particular substratum, say p, possesses the former
superstratum, then it possesses the second. This structure is the one
which underlies the classical Indian canonical syllogism.
Though the canonical syllogism is central to the development of
reflection on argument and reasoning in preclassical and classical
India, other forms of argument were also recognized as good. One form,
as mentioned above, is reductio ad absurdum
(prasaṅga). Others include suppositional reasoning
(tarka) (Bagchi 1953) and a form of reasoning akin to what
contemporaries would call disjunctive syllogism
(arthāpatti) (Keating (ed.) 2020). At the same time,
there are forms of argument, different from the fallacious rejoinders
and specious reasons, which were also regarded as bad. They include
arguments which lead to an infinite regress
(anavasthā), mentioned above, as well as various forms
of circularity. Finally, there are two important forms of argument:
one peculiar to Buddhists, known as the tetralemma
(catuṣkoṭi), and the other peculiar to the Jains
(syādvāda).