How could two logics both be correct, when they disagree about which
arguments are valid? One way is if there is more than one relation of
logical consequence (and so more than one interpretation of
‘valid’) so that one of the logics captures validity in
one sense, while its rival captures validity in another. Pluralists
commonly elaborate on this by maintaining that natural language
expressions like ‘follows from’ are unsettled, vague, or
ambiguous, and may be settled, made more precise, or disambiguated, in
more than one way (Shapiro 2014, 1–2). The best-known version of this
view, for example, is presented as the conjunction of two main theses
(Beall & Restall 2006). First, the Generalised Tarski Thesis: 
Generalised Tarski Thesis (GTT):

An argument is validx if and only if in every
casex in which the premises are true, so is the
conclusion.
Second, the thesis that the expression
‘casex’ in the (GTT) can be made more
precise in at least two, equally acceptable, ways, resulting in
different extensions for ‘valid’. For example, by
‘case’ we might mean a first-order interpretation of the
kind Tarski uses to define classical first-order consequence (Tarski
1983) or alternatively we might mean a possible situation. Other
alternatives include inconsistent or incomplete interpretations, of
the sort used in the model theories for intuitionistic and
paraconsistent logics. Different choices for the interpretation of
‘case’ will result in a different precisifications of the
(GTT) analysis of logical consequence, which may in turn result in
different relations of logical consequence (Beall & Restall 2006,
29–31). Call this view ‘Case-based Logical Pluralism.’
Case-based pluralists do not need to hold that every conceivable
precisification of the GTT defines a relation of logical consequence.
Typically, they think that only relations with certain
properties—e.g., necessity, normativity and formality—are
admissible (Beall & Restall 2006, 26–35). Hence having its
extension given by a precisification of the GTT is only a necessary
condition on being a genuine relation of logical consequence.
One argument for case-based pluralism is the argument from appearances
(Beall & Restall 2006, 30–31). According to it, pluralism is
just straightforwardly plausible—it appears to be true—and
hence ought to be believed in the absence of reasons not to believe
it.
This might seem like a surprising approach, given the presumption of
logical monism in the writings of most logicians of the
past—presumably pluralism did not appear to be correct to them.
But perhaps once one considers the GTT explicitly, accepts the
underdetermination of ‘case’ and considers a few of the
ways it can be made more precise to get different logics, it just
seems clear that there will be several alternative ways to make it
more specific, with none singled out as more correct than the others
by current usage. The hardest thing about logical pluralism, one might
think, was seeing how it could be a coherent view at all, but once the
work of developing and laying out the case-based view has been done,
the resulting position can strike one as quite reasonable. Perhaps an
unbiased reader should feel tempted to endorse it? 
One problem with this argument is that the plausibility of a view
tends to vary with the onlooker’s ability to think up reasonable
alternatives; if view A seems like the only reasonable way a certain
thing can have happened, then we might shrug and accept it as our best
working hypothesis. But if we can conceive of several
different ways things could plausibly be, we might rationally
withhold judgement pending more evidence. 
More specifically, while the case-based pluralism is not patently
implausible, it does rest on a linguistic picture with two distinctive
features: first, that the meaning of ‘case’ is unsettled,
and second, that given that it is unsettled, the discovery of more
than one reasonable precisification should make us pluralists. But
neither of these features is inevitable. Contemporary philosophy of
language describes models in which the correctness of the application
of some ordinary language expression—such as
‘water’, ‘elm’ or ‘star’—can
turn on the presence or absence of a feature that ordinary speakers
need not be able to distinguish, such as having a certain constitution
or make-up. Why should ‘follows from’ not be similar? That
is, though no a priori analysis of ‘follows from’
(or ‘valid’) uncovers the single correct precisification
of the (GTT), there might nevertheless exist an account—perhaps
making use of sophisticated mathematical techniques—that exactly
captures the extension of ‘follows from’. Rival accounts
would then have the same status as rival accounts of stars or water.
Though analysis of the word ‘star’ will not tell us that
stars are not holes in the fabric of the night, or the gods riding
their chariots across the heavens, those accounts are still wrong.
Similarly, though analysis of the expression ‘follows
from’ might not tell us that intuitionist accounts are wrong,
they might be wrong nonetheless. In such circumstances we might hold
that the meaning of ‘follows from’ is not really
underspecified. 
Secondly, even if the meaning of the expression is
underspecified, it needn’t be the case that any
precisifications are correct, and hence pluralism is not an inevitable
consequence of the underspecificity. Consider a paradigm
underspecified word like ‘heap’ and a thinker who presents
themselves as a pluralist about the heap property. They hold that one
may specify the meaning of ‘heap’ different ways within
certain parameters, and arrive at conflicting but equally correct
definitions of ‘heap.’ For example, the classical heapists
might claim that a heap is any pile of items with more than 10
members, deviant heapists protest that a heap is any pile of items
with more than 13 members and the heap pluralist holds that both are
correct. But there are lots of alternatives to pluralism here. For
example, one might think that anyone who interprets the English word
‘heap’ as requiring a pile of n items for any
specific n is wrong, since they are trying to import more
specificity into the meaning of the word than can really be found
there. Or one might be a skeptic about heaps, on the grounds that the
word is too vague—it fails to specify a genuine meaning—or
one might hold that the expression is context-sensitive: in some
contexts it picks out the classical property, in some the deviant, but
argue that that doesn’t make one a pluralist about heaps, anymore than
acknowledging that ‘I’ picks out different people in
different contexts makes one a pluralist about oneself. 
The mere possibility of these alternatives does not, by itself, argue
against that view, but it does undermine the argument from
appearances, since the availability of these alternatives makes it
clear that the intriguing reasonableness of pluralism is not unique.
A different argument for logical pluralism invokes the view’s combined
practical and theoretical virtues: 
One virtue is that the plurality of the consequence relation comes at
little or no cost. Another is that pluralism offers a more charitable
interpretation of many important (but difficult) debates in
philosophical logic than is otherwise available; we will argue that
pluralism does more justice to the mix of insight and perplexity found
in many of the debates in logic in the last century. (Beall &
Restall 2006, 31)
Pluralists have also stressed that their view encourages innovation in
logic (Carnap 1937, foreward), and allows one to study more
mathematical theories, such as those that would be rendered trivial by
classical logic (Shapiro 2014, Ch. 3).
Such claims can be quite difficult to assess. Some important
distinctions need to be drawn between theoretical and practical
reasons to endorse pluralism, and even once this has been done it can
be difficult to decide whether the view, over all, really possesses a
virtue—it may depend on substantial empirical claims for which
the evidence has yet to be gathered—whether or not it possesses
a greater weight of virtues than rival theories (is not logical monism
a simpler theory, and simplicity a theoretical virtue too?) and
finally whether or not that is a good reason to believe the view. 
For example, one virtue claimed for logical pluralism is charity, but
not all instances of charity are theoretically virtuous; no-one should
think that deterministic physics is more likely to be correct because
it allows a more charitable view of wrong-doers, or of Einstein.
Charity can be misplaced. But one place where charity is taken
seriously as a theoretical virtue is in the assessment of theories of
meaning and translation—though even here it can be misplaced,
since it is not a virtue if a theory interprets infants as uttering
true claims about quantum mechanics (Davidson 1984). Logical pluralism
is not itself a thesis about translation or interpretation, but one
about logics and how many there are. Nonetheless, the version outlined
above rests on some substantial claims about the meaning of
‘valid’ and ‘follows from’ and it might be
argued that it is proper to invoke charity in adjudicating between
this theory and rival ones for that reason: we are deciding between
theories which interpret ‘valid’ and ‘follows
from’ differently. Perhaps one of these interpretations seems to
make our informants (both ordinary language users and the experts who
have written about logic) responsible for fewer false claims. 
But an opponent might respond that interpreting ordinary speakers as
uttering truths concerning logic can look rather similar to
attributing true beliefs about quantum mechanics to infants. As the
Wason selection task experiments have shown in psychology, even
educated speakers will fail to act as if the argument form modus
tollens is correct in certain circumstances (Wason 1966, 1968;
Cosmides 1989). Though the most charitable interpretation of their
behaviour might be that they do not mean by ‘follows from’
what the experimenters meant by it, by far the most natural
understanding of what is going on here is that the subjects make
mistakes. To interpret them as meaning something different by misses
what these experiments reveal about human reasoning, and fails to
explain why the subjects later judge that their earlier answers were
wrong. 
The logical pluralist can agree with this, but distinguish between
being charitable to ordinary speakers, and being charitable to expert
logicians. It is, they might maintain, expert logicians that we should
interpret charitably, including those experts who have proposed
apparently incompatible systems. Relevant logicians have written
‘disjunctive syllogism is not valid’. Classical logicians
have written ‘disjunctive syllogism is valid’.
Intuitionist logicians say ‘double negation elimination is not
valid’. Classical logicians have retorted ‘double negation
elimination is so valid.’ If logical monism is correct, at least
two or more of these parties have written falsehoods. Logical
pluralism would allow us to say that more than one, perhaps many more
than one, have been writing truths. 
But logical pluralism is also uncharitable in ways that
logical monism is not, since it holds that the monist participants in
debates over which logic is correct have been arguing based on a
confusion. The upshot with respect to the argument from charity, and
from virtue more generally, is that quite a lot remains to be done
before it will be clear which virtues are desirable and the extent to
which logical pluralism possesses them to a greater degree than its
rivals. 
One objection to case-based logical pluralism is to allow that
‘case’ is underspecified and admits of various
interpretations, but reject the further step that those
interpretations correspond to different relations of logical
consequence. We can do this is by insisting on the largest possible
domain for the quantifier ‘every’ in the context of the
GTT. There is a tradition in logic that holds that in order for an
argument to be logically valid, the conclusion must be true
in (unrestrictedly) all cases in which the premises are true.
So when ‘every’ is used in defining logical consequence,
we might argue, it must be understood in the broadest possible way: if
there are any cases at all—anywhere, of any kind—in which
the premises are true and the conclusion is false, the argument will
be invalid, and if not, then the argument will be valid. The One True
Logic, then, will be the one that describes the relation of
truth-preservation over all cases—where
‘all’ is construed as broadly as possible (Beall &
Restall 2006, 92; Priest 2006, 202). 
Suppose we do take the broadest interpretation of ‘every’.
One question is whether we will be left with any useful relation of
logical consequence at all. Logics which are arrived at by quantifying
over extra cases have a tendency to be weaker—that is, to
classify fewer arguments as valid—since the more cases we
include, the better our chances of including one in which the premises
of a particular argument are true and the conclusion false.
Dialetheists would include cases in which both a sentence and its
negation are true, and this means we can have cases where P and
¬P are true, but Q is false, making both P
∨ Q and ¬P true, even though Q is not, and
thus providing a counterexample to the argument form disjunctive
syllogism. If this is acceptable, one might think, why not
allow cases where A ∧ B is true, but B is
not? Or worse. Perhaps if we construe ‘every case’ broadly
enough, we will find that there are no valid arguments left, and hence
the result will not be logical monism, but a form of logical nihilism,
or something close to it: 
…we see no place to stop the process of generalisation
and broadening of accounts of cases. For all we know, the only
inference left in the intersection of (unrestricted) all
logics might be the identity inference: From A to
infer A. That identity is the only really valid
argument is implausible and, we think, an unmotivated conclusion.
(Beall & Restall 2006,
 92)[3]
Priest disagrees, and suggests that what will stop the slide down this
slippery slope is the fact that certain key consequence relations hold
in virtue of the meanings of the connectives: 
I think it just false that all principles of inference fail in some
situation. For example, any situation in which a conjunction holds,
the conjuncts hold, simply in virtue of the meaning of ∧. (Priest
2006, 202–203)
But it is relatively common for logicians to claim that the logical
principles that they endorse are valid in virtue of the
meanings of the connectives involved. The intuitionist logician denies
that A ∨¬A is true in virtue of the meanings of ∨ and ¬
though other logicians will say that it is, and it is difficult to
adjudicate such disputes independently of a more substantial theory of
the meanings of the connectives. This is yet another area where the
dispute over logical pluralism runs into an older dispute in the
philosophy of logic, and one that is ostensibly a question about
meaning. The two key questions that remain for the success of this
monist objection are i) which, if any, argument forms are guaranteed
to preserve truth (perhaps in virtue of meaning) in any case
whatsoever, and ii) if there are any such argument forms, are there
enough of them to constitute a non-trival logic? 
There is more than one plausible model for the underspecificity of
‘case’ in the GTT. The version of pluralism we have been
considering allows different kinds of things to count as
‘cases.’ Sometimes a case may be a mathematical structure,
sometimes a possible world (perhaps incomplete or inconsistent) or the
actual world or parts of
 it.[4]
 Given this, the underspecification of ‘case’ in the GTT
could be less like the indeterminacy that results from variation in
the domain of quantification, and more like the variation that results
from polysemy. Consider: 
This sentence has two readings because the word
‘bank’—even once we’re talking about money—has
more than one meaning. It can mean a financial institution (such as
HSBC), or the building where a such an institution offers its services
(such as the bank five minutes from campus.) Sometimes additional
context can rule out one of the readings, for example: 
in which it is clear that bank-as-financial-institution is meant, and
in which it is clear that bank-as-building is meant. 
When we were assuming that the underspecificity in the GTT resulted
from underspecificity about the domain of quantification for
‘every’ there was a natural temptation to think that we
would get the strictest, most careful and correct answer by dealing
with a completely unrestricted domain. In the polysemy kind of case
however, what can vary is not (just) the size of the domain of
quantification but also which kind of object it is that we are making
claims about. The result is that we can allow the domain of
quantification to be as large as we like, and no object of the wrong
kind can count as a counterexample to the general claim, precisely
because it is of the wrong kind. To illustrate with
‘bank’: if we mean bank-as-financial-institution, then no
bank-as-building can serve as a counterexample to (1), no matter how
unrestricted the domain of quantification—since the sentence is
not making a claim about such things. And conversely, if we mean
bank-as-building, then no internet bank-as-financial institution can
be a counterexample to sentence (3). 
So suppose that ‘case’ in the GTT is polysemous. Perhaps
‘case’ sometimes means possible world, but it can also be
used to mean first-order model. If the classical logician means
first-order model by ‘case’, then it is not legitimate to
complain that he has failed to take into account incomplete possible
worlds, and hence has not considered every case. On the
case-as-FO-model disambiguation of ‘case’, the classical
logician has considered every case, since incomplete possible
worlds are not cases in that sense. 
Let’s continue to assume that ‘case’ is polysemous. Just
as there was room for someone to argue that only a single
interpretation of ‘every’ was appropriate in the GTT, so a
monist might argue here that there is only one appropriate
disambiguation of ‘case’ in the GTT, and hence that there
is only one relation of logical consequence. 
We can develop that thought as follows. The logician’s task is to
capture the consequence relation on natural language sentences, but it
usually simplifies things to pay attention only to particular
expressions in those sentences, such as conjunction, negation, and
disjunction, say, or those expressions plus the universal quantifier
and identity. Whichever set of symbols we select as our so-called
logical constants, the meanings of all the other expressions
in the sentences—the non-logical expressions—are
determined by the interpretations (or, as we call them in the GTT,
‘cases’), and since we are quantifying over all such
interpretations, in effect we are simply ignoring the meanings of all
non-logical expressions. 
So now consider what we might say about this argument: 
Normally we’d translate this into the language of first-order
predicate logic as something like this: 
That formal argument is not valid, but one might still want to say
that the original, natural language argument is. First-order
logic which fails to treat words like ‘red’ and
‘colored’ as logical constants, one might think, falls
short of capturing logical consequence. 
Priest considers this view, and though he acknowledges that it is not
the only view one might have, he holds that it’s the right one. 
The standard move [to resist this line of thought] is to claim that
the inference is, in fact, invalid, but that it appears to be
valid because we confuse it with a valid enthymeme with suppressed
premise ‘All red things are colored’ taken for granted.
(Priest 2006, 201)
But suppose we do hold, as Priest does, that the argument is valid.
Generalising, we might think that if you are interested only in the
truth about logical consequence, then it is never legitimate
to ignore the meaning of some expression in an argument. If simplicity
and conservativeness are of no concern, then you should not be
appealing to Tarski-style interpretations in defining
validity—since the whole point of such interpretations is to
allow the meanings of certain expressions to vary. Better than any
‘interpretation’ would be a complete possible world
(perhaps we can argue about which things are included in ‘all
possible worlds’, but there might also be a correct answer to
that question.) Hence many of the possible disambiguations of
‘case’ give us different false theories of
validity. Those might be useful because they are simple and they
approximate the true account, but since the logics they capture are
not correct, this is a view on which no pluralism threatens. 
A different objection to logical pluralism starts from the premise
that logic is normative, where this means that logics have
consequences for how we ought to reason, i.e. for what we ought to
believe, and for how we ought to update our beliefs when we learn new
things. Many writers have thought that logic is normative, sometimes
because they have thought that logic just is the science of
good reasoning:
In Logic we do not want to know how the understanding is and thinks,
and how it has hitherto proceeded in thinking, but how it ought to
proceed in thinking. (Kant 1800, p. 4)
logic is a normative subject: it is supposed to provide an account of
correct reasoning. (Priest 1979, p. 297)
Sometimes, though, philosophers have taken the position that whether
or not logic is about reasoning, its claims about logical consequence
have normative consequences for reasoning:
Rules for asserting, thinking, judging, inferring, follow from the
laws of truth. And thus one can very well speak of laws of thought
too. (Frege 1918,
 pp. 289–90)[5]
…logical consequence is normative. In an important sense, if
anargument is valid, then you somehow go wrong if you accept
thepremises but reject the conclusion. (Beall & Restall 2006,
p. 16)
There is an apparent tension between this alleged
normativity of logic and the thesis of logical pluralism. Suppose, for
example that if an argument form is valid, then some normative
conclusion follows concerning what we ought to believe. (Perhaps it is
that we ought to believe the conclusion of an instance of the argument
form if we believe the premises, though much work on the normativity
of logic suggests that it would need to be something substantially
more complicated.) Now suppose that logical pluralism is correct. In
particular logic 1, which says that disjunctive syllogism is valid,
and logic 2, which says that disjunctive syllogism is not valid, are
both correct. Ought we to believe what logic 1 tells us to believe? It
is hard to see how we could escape this obligation, given that logic 1
tells us that the premises entail the conclusion, and logic 1 is
correct. Yet if the normative consequence for belief does follow, then
perhaps logic 2 is falling down in some respect—it fails to capture
all of the obligations that follow from our logic. As S. Read puts it:
Versions of this objection can be found in Priest 2006, Read 2006,
Keefe 2014 (p. 1385), and Steinberger 2018, and there are responses in
Caret 2016, Russell 2017 and Blake-Turner & Russell forthcoming.
A final question for pluralists is whether they are correct to take
rival logicians to be arguing about the same logical
principles. The classical logician accepts a logical truth which they
write “A ∨¬A” and the Strong Kleene rejects as a logical
truth a principle which they write the same way. But it only follows
that they accept different logics if the symbols express the same
principle in both cases, and in particular, if “∨” and
“¬” mean the same in both.
In debate, monists have often been willing to grant this assumption to
the pluralists, because they have assumed that their preferred logic
is right and the rival logic wrong, not that they and their
rivals were talking past each other. Still, the suggestion was
famously made by Quine (1986, 81) that in a dispute between rival
logicians “neither party knows what he is talking about” since
they cease to be talking about negation as soon as its core
logical properties are seriously questioned (in Quine’s example the
logicians argue about whether sentences of the form A∧¬A can
be true.) 
The pluralist thus needs a way to exclude the possibility that each of
their preferred logics is correct, but that pluralism itself is still
false, because those logics don’t disagree. Perhaps each logic
could even be a part of a single, greater logic containing
e.g. intuitionist negation and paraconsistent negation as well as
classical negation and Strong Kleene negation etc. Places were
pluralists have taken on this question include Beall and Restall 2001
(§3) and Hjortland 2013.
The contemporary debate over case-based logical pluralism has lead to
a revival of interest in an older form of pluralism advocated by the
famous logical positivist, Rudolf Carnap (1937, §17 and 1958;
see also Restall 2002; Cook 2010; Field 2009; Kouri Kissel
forthcoming; Varzi 2002; Eklund 2012). 
In section 17 of The Logical Syntax of Language, Carnap
writes: 
In logic there are no morals. Everyone is at liberty to build his own
logic, i.e. his own language, as he wishes. All that is required of
him is that, if he wishes to discuss it, he must state his methods
clearly, and give syntactical rules instead of philosophical
arguments. (Carnap 1937, §17)
Two kinds of tolerance are expressed in this passage. The more famous
is Carnap’s tolerance for different languages, and it is motivated
both by the thought that verbal disputes are not really theoretical
disputes about the domain we are describing, but at best practical
ones about the most useful and efficient ways to use words, given our
goals, and by the thought that such practical matters are best left to
those working in the relevant field. As Carnap wrote later, 
Let us grant to those who work in any special fields of investigation
the freedom to use any form of expression which seems useful to them.
The work in the field will sooner or later lead to the elimination of
those forms which have no useful function. Let us be cautious in
making assertions and critical in examining them, but tolerant in
permitting linguistic forms. (Carnap 1958, 221)
The second kind of tolerance is a tolerance for different
logics, something that is naturally construed as a kind of
logical pluralism. The phrase “everyone is at liberty to build
his own logic” suggests that no-one would be making a mistake in
so doing, and it seems clear from the phrase “i.e. his own
language” that follows immediately after that Carnap takes the
two kinds of toleration to be extremely close, perhaps even that he
thinks linguistic tolerance and logical tolerance amount to the same
thing. 
It might not be obvious to a modern reader why that is the case. Why
could we not be tolerant of alternative languages, which seems only
sensible, without thereby committing ourselves to being tolerant of
alternative logics? Moreover, logicians who disagree about which
sentential logic is correct (e.g., classical or intuitionist) seem to
be able to use the same language (containing ∧, →, ¬,
etc.) even while they suppose that one logic is right for that
language, and one logic wrong. If that position is coherent, then one
side must have made a mistake after all, implying they were not really
‘at liberty to build their own logic.’ 
That view seems at least an open possibility, though whether two rival
logicians are really advocating different logics for the same language
can be difficult to determine. It will not be sufficient that they are
using the same symbols, since they might each be using the symbols
with different meanings in which case they will be using different
languages. But what more, beyond using the same expressions, is
required? 
This is a question to which there are many rival answers, even for the
most basic logical constants. Perhaps the expressions must denote the
same truth-function, or have the same intension, or share a mode of
presentation, or a character, or a conceptual role. But The
Logical Syntax of Language was published (in German) in 1934,
before the innovations of Grice, Gentzen, Montague, Kaplan, Lewis,
Putnam or Kripke, (and, moreover before Tarski’s “On the Concept
of Logical Consequence” (Schurz, 1998; Tarski 1983)) and in an
environment in which Wittgenstein’s Tractatus
Logico-Philosophicus was a powerful influence. Carnap has quite
definite and explicit ideas about both meaning and logic, and these
help to explain why he thinks linguistic tolerance leads straight to
logical tolerance. In the foreword he writes: 
Up to now, in constructing a language, the procedure has usually been,
first to assign a meaning to the fundamental mathematico-logical
symbols, and then to consider what sentences and inferences are seen
to be logically correct in accordance with this meaning. Since the
assignment of the meaning is expressed in words, and is, in
consequence, inexact, no conclusion arrived at in this way can very
well be otherwise than inexact and ambiguous. The connection will only
become clear when approached from the opposite direction: let any
postulates and any rules of inference be chosen arbitrarily; then this
choice, whatever it may be, will determine what meaning is to be
assigned to the fundamental logical symbols. (Carnap 1937, xv).
According to Carnap then, the right way to specify a language is to
pick some expressions, and then give the rules of inference for them.
It is this specification which gives the expressions their meanings,
and so, first, there is no question of their being the wrong rules for
the expressions—everybody is at liberty to build his own logic,
to choose whatever rules he likes—and second, to be tolerant
about language choice is already to be tolerant about choice of
logic—for languages so-conceived come with different logics
already ‘built in.’ 
One of Carnap’s reasons for accepting logical pluralism is that he saw
it as making space for innovation in logic. In the foreword to The
Logical Syntax of Language he writes: 
Up to the present, there has been only a very slight deviation, in a
few points here and there, from the form of language developed by
Russell which has already become classical. For instance, certain
sentential forms (such as unlimited existential sentences) and rules
of inference (such as the Law of Excluded Middle), have been
eliminated by certain authors. On the other hand, a number of
extensions have been attempted, and several interesting, many-valued
calculi analogous to the two-valued calculus of sentences have been
evolved, and have resulted finally in a logic of probability.
Likewise, so-called intensional sentences have been introduced and,
with their aid a logic of modality developed. The fact that no
attempts have been made to venture still further from the classical
forms is perhaps due to the widely held opinion that any such
deviations must be justified—that is, the new language-form must
be proved to be ‘correct’ and to constitute a faithful
rendering of ‘the true logic’.
To eliminate this standpoint, together with the pseudo-problems and
wearisome controversies with arise as a result of it, is one of the
chief tasks of this book. (Carnap 1937)
This passage highlights several features of Carnap’s logical pluralism
and philosophy of logic more generally. It seems clear that he
intended his logical pluralism to be both
‘horizontal’—that is, to allow for different logics
at the same level, such as classical and intuitionist sentential
logics—as well as ‘vertical’—allowing for
logics for new kinds of expression, such as intensional logics and
second-order logic (the terminology is from Eklund 2012). Furthermore
the passage expresses a “logic-first” approach, and
rejects a “philosophy-first” approach, suggesting that
rather than trying to figure out which is the best logic a priori from
first principles (the ‘philosophy-first’ approach), we
should let logicians develop languages as they like, and then make our
judgements based on how things turn out. 
The most obvious contrast here is with W.V.O. Quine, who criticised
second-order logic as “set-theory in sheep’s clothing” and
rejected tense and modal logics on philosophical grounds (Quine 1986
(Chapter 5), 1953, 1966; Burgess 1997, 2012). Such a stand-off is
quite intriguing, given Quine’s rejection of such
“Philosophy-First” approaches in epistemology more
generally. 
A number of contemporary writers have been happy to endorse Carnap’s
approach to pluralism and Restall argues that it is less radical than
his and JC Beall’s case-based version (Varzi 2002, 199; Restall 2002).
Nonetheless there are several issues that someone who wanted to defend
Carnap’s position today would need to address. A first concern about
the view is that while we are working within the various languages we
invent, we could be missing the ‘correct’ rules—the
ones that were out there, in effect, before we invented anything. In
the words of Paul Boghossian, 
Are we really to suppose that, prior to our stipulating a meaning for
the sentence ‘Either snow is white or it isn’t.’ it wasn’t
the case that either snow was white or it wasn’t? Isn’t it
overwhelmingly obvious that this claim was true before such an act of
meaning, and that it would have been true even if no one had thought
about it, or chosen it to be expressed by one of our sentences?
(Boghossian 1996)
Carnap would perhaps not have taken this objection seriously, since,
like the Wittgenstein of the Tractatus (e.g., §4.26,
4.641–4.465), he does not believe that logical truths and rules
are ‘out there’, waiting to be discovered: 
The so-called ‘real’ sentences, constitute the core of the
science; the mathematico-logical sentences are analytic, with no real
content, and are merely formal auxiliaries. (Carnap 1937, xiv)
Nonetheless, such a ‘conventionalist’ view of logical
truth (and along with it, analytic truth) has been argued against by,
for example, Quine, Sober, Yablo and Boghossian, and it no longer
enjoys the popularity that it had in Carnap’s time (Quine 1936; Yablo
1992; Boghossian 1996; Sober 2000). It also highlights the extent to
which it is odd to call Carnap a logical pluralist, since in a way his
view is not that there is more than one correct logic, but that there
is nothing for logic to be correct about (Cook 2010, 498). Perhaps it
would be more illuminating to call Carnap a logical constructivist.
Another issue is whether Carnap’s conception of meaning is correct.
These days there are many alternative approaches to meaning and lively
debate about them. Field writes: 
On some readings of “differ in meaning”, any big
difference in theory generates a difference in meaning. On such
readings, the connectives do indeed differ in meaning between
advocates of the different all-purpose logics, just as
‘electron’ differs in meaning between Thomson’s theory and
Rutherford’s; but Rutherford’s theory disagrees with Thomson’s despite
this difference in meaning, and it is unclear why we shouldn’t say the
same thing about alternative all-purpose logics. (Field 2009)
Field concludes that “the notion of difference of meaning is
unhelpful in the context” and that Carnap’s view of the meanings
of the logical contexts is therefore hard to defend. 
But proponents of particular alternative views about the meanings of
the logical constants might instead hold that they can make good sense
of difference in meaning in these contexts, and that Carnap has simply
endorsed the wrong theory of meaning and as a result drawn the wrong
conclusions for logic. One specific issue that they might point to is
associated with Prior’s 1960 paper “The Runabout Inference
Ticket”, in which he provides rules for a new connective,
tonk, which quickly lead to triviality, suggesting that he
was not quite “at liberty to build his own logic” by
introducing rules for his expressions. Another issue is the fact that
one can generate different logics, not by varying the rules governing
any particular expression, but rather by varying the more general
structural rules of the logic, which govern things like whether or not
one is allowed multiple conclusions, and whether or not a premise can
be used more than once in a proof (Restall 2000; Paoli 2003). This
suggests that even if the meanings of the logical expressions are
governed by the rules that tell you how they can be used in proofs (as
Carnap suggests) two logics can agree on those rules, whilst
disagreeing on the relation of logical consequence. Hence even if you
have successfully chosen a language, it seems that you might not yet
have determined a logic. 
Several other varieties of logical pluralism have been proposed since
Beall and Restall’s early work, and five are outlined in this section.
A useful way to classify these different views—including Beall and
Restall’s case-based pluralism—is as each taking logical consequence
to be relative to a different feature—e.g. precisifications
of ‘case’ (for Beall and Restall), sets of logical constants (for
Varzi), kinds of truth-bearer (for Russell), goals (for Cook’s less
radical approach), and epistemic norms (for
 Field’s).[6]
Occasionally it is objected that one or more of these views does not
constitute a ‘real’ logical pluralism, on the grounds that it merely
relativises consequence to some new parameter, and (the objection
continues) this would make the view a form of relativism, rather than
a form of
 pluralism.[7]
 But it is worth remembering that not just some but most of
the views standardly discussed under the heading of logical
pluralism—including the most central case-based
versions—can be understood as relativising logical consequence
to something distinctive. They they are standardly described as
logical pluralisms anyway, presumably because they are views on which
it can reasonably be claimed that more than one logic is correct. The
literature is thus easier to follow if one doesn’t assume that the
words “pluralism” and “relativism” to mark an important or widely
agreed-upon distinction (Shapiro 2014, p. 1).
Achille Varzi points out that one way to generate competing relations
of logical consequence is to vary the set of expressions that we treat
as logical constants. If we take = to be a logical constant, then the
following argument will be valid 
But if the set of logical constants does not include = then it will
not, since our models will now include those that assign non-reflexive
relations to =, and these can generate counter-examples. 
Should = be treated as a logical constant? Tarski himself endorsed the
view that any expression in the language might be taken to be
logical: 
The division of all terms of the language discussed into logical and
extra-logical … is certainly not quite arbitrary. If, for
example, we were to include among the extra-logical signs the
implication sign, or the universal quantifier, then our definition of
the concept of consequence would lead to results which obviously
contradict ordinary usage. On the other hand no objective grounds are
known to me which permit us to draw a sharp boundary between the two
groups of terms. It seems to me possible to include among the logical
terms some which are usually regarded by logicians as extra-logical
without running into consequences which stand in sharp contrast to
ordinary usage. … In the extreme case we could regard all terms
of the language as logical. (Tarski 1983, 418–419)
Varzi is inclined to endorse Tarski’s liberalism with respect to the
choice of logical constants: 
The relevant claim is that all (or any) terms of the language could in
principle be regarded “as logical”—and I agree with
that. (Varzi 2002, 200)
The result is that on his view there is more than one correct relation
of logical consequence, since that relation is relative to the choice
of logical constants, and there is more than one equally correct set
of these, resulting in different, equally correct logics. 
The Tarksi/Varzi view is controversial. Varzi defends it in his paper
of 2002 and there is useful discussion in MacFarlane 2009. 
Another variety of logical pluralism results if we consider that there
might be different correct logics for different kinds of truth-bearer,
as is argued in (Russell 2008). Suppose that logical consequence is
indeed a matter of truth-preservation over cases. Then we could
coherently talk of truth-preservation relations on (sets of)
sentences, on (sets of) propositions, or on (sets of) characters (as
in Kaplan 1989) and ultimately on any truth-bearer whatsoever. This
would not be very exciting if those logics all turned out to determine
a single ‘parallel’ consequence relation, so that, for
example, a sentence S1 had a sentence
S2 as a logical consequence if and only if the
proposition it expressed, P1, had the proposition
expressed by S2 (P2) as a logical
consequence. Russell uses various examples involving names, rigidity,
direct reference, and indexicals to argue that this is not always the
case. To take just one, on the assumption that the sentence
a=b contains two different, directly referential names,
a = b and a = a express the same
proposition. Given the minimal assumption that the relation of logical
consequence is reflexive, that means that proposition expressed by
a = b is a logical consequence of the proposition
expressed by a = a, even though the sentence a =
b is not a logical consequence of the sentence a = a. Hence the
relation of logical consequence on sentences is interestingly
different from that of the relation of logical consequence on
propositions, and there are at least two different, correct relations
of logical consequence. 
Shapiro and Cook have suggested that the job of a formal logic is to
model a natural language (Shapiro 2006; Cook 2010; Shapiro 2014).
Since models are simplified structures intended to exhibit some but
not all of the features of the phenomenon being modelled, there may be
several rival models of the same language, each capturing different
aspects of that language, and as Shapiro writes: 
…with mathematical models generally, there is typically no
question of ‘getting it exactly right’. For a given
purpose, there may be bad models—models that are clearly
incorrect—and there may be good models, but it is unlikely that
one can speak of one and only one correct model. (Shapiro 2006)
This sounds like it might support a species of logical
nihilism—a view on which there is no correct logic (and
in fact Cotnoir (2019 explores that view)—but Cook prefers to
think of it as offering two different kinds of pluralism. The first,
less controversial, kind holds that which logic is the correct one is
relative to one’s goal. If one wants to study vagueness, the correct
logic might be one that allows for intermediate truth-values, whereas
if one wants to study identity, perhaps first-order classical logic
with identity is to be preferred. Since the correct model is relative
to your goal, so is the correct logic. 
But Cook wonders whether his and Shapiro’s logic-as-modelling view
could also support a more radical pluralism, since it seems possible
that even relative to a specific purpose, there could be two rival
logics, each clearly better than all the rest relative to that
purpose, yet neither of which is better than the other. Under such
circumstances Cook thinks we might want to say that both are correct,
and hence that there is more than one correct logic. However one could
also hold that in such circumstances there are two equally good
logics, neither of which counts as correct. 
Hartry Field proposes another kind of logical pluralism (Field 2009).
The view rests on the thesis that logic is normative (see
 §1.4)
 along with a pluralism about epistemic normativity. Field holds that
there are many possible epistemic norms, and that we might think of
agents as endorsing one, or—more likely—different norms at
different times, and as having views about how good different possible
epistemic norms are. We use these epistemic norms to evaluate
themselves, and other norms (think of using numerical induction to
evaluate both induction and counter-induction.) Some norms do well by
their own lights, in which case we feel no tension. Some do badly even
by their own lights, in which case we feel pressure to change them.
There’s no sense, on Field’s view, in regarding any of these norms
as correct or incorrect, but he does think that it makes sense to call
them better or worse, so long as we recognize that these evaluations
are relative to our epistemic goals. Still, though this makes norms
criticizable and evaluable, it doesn’t mean that there will be a
uniquely best norm. “For instance, there might be a sequence of
better and better norms for achieving the goals; in addition, there
might be ties and/or incomparabilities ‘arbitrarily far
up’” (355). Hence we have an epistemic normative
pluralism.
Similarly, we can use our epistemic norms—including deductive
logics—to evaluate how well various deductive logics perform in
achieving epistemic goals we have, e.g. resolving the semantic
paradoxes. And again “it isn’t obvious that there need be a
uniquely best logic for a given goal, much less that we should think
of one logic as ”uniquely correct“ in some goal independent
sense” (356). The result then, is a kind of logical pluralism:
logics are better or worse relative to different goals, but even
relative to a particular goal, it might be that no single logic
is the unique best one. 
Finally, Hjortland explores another kind of logical pluralism in
defending sub-classical logics from Williamson’s abductive argument
that classical logic is the One True Logic (Hjortland 2017,
652–657; Williamson 2017). Consider the claim that the
ubiquitous use of classical logic (rather than other weaker
logics) in mathematics is a strong point in its favour; if we had to
give up classical logic, we might be worried about losing a lot of
elegant, simple and otherwise virtuous mathematical theories, and
preserving virtuous theories (and letting go of ad hoc and otherwise
vicious theories) is what the abductive approach in logic is all
about.
However, the move from the importance of classical logic in
mathematics to the truth of classical logic is much too fast. It is
one thing to say that classical logic, including say, instances of the
principles of Double Negation Elimination (DNE) and ex falso quodlibet
(EFQ), are widely used in mathematics. But mathematics does not
require any principles with the full strength and generality of
classical logic’s (DNE) and (EFQ)—it only uses some of the
instances of those principles, the instances that employ
mathematical language. When we say that (DNE) and (LEM) are
logically valid we are saying that they are valid no matter
what expressions we substitute for the non-logical expressions in
them—including extra-mathematical vague predicates like ‘heap’ or
‘red’ and notoriously troublesome metalinguistic predicates like
‘true’ and ‘heterological’.
That leaves space for a kind of pluralism that holds that some of the
stronger logical principles are correct only when they are restricted
to particular kinds of linguistic expression (such as those that
feature in the language of Peano Arithmetic); if we don’t restrict
them in this way, there will be counterexamples. Other logical
principles (perhaps conjunction elimination is on this list) do not
need to be restricted to the language of Peano Arithmetic. This leaves
us with a clear sense in which we have different correct logics,
depending on which language we are assuming. 