Louis Althusser was born on October 16th, 1918 in
Birmandreis, a suburb of Algiers. Hailing from Alsace on his
father’s side of the family, his grandparents were pieds
noirs, or French citizens who had chosen to settle in Algeria. At
the time of his birth, Althusser’s father was a lieutenant in the
French Military. After this service was up, his father returned to
Algiers and to his work as a banker. By all accounts save for the
retrospective ones contained in his autobiographies, Althusser’s
early childhood in North Africa was a contented one. There he enjoyed
the comforts of the Mediterranean environment as well as those provided
by an extended and stable petit-bourgeois family.
In 1930, his father’s work moved the family to Marseille.
Always a good pupil, Althusser excelled in his studies and became
active in the Scouts. In 1936, the family moved again, this time to
Lyon. There, Althusser was enrolled in the prestigious Lycée du
Parc. At the Lycée, he began taking classes in order to prepare
for the competitive entrance exams to France’s grandes
écoles. Raised in an observant family, Althusser was
particularly influenced by professors of a distinctly Catholic
tendency. These included the philosophers Jean Guitton and Jean Lacroix
as well as the historian Joseph Hours. In 1937, while still at the
Lycée, Althusser joined the Catholic youth group Jeunesse
étudiantes chrétiennes. This interest in Catholicism
and his participation in Catholic organizations would continue even
after Althusser joined the Communist Party in 1948. The simultaneous
enthusiasm that Althusser showed in Lyon for Royalist politics did not
last the war.
In 1939, Althusser performed well enough on the national entrance
examinations to be admitted to the École Normale
Supérieure (ENS) in Paris. However, before the school year
began, he was mobilized into the army. Soon thereafter, he was captured
in Vannes along with the rest of his artillery regiment. He spent the
remainder of the war as a prisoner of war at a camp in Northern
Germany. In his autobiographical writings, Althusser credits the
experiences of solidarity, political action, and community that he
found in the camp as opening him up to the idea of communism. Indeed,
his prison writings collected as Journal de captivité,
Stalag XA 1940–1945 evidence these experiences. They also provide
evidence of the cycles of deep depression that began for Althusser in
1938 and that would mark him for the rest of his life.
At the end of the war and following his release from the P.O.W.
camp in 1945, Althusser took his place at the ENS. Now 27 years old, he
began the program of study that was to prepare him for the
agrégation, the competitive examination which qualifies
one to teach philosophy in French secondary schools and that is often
the gateway to doctoral study and university employment. Perhaps not
surprisingly for a young man who had just spent half a decade in a
prison camp, much happened during the three years he spent preparing
for the exam and working on his Master’s thesis. Though still
involved in Catholic groups and still seeing himself as a Christian,
the movements that Althusser associated with after the war were leftist
in their politics and, intellectually, he made a move to embrace and
synthesize Christian and Marxist thought. This synthesis and his first
published works were informed by a reading of 19th Century
German idealist philosophy, especially Hegel and Marx, as well as by
progressive Christian thinkers associated with the group Jeunesse
de l’Église. Indeed, it was 19th Century
German Idealism with which he was most engaged during his period of
study at the ENS. In line with this interest (one shared with many
other French intellectuals at the time), Althusser obtained his
diplôme d’études supérieures in 1947
for a work directed by Gaston Bachelard and titled “On Content in
the Thought of G.W.F. Hegel.” In 1948, he passed his
agrégation, coming in first on the written portion of
the exam and second on the oral. After this showing, Althusser was
offered and accepted the post of agrégé
répétiteur (director of studies) at the ENS whose
responsibility it was to help students prepare for their own
agrégations. In this capacity, he began offering
courses and tutorials on particular topics in philosophy and on
particular figures from the history of philosophy. As he retained this
responsibility for more than thirty years and worked with some of the
brightest thinkers that France produced during this time (including
Alain Badiou, Pierre Bourdieu, and Michel Foucault), through his
teaching Althusser left a deep and lasting impression on a generation
of French philosophers and on French philosophy.
In addition to inaugurating his extended association with the ENS,
the first few years spent in Paris after the war saw Althusser begin
three other long-lasting relationships. The first of these was
with the French Communist Party, the second with his companion and
eventual wife, Hélène Rytman, and the third with French
psychiatry. Begun to treat recurrent bouts of depression, this last
affiliation continued for the rest of his life and included frequent
hospitalization as well as the most aggressive treatments post-war
French psychiatry had to offer such as electroconvulsive therapy,
narco-analysis, and psychoanalysis.
The second relationship begun by Althusser was little happier and no
less dependent than the first. At its outset, Althusser’s bond
with Hélène Rytman was complicated by his almost total
inexperience with women and by her being eight years older than him. It was
also made difficult by the vast differences in their experience of the
world and by her relationship with the Communist Party. Whereas
Althusser had known only home, school, and P.O.W. camp, Rytman had
traveled widely and had long been active in literary and radical
circles. At the time the two met, she was also embroiled in a dispute
with the Party over her role in the resistance during World War II.
Though Althusser was not yet a Party member, like many of his
generation, he emerged from the War deeply sympathetic to its moral
aims. His interest in Party politics and involvement with Party members
grew during his time as a student at the ENS. However, the ENS’
suspicion of communists as well as Hélène Rytman’s
troubles with the Party complicated Althusser’s relationship with
each of these institutions. Nonetheless, shortly after
being offered the post of agrégé
répétiteur (and thus safe from being bypassed for
the position due to his membership), Althusser joined the Communist
Party. For the next few years, Althusser tried to advance the aims of
the Communist Party as well as the goal of getting Rytman accepted back
into it. He did so by being a good militant (going to cell
meetings, distributing tracts, etc), by re-starting a Marxist study
group at the ENS (the Cercle Politzer), and by making
inquiries into Rytman’s wartime activities in the hopes of
clearing her name. By his own account, he made a terrible activist and
he also failed to rehabilitate Rytman’s reputation. Nonetheless,
his relationship with the Party and with Rytman deepened during this
period.
During the 1950s, Althusser lived two lives that were only somewhat
inter-related: one was that of a successful, if somewhat obscure
academic philosopher and pedagogue and the other that of a loyal
Communist Party Member. This is not to say that Althusser was
politically inactive at the school or that his communism did not
influence his philosophical work. On the contrary, Althusser
recruited colleagues and students to the Party and worked closely with
the communist cell based at the ENS. In addition, at mid-decade, he
published a few introductions to Marxist philosophy. However, in his
teaching and advising, he mostly avoided bringing in Marxist philosophy
and Communist politics. Instead, he catered to student interest and to
the demands of each new agrégation by engaging closely
with classic philosophical texts and with contemporary philosophy and
social science. Further, the bulk of his scholarship was on
18th Century political philosophy. Indeed, the only
book-length study Althusser published during his lifetime was a work on
Montesquieu, which appeared at the end of the decade. At the ENS,
Althusser’s professionalism as well as his ability to think
institutionally was rewarded in 1954 with a promotion to
secrétaire de l’école littéraire,
a post where he had some responsibility for the
management and direction of the school.
It would have surprised no one if Althusser had continued to
influence French political and philosophical life subtly, through the
students that he mentored, through his scholarship on the history of
political philosophy, through the colloquia among philosophers,
scientists, and historians that he organized, and through his routine
work as a Party member. However, in 1961, with an essay titled
“On the Young Marx,” Althusser aggressively entered into a
heated debate about the continuity of Marx’s oeuvre and about
what constitutes the core of Marxist philosophy. Appearing at a time of
crisis in the French Communist Party’s direction and seeming to
offer a “scientific” alternative to Stalinism and to the
humanist revisions of Marxism then being proffered, the theoretical
viewpoint offered by Althusser gained adherents. Invigorated by this
recognition and by the possibility that theoretical work might actually
change Communist Party practice, Althusser began to publish regularly
on Marxist philosophy. These essays occasioned much public discussion
and philosophical activity both in France and abroad. At the same time
as these essays began creating a stir, Althusser changed his teaching
style at the ENS and began to offer collaborative seminars where he and
his students attempted a “return to Marx” and to
Marx’s original texts. In 1965, the fruit of one of these
seminars was published as Reading Capital. That same year, the
essays on Marxist theory that had made such a sensation were collected
and published in the volume For Marx. Amplifying these
books’ collective impact well beyond the realm of intra-party
discussion was the general trend in literary and social scientific
theory labeled “structuralism” and with which
Althusser’s re-reading of Marx was identified.
At mid-decade, Althusser seized on these works’ popularity and the
fact that his arguments had created a faction within the French
Communist Party composed mostly of young intelligentsia to try and
force change within the Party.  This gambit to have the Party
directed by theorists rather than by a Central Committee whose
Stalinism remained entrenched and who believed in the organic wisdom
of the worker met with little success.  At the most, he succeeded in
carving out some autonomy for theoretical reflection within the
Party. Even though it is his most well known intervention, this was
not the first attempt by Althusser to try and influence the Party (he
had tried once before during the mid 1950s from his position as cell
leader at the ENS) and it would not be his last.  While he lost much
of the student support that his work had created when he remained
silent during the “revolutionary” events of May 1968 (he
was in a psychiatric hospital at the time), he campaigned once more to
influence the Party during the mid 1970s. This intervention occurred
in response to the French Communist Party’s decision to abandon
traditional Marxist-Leninist aspects of its platform so as to better
ally itself with the Socialist Party. Though Althusser’s position was
well publicized and found its supporters, in the end, his arguments
were unable to motivate the Party’s rank-and-file such that its
leadership would reconsider its decision.
During the decades in which he became internationally known for his
re-thinking of Marxist philosophy, Althusser continued in his post at
the ENS. There he took on increasing institutional responsibility
while continuing to edit and, with François Maspero, to publish
his own work and that of others in the
series Théorie. In 1975, Althusser acquired the right
to direct research on the basis of his previously published
work. Shortly after this recognition, he married his longtime
companion, Hélène Rytman.
Following the French Left’s and the Communist Party’s
electoral defeats in the 1978 elections, Althusser’s bouts of depression
became more severe and more frequent. In November
1980, after a painful surgery and another
bout of mental illness, which saw him hospitalized for most of the
summer and whose symptoms continued after his return to the ENS in the
fall, Althusser strangled his wife. Before he could be arrested for the
murder, he was sent to a mental hospital. Later, when an
examining magistrate came to inform him of the crime of which he was
accused, Althusser was in so fragile a mental state that he could not
understand the charges or the process to which he was to be submitted
and he was left at the hospital. After an examination, a panel of
psychiatrists concluded that Althusser was suffering at the time of the
murder from severe depression and iatrogenic hallucinations. Citing a
French law (since changed), which states that “there is neither
crime nor delict where the suspect was in a state of dementia at the
time of the action,” the magistrate in charge of
Althusser’s case decided that there were no grounds on which to
pursue prosecution.
The last ten years of Althusser’s life were spent in and out of
mental hospitals and at the apartment in Paris’ 20th
arrondissement where he had planned to retire. During this period, he
was visited by a few loyal friends and kept up some correspondences.
Given his mental state, his frequent institutionalizations, his anomie,
and the drugs he was prescribed, these were not very productive years.
However, at mid-decade, he did find the energy to re-visit some of his
old work and to attempt to construct from it an explicit metaphysics.
He also managed to write an autobiography, a text he averred was
intended to provide the explanation for the murder of his wife that he
was never able to provide in court. Both texts only appeared
posthumously. When his mental and physical health deteriorated again in
1987, Althusser went to live at a psychiatric hospital in La
Verrière, a village to the west of Paris. There, on the
22nd of October, 1990, he died of a heart attack
Despite its being anthologized and translated during the mid 1990s,
there has until recently been relatively little critical attention
paid to Althusser’s writings prior to 1961. Certainly, in terms of
method, style, and inspiration, the Althusser found in these works
differs significantly from the Althusser of For Marx and
Reading Capital. In his writings from the 1940s, for
instance, his method and conclusions resemble those of the Marxist
Humanists of whom he would later be so critical, while texts from the
1950s deploy without irony the Stalinist shibboleths he would later
subject to such castigation. Nonetheless, as these texts announce many
of Althusser’s perennial themes and because some of the contradictions
these works possess are shared with his classic texts and are repeated
again in his late work, these early essays, books, and translations
are worthy of examination
Althusser’s philosophical output between 1946 and 1961 can
roughly be divided into four categories. The first category includes
those essays, mostly written between 1946 and 1951, where Althusser
explores possible rapports between Christianity and Marxism. In the
first of these essays “The International of Decent
Feelings,” Althusser argues from what he takes to be “the
truth of Christianity” against the popular post-war view that the
misery, guilt, and alienation of the human condition in the atomic age
is equally experienced by all subjects. For him, this existentialist
diagnosis is a type of idolatry: it replaces recognition of our
equality before God with our equality before the fear of death. In that
it does so, it is twice anti-Christian. For, in addition to the sin of
idolatry (death equals God), it fails to acknowledge the existence of a
particular class, the proletariat, for whom anguish is not its lot and
who is actually capable of delivering the emancipation from fear by
re-appropriating the products of human production, including the atomic
bomb. A subsequent essay from 1947, “A Matter of Fact,”
continues in this vein, suggesting the necessity of socialist means for
realizing Christian ends. It also includes a Hegelian critique of the
existing Catholic Church which suggests that the church is incapable of
such an alliance without a theological revolution. Each of these
essays includes the suggestion that critique and reform will
occasion a better church and a truer Christianity. By 1949, however,
Althusser was totally pessimistic about this possibility and, in a
letter to his mentor Jean Lacroix, he argued that the sole possibility
for realizing Christian values is through communist action. Though some
critics have argued that Christian and Catholic values and modes of
reasoning inform all of Althusser’s philosophy, any explicit
consideration of a practical and theoretical reconciliation between the
two was abandoned at this point in Althusser’s development.
The second category of Althusser’s early work, one closely
related to the first, are those texts that deal with Hegel. Written
primarily for an academic audience, they approach Hegel’s
philosophy either critically, in terms of the history of its reception
and use, or exegetically, in terms of examining what possibility
Hegel’s metaphysics, logic, politics, epistemology, and
understanding of subjectivity offer to those interested in
understanding and encouraging societal transformation. Between 1946 and
1950, the results of Althusser’s exegeses were positive: Hegel
indeed had something to offer. This judgment finds its most detailed
explanation in Althusser’s 1947 thesis “On Content in the
thought of G.W.F. Hegel.”  In addition to
detailing Hegel’s relation to Kant and criticizing the
simplification of the dialectic by Hegel’s commentators,
Althusser argues in this work that the dialectic “cannot be
attacked for its form” (1947, 116). Instead, Hegel can only be
critiqued for a failure of the contents of the form (as these contents
are specified in Hegel’s historical and political works) to have
actually fulfilled the absolute idea. Following the Young Hegelians,
then, Althusser uses Hegel’s dialectic against itself to
criticize claims like the one made in The Philosophy of Right
that the Prussian state is the fulfillment of the dialectic. Though he
uses Marx’s Critique of Hegel’s Philosophy of
Right to make his points and though he is in agreement with Marx
that the Hegelian concept, realized in thought, must now be realized in
the world, Althusser does not suggest in his thesis that
Marx’s philosophy leaves Hegel’s insights about, history,
logic, and the subject behind. Instead, he contends
that Marx is guilty of committing the same error as Hegel in mistaking
historical content for the fulfillment of the dialectic. Because all
knowledge is historical, Althusser argues, Marxists can only correct
for this error by appeal to the idea of the dialectic and to its end in
the absolute and the eternal, to a time “when the human totality
will be reconciled with its own structure” (1947, 156). Something
like this argument will appear again in his classical work as a
critique of the empiricist tendency in Marxist philosophy.
By the early 1950s, Althusser’s judgments that Marxism was, of
necessity, Hegelian and that it aimed at human fulfillment had
undergone revision. This transition to thinking about Marx as the
originator of a philosophy totally distinct from Hegel’s was signaled
in a review essay from 1950 which argued that the post-war mania for
Hegel in France was only a bourgeois attempt to combat Marx.  In two
short essays from 1953 on Marxist philosophy, this switch is fully
apparent. In these texts, Althusser aligns himself with the position
advanced by Mehring and Lenin that, at a certain point in Marx’s
development, Hegel is left behind and that, afterwards, Marx forged
his own original concepts and methodology. In his description of what
these concepts and methodology are, Althusser pretty much follows the
Party line, insisting that Marx reversed the Hegelian dialectic, that
historical materialism is a science, that the sciences verify
dialectical materialism, and that the proletariat needs to be taught
Marxist science from above. Though these essays repeat the Party
philosophy as formulated by Lenin, Stalin, and Zhdanov, they also
include recognizable Althusserian themes and show his thinking about
these themes to be in transition. For instance, both essays retain the
idea from Althusser’s 1947 thesis about the quasi-transcendental
status of present scientific knowledge. Both also anticipate future
concerns in their speculations about the ideological character of
current scientific knowledge and in their incorporation of ideas from
Mao about the relationship between theory and practice. Written as a
response to Paul Ricoeur and representing the last example of this
third category of Althusser’s early work, a text from 1955 argues for
the objectivity of historical science. This is a theme to which he
would return. Noticeably absent from this body of work, however, are
the detailed and original claims Althusser would make in the early
1960s about Marx’s philosophy.
Two essays that Althusser wrote in the mid 1950s were the first to
focus exclusively on Marxist philosophy and are interesting inasmuch
as they evidence his rejection of Hegel and his embrace of the
Party’s Marxism-Leninism. In addition, these texts suggest the
need for a thorough study of Marx. This study, however, would wait
until the beginning of the next decade. For the rest of the 1950s,
most of Althusser’s published work involved the study of
philosophical figures who preceded Marx. These figures included
Montesquieu, on whose political philosophy and theory of history he
wrote a book-length study, and Feuerbach, whose writings he translated
and commented upon.  The dual thesis of Althusser’s Montesquieu
book: that, insofar as Montesquieu studies the “concrete
behavior of men” he resists idealism and inaugurates the study
of history as a science and that, insofar as Montesquieu accepts past
and present political formations as delimiting the possibilities for
political life, he remains an idealist, is one that will find echoes
in Althusser’s study of Marx during the next decade. Similarly,
inasmuch as he makes the argument in a commentary (1960) that part of
his intention in translating Feuerbach is to show just what Marx owes
in his early writings to the author of The Essence of
Christianity so that these may be better seen as absent from
Marx’s mature work, these studies of Feuerbach can also be seen
as propaedeutic to the study of Marx which Althusser inaugurated in
1961 with his article “On the Young Marx”.
With the perspective afforded by the mass of posthumous writings
published since the 1990s, it has become clear that Althusser was
perennially concerned with important issues in metaphysics,
epistemology, philosophy of science, historiography, hermeneutics, and
political philosophy. However, it is also true that the primary medium
Althusser employed for thinking through problems in these areas was
Marxist philosophy. This is especially true of the period between 1961
and 1966 when the majority of his published and unpublished work
concerned itself with how to read Marx, the definition of Marxist
philosophy, and how to understand and apply Marxian concepts. In
addition, if we are to take Althusser’s retrospective word for
it, the pieces he published during this period were intended as
political-theoretical acts, polemics meant to respond to contemporary
opinions and policies and to shift the terms of these arguments as well
as the actions which were their results. For these reasons, it is
natural when discussing these texts to focus upon the contexts that
engendered them and upon the positions within Marxist philosophy that
Althusser stakes out by their means. Alternatively, as Althusser
indicates in many of these pieces his debts to contemporaneous
theorists and to philosophical predecessors such as Spinoza, there is
the temptation to understand his thought as a combination of the
insights contributed by these thinkers with Marxist philosophy. While
each is a useful approach to understanding and explaining
Althusser’s philosophy, when excessive attention is paid to one
or another of them, one risks historicizing his contributions or
suggesting that they are merely derivative. Seeking to avoid either
result, even though the following discussion will note the context for
Althusser’s work, its relation to Marxist philosophy, and the
non-Marxist philosophical insights that contribute to its method and
conclusions, this account will also suggest the uniqueness of his
contributions to hermeneutics, metaphysics, epistemology, philosophy of
science, historiography, and political philosophy.
For multiple, overlapping, and complicated reasons of which the most
relevant may be the discrediting of Stalin’s personage, policies,
and version of Marxist philosophy that followed Khrushchev’s
“Secret Speech,” Europe in the late 1950s
saw a blossoming of political and philosophical alternatives to the
version of Marxism-Leninism promulgated by the Soviet Union. This
version of Marxist philosophy had dominated European leftist thought
and action since the dawn of the Cold War in 1947 and, in France, was
widely disseminated via Communist Party schools and literature. While
political and philosophical change were slow to occur in the French
Communist Party, by the late 1950s, many intellectuals associated with
the Party began to ask questions about what constitutes the core of
Marx’s philosophy and about how this philosophy guides, relates
to, or allows for political action.
For many of these intellectuals, answering this question meant a
return to Marx’s early work (those texts written before 1845) in
the hopes of finding the “key” to his philosophy. In pieces
like “Contribution to the Critique of Hegel’s Philosophy of
Right” (1844), and the Economic and Philosophic
Manuscripts (1844), these thinkers found and championed a Marx
obviously indebted to a Hegelian dialectical understanding of
subjectivity and historical development and deeply concerned about
ending human alienation. It is to this project—that of finding
the true method, aim, and intent of Marx’s philosophy in his
early work’s emphasis on the realization of full human freedom
and potentials through dialectical historical change—that
Althusser made the first of his public “interventions” into
Marxist philosophy. He inaugurated this effort with the essay “On
the Young Marx” (1961), which sought to demonstrate that this
method of looking to Marx’s early work for the key to his
philosophy was methodologically suspect and ideologically driven.
Further, in this essay and in subsequent work, he developed an
alternate method of investigation or “reading” that would
allow Marx’s true philosophy to be revealed in its purity.
From the fruits of this new method of reading, Althusser argued that
not only was Marx the originator of a new philosophy, Dialectical
Materialism, that had nothing to do with its Hegelian and Feuerbachian
predecessors, but that he also founded a new science, Historical
Materialism, which broke with and superseded such ideological and
pre-scientific precursors as the political economics of Smith and
Ricardo. For the most part, the essays collected in For Marx
(1965) and the seminar papers issued as Reading Capital (1965)
develop and utilize this method of reading in order to justify and
describe Marxist philosophy and Marxist science as well as to
distinguish between these two theoretical activities. In so doing,
Althusser says quite a bit about the nature of knowledge and the
general relations between philosophy, science, politics, and ideology.
Further, Althusser applies this hermeneutic method to argue against
what he labeled “empiricist” understandings of Marx. These
included the Humanist interpretations of Marx described above as well
as variations on the orthodox Marxist-Leninist theory, which specified
the strict determination of culture and history by the existing modes
of economic exchange and resulting class struggles. The following
paragraphs discuss this theory of reading, how it produces a different
understanding of Marx’s philosophy than that which is derived
from Humanist and Economist readings, and how it informs his
epistemology, philosophy of science, historiography, and political
philosophy.
The label that Althusser gave to the method by which he approached
Marx’s texts was that of a “symptomatic reading.”
Instead of looking back at Marx’s early work in order to find the
“essence” of his philosophy, one of whose expressions was
Capital, and also instead of trying to build a true or
consistent theory out of Marx’s oeuvre by explaining away
contradictions within it and noting certain passages as key, Althusser
argued that Marx’s true philosophy was largely absent from his
work prior to 1845. Even in mature texts such as Capital,
Althusser maintained that Marx’s philosophy remained largely
implicit, as the background system of concepts which allowed the
scientific work Marx was involved in generating to take place. The
symptomatic method of reading was designed to make these concepts
explicit and “to establish the indispensable minimum for the
consistent existence of Marxist philosophy”
(1965a [2005], 35).
The three inspirations Althusser gave for this interpretive method
were those provided by Spinoza, Freud by way of Lacan, and that
provided by Marx himself. In addition, he added to these examples
insights from the French tradition of historical epistemology about the
way in which sciences come to be constituted. One of the ideas borrowed
from Spinoza was the contention that texts and authors are the products
of their times and that the thoughts authors set down on the page
cannot help but be a part of, and be affected by, the ideological
currents that accompany and allow for the satisfaction of needs in a
specific era. So then, similar to the way in which Spinoza argued in
the Theological Political-Treatise that by engaging in a
materialist historical study of the Bible one could disentangle those
prophetic laws and commands which were merely the result of temporal
exigencies and the prophet’s imagination from those which
represented the true word of God, so Althusser argued that one could
disentangle those concepts which were merely ideological in
Marx’s texts from those which comprised his true philosophy.
Though this theory was later to be complicated and revised, during
this period, Althusser consistently argued that Marx’s work prior to
1845 was ideological and that it was saturated with non-Marxian
concepts borrowed from Hegel’s and Feuerbach’s philosophical
anthropologies. Althusser did recognize that some of Marx’s early work
is marked by its rejection of idealist premises and concepts. However,
inasmuch as this early work was seen to espouse a telic view of
humanity in which the individual and society was said to undergo a
necessary historico-dialectical development, Althusser identified it
as fundamentally Hegelian. That there was a materialist correction to
this basic narrative with Marx’s embrace of Feuerbach, Althusser also
granted. However, the replacement by Marx of a speculative
anthropology which saw the historical development of society as the
self-fulfillment of human freedom with a materialist anthropology that
cited the same logic of development but which specified that the motor
of this development was human beings in their “sensuous life
activity,” was seen by Althusser to represent little conceptual
and no logical advance from Hegel.
This “theory of the break,” which held that Marx’s early
work was Hegelian and ideological and that, after a decisive rupture
in 1845 and then a long period of transition between 1845–1857,
his work became recognizably Marxist and scientific, would seem to
indicate that all one has to do to understand Marx’s philosophy is to
read this mature work. However, the actual case is not so
simple. While reading Capital and other late works is
necessary for understanding Marx’s philosophy, it is not
sufficient. It is not sufficient, Althusser argued, because, even in
his post-1857 writings, Marx provides no systematic exposition of his
epistemology or his ideas about social structure, history, and human
nature, all of which were necessary for Marxist philosophy’s
consistent and continuing existence.
Many interpreters of Marx, and not just those Althusser directly
engaged with during the early 1960s, have maintained that such texts as
the 1859 Preface and the 1844 Manuscripts provide
keys to understanding Marx’s philosophy. However, Althusser made
the case that these texts were contradictory and insufficient for this
purpose. It is with this contention that the models provided by
psychoanalysis and by Marx’s own critique of classical political
economy come to inform Althusser’s overall hermeneutic strategy.
Part of this strategy, Althusser maintains, is directly taken from
Marx’s own method. Thus, in a way parallel to Marx pointing out
in Capital V.II (1885) that Adam Smith needed the concept of
the “value of labor” for his explanations of capitalist
economic activity but could not fully generate it out of the systems of
ideas available to him, Althusser argued that, though Marx was
recognizably engaged in the work of Historical Materialism in
Capital, the philosophical theory or background conceptual
framework that allowed this investigation to proceed was not fully
articulated.
The explicit project of Reading Capital and of many of the
essays included in For Marx was to make these fundamental
concepts explicit. It was to do so by paying attention to the
theoretical “problematic,” or background ideological
framework in which the work was generated, by analyzing those passages
where a philosophical concept had to have been in use but was not made
explicit, and by noting and explaining where and why one theoretical
pronouncement is in contradiction with itself or with another passage.
For Althusser, such areas of Marx’s text are “symptoms,”
in the psychoanalytic sense of the word, of the necessary but
unarticulated philosophical framework that underwrites and allows his
scientific investigations. Of these frameworks, Marx was not fully
conscious. However, they were what allowed him to investigate and
describe such socio-economic events as the transformation of money
into capital without recourse to Hegelian logic and
concepts. Althusser argues that by paying attention to these passages
in Marx’s text as well as by seeking out Marxist concepts as these
were developed during the course of practical Marxist activity by
theorists such as Lenin and Mao, an attentive reader can render
explicit Marx’s philosophy. 
That the concepts Althusser derived from his symptomatic reading of
Marx, Lenin, and Mao were Marxist concepts was avowed. Nevertheless,
Althusser also acknowledged that some of the concepts found latent in
these texts were derived from and consistent with his philosophical
and social scientific contemporaries as well as with those of
Spinoza. Of course, this is not inconsistent with the theory of
reading and authorship that underwrites a symptomatic reading of a
text. Inasmuch as authors and readers are always said to think with
concepts borrowed from or supplied by the problematic that they
inhabit, there is no such thing as an innocent or objective reading:
we understand things with and through the concepts available to us.
Perhaps nowhere is this borrowing more evident than in Althusser’s
ideas about how scientific and philosophic knowledge is
generated. Though Althusser is very careful to back up his arguments
about Marx’s epistemology with close analyses of Marx’s work, it is
apparent that the model for knowledge acquisition that is developed
in Reading Capital owes much to Spinoza and to the French
tradition of historical epistemology.
With his re-reading of Marx, Althusser wished to offer an
alternative to the two then dominant understandings of Marx’s
philosophy. Both understandings were charged with the same mistake.
This mistake was, fundamentally, an epistemological one: each cast Marx
as an empiricist. At first glance, this charge might seem ridiculous.
This is especially the case as, according to Althusser’s own
critique, both understandings of Marx offered variants of the Hegelian
claim that there is a reason to history. For Althusser, however, both
readings were “empiricist” inasmuch as each ascribed to
Marx a theory of knowledge in which the subject, by means of a process
of observation and abstraction, comes to know what an object really and
truly is, according to its essence. This is a definition of empiricism
meant to include philosophers as diverse as Locke, Kant, and Hegel and
traditions as varied as British Empiricism, German Idealism,
Positivism, and Pragmatism. In the case of Humanist Marxism, the object
that comes to be known by its essence is the human subject in its full
freedom. It does so by means of critique and by creatively overcoming
that which is alien to it or “merely historical.” In
the case of orthodox Marxism-Leninism, this object is the economy, the
reality that underlies, causes, and can explain all historical
structures and transformations. The economy comes to be known as it
truly is only by the proletariat, by those whom the historical process
has endowed with an objective gaze and who possess the ability to make
this truth objective.
In opposition to the empiricist model of knowledge production,
Althusser proposes that true or scientific knowledge is distinguished
from ideology or opinion not by dint of an historical subject having
abstracted the essence of an object from its appearances. Instead, this
knowledge is understood to be produced by a process internal to
scientific knowledge itself. Though this transformation takes place
entirely in thought, Althusser does not maintain that scientific
knowledge makes no use of facts. However, these facts or materials are
never brute. Rather, specific sciences start with pre-existing concepts
or genera such as “humors,” “unemployment,”
“quasars,” or “irrational numbers.” These
genera may be ideological in part or in whole. Science’s job is
to render these concepts scientific. This labor is what Althusser terms
“theoretical practice.” The result of this practice is
scientific knowledge. Scientific knowledge is produced by means of
applying to these genera the body of concepts or “theory”
that the science possesses for understanding them. This body of
concepts may be more or less unified and consistent and it may be more
or less consciously articulated. Further, the sum of the individual
concepts that this theory consists of delimits the possible ways in
which the genera that a science begins with can be understood.
When applied, a science’s theory weeds out ideological notions
associated with the original concept or genera. The result of this
application of theory to genera is the transformation of the
“ideological generality into a scientific generality”
(1963b [2005], 185). An example of such a process is the
transformation in medical science of a concept like “phlegmatic
humors” into the idea of blood-borne pathogens by dint of the
theory of circulation and infectious disease. Once generated, such
scientific concepts inform regular scientific practice, allowing
specific research programs within an individual science to
progress. Althusser himself gives examples of three such major
transformations. The first is the founding of modern physics by
Galileo, the other that of Greek mathematics, and the third, that of
Marx’s founding of the science of Historical Materialism out of
Classical Political Economy. Each of these foundings is marked by what
Althusser terms an “epistemological break,” or a period
when ideological concepts are replaced by scientific ones. Any
similarity here to Kuhnian ideas about revolutionary and normal
science is not surprising. Both Canguilhem and Bachelard, from whom
Althusser drew inspiration for his theory, were part of a dialogue
that took in the work of Alexander Koyré on scientific
revolutions, a thinker from whom Kuhn, in turn, drew his
inspiration.
Althusser’s debt to the tradition of French historical
epistemology in this account of knowledge production and philosophy of
science should now be evident. However, this epistemology’s
Marxian and Spinozistic elements may be less pronounced. The vocabulary
adopted above to express this theory, however, gestures to both
influences. For Althusser, Marx’s founding of the science of
history is crucial not only to politics (as will be addressed below)
but also to understanding all of human activity, including scientific
activity. That there is a circular logic to this epistemological
theory, Althusser readily admits, for it is only the science of
Historical Materialism that allows us to understand scientific practice
in general. Althusser, though, is comfortable with this circularity.
This is because, insofar as this understanding of scientific practice
in general allows us to understand how individual sciences produce
their knowledge, Historical Materialism is a science that functions
like any other.
For Althusser, the concept that helps to produce this understanding
of scientific practices is that of the “mode of
production.” With it, he argues, Marx supplied theorists
with an idea sufficient to comprehend the way in which we materially
produce our selves, our environments, our knowledges, and our
histories. Indeed, this concept makes it possible to analyze all of our
activities in their specificity and to understand them in their
relation to the totality of which they are a part. As it must be if we
are to make sense of scientific practice as one aspect of the total
mode of production, much more than the activity of economic production
must be included in this totality of productive practices. Added by
Althusser to these two aspects of the mode of production are those of
ideological, political, and philosophical production, among others.
In each of the practices that together comprise, at any given time, a
specific mode of production, some form or forms of labor uses the existing means
of production to transform existing materials into new products.
According to Althusser, this realization is Marx’s basic insight.
In scientific production, for example, thinkers use existing theories
to transform existing concepts into new, scientific concepts. However,
and this is where Althusser’s Spinozism becomes apparent and also
where he breaks with economistic understandings of Marx, it is not the
case that the analysis of any one mode of production within the
totality of productive practices is capable of generating an
understanding of the way in which all rest of the productive processes
are causally determined. Rather, and in line with the parallelism
attributed by Leibniz to Spinoza, as each productive process transforms
a unique material (concepts in science, goods in economics, social
relations in politics), each process can only be understood in terms of
its unique causal structure. In addition, and again also in a way
similar to Spinoza’s account of substance as seen from different
aspects, each productive process is understood to stand in relation to
and play a part of a complexly structured whole, none of which is
reducible to being the simple or essential cause of the others.
That Althusser regards most, if not all, human activity as consisting
of material processes of production and reproduction can be used as a
key to understanding other parts of his philosophy. These include his
thoughts on the structure of the social and political world, the
historical process, and philosophy. As philosophy is closely related to
science and because it is charged with a task that allows the
production of knowledge about the other socio-economic practices to be
generated, it is probably best to start with Althusser’s
understanding of philosophy as a material practice of production before
proceeding to a discussion of how Althusser understands the other
practices listed above.
According to Althusser, most activity labeled
“philosophy” is really a type of ideological production. By
this, he means to say that most philosophy reproduces, in highly
abstract form, notions about the world whose effect is to sustain
existing socio-economic relations. As such, philosophy merely reflects
the background values, attitudes, and ideas that allow the
socio-economic world to function. However, for Althusser, genuine
philosophy functions as a “Theory of theoretical practice”
(1965b). In this mode, it works to provide an aid to scientific
practice by distinguishing between ideological concepts and scientific
ones as well as by clarifying and rendering consistent the scientific
concepts that enable a science to transforms existing
ideas into scientific knowledge.
For Althusser, it is not necessary that this process of distinction
and clarification be accomplished before a specific theoretical
practice can generate scientific knowledge. In fact, scientific
activity often proceeds without a clear understanding of the concepts
that allow it to produce its knowledge. Indeed, Althusser maintained
that this was Marx’s lot when he was writing Capital:
scientific knowledge of the capitalist economic system was being
produced, but Marx did not possess a full awareness of the concepts
allowing this production. According to this definition of philosophy as
the Theory of theoretical practice, Althusser’s re-reading of
Capital and other texts was philosophical insofar as it was
able to name and distinguish the concepts that allowed Marx’s
scientific analysis of history to proceed.
The latent concepts rendered explicit by the practice of symptomatic
reading were said by Althusser to constitute the theory of Dialectical
Materialism, or what is the same thing, Marx’s philosophy. With
these concepts made explicit, Althusser believed that Marxist science,
or Historical Materialism, could employ them in order to achieve better
analyses of specific modes of production and better understandings of
the opportunities that specific modes of production presented for
political change. Some of these concepts have already been articulated
in the discussion of the mode of production above, but without being
named. To label these concepts and then to add some more, the idea that
each individual productive process or element stands in relation to and
plays a part of a complexly structured whole, none of which is
reducible to being the simple or essential cause of the others, is what
Althusser terms the idea of “structural causality.”
This concept, in turn, is closely related to the idea of
“overdetermination” or the theory that every element in the
total productive process constituting a historical moment is determined
by all the others.
Another Marxist philosophical concept that allows the historical
materialist scientist to understand the logic of a specific mode of
production is that of “contradiction.” This is the
idea that, at any given period, multiple, concrete and definite
practices take place within a mode of production. Among and within
these specific practices, there may or may not be tensions. 
To take an example from Marx’s chapter on
“Primitive Accumulation” in Capital V.I, at the
same time as peasants holdings were being expropriated in the late
15th and early 16th centuries by a nascent
bourgeoisie, the church and the aristocracy were passing laws against
this appropriation. Any isolable element of the total structure, be it
a person, a social class, an institution, or the state, in some way
reflects and embodies these practices and these antagonisms and as such
each is said to be “overdetermined.” Further,
Althusser specifies that the development of productive practices within
a specific mode of production is often “uneven” in addition
to possibly being antagonistic. This means, for instance, that some
economic elements within a whole may be more or less capitalistic while
others simultaneously operate according to socialist norms. Thus the
development within a mode of production of the practices specific to it
is not necessarily homogenous or linear.
Added to the Marxian concepts of structural causality,
contradiction, uneven development, and overdetermination is that of the
“structure in dominance.” This concept designates
that major element in a structural whole that tends to organize all of
the other practices. In much of the contemporary world and inasmuch as
it tends to organize the production of moral values, scientific
knowledge, the family, art, etc. this structure is the economic
practice of commodity production and consumption. However, in another
era and in other places, it may be the production and dissemination of
religious beliefs and practices that dominates and organizes the socio-economic
structure.
With this understanding of the elements that compose any
socio-economic structure and their relations made explicit, something
can now be said about the social and political philosophies that
follow from it. First, with the idea that human individuals are merely
one of the sites at which the contradictory productive forces that
characterize an era are enacted, Althusser signals that the primary
object of social philosophy is not the human individual. Second, with
the idea that the state produced by political activity is merely one
productive process among others, Althusser signals that the primary
element in political philosophy is not the state. Though both states
and individuals are important elements of the socio-economic whole,
nothing philosophical is learned by examining the essence of the
individual or the way in which justice is embodied by the state.
As Althusser understands them, whatever conceptions we have of the
nature of human beings or about the proper function of the state are
historically generated and serve to reproduce existing social
relations. In other words, they are ideological. Apart from the
necessity of human beings to engage in productive relations with other
human beings and with their environment in order to produce their means
of subsistence, there is no human nature or essence. This is the core
of Althusser’s “anti-humanist” position. Further,
though some order must exist in order to allow for the production and
reproduction of social life, there is no essential or best form that
this order must take. This is not to say that human beings do not
conceive of or strive for the best order for social life or that they
do not believe that they are essentially free or equal and deserving
of rights. It also does not mean that all of our ideas are homogenous
and that heterogeneous ideas about what is best cannot exist side by
side in the same system without leading to conflict (though they
sometimes do). However, the science of Historical Materialism has
revealed the desire for such orders to be historically generated along
with the ideas about human nature that justify them.
This account of the ideological role of our conceptions of human
nature and of the best political arrangement shows Althusser to differ
little from interpretations of Marx which hold that political
ideologies are the product of and serve existing economic relations.
However, and as was detailed above, Althusser rejects the simple
understanding of causality offered by this model in which economic
practices order consciousness and our cultural practices. He also
rejects the philosophy of history that often accompanies this model.
This philosophy has it that certain economic practices not only
generate corresponding cultural practices, but that there is a pattern
to economic development in which each economic order inexorably leads to
its own demise and replacement by a different economic system. In this
understanding of history, feudalism must lead to capitalism and
capitalism to socialism. Althusser, however, argues against the idea
that history has a subject (such as the economy or human agency)
and that history has a goal (such as communism or human freedom).
History, for Althusser, is a process without a subject. There are
patterns and orders to historical life and there is historical change.
However, there is no necessity to any of these transformations and
history does not necessarily progress. Transformations do occur.
However, they do so only when the contradictions and levels of
development inherent in a mode of production allow for such change.
From the time of its initial dissemination, Althusser’s
re-reading of Marx was met by almost equal amounts of enthusiasm and
castigation. For every reader who found in his prose an explanation of
Marx’s philosophy and science that rendered Marx philosophically
respectable and offered renewed hope for Marxist theory, there were
critics who judged his work to be idealist, Stalinist, dogmatist, or
excessively structuralist, among myriad other charges. Though many of
the initial reactions were contradictory and evidenced
misunderstandings of what Althusser was up to, compelling criticisms
were also offered. One was that Althusser was only able to offer his
reading by ignoring much of what Marx actually wrote about his logic
and about the concepts important to his analysis. Another criticism,
and one voiced to Althusser by leaders of the French Communist Party,
was that Althusser’s reading of Marx offered little on the
relationship between Marxist theory and Marxist political practice.
It took a long time before Althusser explicitly addressed the charge
that he had ignored much of what Marx had to say about his own logic
and concepts. However, buffeted by these criticisms and with a sense
that there were idealist or “theoreticist” tendencies in
his reading of Marx and that the relationship between theory and
practice was indeed under-developed, Althusser set out during the late
1960s and 1970s to correct and revise his take on the relationships
among philosophy, science, ideology, and politics. To some readers,
these revisions represented a politically motivated betrayal of his
theoretical accomplishments. For others, they simply revealed his
project as a whole to be untenable and self-contradictory. Some recent
critics, however, have argued that these revisions are consistent with
and necessary to the development of what they view to be the overall
goal of Althusser’s work: the development of a materialist
political philosophy adequate for political practice.
Althusser’s initial revisions to his understanding of the social
structure and knowledge production were informed by a renewed
attention to the works of Lenin and by a seminar he convened at the
ENS in 1967 for leading scientists and interested students. This
course resulted in a series of papers, gathered together
as Philosophy and the Spontaneous Philosophy of the
Scientists (1967a), in which Althusser began rethinking the
relations among philosophy, science, ideology, and politics. Though
this revision was later to be made more explicit, one of the most
striking aspects of these papers was Althusser’s abandonment of the
Spinozistic claim that the different levels of theoretical practice
were autonomous. He now maintained that there was no criterion
sufficient to demarcate scientific from ideological concepts and that
all theoretical concepts are marked by ideology. This did not mean,
however, that any concept was as good as any other.  Scientists,
through their work on the material real, tended to generate better
understandings of things than were available intuitively.  Further, he
argued that philosophy still had a role to play in the clarification
of scientific concepts. This is the case because, no matter how much
work scientists do to understand the material real and to generate
better concepts, they must always employ ideological concepts to frame
their investigations and its results. Marxist philosophers, he
maintained, could be useful to scientists by pointing out, from the
standpoint of politics and by the method of historical critique, where
and how some of the concepts scientists employed were ideological. The
result of this intervention of philosophy into politics would not be
“truer” concepts, but ideas that were more
“correct” or “right” in both the normative and
positive senses of these words.
Parallel to this move, and motivated by the need to provide the link
between philosophical theory and political practice that was largely
missing from his classic work, Althusser now argued that philosophy had
a useful role to play between politics and science. Political practice,
Althusser maintained, was mostly motivated by ideological
understandings of what the good is and how to accomplish it. Though he
did not argue that there was a way to leave ideology behind and to
reveal the good in itself, he did maintain that science could help to
correct ideological thinking about political means and ends. Social
science in particular could do so by showing how certain goals were
impossible or misguided given present socio-economic relations and by
suggesting that, at a certain time and in a certain place, other means
and other ends might be more fruitfully adopted and pursued. As
scientific knowledge does not speak directly to the public or to
politicians, Althusser assigned materialist philosophers the job of
communicating scientific knowledge of the material real, its
conditions, and its possibilities to politicians and the public. If
this communication is successful, Althusser maintained, one should not
expect all political activity to be successful. Instead, one should
expect a modest shift from an idealist ideology to one that is
materialist and more scientific and which has a better chance of
realizing its goals.
During the 1970s, Althusser continued the revisions begun in 1967 and
elaborated other Marxian ideas he believed to be
underdeveloped. Perhaps the best known of the new conceptual
formulations resulting from these efforts is that of
“ideological interpellation.” This account of how a human
being becomes a self-conscious subject was published in an essay
titled “Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses”
(1970). It was excerpted from a larger essay essay titled “On
the Reproduction of Capitalism.” This work analyzed the
necessary relationship between state and subject such that a given
economic mode of production might subsist. It includes not only an
analysis of the state and its legal and educational systems but also
of the psychological relationship which exists between subject and
state as ideology. This narrative of subjectification was intended to
help advance Althusser’s argument that regimes or states are able to
maintain control by reproducing subjects who believe that their
position within the social structure is a natural one.  Ideology, or
the background ideas that we possess about the way in which the world
must function and of how we function within it is, in this account,
understood to be always present. Specific socio-economic structures,
however, require particular ideologies. These ideologies are
instantiated by institutions or “Ideological State
Apparatuses” like family, schools, church, etc., which provide
the developing subject with categories in which she can recognize
herself. Inasmuch as a person does so and embraces the practices
associated with those institutions, she has been successfully
“hailed” or “interpellated” and recognized
herself as that subject who does those kinds of things. As the effect
of these recognitions is to continue existing social relations,
Althusser argued that a Dictatorship of the Proletariat is necessary
so that Ideological State Apparatuses productive of the bourgeois
subject can be replaced with those productive of proletarian or
communist subjects.
In 1978 and as a response to what he saw, yet again, as the
theoretical and political misdirection of the Communist movement,
Althusser authored a piece, “Marx in his Limits,” which was
intended to separate the good from the bad in Marx’s philosophy.
In his classic work, Althusser had tried to accomplish this goal by
separating out ideological concepts and by bringing forth the
scientific ones. However, in “Marx in his Limits,” he now
argued that such a method of separation cannot work
because—within Marx’s writings and throughout his
oeuvre—both good and bad, materialist and idealist concepts, are
hopelessly intermixed and many are underdeveloped.
Inasmuch as Althusser admits in this piece that Marx never fully
abandoned Hegel’s logic, the concept of human alienation, or the
idea that history has a goal, the inventory Althusser offers can be
seen as a positive response to the charge that he had ignored
Marx’s explicit statements in order to imagine for Marx a
consistent and “true” philosophy. Althusser does not give
up on the task of articulating a better Marxist philosophy, however.
Instead, he argues that there is another, “materialist”
criterion that allows us to see the limits of Marx’s thinking and
to recognize those points in his work where Marx was
unable to transcend his bourgeois background and his education in
German Idealism. This criterion is that of the practical success or
failure of Marx’s concepts as each has been employed in the
history of Marxist movements. When we have affected this inventory and
grouped together the successful concepts, what we are left with is a
materialist Marxism, a Marxism which endorses the scientific method as
the best way for understanding ourselves and our potential but that
also understands that this method is fallible. Remaining also is a
Marxism which does not subscribe to any philosophy of history and which
certainly does not maintain that capitalism will inevitably lead to
communism. This Marxism has no system of interrelated concepts that
guarantee a scientific analysis. Further, it possesses no worked out
theory of the relations between economic structures and cultural
structures but for that limited knowledge which scientific practice
provides. Finally, this Marxism has given up the dream of analyzing the
whole of culture and its movement from the outside; it realizes that
one thinks inside and about the culture one inhabits in order to
possibly effect and change that culture.
After being interrupted by ill health and by the events following
from the murder of his wife, in 1982 Althusser returned to the question
of what was essential to Marx’s philosophy and expanded the scope
of this inquiry to include speculation about the metaphysics that must
underlie it. Freed by his ignoble status from the
task of influencing the direction of the Communist movement, the texts
associated with this project and gathered together in the book
Philosophy of the Encounter differ tremendously in subject
matter, style, and method from his other writings. Whether these texts
represent a continuation of, or even the key to his philosophy or
whether they are an aberration is presently being debated in the
secondary literature. However, as there is strong textural and archival
evidence that many of the ideas explicitly expressed in these works had
been gestating for a long time, the contention that these writings are
of a piece with his earlier work seems to be gaining ground.
The principal thesis of Althusser’s last philosophical
writings is that there exists an “underground” or little
recognized tradition in the history of philosophy. Variously labeled a
“materialism of the encounter” or “aleatory
materialism,” the method which he uses to articulate this
philosophy is to simply comment upon works by philosophers who
exemplify this current and to point out where, how, and to what extent
they do so. In addition to Marx, the philosophers that he cites as
being part of this underground tradition include Democritus, Epicurus,
Lucretius, Machiavelli, Spinoza, Hobbes, Rousseau, Montesquieu,
Heidegger, and Wittgenstein. From these readings in the history of
philosophy, Althusser aims to suggest that this tradition exists and
that it is both philosophically fecund and viable. He also wishes to
return to and bolster the thesis he first ventured in the late 1960s
that there are really only two positions in philosophy: materialism and
idealism. As he understood it, the two tendencies are always in a war
of opposition with the one functioning to reinforce the status quo and
the other to possibly overcome it.
Perhaps because it functions in opposition to the idealist tendency
in philosophy, aleatory materialism is marked almost as much by its
rejections as it is by the positive claims it contains about the world
and about history. As Marx is included within this tradition, it is not
surprising that many of these rejections are also attributed to him
during the course of Althusser’s earlier work. These include a
dismissal of what Althusser calls “the principle of
Reason,” or the idea that the universe or history has an origin
or an end. With this prohibition, Althusser means to exclude from this
tradition not only the usual suspects in the rationalist tradition, but
also mechanical and dialectical materialisms with their logics of
determination. Also dismissed, he maintains, is the myth that somehow
philosophy and philosophers are autonomous, that they see the world
from outside and objectively. Though there is an objective world,
philosophy does not have knowledge of this world as its object for
there is no way for it to ground itself and the material it thinks with
and through arises historically. Philosophy is therefore not a science
or the Science of sciences and it produces no universal Truth. Rather,
the truths it produces are contingent and are offered in opposition to
other competing truths. If philosophy does have an object, it is the
void, or that which is not yet but which could be.
That the philosophy of the encounter lacks an object does not mean
that it lacks positive propositions. However, given the
epistemological status attributed to philosophy by Althusser, these
metaphysical propositions or “theses” are true only insofar
as they have explanatory or practical value. First among them,
following Democritus, is the thesis that matter is all that exists.
Second is the thesis that chance or the aleatory is at the origin of
all worlds. That the patterns which constitute and define these worlds
can be known, described, and predicted according to certain laws or
reasons is also true. However, the fact that these worlds ever came to
be organized in these patterns is aleatory and the patterns themselves can only
ever be known immanently. Third, new worlds and new orders themselves
arise out of chance encounters between pre-existing material elements.
Whether or not such orders emerge is contingent: they do not have to
occur. When material elements collide, they either “take”
and a new order is founded, or they do not and the old world
continues.
To Althusser, the propositions which have explanatory value at the
level of ontology and cosmology also have value at the level of
political philosophy. After first citing Rousseau and Hobbes as
example of philosophers who recognized that the origin and continued
existence of political orders is contingent, Althusser turns to
Machiavelli and Marx for his principle examples of how aleatory
materialism functions in the political realm. The anti-teleological,
scientistic, and anti-humanist, Marxist philosophy developed by
Althusser over the course of his career works well with the
materialist metaphysics recounted above. In this understanding of
Marxist philosophy, societies and subjects are seen as patterns of
activity that behave in predictable ways. Though scientists may study
and describe these orders in their specificity, it does not at first
appear that philosophy can do much except to categorize these
interactions at the most general level. However, citing Marx’s
work again and taking inspiration from Machiavelli’s project of
installing “a new prince in a new principality,” Althusser
argues that the materialist philosopher may accomplish somewhat more
than this with her descriptions, critiques, and predictions. This is
because, by examining a political order not from the perspective of
its necessity but with an awareness of its contingency, this
philosopher may be able think the possibility of its
transformation. If chance smiles on her, if someone listens and if
effects occur, then elements might recombine and a new political might
take hold. This is, to be sure, a very limited and unpredictable power
attributed to the philosopher. However, it is also the only one that
Althusser in his late works argues is adequate for political practice
and that does not, like idealism, merely serve to reproduce existing
relations.