Until recently, loyalty did not attract much attention in Western
philosophical writing. Most of the detailed engagement with loyalty
came from creative writers (Aeschylus, Galsworthy, Conrad), business
and marketing scholars (Goman; Jacoby & Chestnut), psychologists
(Zdaniuk & Levine), psychiatrists
(Böszörményi-Nagy), sociologists (Connor), religion
scholars (Sakenfeld; Spiegel), political economists (Hirschman),
and—pre-eminently—political theorists, who took a
particular interest in nationalism, patriotism and loyalty oaths
(Grodzins, Schaar, Guetzkow). Because of its focus on familial
relations, Confucian thought has long been interested in loyalty
(Goldin). The grand Western philosophical exception has been Josiah
Royce, who, influenced by eastern philosophy (Foust, 2012b, 2015),
created an ethical theory centering on “loyalty to
loyalty.” Royce has generated a steady but specialized interest
(see, esp. Foust, 2012a, 2011).  Since the 1980s, though, some
independent philosophical discussion has begun to emerge (Baron,
Fletcher, Oldenquist, MacIntyre, Nuyen, Keller, Jollimore, Felten,
Kleinig), not only generally and in the context of political theory,
but also in the areas of occupational and professional ethics
(McChrystal, Trotter, Hajdin, Hart & Thompson, Schrag, Coleman),
whistleblowing (Martin, Varelius), friendship (Bennett), and virtue
theory (Ewin).
Although the term “loyalty” has its immediate philological
origins in Old French, its older and mostly abandoned linguistic roots
are in the Latin lex. Nevertheless, dimensions of the
phenomenon that we now recognize as loyalty are as ancient as human
association, albeit often manifested in its breaches (disloyalty,
betrayal).  The Old Testament writers were continually occupied with
the fickleness of human commitments, whether to God or to each
other. To characterize it they tended to use the language of
(un)faithfulness, though nowadays we might be inclined to use the more
restricted language of (in)fidelity, which has regard to specific
commitments. In medieval to early modern uses of the term, loyalty
came to be affirmed primarily in the oath or pledge of fealty or
allegiance sworn by a vassal to his lord. That had an interesting
offshoot as monarchical feudalism lost sway: loyal subjects who were
torn by the venality of sitting sovereigns found it necessary—as
part of their effort to avoid charges of treason—to distinguish
their ongoing loyalty to the institution of kingship from their
loyalty to a particular king.
As a working definition, loyalty can be characterized as a practical
disposition to persist in an intrinsically valued (though not
necessarily valuable) associational attachment, where that involves a
potentially costly commitment to secure or at least not to jeopardize
the interests or well-being of the object of loyalty. For the most part, an association that we come to value for its own sake is also one with which we come to identify (as mine or ours).
The nature of loyal attachment is a matter of debate. The strong
feelings and devotion often associated with loyalty have led some to
assert that loyalty is only or primarily a feeling or
sentiment—an affective bondedness that may express itself in
deeds, the latter more as an epiphenomenon than as its core. As Ewin
puts it, it is an “instinct to sociability” (Ewin, 1990,
4; cf. Connor). But feelings of loyalty are probably not constitutive
of loyalty, even if it is unusual to find loyalty that is
affectless. Arguably, the test of loyalty is conduct rather than
intensity of feeling, primarily a certain “stickingness”
or perseverance—the loyal person acts for or stays with or
remains committed to the object of loyalty even when it is likely to
be disadvantageous or costly to the loyal person to do so.
Those who focus on loyalty as a sentiment often intend to deny that
loyalty might be rationally motivated. But even though expressions of
loyalty are not maximizing (in cost-benefit terms), the decision to
commit oneself loyally may be rational, for one need not (indeed, ought
not to) enter into associations blindly, or—even when they are
initially unavoidable (as with familial or national ones)—accept their
demands unthinkingly. Moreover, once made, such commitments may be
forfeited by the objects of loyalty should there be serious failure on
their part, or they may be overridden in the face of significantly
greater claims. One loyalty may trump another.
Unsentimental loyalties, such as the zealous but unsentimental
professional loyalty of a lawyer to a client, are not unthinking, but
have their rationale in professional or associational tele,
such as that of the adversarial system (however, see McConnell). It is
to this shared professional commitment that the lawyer is ultimately
committed, not as a matter of mere sentiment but of deliberated
choice.
Posing the issue as one of either “practical
disposition” or “sentiment” is probably too stark.
Some evolutionary biologists/psychologists see loyalty as a genetically
transmitted adaptive mechanism, a felt attachment to others that has
survival value (Wilson, 23). Given what is often seen as the
self-sacrificial character of individual loyalty, such loyalty is taken
to be directed primarily to group survival (West, 218). But it is not
clear what any such explanatory account shows. What
“loyalty” may have begun as (defense of the group against threat) and what it has come to be for
reflective beings need not be the same. Nor would it impugn what
loyalty has come to be that it began as a survival mechanism (presuming
an adaptive account to be correct).
Although we often speak of loyalty as though it were a relatively
free-floating practical disposition—which it occasionally is—it
is more common to associate loyalty with certain natural or
conventional groupings. Our loyalty tends to be expressed in
loyalties. That is, it is not just a general affiliational
attachment, but one that is tied to certain kinds of natural
or conventional associations, such as friendships, families,
organizations, professions, countries, and religions. There is a
reason for this. Associations that evoke and exact our loyalty tend to
be those with which we have become deeply involved or
identified. This is implicit in the working
definition’s reference to “intrinsically valued
associational attachments.” Intrinsically valued associational
attachments are usually those to which we have developed a form of
social identification. We have come to value the associational bond
for its own sake (whatever may have originally motivated it). Our
loyalties are not just to any groups that may exist, or even to any
group with which we have some association, but only to those to which
we are sufficiently closely bound to call ours. My loyalties
are to my friends, my family, my
profession, or our country, not yours, unless yours are also
mine. In such identifications, the fate or well-being of the objects
of loyalty become bound up with one’s own. We feel shame or
pride in their doings. We will take extra risks or bear special burdens for
them.
Although our primary loyalties tend to be associations or groupings
that are socially valued, such that loyalty may seem to be an important
practical disposition, this need not be the case. For in theory, any
association can become intrinsically important to us, whether or not it
is generally valued, and it may do so even if it is socially despised.
Football teams and coffee chains, gangs and crime families, may become
objects of loyalty no less than professional associations and
siblings.
This raises the important question whether judgments about the worth
of loyalty are reducible to judgments about the worth of the
associations to which loyalty is given or the legitimacy of what is
done as a result of them. Does loyalty have any value independent of
the particular associational object with which it is connected or is
its value bound up exclusively with the object of loyalty? There is
disagreement on this (paralleling disagreements about the
obligatoriness of promise keeping). Some would argue that loyalty is
virtuous or vicious depending on what is done out of loyalty. Others
would argue that loyalty is always virtuous, though overridden when
associated with immoral conduct. Consider the complicated case of a
loyal Nazi. Ewin would argue that because a Nazi can be loyal, loyalty
could not be a virtue, for the virtues are internally linked to the
idea of good judgment. Whether that follows can be disputed. The loyal
Nazi might express that loyalty in a number of ways (as a husband and
father, as a compassionate co-worker, or as a scourge of Jews) and in
at least some of these ways loyalty would appear to function as a
virtue (unless, perhaps, there is some special Nazi way of being a
husband). In the more interesting case of a loyal Nazi whose loyalty
expresses itself in anti-semitic forms, we could respond in one of two
ways. On the one hand, we could point to the fact that the loyalty is
likely to aggravate the harm caused. On the other hand, were such a
Nazi to act disloyally by allowing Jews who bribed him to escape, we
could argue that he is doubly deficient—self-serving and
defective in his capacity to form close bonds. Certainly the value of
particular associations is of importance to how we value loyalty to
them; but it is doubtful whether the value of loyalty is simply
reducible to the value of the association in question. 
It has sometimes been suggested that “A can be loyal to
B only if there is a third party C … who
stands as a potential competitor to B” (Fletcher,
8). It is true that many, if not most, expressions of loyalty occur
against the background of some challenge to B’s interests
whose protection by A will be at some cost to
A. Failures of loyalty often result in betrayal (of
B, sometimes to C). Defending one’s
spouse in the face of criticism may also subject oneself to
vilification. Refusing to leave one’s university for another may
involve a sacrifice of pay and opportunities. Patriotic loyalty may
involve volunteering for military service when one’s country is
attacked. Sometimes, though, the loyal friend will simply manifest the
loyalty by being responsive to B’s need at some
inconvenience. The loyal A will get up at 2.00am to fetch
B when B’s car has broken down or will agree to be
best man at B’s wedding even though it will involve a long
flight and great expense. No third party is involved, but there will
be a cost to A. The essence of disloyalty is more likely to be found in the blandishments of self-interest or self-maximization than in external temptations (C).
Some defenders and critics of loyalty take the frequent presence of
C as a reason for seeing loyalty as inherently
exclusionary. To put it in the words of the political consultant,
James Carville, “sticking with” B requires
“sticking it to” C (Carville). No doubt some
loyalties—especially political ones—frequently express
themselves in such terms. But jingoism is not necessary to patriotic
loyalty (pace Tolstoy), and in most contexts the privileging
of an object of loyalty (B) does not require treating others
(C) badly. Loyalty to one’s own children need not involve
the disparagement of others’ children.
Loyalty is generally seen as a particularistic virtue. That is, it
privileges certain groups or individuals. Although Royce made
“loyalty to loyalty” into a universalistic principle,
there has been much debate concerning the relation between
particularistic obligations, such as those associated with loyalty and
gratitude, and universalistic obligations owed to all by virtue of
their humanity. Are particularistic obligations subsumable under
universalistic ones (honor your father and mother) or are they
independently derived? If the latter, do they stand in permanent
tension (obligations to the poor vs. obligations to one’s
children)? How, if at all, are conflicts to be resolved?  The
discussion has its modern roots in Enlightenment ideas of equal
respect and of what is therefore owed to all by virtue of their common
humanity. Both consequentialist and Kantian universalism have some
difficulty in accommodating particularist virtues such as loyalty, and
on occasion have eschewed the latter. As Godwin notoriously asked:
“What magic is there in the pronoun ‘my,’ that
should justify us in overturning the decisions of impartial
truth?” (Godwin, vol. 1, 127).
Although most classical theorists have tended to accord moral
priority to universalistic values, there have been important
exceptions. Andrew Oldenquist has argued for the primacy of certain
communal domains defined by our loyalties (“all morality is
tribal morality”), within which considerations of impartiality
may operate: “our wide and narrow loyalties define moral
communities or domains within which we are willing to universalize
moral judgments, treat equals equally, protect the common good, and in
other ways adopt the familiar machinery of impersonal morality”
(Oldenquist, 178, 177). Although Oldenquist denies that there is a
nontribal, universalist morality, thus seeking to deprive the
universalist of any independent traction, he does not do much to
establish the primacy of the tribal apart from its temporal
priority.
Bernard Williams has argued that if the claims of universalism
(whether of the consequentialist or Kantian kind) are given
pre-eminence, they will alienate people from their “ground
projects,” where the latter include the deep attachments
associated with loyalties. Williams obviously has a point, though even
he concedes that such projects are not impervious to universalistic
challenges (Williams, 17–18).
Many systematic moral theorists attempt to anchor particularistic
virtues such as loyalty in larger universalistic premises. R.M. Hare,
for example, adopts a two-tiered consequentialist position that seeks
to justify the particularistic obligations of loyalty within a broader
consequentialist schema: we contribute more effectively to overall
well-being if we foster particularistic obligations. Reflecting on the
particularism of mother love and loyalty, he writes: “If mothers
had the propensity to care equally for all the children in the world,
it is unlikely that children would be as well provided for even as they
are. The dilution of the responsibility would weaken it out of
existence” (Hare, 1981, 137). Unfortunately, simply being aware
of the larger schema may be sufficient to evacuate the particularistic
obligation of much of its power—and, indeed, to call it into
question. Moreover, it may overlook the distinctive source of the
particularistic obligation—not in the needs of children so much
as in their being one’s own.
Peter Railton has attempted to find a place for loyalties within a
broadly consequentialist framework that avoids both alienation and the
problem confronting Hare’s two-tiered system. According to
Railton, there are good consequentialist reasons for particularistic
preferences, consequentialist reasons that do not undercut but honor
the particularism of those preferences. Railton’s defense trades
on a distinction between subjective and objective consequentialism, the
objective consequentialist (whom he supports) being committed to the
course of action available to an agent that would maximize the good
(Railton, 152). That, he believes, does not require that the agent
subjectively decide to maximize the good—indeed, it may require
that the agent not make such calculations. Overall, then, a loyalty to
friends and family, and commitment to ground projects may maximize
good, even though, were one to make a subjective calculation, it would
undermine the loyalty or commitment. Although there is some debate
about the success of this strategy (Wilcox; Conee), it goes some way to
countering the common perception that universalistic (or impersonal)
theories can find no place for particularist obligations.
Another two-tiered system, but of a nonconsequentialist variety, is
suggested by Alan Gewirth, who accords primacy to the principle that it
is a necessary condition for human agency that all be accorded equal
rights to freedom and well-being. That commitment, he believes, will
also be sufficient to ground special obligations such as those finding
expression in personal, familial, and national loyalties. It serves as
such a ground because the commitment to individual freedom permits the
formation of voluntary associations, including “exclusive”
ones, as long as they do not interfere with others’ basic
freedom. Such voluntary associations are formed not merely for
instrumental purposes, as contributions to our freedom, but are
expressive of it. A persisting problem for this account concerns the
resolution of conflicts between obligations that arise out our
associational commitments (say, our families) and those that arise
directly out of the general principle (say, to assist the world’s
needy). This is of course a general problem, and not just one for
Gewirth; but it puts a question mark against the success of
Gewirth’s distinctive project, which was to develop a systematic
alternative to the moral pluralism that he associates with Isaiah
Berlin, Michael Walzer, and Thomas Nagel.
It may be that particularistic obligations such as those of loyalty
have to be considered as sui generis, products not simply of our common
humanity but of our sociality, of the self-realizing significance of
associational bonds—most particularly friendships, but also
various other associational connections that come to be constitutive of
our identity and ingredients in our flourishing. That leaves, of
course, the problem of resolving conflicts with universalistic
obligations when they occur. We may, with Scheffler, wish to argue that
the reasons generated by particularistic associations are
“presumptively decisive” in cases in which conflict arises
(Scheffler, 196), though that would need to be integrated in some way with judgments about the value to be attributed to particular associations.
The primary subjects of loyalty tend to be individual persons, but
loyalty is not restricted to these. Mutuality is a feature of many
loyalties, and it is often a normative expectation of the loyal individual that
the collectivity to which the individual is loyal will also be loyal
in return (Ogunyemi). Just as we personify organizations, regarding them as in
some sense responsible actors, so we can attribute loyalty to them 
or—more often—bemoan their lack of loyalty to those who
have been loyal to them.
May animals be loyal? Tales of canine loyalty are legion, and even
among wild animals, especially those that move in social groups,
loyalty is often said to be shown. To the extent that loyalty is seen
as an adaptive sentiment, we may think that animals are capable of
loyalty. That may be a convenient way of characterizing animal
behavior (what Aristotle refers to as a "natural" virtue), though, as Fletcher observes, the kind of loyalty shown is
limited because such loyalty cannot be betrayed. The dog who is
distracted by the burglar’s steak does not betray its owner; its
training has simply been inadequate. It is the kind of loyalty that, if
displayed by humans, would be characterized as “blind” and
therefore likely to expose one to moral peril (Blamires, 24).
As noted, the primary objects of loyalty tend to be
persons, personal collectivities, or quasi-persons such as
organizations or social groups. Some argue that it is only to such
that we can be loyal (Ladd; Baron). But that is at odds with the view
that almost “anything to which one’s heart can become
attached or devoted” may also become an object of 
loyalty—principles, causes, brands, ideas, ideals, and ideologies
(Konvitz, 108). Royce himself argued that loyalty is the
“willing and practical and thoroughgoing devotion of a person to
a cause” (Royce, 1908, 16–17). In response, those who
personalize the objects of loyalty point out that we have equally
available to us the language of commitment or devotion and, in the
case of what is spoken of as “loyalty to one’s
principles,” we have the language of integrity.
There is some reason to favor the more restrictive focus for
loyalty. Our core loyalties, which also happen to be those that are
psychologically more powerful (Walzer, 5), tend to secure the
integrity of our particular human associations. To the extent that our
moral obligations encompass not only our relations with other human
beings in general but also our relationships with particular
others—our friends, families, fellow citizens, and so
on—loyalty will be partially constitutive and sustaining of
these particular others in contexts in which narrow or short-term
self-interest is likely to be better served by abandoning them. If we
further argue that the core of morality is concerned with the quality
of relationships that people have with each other, both as fellow
humans and in the various associative groups that they form, then
loyalty will constitute an important dimension of that relational
network. Even the “cause” with which Royce associates
loyalty is ultimately articulated in terms of devotion to a community
(Royce, 1908, 20; 1913, vol. 1, xvii).
Although the particularism of loyalty is sometimes thought to be
morally problematic, there is nothing in theory that prevents the
particular group being the whole human race (pace Ladd). A
universalist particularism can be found in some environmental contexts,
when the future of humanity is up for consideration, or—as it
was nicely illustrated in Mary Shelley’s Frankenstein—when 
Victor Frankenstein decided not to jeopardize the human
race by creating a companion for his monster (Shelley, 187). In
contexts in which the human race can itself be viewed as a
collectivity, loyalty to it may sometimes be attributed.
There is, perhaps, a deeper point to the view that the primary
object of loyalty is “personal,” a point that may also help
to explain why we are tempted to move from loyalty to people to loyalty
to ideals. In identifying with the object of our loyalty, there is
usually implicit in our loyalty a judgment that its object
meshes with that for which we stand. That is, embedded in those
associations to which our loyalty is given are certain presumptions
about the compatibility of the basic values attributable to the object
of loyalty with those to which we are committed (not that the values
themselves are what ground the loyalty, for that might suggest that the
loyalty is to the values). To the extent that we discover it to be
otherwise we have a reason for taking some action—either to try
to bring about a change in the object of our loyalty (what Albert
Hirschman calls giving voice) or to abandon it (Hirschman’s exit
option) on the ground that it has forfeited its claim to our
loyalty. There may, of course, be some sort of persistence of
loyalty despite a recognition that the object of loyalty is no longer
worthy of it. In such cases, the loyalty seems to ride on some
commitment to an associational ideal (“He will always be our
son.”). Nevertheless, though it may sometimes appear to allow for
attributions of loyalty to the supposedly embedded values, our loyalty
is primarily to the affiliational object or person, and not to the
particular values that it instantiates. The loyalty is to the
object of an association or relationship, that is, the person or
collectivity-in-relation.
Mark Twain and Graham Greene (“the virtue of
disloyalty”) notwithstanding, there is greater agreement that
disloyalty is a vice than that loyalty is a virtue. Perhaps the
frequency with which the demand for loyalty is used to
“justify” engagement in unethical conduct has led to
cynicism about its value. There is a certain resonance to the saying
that “when an organization wants you to do right, it asks for
your integrity; when it wants you to do wrong, it demands your
loyalty.” What might it be about loyalty that makes it vulnerable
to such uses?
There are those who, on the basis of their particular theory of
virtue, deny that loyalty could be a virtue. Ewin, for example, argues
that because loyalty can be badly placed and because, once formed, it
requires us not merely to suspend our own judgment about its object but
even to set aside good judgment (Ewin, 1992, 403, 411), its pretensions
to the status of a virtue are undermined, for the virtues are, he
argues, internally linked to some idea of good judgment.
There are two problems with this account. First, the understanding of
the virtues may be thought too restrictive. As with loyalty,
conscientiousness and sincerity can be directed to unworthy objects,
but conscientiousness and sincerity do not for that reason fail as
virtues.  It is arguable that had Ewin given consideration to the view
that virtues are not just practical dispositions that make possible
and tolerable some form of common life but do so in a particular
way—by operating, as Philippa Foot puts it, “at a point at
which there is some temptation to be resisted or deficiency of
motivation to be made good” (Foot, 8)—he might have been
able to accommodate them within a catalogue of virtues.
The second problem has to do with the idea that loyalty may require us
to set aside good judgment. No doubt something of that kind is
attempted by those who seek to exploit loyalty (and other virtues such
as generosity and kindness). But the well-established idea of a
“loyal opposition” should give pause to the suggestion
that loyalty requires complaisance or servility. Certainly, the loyal
person does not normally address radical questions to the object of
loyalty, but limits them instead to what is seen as compatible with
that object’s interests. But the radical questions need not be
foreclosed, even if a well-formulated challenge is needed to generate
them. If the setting aside of good judgment is sought, there is
nothing to stop a person—albeit with a heavy heart—from
questioning whether the object of loyalty may have forfeited claims to
it. The trust that tends to accompany loyalty need not encompass
gullibility and credulity.In the ordinary course of events, the trust
that accompanies loyalty has a judgment of trustworthiness as its
background.
The virtues are a mixed bag, conceptually and normatively. There are,
for example, moral and intellectual virtues, Christian and pagan
virtues. In the instant case, there is a distinction between
substantive and executive virtues.
Inter alia, the substantive virtues include compassion,
fellow-feeling, kindness, and generosity, whereas the executive
virtues include sincerity, courage, industriousness, and
conscientiousness. Substantive virtues motivate us to act well, that
is, to do good, and are critical to our moral relations with others
(and, in the case of prudence, to our own interests as well). The
executive virtues, or, as they are sometimes known, virtues of the
will, are important to the implementation of what the substantive
virtues require of us—sincerity in our compassion, courage in
our kindness, conscientiousness in our generosity. They help us to
surmount obstacles to our doing good. Loyalty, like sincerity, is an
executive virtue, and its worth in a particular case is especially
sensitive to the value of its object. Like other executive virtues, it
can become attached to unworthy objects—one may be a loyal Nazi
or sincere racist. But that does not make the executive virtues merely
contingent or optional. A world or person without sincerity or
conscientiousness or loyalty would be a seriously deficient one.
The executive virtues are an important ingredient in human excellence,
but they should not be cultivated in isolation from other virtues,
particularly the substantive ones. When Aristotle discussed the
virtues, he argued for the importance of phronesis or
practical wisdom in the application of the virtues so that they would
not be deficient, excessive, or misplaced. The virtues were never
meant to be possessed in isolation but as a cluster—one of the
things the ancients were plausibly getting at when they spoke of the
unity of the virtues.
There is sometimes a further question about whether loyalty, even if a
virtue, should be seen as a moral virtue. Loyalty may be thought
excellent to have—even a component of a good life—but is
it essentially a moral disposition? The divisions among virtues (say,
intellectual, moral, personal, and social) are, however, at best
unclear and probably overlapping. Kindness is almost always morally
commendable, but imaginativeness (often said to be an intellectual
virtue), courage (usually categorized as a personal virtue) and
reliability (sometimes called a social virtue) may be shown on the
sports field or by enemy soldiers as well as in contexts that render
them morally commendable. There may be no great value in attempts to
differentiate loyalty (and other virtues) into rigid and exclusive
categories. What is almost certainly arguable is that a person who is
completely devoid of loyalties would be deficient as a person
understood inter alia as a moral agent.
There is a great deal of contingency to the development of
loyalties. The loyalties we develop to family, tribe, country, and
religion often emerge almost naturally out of the process of nurture as
we become increasingly aware of the environmental factors that have
formed us. Our identifications can be very deep, and are often
unquestioning. For some writers, this unchosenness is what
distinguishes loyalty from other commitments such as fidelity (Allen).
But usually loyalty can be extended to consciously acquired relational
commitments, as we choose to associate with particular people, groups,
and institutions. Here again, the loyalties may or may not develop,
depending on the extent to which those associations acquire some
intrinsic significance for us beyond any instrumental value that may
have first attracted us to them. Such explanatory accounts, however, do
not justify the loyalties we form or may be inclined to form. Yet,
because loyalties privilege their objects, the provision of a
justification is important.
For some writers, the distinction between chosen and unchosen
loyalties is critical. Simon Keller, for example, considers that our
general unwillingness to question unchosen loyalties exhibits the lack
of integrity often referred to as bad faith. Once we have such
loyalties—he focuses on patriotic loyalties—we are
resistant to their scrutiny and self-defensively discount challenges to
them (Keller, 2005; 2007). There may be some truth to the view that we are
more likely to show bad faith as far as our unchosen loyalties are
concerned, but it may be difficult to offer that as a general comment
on unchosen loyalties. There may be no more reason not to call our
patriotism into question when we see how our country is behaving than
there is not to call a friendship into question when we see how our
friend is behaving. It may be psychologically harder (and a moral hazard associated with loyalties), but that
does not sustain a general judgment about unchosen loyalties.
Some have treated arguments for associational loyalty as though they
were cut from the same cloth as general arguments for associational
obligations. They have, therefore, embedded claims for loyalty in
“fair-play” or “natural duty to support just
institutions” arguments for associational obligations. But
whatever the merits of such arguments as grounds for general
institutional obligations, they do not provide grounds for the
particularistic obligations that we connect with loyalty. They do not
capture the particularity of such obligations. Even consent-based
arguments are insufficiently particularistic. Leaving aside the
possibility that our basic political or parental or other associational
obligations may also include an obligation to be loyal, we may usually
fulfil what we take those obligations to be without any sense of
loyalty to their objects. Obligations of loyalty presuppose an
associational identification that more general institutional or
membership obligations do not.
But as valuable as loyalty may be for associational recuperation, it
is not clear that we can link its justification only to its
recuperative potential. For even within a generally consequentialist
framework loyalty may play a more positive role. The loyal alumnus who
donates $100 million to an already healthy endowment fund is
contributing to institutional advancement rather than stemming
institutional decline. In such a case the loyalty expresses a desire to
further institutional interests rather than restore them. The donation
is seen as an expression of loyalty because it expresses a commitment
to the institution in the face of (presumably) more narrowly self-serving
alternatives available to the donor. An outside philanthropist might,
however, choose to donate the same amount, though not out of loyalty to
the institution.
More critically, if loyalty is viewed simply in terms of the goods
that the associative object is able to secure or produce, the
intrinsic value that the association has come to have for the loyal
person is overlooked, along with the sense of identification that it
expresses. It is out of that sense of identification that loyalty
arises. We return to this in c.  below.
But obligations of gratitude are not ipso facto obligations of
loyalty: the brutalized Jew who was rescued by the Good Samaritan may
have had a debt of gratitude but he had no debt of loyalty (Luke
10:25–37). Loyalty, moreover, may be owed where there is no
reason for gratitude: as may be the case between friends.  Obligations
of gratitude are recompensive, whereas obligations of loyalty are
associative.
A broad justification such as this leaves unstated what associations
might be constitutive of human flourishing. Perhaps there is no
definitive list. But most would include friendships, familial
relationships, and some of the social institutions that foster,
sustain, and secure the social life in which we engage as part of our
flourishing. To the extent that we accept that engagement with or in a
particular form of association or relation is constitutive of our
flourishing, to that extent we will consider loyalty to it to be
justified—even required.
The arguments that justify loyalty do not ipso facto justify absolute
loyalty, though they do not rule out the possibility that, for
example, a person might legitimately be willing, out of loyalty, to
lay down his life for another. That is often the case in wartime and
may also be true of some friendships. The strength of the claims of
loyalty will depend on the importance of the association to the person
who has the association and, of course, on the legitimacy of the
association in question. Not only may some associative relations be
illegitimate, but the expectations of one association may come into
conflict with those of another: we may have conflicts of loyalty. If
the conflict is resolved by giving one loyalty precedence over
another, it does not necessarily follow that loyalty to the one is
disloyalty to the other. It is no disloyalty to a friend who is
counting on me if instead I attend to my dying mother’s
needs. Sometimes such priorities will be straightforward; at other
times not. Prioritization may, nevertheless, call for an apology and
compensation in respect of the disappointed party. Even if we decide
unwisely (as did Robert E. Lee), our decision will not ipso facto
count as disloyalty.  Disloyalty is more often associated with the
self-serving or hypocritical abandonment of loyalty.
Royce, who sometimes appears absolutist about loyalty, seeks to avoid
the problems of absolutism in two ways. First, he construes the
loyalty that he considers central to the possession of a life over
which one is sovereign as some reasonably chosen cause: unchosen
causes do not qualify as causes in Royce’s sense. And second, he
thinks that his overarching ethical principle, “loyalty to
loyalty,” will exclude the formation of loyalties that manifest
themselves in the invasion of other loyalties (see also Foust, 2012a;
Mullin). But the formality of Royce’s position gives relatively little
guidance as to the content of loyalties that won’t interfere with
other loyalties or even to some lexical ordering that would resolve
potential conflicts.
It has already been noted that it is not part of loyalty to be
complaisant or servile, though loyalty may be corrupted into such. In
any plausible account of loyalty as a virtue there must be openness to
corrective criticism on the part of both the subject and object of
loyalty. The “corrective” qualification is important. Not
any opposition is permissible. A loyal opponent is not just an
opponent, but one who remains loyal. What that entails is that the
opposition stays within bounds that are compatible with the well-being
or best interests or flourishing of the object of loyalty. Generally
speaking, a loyal opposition will not advocate (the equivalent of)
rebellion or revolution for the latter would jeopardize the object of
loyalty (and perhaps lead to its replacement by an alternative object of
loyalty).
It is the commitment to opposition within (what are judged to be) the
prevailing structures that has led some radical critics of loyalty
(e.g., Agassi, Greene) to see it as—at bottom—a
conservative virtue. It is conservative, though in a positive
sense of that word: it involves a commitment to securing or preserving
the interests of an associational object, an object that is, or has
come to be, valued for its own sake (whatever else it may be valued
for). Nevertheless, the existence of a loyal opposition need not
preclude the possibility that a more radical opposition might and
indeed should subsequently be mounted. If the loyal opposition proves
incapable of “reforming” the object of loyalty, the exit
option (or something stronger) might be taken. In such cases it could
be argued that the object of loyalty was no longer worthy of it or had
forfeited its claim to it. It is only if we mistakenly or misguidedly
think of loyalty as making an absolute claim on us that a derogatory
charge of conservatism against a loyal opposition will have
traction.
For heuristic purposes, we can probably distinguish a double focus
for loyalty—either a type of association (such as a state)
or a particular instantiation of the type (such as the United States).
Strictly, loyalty will be only to the latter, though it assists in
understanding the limits of loyalty if we make the distinction.
If the type of institution is thought to be critical to human
flourishing, then loyalty to it will be expected. But if the
institution is of relatively minor significance, the development of
instantiations of it, along with loyalty to them, will be relatively
unimportant (though not necessarily to those who develop such
loyalties). Whether, for example, patriotism (that is, patriotic
loyalty) is justified will depend in part on the importance to be
accorded to a state or country. If we are social contractarians, then
the state (broadly conceived) offers a significant solution to some of
the problems of human association as well as an arena for social
identification. We might think that both a state and loyalty to it are
important. That, however, needs to be embodied in a particular state,
and that state may be such that the loyalty it should garner
is forfeited by how it acts.
Loyalty to a particular object is forfeited—that is, its
claims for the protection and reinforcement of associative identity and
commitment run out—when the object shows itself to be no longer
capable of being a source of associational satisfaction or
identity-giving significance. That is, the claims run out for the
once-loyal associate. (Others, of course, may dispute this.) But
whether or not loyalty is thought to be justifiably forfeited, the
breakpoint may differ for different people. Consider the case of
infidelity. For one woman, a husband’s infidelity may be a
challenge to the future of the relationship but not automatically
destructive of it. The relationship will be considered reparable. The
issues of trust that are involved may be addressed and the relationship
repaired. But for another, such infidelity may collapse the structure
in which the relationship has been housed. Essential trust will have
been smashed like Humpty Dumpty.
Is there a right and a wrong in such cases? Does the first woman
lack an appreciation of the “sanctity” of
marriage/intimacy? Does the second fail to appreciate our shared
frailty and the possibilities for redemption and renewal? We should
probably not acquiesce in the relativistic view that what is right for
one is wrong for the other. At the same time, however, there may be no
easy answer. The two positions constitute the beginnings of a
consideration of the nature of intimacy, what it reasonably demands of
us, and how we should respond to transgressions of its expectations.
The same may be true of other loyalties. Our approach may be assisted
by utilizing the earlier heuristic distinction between the general
form of an association and its particular instantiation. We may be
able to reach some general consensus on what a state might reasonably
expect of us. However, in any actual association with a particular
state the content of the bond may be individualized.
The issue of loyalty’s limits is usefully illustrated by the
phenomenon of “whistle blowing.” Although there is some
debate about its scope, whistle blowing can be helpfully (if not
fully) characterized as the activity of an employee within an
organization—public or private—who alerts a wider group to
setbacks to their interests as a result of waste, corruption, fraud,
or profit-seeking (Westin; Bowman; Miethe).  Because such employees
are generally considered disloyal, it has been common to characterize
them as traitors, snitches, weasels, squealers, or
rats. “Whistle blower” offers a more neutral way of
referring to such people, and permits an inquiry into the proper
limits of employee loyalty.
The normative background to whistle blowing is a belief that
employees owe loyalty to their employing organizations. Such loyalty
will include an expectation that employees not jeopardize their
organization’s interests by revealing certain kinds of
information to people outside it. If employees have grievances, they
should be dealt with within the organization (“we wash our own
laundry”). The case for whistle blowing, then, is driven by the
recognition, first of all, that internal mechanisms often fail to deal
adequately with an organization’s failures, and second, that
because the interests jeopardized by those failures often include those
outside the organization, a wider group has a prima facie right to know
of the costs that it faces or that have been imposed on it.
Blowing the whistle frequently creates significant disruption within
an organization—it may lose control of its affairs as it is
subjected to external inquiries and constraints; it may find itself
crippled by costs or other restrictions; and many within it who are
little more than innocent bystanders may suffer from the repercussions
of an externally mounted investigation. Because the whistle blowing
jeopardizes the organization’s interests (at least as they are
understood within the organization), whistle blowing is therefore seen
as a significant act of disloyalty. Whistle blowers themselves will
often argue that owed loyalty has been forfeited (or at least
overridden), so that no disloyalty has been perpetrated. Occasionally they will argue that whistle blowing can be an act of loyalty.
A resolution to such conflicting assessments must address the issue
of loyalty’s limits and, in the case of whistle blowing, it must
take cognizance of several considerations: (i) Because of the
disruption it threatens, the whistle should be blown only as a matter
of last resort. (ii) For the same reason the organizational
wrongdoing should be sufficiently serious. (iii) The public
complaint should be well-grounded—the reasons that
support it should be strong enough to be publicly defensible. (iv) A
potential whistleblower should consider whether he or she has a special
role-related obligation to take some action. Although any
member of an organization might have some responsibility for what is
done in its name, some members will be better placed to make
appropriate assessments of seriousness and may be more responsible for
the way in which the organization conducts its activities. (v) Because
the purpose of blowing the whistle is to bring about change, the
potential for the whistle blowing to be effective ought to be
considered. (vi) It is sometimes argued that the act of whistle blowing
needs to be appropriately motivated—it must at least be done
out of concern for those whose interests are being jeopardized. This
consideration, however, may have more to do with the whistle
blower’s praiseworthiness than with the justifiability of blowing
the whistle. A morally compromised whistleblower, however, may find his
or her credibility undermined and the exposé rendered
ineffective.
Even if the foregoing considerations are satisfactorily addressed,
there remains a question whether blowing the whistle is obligatory or
merely permissible. As omissions, failures to blow the whistle must
engage with debates about the moral obligatoriness of our acting to
prevent harm. Even if it is morally obligatory, though, there may be
reasons for not making whistle blowing legally mandatory. In addition,
the potential costs to a whistleblower may excuse even legally mandated
reporting of organizational wrongdoing (Glazer & Glazer; Martin).
Although legal protections for whistle blowers have been instituted
in some jurisdictions, they have often proved inadequate (Glazer &
Glazer).
Anonymous whistle blowing represents a possible solution; it opens
the door, however, to disruptive whistles being blown for the wrong reasons or
after careless investigation (cf. Elliston; Coulson).
In sum, the case of whistle blowing illustrates not only the
importance of loyalty to many organizations but also the care that
needs to be exercised when it is claimed that obligations of loyalty
are justifiably overridden or forfeited.