We know virtually nothing, beyond what little can be inferred from
the poem itself, of Lucretius’ biography. There is just one
contemporary reference to him (or near contemporary, depending on the
date of his death): it is found in a letter of Cicero, written in 54
BCE, where he briefly agrees with his brother about the ‘flashes
of genius’ and ‘craftsmanship’ that characterize
Lucretius’ poetry.
What we can say for sure is that the poem is dedicated and addressed
to a Roman aristocrat named Memmius, although it is not altogether
certain which member of the Memmius family this was. Lucretius
expresses a hope for Memmius’ friendship, but that does not rule out
the possibility of an asymmetric client-patron relation, as distinct
from one of genuine social equality.
The other biographical data are late and untrustworthy. They put
his birth in 94 BCE, his death in either 54 or 51. (A case has even
been made, by Hutchinson 2001, for dating his death later still, to
the early 40s BCE). We can, at all events, say with some confidence
that Lucretius wrote his poem in the mid first century BCE.
Because early Christianity branded Lucretius an enemy of religion,
his life and death had to be depicted as appropriately wretched. Thus,
according to St Jerome, he was driven mad by a love philtre, wrote
poetry in his lucid intervals, and died by his own hand, leaving his
poem to be edited posthumously by Cicero. This—apart from the
last detail, which some have found credible—is a palpable
fabrication. Its portrayal of wretched insanity is implicitly
contradicted by Lucretius’ younger contemporary and admirer Virgil, who
felt able to write of him in his Georgics, a didactic poem
heavily in Lucretius’ debt, the celebrated lines (2.490–2) ‘Happy
he who was able to know the causes of things (felix qui potuit
rerum cognoscere causas), and who trampled beneath his feet all
fears, inexorable fate, and the roar of devouring hell’. With
these admiring words, Virgil neatly encapsulates four dominant themes
of the poem—universal causal explanation, leading to
elimination of the threats the world seems to pose, a vindication of
free will, and disproof of the soul’s survival after death. But he
also, in advertising Lucretius’ philosophical understanding as his
enviable source of happiness, makes it implausible that the author of
DRN had by this date acquired his later reputation as a
suicidal psychotic.
Whether or not the poem is altogether in the finished state that
Lucretius would have wanted, its six-book structure is itself clearly a
carefully planned one. It falls into three matching pairs of books:
The sequence is one of ascending scale: the first pair of books
deals with the microscopic world of atoms, the second with human
beings, the third with the cosmos as a whole. Within each pair of
books, the first explains the basic nature of the entity or entities in
question, the second goes on to examine a range of individual phenomena
associated with them. A further symmetry lies in the theme of
mortality, treated by the odd-numbered books. Book I stresses from the
outset the indestructibility of the basic elements, while books III and
V in pointed contrast give matching prominence to the perishability and
transience of, respectively, the soul and the cosmos.
In addition to this division into three matching pairs of books, the
poem can also be seen as constituted by two balanced halves,
orchestrated by the themes of life and death. It opens with a hymn to
Venus as the force inspiring birth and life. The first half closes, at
the end of III, with Lucretius’ long and eloquent denunciation of the
fear of death. And the poem as a whole returns at its close to the
theme of death, with the disquieting passage on the frightful Athenian
plague during the Peloponnesian War: whether or not this, as we have
it, is in its finished form, there can be little doubt that the placing
of its theme itself somehow represents the author’s own
orchestration.
There has been much dispute over this ending. Some judge it a
poetically effective closure as it stands, others believe that
Lucretius would, had he lived, at least have completed it with a
suitable moral. The former party maintains that Lucretius by this point
in the poem is liable to leave readers to work out the moral for
themselves. On this, however, see further
 §5
below.
Epicurus founded his system in the late 4th and early 3rd
century BCE, and it became one of the most influential of the
Hellenistic age. Lucretius lived in Italy in a period when
Epicureanism flourished there, especially in the area of the Bay of
Naples, where a major Epicurean circle had formed around
Philodemus. Philodemus’ library was rediscovered during the
18th-century excavations of Herculaneum (recent claims to
have found remains of Lucretius’ poem among its badly
damaged contents may be unduly optimistic). In addition, the main
Epicurean school was still flourishing in Athens, despite the
departure of most other schools from their metropolitan headquarters
there, and it had other regional branches to which a Roman might
equally well go for study. In any case, Epicureanism was by now one of
the four leading philosophical systems that any aspiring
philosophy student was expected to master. Romans who, against this
background, became Epicureans included Cicero’s friend Atticus, and
Cassius, later an assassin of Caesar. It therefore becomes both easy
and attractive to think of Lucretius’ turn to Epicureanism as part of
a trend among the Roman intelligentsia. Curiously, however, his poem
shows few if any signs of contemporary philosophical or scientific
engagement.  We know a good deal about recent trends in the Epicurean
school—for example, its sophisticated debates with the Stoics
on scientific method and mathematics—yet we find little or no
evidence in Lucretius’ poem that he is aware of, let alone engaged in,
these developments. And although he includes a number of critiques of
anonymous opponents, none of these opponents can plausibly be
identified with anyone who lived in the two centuries separating
Epicurus’ own lifetime from Lucretius’, including adherents of the
era’s most prestigious school, the Stoa. It may, then, be more
accurate to think of Lucretius as philosophically isolated, drawing
his inspiration from Epicurus’ own treasured writings, and for that
reason adopting Epicurus’ polemical targets as his own.
This alternative fits well with the apparent facts about Lucretius’
use of sources. So far as one can tell, the material on physics that he
started from and reworked was all taken from the first fifteen books of
Epicurus’ 37-book magnum opus, On nature. Thanks to the
accidental survival in Lucretius’ book 4 of two alternative
programmatic passages for the book, we can work out that what we call
book 4 was initially planned to come directly after book 2, a sequence
of topics which would have exactly reproduced Epicurus’ own in On
nature, and that it was only in a later phase that he reorganised
his material so that our book 3 came to intervene. This gives good
grounds for the guess that the relatively small number of other
demonstrable departures from Epicurus’ original sequence likewise
represent the process by which, either while or after completing a
first draft, Lucretius set about reorganising the poem’s contents into
the six-book structure we possess today. So far as one can tell, his
rewriting of books 1–3 was complete, but that of books 4–6 was still
under way at the time of his death. (This is all argued at length in
Sedley 1998.) Among other signs of incompleteness, the latter three
books are very long, and would probably have been cut down to something
like the length of books 1–3 in the final revision.
Because of the way he worked, there are grounds for confidence that,
by and large, the central philosophical content of Lucretius’ poem
closely mirrors what he found in Epicurus. His departures from Epicurus
are more in the matter of sequence than of doctrine or argument. This
adherence to Epicurus’ own text is further confirmed by the reverent
tones in which Lucretius speaks of his master’s writings: ‘I
follow you, glory of the Greek race, as in your footprints I now plant
my own, not so much out of any desire to compete with you as for love,
for my wish is to imitate you … You are our father, the
discoverer of reality. You pass to us your paternal precepts, and from
your scrolls, glorious one, just as bees sip all they can find in the
flowery glades, we likewise feed upon all of your golden 
words—golden, and ever deserving of perpetual life’ (3.3–13).
At 1.921–50 (lines which later recur in part as the proem to book 4)
Lucretius sets out his poetic manifesto, declaring the revolutionary
novelty of his task. By this he means, no doubt, above all his task as
the first poet of Epicureanism. Philosophical poetry had been pioneered
by the early Greek writers Xenophanes, Parmenides and Empedocles, the
last of whom Lucretius both reveres and imitates. But none before him
had written poetry in defence of Epicureanism, or for that matter (and
Lucretius may have this innovation in mind too) philosophical poetry in
Latin.
There has been much discussion regarding the supposed unorthodoxy of
an Epicurean writing philosophical verse, but it has not been
established that Lucretius was breaking any school edict. Epicurus’ own
hostility to poetry had, it seems, belonged in a tradition that went
back at least to Plato, focusing on the morally harmful content of the
poetry, by Homer and others, that played such a large part in the Greek
educational curriculum. That versification as such was considered
objectionable in the school’s earlier tradition has not been shown.
Lucretius’ own explanation of his choice of a poetic medium is that
philosophy is medicine for the soul, and that the charms of verse can
function like the honey that doctors smear on the rim of a cup of
bitter medicine, to persuade children to drink it for their own good.
For, Lucretius loves to remind us, when it comes to fear of the
unknown, we are all of us mere children, terrified of the dark.
A feature germane to philosophical prose which Lucretius retains and
even enhances in his verse is the carefully tabulated order of a series
of arguments for each demonstrandum, even though additional, more
rhetorical features of his argumentative techniques have been rightly
noted by scholars (e.g., Asmis 1983, Markovic 2008). Another is the defence of a
hypothesis by appeal to analogy with familiar empirical data. This
latter procedure, integral to Epicurean methodology, presents Lucretius
with frequent occasion to develop rich and complex poetic 
similes—one of the most admired and appreciated aspects of his
writing.
Book 1 sets out the fundamental principles of Epicurean atomism.
1.149–482. First comes, in effect, Lucretius’ ontology.
Nothing comes into being out of nothing or perishes into nothing. The
only two per se entities are body and void; all other existing
things are inseparable or accidental properties of these (Lucretius’
own terms for which are coniuncta and eventa
respectively). Two further items that might be suspected of existing
independently of any concurrently existing body or void, (1) time and
(2) historical facts, are argued to be in fact existentially parasitic
on the presently existing world, and thus not after all per se
existents.
1.483–634. Lucretius next turns to the basic truths of
physics. Body comes in minute and physically indivisible portions,
atoms—although Lucretius does not use this Greek loan-word, and
prefers a series of circumlocutions such as ‘first beginnings of
things’ (primordia rerum), ‘seeds’, and
‘matter’ (materies, derived from mater,
‘mother’), which serve his poetic purposes by evoking the
creative powers of these primary particles. It is by their combination
into complex structures that all phenomenal beings are generated.
Epicurus had attached enormous importance to the internal structure
of atoms, which he held to consist of altogether partless magnitudes
called ‘minima’. Lucretius condenses and largely edits out
this doctrine. What little he does say in support of it is mixed in
with his defence of atoms themselves (1.599–634), rather than exhibited
as a separate part of the physical theory. Whether this policy reflects
the theory’s difficulty for himself or his readers, the economies
entailed by keeping the overall subject matter within the chosen
six-book structure, or a theoretical difference from early
Epicureanism, is destined to be a matter for speculation only.
1.635–920. Lucretius now turns polemical, attacking in
sequence three Presocratic philosophers representing three rival
physical systems as these had come to be classified in the
Aristotelian tradition: monism, finite pluralism and infinite
pluralism. Heraclitus, with his reduction of everything to fire, is
the token monist; Empedocles, with his four elements, represents
finite pluralism; and Anaxagoras, read through the lens of
Aristotelian doxography as making all the ‘homoeomerous’
or ‘like-parted’ stuffs the elements, is treated as
fundamentally sui generis. None of these thinkers had a
significant, if indeed any, following in Lucretius’ day (even if
Heraclitus had been accorded an honourable place in the prehistory of
Stoicism). His choice of them as targets probably reflects his
readiness to take over from Epicurus (most likely drawing on the
latter’s On nature books 14 and 15, but see Montarese 2012 for a different view) the critiques which the
school founder had felt it appropriate to launch in his own historical
context.
1.951–1117. The final part of book 1 is a leap from the
invisibly small to the unimaginably large. The universe is infinite,
he argues, consisting of infinitely extended space and an infinite
number of atoms. Some philosophers, he adds, mistakenly picture our
world as formed around a spherical earth, itself located at the
universe’s centre. Although Lucretius does not say so, the
juxtaposition of these two themes was natural because the latter
thesis—a version of the Platonic one that privileged our own
world as unique—was the main rival to that of the universe’s
infinity. Modern readers may therefore well sympathize with the
motivation of Lucretius’ critique of it, even if at the same time
regretting his too ready dismissal of the ridiculous image of animals
walking upside down in the antipodes, where it is day when it is night
here (1.1058–67).
Book 2 explains the nature of atomic compounds.
2.80–332. The opening exposition of book 2 descends into the
details of atoms’ behaviour and qualities. They are in perpetual
motion at enormous speed, since in the void they get no resistance
from the medium, and when they collide they can only be deflected, not
halted. Their weight gives them an inherent tendency to move
downwards, but collisions can divert those motions in other
directions. The result is that, when in a cosmic arrangement, atoms
build up complex and relatively stable patterns of motion, which at
the macroscopic level appear to us as states of rest or relatively
gentle motion. Lucretius compares a flock of sheep on a distant
hillside, which appears as a stationary white patch, even though close
up the constituent sheep prove to be in motion (2.317–22). The most
celebrated part of this account, however, is at 2.216–93 (see extended textual discussion in Fowler 2002), where
Lucretius maintains that not only to explain how atomic collisions can
occur in the first place, but also to account for the evident fact of
free will in the animal kingdom, it is necessary to postulate a
minimal indeterminacy in the motions of atoms, an unpredictable
‘swerve’ (clinamen) ‘at no fixed place or
time’. Otherwise we would all be automata, our motions
determined by infinitely extended and unbreakable causal chains. A
striking resemblance to the indeterminacy postulated by modern quantum
physics—which has also often been invoked in debates about
determinism—has helped make this passage the subject of
particularly intense debate.  Analogously to various modern
philosophical attempts to exploit quantum indeterminacy as a basis for
psychological indeterminism, interpreters of Lucretius have long
debated what relation he postulates between the swerve and free
will. Some have read him as positing at least one atomic swerve in the
soul to coincide with (and probably help constitute) every new
volition. Others have drawn attention to his remark that the swerve is
needed ‘so that cause should not follow cause from
infinity’ (2.255) and argued that the theory aims merely to
ensure that our present self is not the necessary product of our
entire past atomic history. A wide variety of further variants have been proposed.
2.333–1022. After his account of atoms’ motion, Lucretius
turns to their properties, explaining how a vast but finite variety of
atomic shapes underlies and accounts for the vast but finite phenomenal
variety that the world has to offer, without the atoms themselves
possessing either sensible properties such as colours, or mental
powers.
2.1023–1174. The final part of the book returns,
symmetrically with the end of book 1, to the nature of the universe
beyond the confines of our own world. This time Lucretius’ theme is the
existence of other worlds besides our own, it being inconceivable, he
argues, that in an infinite universe it should be only here that a
world has formed. Moreover, he adds, worlds come and go, our own
included. Both themes—the numberless plurality of worlds and
their transience—Lucretius regards as helpfully damaging to the
religious view of our world as a product of divine creation.
Book 3 turns to the soul and its mortality.
3.94–416. the soul’s constitution. The soul consists of two
parts. The ‘spirit’ (anima) is spread throughout
the body, while the ‘mind’ (animus) is the command
centre, located in the chest. The soul in both aspects can be shown to
be corporeal, Lucretius argues. Its characteristic sensitivity and
mobility are explicable by the special combination of atoms that
constitute it: it is a blend of the types of atoms constitutive of air,
wind and fire, along with a fourth, ultra-fine type unique to soul.
Although modern readers will find the details of this physiology
hopelessly outdated, they can usefully replace Lucretian
‘mind’ and ‘spirit’ with, respectively, the
brain and nervous system, in order to appreciate the enduring relevance
of what follows, Lucretius’ argument that our conscious selves cannot
survive death.
3.417–829. Given that it is atomically constituted, the
soul must like every atomic compound be destined for eventual
dissolution. Once the body dies, there is nothing to hold the soul
together, and its atoms will disperse—as Lucretius argues with
a massive battery of proofs (around thirty, the exact number depending
on alternative ways of dividing up the text). For example, he argues,
our mental development tracks that of the body through infancy,
maturity and senility alike, so it is only to be expected that the
body’s final disintegration should be accompanied by that of our mental
faculties. There is therefore, contrary to the most favoured religious
tradition, no survival after death, no reincarnation, and no punishment
in Hades. For the consequent lesson that death is not to be feared,
 see
 § 5
 below.
Book 4 moves the focus to the soul’s powers.
4.26–215. Lucretius starts by setting out the theory of
simulacra—atom-thin and lightning-fast
‘images’ that stream from the surfaces of solid objects (or
sometimes form spontaneously in mid air) and enter the eyes or mind to
cause vision and visualization.
4.216–1059. The basic theory is then applied to
sense-perception, and above all to vision and visualization, including
dreams. (The non-visual senses are addressed too, even though,
technically speaking, they rely not on simulacra but either on direct contact with their object or on other
kinds of effluence.) Lucretius devotes a substantial section to
describing optical illusions, which his atomic theory claims to be able
to account for without sacrificing its fundamental position that it is
never the senses that lie, only our interpretations of their data.
Indeed, he defends this latter Epicurean paradox by deploying a
classic self-refutation argument against the sceptical alternative: to
deny that we have access to knowledge through the senses (its only
possible entry route) is a philosophical stance that disqualifies its
own adherents by depriving them of any possible grounds for its
assertion (4.469–521).
Although cognitive mechanisms provide the main focus, a variety of
other animal functions, including nutrition and locomotion, are covered
by this part of the book. Among the gems is a digression attacking the
teleologists’ mode of physiological explanation (4.823–57). To explain
bodily limbs and organs on the model of artefacts, as divinely created
for the sake of their use, is a misapplication of the craft-nature
analogy. Artefacts were invented for the better fulfilment of functions
that already existed in nature—cups to facilitate
drinking, beds to improve sleep, weapons for more effective fighting.
No analogous story can be told about e.g., the eye being created for
seeing, because before there were eyes there was no such function as
seeing.
Books 5 and 6 set out to explain the cosmos as a whole and its
phenomenal contents.
5.91–415 expands the earlier argument that our world is no
more than a transient amalgam of atoms. This finding is taken by
Lucretius to be damning to creationism, for benevolent creators would
surely (as Plato had maintained) have ensured that their product would be
everlasting. Besides, he argues, the world is an environment too
hostile to human beings to lend any credence to the creationist thesis
that it was made for them. While other creatures seem to have it easy,
we struggle all our lives to eke out a living. When the new-born human
baby takes its first look at the world and bursts into tears, one can
admire its prescience, considering all the troubles that lie ahead for
it.
5.416–770. Following up on this theme, Lucretius now
reconstructs the blind process of atomic conglomeration that gave rise
to our world. He then continues with a matchingly non-theistic series
of explanations of individual celestial phenomena. In true Epicurean
spirit (here and in book 6 too; see especially 6.703–11), his favoured
policy is to list a plurality of explanations of one and the same
phenomenon without selecting one as correct. What matters is that,
however many such explanations we acknowledge, they should be
exclusively material explanations sufficient to render unnecessary the
postulation of divine intervention. Being intrinsically possible, they
must also be true, if not in our world, then at any rate
somewhere, for in an infinite universe no possibility can
remain unactualized (an application of the Principle of Plenitude).
Lucretius is here relying on an Epicurean modal theory based on 
actual—not just possible—worlds, whereby
‘possible’ is equated with ‘true in one or more
(actual) worlds’, ‘necessary’ with ‘true in all
(actual) worlds’.
5.771–1427. Continuing the early history of our world,
Lucretius envisages how life first emerged from the earth, and (an
especially admired and influential reconstruction) how humans developed
from nomadic hunters to city-dwellers with language, law and the arts.
In this prehistory the exclusion of divine intervention, while rarely
foregrounded, is plainly the underlying motivation. The fertile young
earth naturally sprouted with life forms, and the organisms thus
generated were innumerable random formations. Of these, most perished,
but a minority proved capable of surviving—thanks to strength,
cunning, or utility to man—and of reproducing their kind. This
account, which has won admiration for its partial anticipation of
a Darwinian principle, the survival of the fittest, is plainly using a
kind of natural selection to account non-teleologically for the
apparent presence of design in the animal kingdom.
Much the same anti-teleological program underlies the ensuing
prehistory of civilization (5.925–1457). Each cultural advance was
prompted by nature, and only subsequently taken up and developed by
human beings. Hence, it is implied, no divine intervention need be
postulated as an explanatory tool. No Prometheus was needed to
introduce fire, which rather was first brought to human attention by
naturally kindled forest fires (5.1091–1101). Language emerged
(5.1028–90) because people started to notice how their instinctive
vocal responses to things, comparable to animal noises, could be put at
the service of their intuitive desire to communicate (for which infants’
pre-linguistic pointing is cited as evidence). The same part of book 5
is rich in other cultural reconstructions, including the origin of
friendship and justice in a primitive social contract (5.1011–27), and
of conventional religion in early mankind’s misguided tendency to link
visions of the gods, above all in dreams, to their desire to explain
cosmic phenomena (5.1161–1240).
6.96–1286. To conclude his poem, Lucretius works through a
range of the phenomena that physical theorists were standardly called
upon to account for: storms, waterspouts, earthquakes, plagues and the
like. Once more the exclusion of divine causation undoubtedly motivates
the account, the phenomena in question being nearly all ones popularly
regarded as manifestations of divine intervention. Lucretius not only
explains them naturalistically, but is ready to mock the rival,
theological explanations: for example, if thunderbolts are weapons
hurled by Zeus at human miscreants, why does he waste so much of his
ammunition on uninhabited regions, or, when he does score a hit,
sometimes strike his own temple (6.387–422)?
The De rerum natura is, as its title confirms, a work of
physics, written in the venerable tradition of Greek treatises On
nature. Nevertheless, Lucretius writes as a complete Epicurean,
offering his reader not just cosmological understanding but the full
recipe for happiness. Certainly to eliminate fear of the divine through
physical understanding is one component of this task, but not the only
one. According to the Epicurean canon, the fear of death must also be
countered, and the rational management of pleasures and pains
learnt.
Such an agenda manifests itself at various strategically significant
points of the poem, in the form of Lucretius’ uplifting pleas for
Epicurean values. The magnificent finale of book 3 (830–1094) is a
diatribe against the fear of death, taking as its starting point the
preceding demonstration that death is simply annihilation. To fear a
future state of death, Lucretius argues, is to make the conceptual
blunder of supposing yourself present to regret and bewail your own
non-existence. The reality is that being dead will be no worse (just as
it will be no better) than it was, long ago, not yet to have been born.
This Lucretian ‘symmetry argument’ (see Warren 2004; also
Death 2.3), which has enjoyed widespread discussion in
the recent philosophical literature on death, is found in company with
a whole battery of further arguments for acquiescing in the prospect of
one’s own dissolution. Book 4’s treatment of sexual passion (1037–1287) includes a
matching diatribe, comically denouncing the folly of enslaving oneself to any individual (1121–1191).
The proem to book 2 extols the Epicurean life of detached
tranquility, portrayed as maintaining modest and easily satisfied
appetites while shunning lofty ambitions and the disquiet these
inevitably bring in their wake. And the proem to book 6, in praising
the city of Athens for the gifts of civilisation, adds that these are,
nevertheless, dwarfed by that city’s greatest gift to mankind, Epicurus
and his philosophy. For it is Epicurus alone who has made life
genuinely worth living, not only by releasing us from the torment of
fear but also by teaching us how to manage our desires to the point
where we can enjoy their genuine and lasting satisfaction. Lucretius’
entire history of civilisation in book 5 (1011–1457) can be read as
strengthening this same motif (cf. Furley 1978): civilization has
advanced because of man’s desire to better his lot, but to no avail,
because every advance eliminates one source of grief only to replace it
with another. The root cause of our troubles lies elsewhere, Lucretius
is implying, and, even after civilization had reached its peak, it
remained for Epicurus to bring that cause to light.
The Epicurean fourfold cure (tetrapharmakos) read:
‘God holds no fears, death no worries. Good is easily attainable,
evil easily endurable.’ The first three of these maxims are fully
represented by the poem’s moral commentary, but the fourth is curiously
absent. How was evil to be endured? Epicurus’ recipe for
accepting pain with equanimity lay in such strategies as concentrating
the mind on past pleasures, and, where the pain was terminally severe,
on its imminent eclipse by the painless state of death. Although this
recipe has not always impressed Epicurus’ modern interpreters, it was
widely and admiringly quoted by his ancient followers and sympathizers.
It is hard to believe that Lucretius, with his deep understanding of
Epicurean ethics, did not plan to rectify its glaring omission from his
poem. If he did so plan, the obvious place to incorporate the final maxim
of the canon would have been in connection with the frightful
sufferings in the great Athenian plague, horrifyingly described in the
poem’s closing verses. Those who believe that the poem is unfinished,
and that Lucretius had he lived would have developed or restructured
its final part, may justifiably suspect that the possibility of good
cheer and optimism in the face of pain was the motif that he was saving
for that role, wherever and however he might eventually have chosen to
work it in.
Lucretius presents Epicurus’ chief achievement as the defeat of
religio. Although this Latin word is correctly translated into
English as ‘religion’, its literal meaning is
‘binding down’, and it therefore serves Lucretius as a
term, not for all attitudes of reverence towards the divine, but for
those which cow people’s spirits, rather than, as he thinks such
attitudes should, elevate them to a joyful state of tranquility.
Epicurus had insisted on the existence of the gods, but the mode of
existence he attributed to them has become a matter of controversy.
They have only ‘quasi-bodies’, for example, and are
constituted by nothing more than the wafer-thin and lightning-fast
‘images’ (Latin simulacra, see above
 § 4)
 which according to Epicurus enter our eyes and
minds to become the stuff of vision, imagination and dreams. Some
scholars take this constitution out of simulacra to describe a
highly attenuated mode of biological being which somehow makes the
immortal gods an exception to the rule that compounds must eventually
disintegrate, so that they are able to live on forever, not in any
world like ours (since all worlds must themselves eventually perish)
but in the much safer regions between worlds. Others, who
doubt such a realist interpretation, take the reduction of gods to
simulacra to be Epicurus’ way of saying that these immortal
beings are our own intuitive thought-constructs, our personal
idealizations of the ideally tranquil life to which we naturally
aspire, and that he is not committed to the further view that such
beings must actually exist as living organisms somewhere in the
universe. Epicurus’ recorded instruction to think of god as a
blessed and immortal being does not help us choose between the two
readings. It would probably be a mistake to assume that any text or
texts of Epicurus were available to resolve the ambiguity definitively,
similar ambiguities being an endemic characteristic of much religious
discourse (the most famous case in antiquity was Plato’s account of the
creation in his Timaeus, on whose interpretation his followers
never agreed despite possessing his entire works). Lucretius shows
signs of assuming the realist view of the gods (2.153–4, 6.76–7), yet
his account of the origin of religion (5.1169–82) leans more towards
the idealist reading. Disappointingly, the actual exposition of the
gods’ nature that he promises us (5.155) never materializes. One may
wonder whether he ever located in his massive Epicurean source the
explicit account of the gods’ mode of being that he was expecting to
find there.
Either way, what is not in doubt is that the gods’ role as moral
ideals is paramount in the Epicurean system. And this is the function
Lucretius too gives them, especially in the proems to books 1, 3, 5 and
6. The gods live a supremely tranquil life, never disquieted by either
favour or anger towards us. By contemplating them as they truly are we
can aspire to achieve that same blissful state within the confines of a
human lifespan. But Lucretius adds another dimension to this theology:
for as the poem progresses Epicurus himself is increasingly presented
as a god. In itself this apotheosis is probably consistent with
Epicurean theology: Epicurus did after all attain the same morally
paradigmatic status which characterizes the gods. But in the proem to
book 5 Epicurus is permitted to go beyond this paradigmatic role, and
to become a heroic benefactor of mankind. Here Lucretius
follows a trend which had gathered pace after Epicurus’ own day, the
rationalistic practice—associated with the name of 
Euhemerus—of explaining the gods as pioneering human benefactors whose
service had been institutionally acknowledged by formal divinization.
What Lucretius effectively asserts is that, on a Euhemeristic ranking,
Epicurus is a far greater god than Ceres or Bacchus, held to have
originally been the institutors of, respectively, agriculture and wine,
and also a far greater god than the divinized Hercules. For Hercules
rid the world merely of literal monsters like the Hydra, but it’s not
as if there aren’t plenty of wild beasts left in the world to terrorize
us today. Epicurus on the other hand has offered us real and permanent
salvation from monsters, namely those truly frightful monsters that
haunt our souls, such as insatiable desires, fears, and arrogance.
Another possibly Euhemerizing tendency, one that is an unsurprising
feature of Latin poetry and, if only for that reason, to be found in
the pages of Lucretius, is the use of gods’ names to designate items of
special significance for human life, such as ‘Venus’ for
love or sex, and ‘Bacchus’ for wine. At 2.598–660 Lucretius
discusses the religious portrayal of Earth as divine mother, and
concludes that if one is going to call sea
‘Neptune’, corn ‘Ceres’, wine
‘Bacchus’, etc.—as he himself indeed often enough
does—one might reasonably also personify the earth as their
mother, hence as ‘mother of the gods’. But, he adds in an
important codicil, this usage is permissible only if one avoids the
pernicious religious beliefs that such locutions imply.
The proems are the most original poetic compositions in the
DRN, and one may suspect that the book 5 proem’s brand of
Euhemerizing theology goes beyond traditional Epicureanism. The same
suspicion recurs with even greater force when we focus on the proem to
book 1. In it Lucretius prays to Venus, not only as the universal life
force but also as ancestress of the Romans, begging her to intervene
with her lover Mars and save the troubled Roman republic from civil
strife. Although this choice of motif may owe much to Lucretius’
forerunner and model Empedocles, for whom Love or Aphrodite is the
great creative force in the cosmos, it borders perilously on a betrayal
of the poem’s central motif, that we should not fear the gods because
they do not, and never would, intervene in our world. Readers, as they
progress further into the poem, are no doubt expected to accumulate the
appropriate materials for understanding the proem as in tune with the
true Epicurean message, but there is little agreement as to how this is
meant to be achieved. One possibility is as follows. The warlike Mars
is not, as such, a true Epicurean god, but a popular perversion of the
true divine nature, resulting from people’s projection of their own
angry and competitive temperament onto this ideal being. If so, the
prayer for Venus to pacify Mars is no more than the expressed hope that
Romans will return to appreciating the true peaceful nature of
divinity, which for an Epicurean like Lucretius is nothing different
from their themselves striving to emulate this paradigm of
peacefulness. The poem’s lesson will itself, if successfully taught to
its Roman audience, be enough to answer its author’s opening
prayer.
Lucretius was both admired and imitated by writers of the early
Roman empire, while in the eyes of Latin patristic authors like
Lactantius he came to serve as the leading spokesman of the godless Epicurean
philosophy. His poem subsequently survived in two outstanding
9th-century manuscripts (known as O and Q), which following the poem’s
rediscovery by the papal secretary Poggio Bracciolini in 1417 (for this fascinating story see Greenblatt 2011) became the basis of the
Renaissance editions. It was through Lucretius, along with the Latin
translation of Diogenes Laertius’ Life of Epicurus, that Epicurean
ideas entered the main philosophical (especially ethical) debates of
the age. However, despite his extensive impact in literary and
philosophical circles—he is, for example, among the writers
most assiduously cited by Montaigne—Lucretius struggled for two
centuries to shake off the pejorative label of ‘atheist’.
He became a key influence on the emergence of early modern atomism in
the 17th century—a development above all due to
Pierre Gassendi’s construction of an atomistic system which, while
founded on Epicurus and Lucretius, had been so modified as to be
acceptable to Christian ideology. Lucretius’ many admirers in the early modern era included Thomas Jefferson, a self-declared Epicurean who owned numerous editions of the poem.