Ludwik Fleck was born on July 11, 1896, in Lvov (now Lviv), at that
time under the rule of Austria-Hungary, to a family of Jewish
craftsman. His medical studies at the John Casimir University were
interrupted by military service. He graduated in 1922, when Lvov
belonged to the reborn Poland. At the end of his studies he was an
assistant of the famous typhus specialist Rudolf Weigl. In 1923 Fleck
founded a private laboratory of medical analysis and was in charge of
the Lvov Sick Fund and the bacteriological-chemical laboratories of
the General Public Hospital.
Although he was only loosely related with any academic environment at
that time, Fleck conducted medical research, the results of which he
published in about 40 papers, mostly in Polish and in German. In 1927
he published in Polish his first work in the philosophy of medicine:
“Some Specific Features of the Medical Way of
Thinking”. Two years later he published in German a paper
“On the Crisis of ‘Reality’”(1929) inspired
mostly by the quantum revolution in physics. Both articles are of a
provisional character, but the first one already includes the terms
“thought style” and “incommensurability”.
In September 1933 Fleck sent the manuscript of his book Die
Analyse einer wissenschaftlichen Tatsache to Moritz Schlick. In
March 1934, Schlick replied and expressed his willingness to recommend
it for publication under the condition that a specialist on the
history of medicine would also review it positively.  In 1935, Benno
Schwabe finally published the book Entstehung und Entwicklung
einer wissenschaftlichen Tatsache: Einführung in die Lehre vom
Denkstil und Denkkollektiv (The Genesis and Development of a
Scientific Fact: An Introduction to the Theory of Thought Style and
Thought Collective). It was accompanied by a Polish summary of the
main theses of the book (1934) and two important papers:
“Scientific Observation and Perception in General” (1935b)
and “The Problem of Epistemology” (1936). In Poland the
book was criticized by Izydora Dąmbska and Fleck answered her critique
in (1938). Fleck’s next Polish philosophical article (1939a)
referred, among others, to a book by a psychiatrist and historian of
medicine, Tadeusz Bilikiewicz.  Bilikiewicz replied with a moderate
critique of Fleck’s epistemology. Fleck in turn wrote a paper
“Rejoinder to the Comments of Tadeusz Bilikiewicz” (1939b)
in which he stated strong anti-realistic theses.
When Lvov was incorporated into the Ukrainian Soviet Republic in 1939,
Fleck had been appointed the head of the municipal laboratory of
hygiene and bacteriology. On June 30, 1941, Lvov was captured by
Germans. Anti-Jewish pogroms began, and Germans also started to murder
university professors of Polish origin. Fleck and his wife survived,
probably because Rudolf Weigl included him on the list of employees of
the Lvov Institute of Research on Typhus and Viruses. In August 1941,
Germans resettled Fleck to the Lvov ghetto, where he developed and
produced an anti-typhus vaccine from the urine of sick people. He was
then relocated with his family to the area of the pharmaceutical
company Laokoon and tasked with producing an anti-typhus vaccine for
German soldiers. Finally he and his wife and son were deported to the
concentration camp in Auschwitz. At first he was forced to do physical
labor, but later he was transferred to the camp’s hospital with
the assignment to conduct bacteriological tests on prisoners. In
December 1943 Fleck was transferred to the concentration camp in
Buchenwald. There a group of prisoners—scientists and medical
doctors of various nationalities—led by a scientifically
illiterate German doctor produced an anti-typhus vaccine.
The Buchenwald concentration camp was liberated in April 1945. One
month later Fleck found his wife and son in Lvov, which once again
belonged to the Soviet Union. They hastily left for Poland, whose
territory—by the decision of the Allies—was moved 200 km to
the west. The Communist government in Poland was establishing Maria
Curie-Skłodowska University in Lublin, and since Germans murdered many
Polish scholars, there was a scarcity of employable professors. In
October 1945 Fleck became the head of the Institute of Medical
Microbiology at that
university, and he became a full professor in 1950. In 1948 he
testified in the Nuremberg Trials of German doctors, who conducted
criminal experiments on prisoners of concentration camps.
He published two more epistemological papers in Polish: “Problems
of the Science of Science” (1946) and “To Look, To See, To
Know” (1947). Those texts do not add anything important to the
theory which he formulated in the 1930s. He was absorbed by research
on a defence mechanism which he discovered in 1942 and named
“leucergy”. It was the chief subject of most of his roughly
80 medical papers which he published in those years, mostly in Polish,
but also in English and French. In 1952 he became the director of the
bacteriology and immunology laboratory of the Institute of Mother and
Child in Warsaw. Fleck was honored with
many high national distinctions; he had a company car at his disposal,
and attended international conferences abroad. In 1954 he became a
member of the Polish Academy of Sciences.
When Fleck emigrated with his wife to Israel in 1957, where his
only son had been living for many years, he was already very ill with
cancer and heart problems. For a few years he was employed in the
Institute of Biological Research in Ness Ziona. He then wrote in
English his last philosophical paper “Crisis in Science. Towards
a Free and More Human Science”, that was rejected by several
philosophical journals.  Ludwik Fleck died on June 5, 1961, of a
second heart attack.
In his epistemological works, Fleck combined: (1) experience of a
scientist; (2) reflections on the history of medicine; (3)
philosophical ideas; and (4) sociological ideas. In the light of his
own sociology and philosophy of science, one needs first to ask which
thought collectives he belonged to and what thought styles he
assimilated.
(1) While working in a private laboratory and hospital Fleck conducted
certain medical research, but he remained outside university circles,
and his research was rather marginal.
(2) In the interwar period Poland was probably the only country where
faculties of medicine had chairs for the philosophy and history of
medicine (Löwy 1990). Between 1908 and 1919 Władysław Szumowski
taught the history of medicine in Lvov. Fleck also had some
professional contact with two philosophers and historians of medicine,
Włodzimierz Sieradzki and Witold Ziembicki. He was a friend of
Jakób Frostig, a philosophizing psychiatrist. It is worth
mentioning a few remarks from Frostig’s Das schizophrene
Denken. Phänomenologische Studien zum Problem der widersinnigen
Sätze (Leipzig 1929), which can be seen almost without any
change among those written by Fleck: “We mean by [the expression
‘social group’] any group of people bound together by a
common ‘intention’. Thus the group of mathematicians is a
group of a very special, mathematical mentality. (…) one and
the same person can (…) belong to several very different human
groups.  (…) the group’s collective storehouse ever changes and
with it the criteria for truth. (…) It is only in relation to
the collective stores of the group in question that we can denote a
state of affairs as correct or as a personal error” (following
Schnelle 1986, p. 9). However, Fleck does not mention any of these
scholars in his writings, even though they created the thought style
and intellectual mood that, according to his views, were necessary for
his sociology and philosophy of science to emerge.
(3) Before World War II, Lvov had a “philosophical
branch” of a distinguished mathematical-philosophical
school—the Lvov-Warsaw School. Despite the fact that Fleck had
connections with this school, he never mentioned either Kazimierz
Ajdukiewicz or Leon Chwistek, even though Chwistek’s idea of the
multiplicity of reality (in art but also in life and science) has much
in common with his theory of thought styles. In his writings Fleck
makes a few critical remarks on conventionalists and logical empiricists;
however, nothing really supports the claim that he knew their views
well. Also, Fleck’s remarks on epistemology of Kant, Mach, Wundt
and Uexküll’s are superficial and dispersed—he does
not adopt views from them, but only looks for some superficial
confirmation of his own claims. Thus, we cannot include Fleck among any
esoteric philosophical circles.
(4) In (1935a) Fleck devotes only a few pages to the sociology of
knowledge, and, moreover, he refers exclusively to the German
translation of Lucien Levy-Bruhl’s book
Das Denken der Naturvölker, 1921 and to Wilhelm
Jerusalem’s paper of 1929. Clearly he did not know works of the
“founders of sociology of knowledge”: Max Scheler and Karl
Mannheim. Schnelle (1986) even claims that Fleck had acquired the
basic information on the sociology of science from a popular paper
published in Polish by Paweł Rybicki. When Fleck mentions the
works of Durkheim, Levy Bruhl, Jerusalem or Gumplowicz, he does this
superficially; he does not adopt any of their conceptions and is
content with a general thesis that “What actually thinks within
a person is not the individual himself but his social community”
(Gumplowicz; quot.  from Fleck 1935a, § II.4). Fleck accuses
them of ignoring the results of their research into the beliefs of
traditional societies once they turn to scientific thinking, where
they hold that “perceptions proper” displace mythical
elements, and a traditional conviction on the existence of spirits and
daemons is replaced with justified beliefs about “what
physically is possible or impossible” (Levy-Bruhl, quot. from
Fleck 1935a, § II.4). In contrast, Fleck claims that scientific
thinking is an object of sociological examination to the same extent
as mythical thinking.
An interesting hypothesis was recently formulated by Eva Hedfors
(2006), who critically evaluated Fleck’s competencies in the
history of medicine. She claims that the chief role in the development
of his thought was played by the interdisciplinary journal Die
Naturwissenschaften, where on the turn of the 1920s and 1930s
scientists and philosophers carried out a philosophical debate about
the relativistic and quantum revolution in physics. According to
Hedfors this debate inspired Fleck, who wrote on the “physics of
tomorrow”:
As Fleck—because of the lack of education in this
area—could not write about physics, he found corresponding episodes
in the history of medicine with which he illustrated theses circulating
in the thought collective of physicists who were debating what was happening
in their discipline.
Immanuel Kant made us aware that while we learn about nature from
experience, in order to do this we have to know something before
experiencing anything. According to Kant, a priori synthetic
knowledge is unchangeable and plays an active role in cognition: our
picture of the world is formed as much by things in themselves as by
our forms of perception and categories of thought, and we will never
know whether and how that picture is similar to what exists
independently of our cognitive acts. Fleck adopted Kant’s thesis
on the active role of cognitive a priori: an empty mind would
neither perceive nor think. So, before a mind starts to experience,
and on the basis of experience starts to think, it has to be filled
with some initial knowledge. But the quantum revolution in physics has
shown that there is nothing necessary or unchangeable in a
priori forms and categories. A non-Kantian explanation of the
origins of cognitive a priori was badly needed.
According to Fleck, the basic phenomenon we have to accept in order
to build the edifice of epistemology is the collective mental
differentiation of men (1936, II). People perceive and think
differently, but those differences concern groups rather than
individuals. So we speak of various ways of perceiving and thinking
about stars and planets by astronomers, by astrologists, by theologians
or by mystics. Those people understand each other very well within
their groups: an astronomer understands another astronomer well, and an
astrologist another astrologist; but between groups—like
between an astrologist and an astronomer—there is usually no
understanding.
Cognition is a collective activity. It is confusing just to say that
an individual X got to know a phenomenon P: one should say that
“X got to know P in the thought style S from the epoch E”
(1936, V)—yet the thought style S from the epoch E is a product
of a certain thought collective to which X belongs. What to a stubborn
metaphysician appears as necessary forms of thinking results from the
social nature of cognition:
A thought collective is defined by Fleck as a community of persons
mutually exchanging ideas or maintaining intellectual interaction
(1935a, II.4). Members of that collective not only adopt certain ways
of perceiving and thinking, but they also continually transform
it—and this transformation does occur not so much “in their
heads” as in their interpersonal space. It is easy to observe this
phenomenon in everyday life. When a group of people speak about
something important, they start to speak about things which would not
cross their minds if they were alone and which they would not tell if
they were in another group of people. There arises a thought style
characteristic for that group. There also arises a certain collective
mood which straightens up the ties among the group members and inclines
them to act in a certain way.
Some collectives last shortly—even only as long as an individual
conversation lasts. When social forces connecting people operate for a
long time, there arise thought collectives lasting for many
generations. They take forms of religious movements, folk traditions,
art or science. Long-lasting collectives create social institutions
which enable and regulate the method by which next generations are
added to a given collective: educational systems and social rituals
accompanying the admission of new members.
All members of small ethnic groups belong to the same thought
collective: everybody perceives and thinks in the same way, just like
everybody performs the same or very similar actions. Within more
developed societies there are many various collectives: religious,
artistic, scientific, astrological, and those related to fashion, politics,
economy, medicine, quack, sport, etc.

When a thought style, developed and employed by a collective,
becomes sufficiently sophisticated, the collective breaks into a small
esoteric circle—a group of specialists which “are
in the know”—and a wide exoteric circle for all
those members, who are under the influence of the style, but do not
play an active role in its formation. Members of the first group are
those “initiated”—priests and theologians in the
case of religion; artists and art critics in the case of art;
scientists in the case of science etc. The corresponding exoteric
circles for those groups are: lay believers; art-lovers; school
teachers of physics, chemistry, and biology, and also engineers and
all people interested in science.
 
Exoteric circles have an access to a proper thought style only
through esoteric circles—for example through listening to
sermons given by priests, or reading popular literature written by
scientists.  Members of exoteric circles trust the initiated. But
specialists and members of esoteric circles are not independent of
exoteric circles: this is the “public opinion” which
justifies the efforts of specialists and gives them a stimulus to
continue their work.
In contemporary societies almost everybody belongs to many thought
collectives; e.g. a scientist may be also a member of a certain church,
political party, mountain climbing club. An individual usually belongs to 
distant thought collectives, so that conflicts between thought styles coexisting 
in him/her do not arise. Most of people belong only to
exoteric circles; only few become members of any esoteric circle,
sporadically belonging to more than one. Everybody also belongs to a
wide “everyday life” collective (which also differs from
culture to culture).
Within the esoteric circle Fleck distinguishes the following
subgroups: (1) vanguard, “the group of scientists working
practically on a given problem”, (2) the main body, “the
official community”, and (3) the group of stragglers (1935a,
IV,4). In other places he omits stragglers and introduces a distinction
between professionals (specialists sensu stricto) and more
general specialists (1936, VI).
Members of a thought collective naturally possess a certain bond,
some feeling of group solidarity, of being a “comrade”,
“coreligionist”, “countryman”, or
“colleague”. It is accompanied by the feeling of hostility
or contempt to a “stranger”, who worships other gods, is
guided by other values, or uses unfamiliar words etc.
These are collective moods which
induce members of collectives both to sacrifice themselves for others
and to burn dissenters at stakes. They make scientists work for public
enlightenment, and at the same time they arouse the feeling of disdain
for astrologists or alchemists.
Fleck stresses that there is no thinking which is free from emotions:
“There is only agreement or difference between feelings, and the
uniform agreement in the emotions of a society is, in its content,
called freedom from emotions” (1935a, II.4). Emotions have a
social character; they are already hidden in a language employed by a
collective. Technical terms not
only denote something determined by their definitions, but they also
encompass “a certain specific power, being not only a name but
also a slogan”, they have “a specific thought-charm”.
This is why once the members of an esoteric circle master technical
terminology there appears a sense of mission, and joining such a circle
itself has “the value of the sacrament of initiation”
(1936, V).
If the position of an elite is stronger than the position of the
masses, the elite isolates itself and demands obedience from the
masses. Such collectives develop dogmatic styles of thinking in which a
test of correctness is usually located in some distant past in a more
or less mythical master or savior. Collective life acquires a
ceremonial character and access to the esoteric circle is
well-guarded. Conservatism reigns: there is no place for fundamentally
new ideas, and one can only better or worse realize the revealed
principles. This is characteristic of most religious collectives.
If the position of the masses is stronger than that of an
elite—like in scientific collectives—the elite endeavors
after trust and appreciation of the masses, pledging its commitment to
serve common good. This collective has a democratic character: the test
of correctness is “the recognition by everybody”. Everybody
is encouraged to learn, and everybody who meets intellectual standards
can become a member of the esoteric circle.
“This obligation is also expressed in the democratically equal
regard for anybody that acquires knowledge. All research workers, as a
matter of principle, are regarded as possessing equal rights”
(1935a, IV.5). In principle every man—not only an elite with
special privileges—should be able to verify whether a statement
is true, to repeat an experiment conducted by somebody else etc.
Here an unsolvable problem arises. General education, necessary for
joining a scientific collective, is acquired in schools before
maturing, and if this is not achieved an individual is practically
doomed to remain outside the scientific collective. In science no
transfers from the uneducated general public to the body of general
specialists occur. However, a democratic respect for an (imagined)
“anybody” grants scientific thought styles an impersonal
character which in turn leads to the objectivization of collectively created
thought structures. Objective truth expressed clearly and precisely
becomes an ideal. Of course, this ideal is to be realized in some
distant (maybe even infinite) future. However, even if a researcher
herself is removed from the results of her work, a cult of scientific
heroes and geniuses devoted to scientific service develops.
Part of a collective mood arises at the point of contact between esoteric and 
exoteric circles. On the one hand, members of exoteric circles usually trust 
professionals and they admire them. On the other hand esoteric circles act under 
pressure of expectations of the masses. When a certain domain lacks support from 
outside, it does not have significant achievements. Fleck here uses an analogy 
of sand carried by the wind. A rock sometimes hits its target and sometimes it 
does not, whereas sand carried by the wind unavoidably accumulates in hollows 
(1935a, III). So
when some social pressure makes enough researchers work long enough on
a certain issue and obtain sufficient material support, they
finally arrive at more or less satisfying results. A condition of
success is not the alleged truth of employed theories but the systematicity
of research.
The democratically equal regard for everybody makes scientists write
popular works to familiarize laypersons—as far as it is
possible—with a current state of knowledge. They use widely
understood common language full of imprecise expressions and metaphors.
Since popular texts cannot include complications which a professional
meets every day in her work and because an author speaks to the public
as an authority, such books and articles have a dogmatic character.
Instead of provisions like “it seems that”, “as we
tried to prove” often present in scientific papers, in popular
works there are expressions like “it is a fact that” or
“as science has proven”. This has serious (although not
intended) effects on the development of science itself, for those who
are to become scientists in future have their first contact with a
discipline precisely through popular readings. Thus, what was
created by a group of people acquires an impersonal, autonomous
character. “Social distance transforms the author from a creator
to a discoverer”—and this is how a mythical ideal of knowledge
“as representation of reality independent of the subject of
cognition” (1936, VI) arises.
One should then start to read textbooks and experiment under the
supervision of specialists. This introduction into a domain still has a
dogmatic character. An individual’s mind is introduced
“into a self-contained world” and acquires a peculiar mystagogy.
Finally, some people become fully-fledged members of a thought
collective of a scientific discipline—specialists: “the
expert is already a specially molded individual who can no longer
escape the bonds of tradition and of the collective; otherwise he would
not be an expert” (1935a, III).
As a specialist she starts to face certain research problems. She
does not face them alone: she is a member of a group, where everybody
perceives the world similarly and thinks about it in (almost) the same
way. And if an issue is new, then any success is achievable only if the
whole group of scholars is engaged. Usually the analyzed phenomena are
extremely complicated and diversified—and they require
distinguishing, segregation, unification, and simplification, and those are
tasks which exceed the capabilities of any single researcher. “Only
through organized cooperative research, supported by popular knowledge
and continuing over several generations, might a unified picture
emerge” (1935a, II.1).
We do not only mean here that there is too much work to do. When phenomena 
are not sufficiently examined, we lack concepts by means of which we could
adequately describe them. And we also cannot begin with gathering
facts. Traditionally—and today some still think so—facts
were considered to be what is given and accessible through the senses. Modern
empiricists claimed that there is nothing in the mind that was not
first in the senses. Fleck reversed this maxim: there is nothing in the
senses that was not first in the mind. So, in order to perceive we have
to learn something before. It is not so that we first see some moving
dashes and then we compose a whole of them. Quite the contrary:
This set of forms was transferred to an individual in the process of
socialization. When we bring a layperson to a laboratory and we ask
her to describe a course of scientific experiments, professionals will
find out immediately that she is not able to do this. She will surely
create a long description and bring up a lot of unimportant or
accidental details, but she will not pay attention to what is
important from a scientist’s point of view. “If we wanted
necessarily to render his experience in words, the most appropriate
slogan would be: ‘I search’ or ‘I have a
chaos’” (1935b). An expert sees differently than a layperson
because she went through a special training during which she was
familiarized with many examples—e.g. symptoms of a given disease
and at the same time symptoms of other diseases (so with what X
is and what X is not). At the same time she was equipped with a
certain set of views on what that disease is, on the course of it, on
how it is affected by external conditions etc. Thus, if the training
process is successful a new member of a collective will directly see
the same as what other members see “with their own
eyes”. As Fleck states in the last sentence of (1935b),
“’To see’ means: to recreate, at a suitable moment, a
picture created by the mental collective to which one
belongs”.
However, when a specialist starts research on phenomena of a new
kind she is in the same situation as a layperson: she does not know
what and how to observe. She does not recognize certain forms, she
experiences chaos in which it is very hard to grasp anything constant.
This is why—as it was mentioned above—scholars cannot
start from gathering experimental data. Fleck also stresses that there
is no spontaneous creation of concepts (1935a, II.1). This is why a new research
starts usually—although not always—from proto-ideas which
often are of a religious or philosophical character, which had existed
centuries before they acquired a scientific character. For example,
long before Copernicus there was a proto-idea of a heliocentric system,
before Lavoisier—a proto-idea of chemical elements, before
Dalton—a proto-idea of atom, and before Leeuwenhoek—a
proto-idea of microbe (1935a, II.2). Proto-ideas are vague, and therefore in the
scientific understanding they cannot be considered as true or false.
(Even though they were true for the members of corresponding thought
collectives). But they can become a point of departure for
investigation.
Inquiries cannot be conducted by an isolated researcher, for she would
chase her tail endlessly by repeating old formulas. As we have
mentioned before, the constitution of a research collective is
necessary and it happens when an appropriate mood arises—a mood
which unites people and makes them work. In the case of research that
was analyzed by Fleck, i.e., the research which led to the discovery
of Wassermann’s reaction, the source of an appropriate mood was
social pressure—a common demand for effective means for curing
syphilis which was considered as an embarrassing and
reputation-damaging disease.  (Fleck brought forward a controversial
claim that the absence of any analogous success in the struggle with
tuberculosis was related to a common approach to tuberculosis as
“romantic”, which in turn resulted with insufficient social
pressure to overcome it.) This made the German government join the
process of organizing research teams in that area; an additional
reason was to make achievements of German scientists outmatch
achievements of other nations. “The mood gave a driving power,
and the proto-idea—the direction” (1934).
If a group of people participate in a research program there occurs a
peculiar process.  Each member of the group reads different texts
(both popular and professional), participates in different
experiments, and belongs to more or less different thought collectives
(both scientific and non-scientific). So, when they start speaking to
each other and reading each other’s papers, a series of
misunderstandings arises.  Ideas circulate within a collective and are
enriched by new associations, and therefore the words that are used
change their meanings. Sometimes nothing is left of the original
meanings intended by those participating in the exchange of
ideas. Sometimes the changes stem from a clash of various
proto-ideas. And that clash itself is a result of various social
factors. Having conducted countless studies and conversations and
embarked upon a long journey, the scholars finally create a thought
style which nobody intended. And after this has happened,
nobody post factum knows when and how that style started to
operate and who, specifically, created it.
Of course this process—an important element of which are
misunderstandings among researchers—cannot be logically
reconstructed.
Together with the mutation of ideas, new forms recognized in
sensations occur. First, when observing phenomena of a new kind one
reaches for the set of known forms—and starts to recognize that
this, what is new, sometimes and under a certain respect resembles what
is known, but some other times and under other respects it is
different. In this period descriptions of results of experiments are
full of comparisons with what one earlier learned to perceive, but also
are full of provisions that those comparisons are sometimes unreliable.
The unreliability manifests itself in the unrepeatability of initial
experiments: something goes differently than before, and we
know neither why it was so, nor what to do in order to get the same
result next time. This raises concerns and the readiness for change. A
researcher acting more or less blindly, searches for some constraints
of thought:
Changes in the way of seeing cannot—as it was said
before—be made by an individual. Descriptions of experiments
circulate among scientists, and again as a result of misunderstandings
and understandings the traditional forms are (and this fact is not
noticed by the participants of that process) restyled, some are
rejected, other connected into unique wholes, “and, finally, a
new readiness is formed, i.e. the readiness to see a new, specific
form” (1935b). Finally, in descriptions published in professional
papers comparisons disappear and one states: this and that was
observed. (Similarly, after some time of being in contact with the
Latin alphabet we directly recognize the letter A despite the enormous
variety of shapes it exists in, and at the same time we are not able to
say what this recognizing consists in, cf. Fleck 1947, I.)
Thus, it is impossible to see something radically new “simply
and immediately”: first the constrains of an old thought style
must be removed and a new style must emerge, a collective’s thought
mood must change—and this takes time and work with others. In the
course of interpersonal exchange concepts evolve and facts evolve
together with them. This in turn stimulates creation of new concepts.
Sometimes new ideas come from unexpected directions and without any
relation to science itself. This is how Fleck explains the discovery of
spermatozoon which happened together with the fall of political
absolutism and popularization of the idea of individual freedom
understood mainly as freedom of personal movement. One could not
discover spermatozoon just looking through a microscope. However
someone, who thought about a free person, could notice freely
moving—so “free”—spermatozoa (1939a). This was the
influence of environment which created a restless mood necessary for
searching for something new. And a new mode of thinking created in a
different domain of life allowed one to perceive, distinguish, and describe
it in a way which would stimulate reflections of others—those
participating in revolutionary social changes as well.
Before new sensual and thought forms arise, a certain
“specific intellectual unrest must arise and a change of the
moods of the thought collective” (1935b). If a person makes an
important discovery but social moods do not change, she will not find
people who take up her ideas and continue research. On the other hand
facts are mutually dependent
on each other, so “each new fact harmoniously—though even
so slightly—changes all earlier facts” (1935a, IV.3). As a
result, it sometimes happens that those initial observations from which
a certain research began does not belong to the same class of facts as
the one emerging from that research. (The research on the variability
of bacteria was initiated by observations made in 1906 by Neisser and
Massini, which today are regarded as bacteriophage effects.) Sometimes 
nothing remains of the proto-ideas from which investigations
started and which inspired early experimental work. (Like the
proto-idea of syphilis blood has nothing to do with contemporary
Wassermann’s reaction). And finally there arises the edifice of
knowledge which was neither intended nor foreseen by anybody.
In this process there is nothing necessary; various accidental
circumstances decide which ideas become a basis for investigation and
are disseminated within a collective; which meetings between scientists
happen; which research projects acquire social support; which
experiments are conducted first etc. Fleck claims that if e.g. Sigle’s
idea of protozoa-like structures as the causative agent of syphilis had
acquired sufficient support, we would have reached a harmonious system
of knowledge different from the current one. The scope of the name
“syphilis” would have been somewhat different than it is
today, just like the methods of research and therapy would. But when a
certain thought style develops and dominates researchers’ minds,
alternative ways of development become closed. Summing up this idea
Fleck claims that most—and maybe even the whole—content of
scientific knowledge is conditioned by historical, psychological
and sociological factors and one has to consider them when attempting
to explain that content (1935a, II.1).
Of course, a series of misunderstandings is not enough to create a
thought style that connects everybody. This is why for the existence of a
certain discipline the main body of an esoteric circle is
necessary—the group composed of general specialists well prepared
to choose among propositions of the vanguard those that are most useful,
and to elaborate, employ and harmonize them with each other. I.e. to
create from a set of provisional claims present in papers aimed at
professionals a system and to pass it on to a next generation of
researchers. This occurs when textbooks are created.
The social structure of a scientific thought collective is reflected
in types of scientific literature. Papers in scientific journals are
written by scientists working practically on a given problem and are
aimed at other scientists. More general specialists write textbooks
consolidating their esoteric circle and educating its new members.
Popular works are directed to exoteric circles.
The victory of a thought style depends on whether it will be
possible to have a next generation of its followers, and to prevent 
influences of other styles. Certain research problems should be
propagated, and other should be removed. A certain mental readiness must be
created among the adepts of science. When it is achieved, all researchers
“will see the new form directly, with their own eyes, as if it
were the only one, everlasting truth, independent of the people”
(1935b). At the end of his life Fleck summarized this as
follows:
The victory of a given thought style is never ultimate. Each new
experimental discovery and every theoretical idea more or less changes
the whole system. Even if at the beginning one sees only what
corresponds with the theory, after a while there appear complications
and exceptions (Kuhn’s anomalies) which sooner or later leads to
revisions of concepts and assumptions. “Mutations” in a
thought style, such as contemporary transformations in physics or in
bacteriology, constantly occur. Sooner or later we will have to change
e.g. the law of conservation of energy (1935a, II.1) and any other concept and claim.
In the historical development of science there is nothing determined
once and for all, nothing invariant. Both thinking and facts change.
Fleck defines a thought style as the readiness for directed
perception, with corresponding mental and objective assimilation of
what has been so perceived, characterized by specific problems of
interest, by judgments which the thought collective considers evident
and by methods which are applied as a means of cognition (1935a, IV.3).
What was collectively developed plays an active role in cognition:
shapes modes of perception and the thinking of members of a thought collective. An
individual, who has assimilated a certain thought style, becomes 
passive when conducting standard research: recognizes in
environment specific forms and draws specific—those and no
other—conclusions from an assimilated theory and results of
experimental research.
The occurrence of passive elements cannot be explained
sociologically. They are, so to speak, results of employing a conceptual
measure which resulted from historical and cultural circumstances to the
results of experiments—which, as the title of Fleck’s book 
says, came to existence together with the
creation of a new though style and are developed with it.
What Fleck calls active elements of a thought style, Henri
Poincaré calls “principles” and sees as
“disguised definitions”. Poincaré stresses that
there is nothing necessary in definitions—they can be various
and they are chosen for pragmatic and aesthetic reasons. Fleck agrees
with him to a certain extent. He notices that in the 19th century
syphilis was defined in many ways: as a carnal scourge, as a
mercury-treated decease, and finally as a set of typical symptoms. And
he claims that “(…) if syphilis can be defined in various
ways, the definition selected still determines some
conclusions. (…) there are some associations which are open to
choice (…) and others that are constrained” (1935a, I).
For example if one defined syphilis as a “carnal scourge”,
then other diseases like gonorrhea, soft chancre, etc. would be cases
of syphilis; and when proper experiments had been conducted one stated
for example that “sometimes mercury does not cure the carnal
scourge but makes it even worse”. Looking at the same experiment
those who defined syphilis as a disease which can be treated with
mercury would conclude that they are not dealing with syphilis.
However, Fleck opposes the conventionalist idea that definitions can
be chosen freely. Definitions are born with the birth of a thought
style, and their formulation is determined by both historical-cultural
conditioning and by the process of exchanging ideas among researchers
which was described above. A mature thought style is a system where
definitions mutually condition each other and where accepting a
certain definition can prevent accepting some other ones.
The distinction between active and passive elements is still not
clear. Some examples are obvious: if 16 is assumed—on the basis
of some arbitrary convention—as the atomic weight for oxygen, the
atomic weight of hydrogen will necessary be 1.008. “This means
that the ratio of the two weights is a passive element of
knowledge” (1935a, IV.1). However, as an active element of
knowledge Fleck indicates also “the mere use of alcohol in
preparing extracts”, adding however that “the actual
usefulness of such extracts is a passive one and therefore a necessary
consequence”. He also writes that the concepts of chemical
element and of atom are derived “from collective
imagination”, but “the usefulness of these concepts in
chemistry (…) is really independent of the individual
knower”. The active and passive elements of knowledge are
inseparable either historically or logically, and every statement can
be divided into active and passive part.
Both kinds of elements can be found in each thought style, and also in
mythical and religious thinking. In one place Fleck notices that
whereas a myth has little passive elements, the characteristic feature
of science is that it attempts to add as many passive elements as it
can to its system. Fleck never developed this idea, and this is
unfortunate, for this could be his contribution to the solution of the
problem of demarcation. There are some places where he makes remarks
complementing argumentation developed in the last chapter: “What
has previously been classed with the passive elements of knowledge may
later join the active ones” (1935a, IV.2). We should regret
again that he did not develop the idea which could contribute to
understanding the mechanism of those transformations which Kuhn later
called “scientific revolutions”. For it suggests that not
only pre-scientific proto-ideas, but also passive results obtained
within an old scientific thought style can serve as a starting point
for constructing a new one.
As explained above, what and how we see and what and how we
think depends on a collectively created thought style assimilated
through contacts with others. However,
It is peculiar that those who participate in social creation of a
thought style do not sometimes realize it either. After years they do
not remember that once they perceived and thought differently, and
they recall their research not as a winding road, full of turns, blind
steps, successes resulting from compensation of accidental errors,
etc. And above all they do not record in their memory those moments
when new ideas appeared as a result of misunderstandings between
researchers. Fleck compares Wassermann’s texts from different
periods and his memories on the road which his team took and which
finally led him to the discovery of reaction that now carries his
name. This comparison shows that after years Wassermann did not
realize how in the past, during collective debates and research, facts
and meanings of words, research problems and methods of solving them
had changed. “(…) after fifteen years an identification
between results and intentions had taken place in Wassermann’s
thinking. The meandering process of development (…) had become
a straight, goal-directed path” (1935a, III).
Scientists also do not see the changes of facts and concepts that
had happened in their discipline. Since they perceive the world differently
than their predecessors and they think on the basis of different
assumptions, they are not able to understand the meanings of words from old
texts. They do not know that in the past one not so much thought
differently (for incorrectly) about what they now think about, and
perceived differently (for incorrectly) what they perceive, as
one thought of and perceived something else. They instinctively
understand old books and papers according to their own thought style
and consider those texts as steps—although sometimes
erroneous—towards this world-view which they possess now.
The next aspect of social nature of cognition is the phenomenon that
members of a thought collective mutually reinforce themselves in the
conviction that their thought style is true. Members of religious
communities under group pressure do not consider their faith as one of
many, but as the definite truth; they do not consider the principles
of conduct which their faith imposes on them as the principles of one
of many ways of living, but as those grasping of the essence of
morality etc. Also scientists are convinced that their thought style
is at least partially true today, and with time, when they work
together, it will get closer and closer to being true. Yet, one may
say, the conviction as to the truth of a thought style can break down
under the pressure of facts that contradict it, and also as a result
of confrontation with those who think differently. The remarks given
above quite clearly show that this is not the case. Nonetheless let us
summarize Fleck’s views on those matters.
A thought style is included already in meanings of words, and
those meanings are considered by members of the collective not as
something formed by people but as “objective”. Thus,
opposing a system is unthinkable: someone who opposes it is considered
to be the one who does not understand meanings of the words used (1935a, IV.5; 
1936, VI).
Scientific instruments which embody some results of a thought
style, “direct our thinking automatically on to the tracks of
that style” (1936, VI).
Forming our cognitive activity, our perception and thinking,
“[c]ognition modifies the knower so as to adapt him harmoniously
to his acquired knowledge” (1935a, IV.2). Since everybody
sees the world in a way imposed by one’s thought style, in every step
one notices facts corresponding with that style and does not notice
what does not fit active assumptions of it.
Even if facts incoherent with a given thought style are noticed,
one ignores them as unimportant. For example, for several decades
physicists knew that Mercury had not moved as it should according to
Newton’s mechanics, but they failed to mention this fact to the general
public. Only today one precisely
describes those facts because they confirm a new thought style: the
general theory of relativity (1935a, II.3).
Cognitive problems we choose to solve do not come from a neutral
reservoir of problems which existed prior to the development of
sciences, but we choose those which are born on the ground of a thought
style imposed on us—and they are usually successfully solved
within its confines. And we do not work with problems which are born
within other styles—our collective considers them not worthy of
attention or even senseless (1935a, IV.3).
When anomalies can be no longer ignored, one attempts to show
that they are not incompatible with one’s thought style (1935a, II.3). (Today we
would say one adds to the system various ad hoc
hypotheses.)
Sometimes in old texts we find descriptions of results of
experiments which we, as the users of another thought style, consider
illusions. It happens that somebody sees something what corresponds
with prevailing views and other members of a collective confirm his
experiences (1935a, II.3).
So it is not possible to compare a theory with “reality in itself”.
It is true that those who use a thought style give arguments for their
views, but those arguments are of restricted value. Any attempt to
legitimize a particular view is inextricably bound to standards
developed within a given style, and those who accept those standards
accept also the style. So legitimization is actually unnecessary, for
it occurs within a collective with more or less similar education and a
thought-stylized intellectual constitution. “In science, as in
art and in life, only that which is true to culture is true to
nature” (1935a, II.3).
One may however insist, that not only reality exists but also other 
people with other thought styles. Can they not convince us that our thought
style is erroneous? No—for every human thinks that those who
belong to the same thought collective as she does are
“normal” and authoritative, and everybody else is
disregarded as more or less “abnormal” (1938). Since everybody’s
attention is directed at members of one’s collective, one finds
confirmation of one’s own views everywhere. Moreover, the conviction
that we have possessed truth is empowered by the circulation of
thoughts between esoteric and exoteric circles. Laymen accept a
specialist’s opinion as revelation, and when that opinion returns from
laypersons to the specialist, she considers it the people’s voice
confirming her achievements.
When members of various thought collectives meet, a peculiar
phenomenon occurs. One sees passive elements in one’s thought style,
but the active ones remain almost unnoticed. However, “any alien
thought style appears like a free flight of fancy, because he can see
only that which is active and almost arbitrary about it” (1935a,
IV.5). Since passive results obtained within another thought style
appear to her as erroneous – as they are built on an arbitrary
and false basis—she is not able to see their merits and does not
understand that people thinking differently successfully use their own
world view. This leads us to the phenomenon called
“incommensurability”.
As explained above, when people with different thought styles meet,
they do not fully understand each other, and at the same time one
person thinks that the other is a fool and heretic. Fleck, using
examples from the history of medicine, shows that such a lack of
understanding manifests itself not only where a physicist and a
metaphysician or astrologer meet, but also when today’s scientists
read works of their ancestors from the distant past. (Just like Kuhn
Fleck does not think that the history of physics as science started
with Galileo and Newton, and the history of scientific chemistry with
Lavoisier.) For us the views of medieval scholars seem fantastic,
unjustified, useless, so “non-scientific”. But what would
happen if they read our “scientific” dissertations? They
would probably consider them artificial, arbitrary, meaningless. They
understood each other well and together developed their thought
styles. Just like our views allow us to deal with necessities of life,
“theological” views allowed our ancestors to organize life
and gave them an understanding of the sense of life (1935a, IV.5).
On several occasions, especially in (1927) and (1939a), Fleck uses
the term “incommensurability”
(niewspółmierność) of concepts or ideas. He does
not develop this issue. Yet it is easy—by looking through the
Kuhnian glasses—to extract from his writings a quite well
developed theory of incommensurability of thought styles. Its core is
constituted by the claim that in the historical development of science
there are no invariants.
(a) The language used to describe what to members of a collective
appears as reality changes. Some words disappear, other appear, and
even if words remain their meanings change to a greater or lesser
extent. Fleck quotes some fragments of writings of a physicist James
Clerk Maxwell and a philosopher Henri Bergson on motion and knowledge
on motion and he concludes that the words “motion” and
“knowledge” have different meanings for them: “it is
not as if the word of one of them meant a thing that the other would
give a different name, but that a thing to which one of them gave a
certain name does not exist at all for the other one” (1936, II).
We can find similar examples in writings of “scientists”.
Heat in the second half of the 18th century was on the list of chemical
elements, and in the 19th century it became the motion of atoms. What
Lavoisier or Carnot called “heat”, for Maxwell or Boltzmann
did not exist and vice versa. So if they could meet and talk
they would not make inconsistent claims about the same phenomenon, but would speak
of something different. “It is not possible to express with
today’s words the content of a view of a distant epoch since particular notions
of this epoch are incommensurable with the ones of today”
(1939a).
Obviously, it is not possible to explain to somebody outside of
our thought collective the meanings of the concepts we use through verbal
definitions, for we define words by other words which she does not
understand to the same degree as she does not understand the defined
word. It is not possible to define a word ostensively, for that person
does not perceive in the world those objects which we perceive as
belonging to the scope of the term defined. The only thing we can do is
to teach her the basis of our thought style, like we teach our children
and the young. The first step sometimes consists in creating a platform of
partial understanding with a member of other collective for the price
of impoverishing content and some deformations. But this is not
argumentation but propaganda (1936, III).
(b) After passing from one thought style to another within “the
same” scientific discipline, research problems change. Losses
appear along with benefits. For example, when the contemporary concept
of syphilis was created one learned very much, but many details of
earlier theories were also lost. Earlier researchers did not know many
of the details that we know, but knew more about what according to
them had a greater value. Later researchers see many problems which
their predecessors treated as unimportant or senseless. “This
creates specialized valuation and characteristic intolerance, which
are features shared by all exclusive communities” (1935a,
IV.3). This valuation becomes stronger, for after passing from one
thought style to another the research methods and standards for
evaluating research results change to a greater or lesser extent.
(c) Previous researchers—looking from the same point to the same
direction—did not see what we see, but they saw something we are
not able to see. Those people thought and saw differently than we do
(1935a, IV.5). Their physical reality does not exist for us, and our
physical reality did not exist for them.
This all leads to an extremely anti-realistic standpoint. The
thought style creates reality. Nowadays science is not closer to any
objective picture of the world than the science of 100 years ago
(1946). The only difference is that there are now many more scientists
than ever and as a result our picture of the world is richer in details
than any prior picture. However, the fact that a certain view seems
for us to be true is only a sign of our education and not that of the
correspondence to “an independently existing reality”
(1938). What members of a collective call truth, from the point of view
of sociology of cognition is the up-to-date stage of changes of
thought-style (1936, VI) or stylized thought constraint (1935a,
IV.3).
Since in the historical development of science there is no constant,
unchanging part, since scientific knowledge changes continuously as a
whole, then science does not contain any objective picture of the
world, and it does not even contain any part of such a picture (1946). Yet
contrary to Kuhn, Fleck does not avoid using the term
“truth” in reference to scientific statements. And he
emphasizes that truth is neither subjective nor relative:
Before World War II there appeared nineteen reviews of Fleck’s book on
the genesis and development of a scientific fact, most of them
positive; yet only one was published in a philosophical journal, and
the rest were published in medical or popular journals and
newspapers. After WWII Fleck’s epistemology, in spite of all his
efforts, was completely forgotten. Thomas S. Kuhn mentioned his book
in the Preface to The Structure of Scientific Revolutions as
“an essay that anticipated many of my own ideas” (Kuhn
1962, p. VII); but for at least fifteen years during fierce debates
provoked by Kuhn’s book, nobody paid attention to this remark. It was
only a paper by Wilhelm Baldamus (1977) and a book by his student
Thomas Schnelle (1982) that awakened a broader interest in Fleck’s
philosophy and sociology of science. Fleck’s book was republished in
the German language in 1980. In 1979 its English translation
Genesis and Development of a Scientific Fact appeared; and
between 1986 and 1990 most of Fleck’s epistemological papers became
available in English. Fleck’s book and articles was translated into Italian,
Polish, Spain, Swedish, Russian, Ukrainian, Korean, French and Brazilian
Portuguese.
 Today, in the English speaking world, Fleck is mostly considered
to be an unappreciated forerunner of Thomas Kuhn’s theory of
scientific revolutions. It is in the German speaking community of
philosophers and sociologists of science that Fleck is considered to
be a highly original epistemologist, who presents human knowledge in a
quite peculiar and explorative way which significantly transcends
Kuhn’s theses. In France there is a group of philosophers and
historians of medicine—Ilana Löwy and others—who
apply Fleck’s ideas in their research. In his famous introduction to
the actor-network theory, Bruno Latour named Fleck “the founder
of sociology of science” (Latour 2005, p. 112). In 2005 Ludwik
Fleck Zentrum was founded in Collegium Helveticum, Zürich, led by
Johannes Fehr until 2014; since 2015 the centre is managed by Hartmut
von Sass. In Brazil Ludwik Fleck has influenced at least three
different “thought collectives”: his theory is applied by
historians of science, in teaching and learning science, and in
philosophy (Condé 2016). There is a group of Serbian
archaeologists who are inspired in their work by Fleck’s epistemology
(Milosavljević 2016).