Ludwig was the third son of the distinguished jurist, Paul Johann
Anselm Ritter von Feuerbach. His nephew, the neo-classical painter,
Anselm Feuerbach, was the son of Ludwig’s older brother, also
called Anselm, himself a classical archaeologist and aesthetician
“in the spirit of Gotthold
Ephraim Lessing and
 Johann Joachim 
 Winckelmann”.[2]
 Ludwig’s father, who studied philosophy and law at Jena in the
1790s with the Kantians, Karl Reinhold and Gottlieb Hufeland,
respectively, belonged to a group of distinguished northern German
scholars called to Bavaria during the period of administrative reform
under Maximilian Montgelas, and charged with the task of modernizing
the legal and educational institutions of what became in 1806 the
modern kingdom of Bavaria. Other members of this group of
Nordlichter or “northern lights” included F.I.
Niethammer, F.H. Jacobi (the godfather of Ludwig’s younger
brother, Friedrich), and Friedrich Thiersch (the tutor of
Ludwig’s two oldest brothers, who has sometimes been called
“the Humboldt of Bavaria”). P.J.A. Feuerbach was knighted
in recognition of his achievement in modernizing the Bavarian penal
code, though his political influence was dramatically curtailed as a
result of outspoken national-liberal criticisms of Napoleon expressed
in pamphlets he published in 1813 and 1814.
Raised Protestant and religiously devout in his youth, Ludwig
matriculated in the theological faculty of the University of
Heidelberg in 1823, where his father hoped he would come under the
influence of the late rationalist theologian, H.E.G. Paulus. Ludwig
was won over instead by the speculative theologian, Karl Daub, who had
been instrumental in bringing Hegel to Heidelberg for two years in
1816, and was by this time one of the foremost theologians of the
Hegelian school. By 1824 Ludwig had secured his father’s
grudging permission to transfer to Berlin under the pretext of wanting
to study with the theologians Friedrich Schleiermacher and August
Neander, but in fact because of his growing infatuation with
Hegel’s philosophy. Feuerbach’s matriculation at Berlin
was delayed because of suspicions of his involvement in the
politically subversive student fraternity (Burschenschaft)
movement, in which two of his older brothers were active, as a result
of which one of them (Karl, a talented mathematician) was imprisoned
and subsequently attempted suicide. In 1825, to his father’s
consternation, Ludwig transferred to the philosophical faculty,
thereafter hearing within a two-year period all of Hegel’s
lectures except for those on aesthetics, repeating the lectures on
logic
 twice.[3]
Shortly after defending his Latin dissertation, De ratione, una,
universali, infinita, at Erlangen in 1828 Feuerbach began to
lecture on the history of modern philosophy at the conservative
university there, many of whose faculty were closely associated with
the neo-Pietist Awakening, and, in the case of Julius Friedrich Stahl,
who would go on to become a leading theorist of conservatism, also
with the so-called “positive philosophy” of the late
Schelling. The scathingly satirical and even vulgar couplets
(Xenien) directed against the Pietists that Feuerbach
appended to his first book, Thoughts on Death and Immortality
(1830, hereafter Thoughts; see
 Section 2
 below), which he published anonymously in 1830, effectively destroyed
his prospects for an academic career.
During the 1830s Feuerbach published three books on the history of
modern philosophy, in addition to several essays and reviews. These
include the History of Modern Philosophy from Bacon to
Spinoza (1833), History of Modern Philosophy: Presentation,
Development, and Critique of the Leibnizian Philosophy (1837),
and Pierre Bayle: A Contribution to the History of Philosophy and
Humanity (1838), none of which have been translated into English.
The first of them won him the praise of Edward Gans and an invitation
from Leopold von Henning to contribute reviews to the Annals for
Scientific Criticism, the principal journal of the Hegelian
academic establishment in Berlin. In these reviews Feuerbach defended
the Hegelian philosophy vigorously against critics such as Karl
Bachmann. Even after the publication of the works on Leibniz and
Bayle, however, he was refused an academic appointment. He was able
for several decades to sustain his existence as an independent scholar
in the remote Frankish village of Bruckberg by virtue of his wife,
Bertha Löw, having been partial heir of a porcelain factory
located there, from a modest pension due to his father’s service
to Bavaria, and from publishing royalties. 
The event that precipitated the gradual dissolution of the Hegelian
synthesis of faith and knowledge that Marx and Engels later referred
to sardonically as the “putrefaction of absolute spirit”
was the publication in two volumes in 1835–36 of D.F.
Strauss’s Life of Jesus Critically Examined. Here
Strauss used the tools of the “Higher Criticism” he had
acquired from his Tübingen teacher, F.C. Baur, to reveal the
historical unreliability of the accounts of the life of Jesus
preserved in the canonical gospels, and interpreted the doctrine of
the incarnation of Christ as a mythological expression of the
philosophical truth of the identity of the divine spirit and the human
species (conceived as the community of finite spirits existing
throughout history, and not as the historical individual, Jesus of
Nazareth). The appearance of Strauss’s book confirmed the
suspicions of theological conservatives like E.W. Hengstenberg and
Heinrich Leo that Hegel’s philosophy, despite its use of
Christian terminology, is incompatible with the historical faith, and
the editors of the Berlin Annals felt compelled to publicly discredit
Strauss’s Hegelian credentials. It was in the wake of these
events that Arnold Ruge established the Halle Annals for German
Science and Art, which served for several years as the principal
literary organ of the Young Hegelians, and to which Feuerbach began to
contribute essays and reviews in 1838, including in 1839 an essay
entitled “Toward a Critique of the Hegelian Philosophy”,
in which he first began to distance himself publicly from the Hegelian
cause, calling for a “return to nature”—and to a
naturalistic explanation of the mysteries of Christianity, and of
religion more
 generally.[4]
Feuerbach achieved the height of his brief literary fame with the
publication in 1841 of The Essence of Christianity, which was
translated into English by the novelist, Mary Anne Evans (a.k.a.
George Eliot), who also translated Strauss’s Life of
Jesus. Engels recalled the appearance of Feuerbach’s book
as having a profoundly “liberating effect” on him and Marx
by “breaking the spell” of the Hegelian system, and
establishing the truths that human consciousness is the only
consciousness or spirit that exists, and that it is dependent upon the
physical existence of human beings as part of nature (Engels 1888:
12–13). In 1844 Marx wrote to Feuerbach, with reference to the
latter’s Principles of the Philosophy of the Future
(1843; hereafter Principles) and The Essence of Faith
According to Luther (1844), that in them he had, intentionally or
not, “given socialism a philosophical foundation”
(GW v. 18, p. 376). In fact, Feuerbach was only then
beginning to acquaint himself with socialist ideas through his reading
of authors like Lorenz von Stein and Wilhelm Weitling. In the end he
declined Marx’s request for a contribution to the
German-French Annals, as well as Ruge’s urging that he
become more politically engaged. He did come out of rural seclusion to
observe fairly passively the ultimately disappointing events in
Frankfurt in 1848, and to deliver a series of public lectures at
Heidelberg beginning the same year. He unfortunately failed to develop
with much specificity or argumentative rigor the “philosophy of
the future” for which he himself called in the early 1840s,
continuing instead to focus his attention mainly on religion in works
like The Essence of Religion (1845), Lectures on the
Essence of Religion (1851), and Theogony According to the
Sources of Classical, Hebrew and Christian Antiquity (1857). The
five years of philological labor that Feuerbach invested in the latter
work, which he considered his crowning achievement, went largely
unnoticed both by his contemporaries and by posterity.
During the 1840s Feuerbach corresponded and occasionally visited and
maintained close personal relationships with several leading German
radicals, including, in addition to Ruge and Marx, the publishers Otto
Lüning, Otto Wigand, and Julius Fröbel; the revolutionary
poet, Georg Herwegh, and his wife, Emma; Hermann Kriege, a freelance
activist and early German socialist who emigrated to America; and
scientific materialists like Jacob Moleschott and Carl Vogt. The
impression made by him on several leading lights of the younger
generation is reflected in Gottfried Keller’s
Bildungsroman, Green Henry, first published in 1855,
and in the dedication (to Feuerbach) of Richard Wagner’s early
book, The Art-Work of the Future (1850).
Partly as the result of a global financial crisis, the porcelain
factory that had supported Feuerbach’s literary existence went
bankrupt in 1859. The following year he and his wife and daughter were
forced to relocate to the village of Rechenberg, located then on the
outskirts of Nuremberg, where Feuerbach lived out the remainder of his
life under severely strained financial circumstances and in
increasingly ill health. Although his productivity as a writer
declined sharply during this period, he was able to bring out in 1866
the tenth and final volume of his collected works (which had begun to
appear in 1846), bearing the title God, Freedom and Immortality
from the Standpoint of Anthropology, and including a fairly
substantial, though fragmentary, essay “On Spiritualism and
Materialism, Especially in Relation to the Freedom of the Will”.
In this essay, and in an essay on ethics that Feuerbach left
incomplete at his death, we find him beginning to sketch out a moral
psychology and an eudaimonistic ethical theory in which the concept of
the “drive-to-happiness”
(Glückseligkeitstrieb) plays a central role.
In an essay published in 1835 Heinrich Heine observed that pantheism
had by this time become “the secret religion of
Germany”.[5] That Feuerbach is generally remembered as an
atheist and a materialist has tended to obscure the fact that he began
his philosophical career as an enthusiastic adherent of this
philosophical religion, one early expression of which can be found in
the Greek words “Hen kai Pan” (One and All)
inscribed in 1791 by Hölderlin in Hegel’s student album
from Tübingen (cf. Pinkard 2000:
32).[6] This
inscription is an allusion to words uttered by Lessing after reading
Goethe’s poem-fragment, “Prometheus”, and responding
enthusiastically by declaring himself a Spinozist, according to the
account contained in Jacobi’s famous Letters on the Doctrine
of Spinoza (1785; cf. Jacobi [MPW]: 187). It was the publication
of these letters that set off the original Pantheism Controversy, and
had the unintended effect of leading more than one generation of young
German poets and thinkers to regard Spinoza no longer as a “dead
dog” and a godless atheist, but rather as the God-intoxicated
sage of a pantheistic creed in which those who, like Lessing, could no
longer “stomach” orthodox conceptions of the divinity that
make a strict distinction between creator and creation, could seek to
satisfy their spiritual aspirations. Feuerbach included several verses
of the Prometheus-fragment as an epigram to his first book, in which
he used the tools of Hegelian logic to develop a view of the divinity
as One and All along lines laid out by Spinoza, Giordano Bruno and
Jacob Boehme. These three he hailed as ‘pious God-inspired
sages’ (GTU 241/48) who prepared the ‘feast
reconciliation’ (GTU 463/214) between nature and spirit that it
is that task of the modern age to celebrate.
But this reconciliation, he argued, cannot occur as long as God
continues to be thought of as an individual person existing
independently of the world. 
That Feuerbach, unlike Strauss, never accepted Hegel’s
characterization of Christianity as the consummate religion is clear
from the contents of a letter he sent to Hegel along with his
dissertation in
 1828.[7]
 In this letter he identified the historical task remaining in the
wake of Hegel’s philosophical achievement to be the
establishment of the “sole sovereignty of reason” in a
“kingdom of the Idea” that would inaugurate a new
spiritual dispensation. Foreshadowing arguments put forward in his
first book, Feuerbach went on in this letter to emphasize the need for
the I, the self in general, which especially since the beginning of
the Christian era, has ruled the world and has thought of itself as
the only spirit that exists at all [to be] cast down from its royal
throne. (GW v. 17, Briefwechsel I (1817–1839),
103–08) 
This, he proposed, would require prevailing ways of thinking about
time, death, this world and the beyond, individuality, personhood and
God to be radically transformed within and beyond the walls of
academia.
Feuerbach made his first attempt to challenge prevailing ways of
thinking about individuality in his inaugural dissertation, where he
presented himself as a defender of speculative philosophy against
those critics who claim that human reason is restricted to certain
limits beyond which all inquiry is futile, and who accuse speculative
philosophers of having transgressed these. This criticism, he argued,
presupposes a conception of reason is a cognitive faculty of the
individual thinking subject that is employed as an instrument for
apprehending truths. He aimed to show that this view of the nature of
reason is mistaken, that reason is one and the same in all thinking
subjects, that it is universal and infinite, and that thinking
(Denken) is not an activity performed by the individual, but
rather by “the species” acting through the individual.
“In thinking”, Feuerbach wrote, “I am bound together
with, or rather, I am one with—indeed, I myself am—all
human beings” (GW I:18).
In the introduction to Thoughts Feuerbach assumes the role of
diagnostician of a spiritual malady by which he claims that modern
moral subjects are afflicted. This malady, to which he does not give a
name, but which he might have called either individualism or egoism,
he takes to be the defining feature of the modern age insofar as this
age conceives of “the single human individual for himself in his
individuality […] as divine and infinite” (GTU
189/10). The principal symptom of this malady is the loss of
“the perception [Anschauung] of the true totality, of
oneness and life in one unity” (GTU 264/66). This loss
Feuerbach finds reflected in three general tendencies of the modern
age: 1) the tendency to regard human history solely as the history of
the opinions and actions of individual human subjects, and not as the
history of humanity conceived as a single collective agent, 2) the
tendency to regard nature as a mere aggregate of “countless
single stars, stones, plants, animals, elements and things”
(GTU 195/14) whose relations to one another are entirely
external and mechanical, rather than as an organic whole the internal
dynamics of which are animated by a single all-encompassing vital
principle, and 3) the tendency to conceive of God as a personal agent
whose inscrutable will, through which the world came into being from
nothing and is continually directed, is unconstrained by rational
necessity.
Feuerbach’s basic objection to the theistic conception of God
and his relation to creation is that, on it, both are conceived as
equally spiritless. Rather than consisting of lifeless matter to which
motion is first imparted by the purposeful action of an external
agent, Feuerbach argues that nature contains within itself the
principle of its own development. It exercises “unlimited
creative power” by ceaselessly dividing and distinguishing its
individual parts from one another. But the immeasurable multiplicity
of systems within systems that results from this activity constitutes
a single organic totality. 
Nature is ground and principle of itself, or—what is the same
thing, it exists out of necessity, out of the soul, the essence of
God, in which he is one with nature. (GTU 291/86) 
God, on this view, is not a skilled mechanic who acts upon the world,
but a prolific artist who lives in and through it.
In Thoughts Feuerbach further argues that the death of finite
individuals is not merely an empirical fact, but also an a
priori truth that follows from a proper understanding of the
relations between the infinite and the finite, and between essence and
existence. Nature is the totality of finite individuals existing in
distinction from one another in time and space. Since to be a finite
individual is not to be any number of other individuals from which one
is distinct, non-being is not only the condition of individuals before
they have begun to exist and after they have ceased to do so, but also
a condition in which they participate by being the determinate
entities that they are. Thus, being and non-being, or life and death,
are equally constitutive of the existence of finite entities
throughout the entire course of their generation and destruction.
Everything that exists has an essence that is distinct from its
existence. Although individuals exist in time and space, their
essences do not. Essence in general is timeless and unextended.
Feuerbach nevertheless regards it as a kind of cognitive space in
which individual essences are conceptually contained. Real or
three-dimensional space, within which individual things and people
exist in distinction from one another and in temporal succession, he
thinks of as essence “in the determination of its
being-outside-of-itself” (GTU 250/55). In his
being-one, Feuerbach argues, God is everything-as-one, and is, as
such, the universal essence in which all finite essences are
“grounded, contained and conceived [begriffen]”
(GTU 241/48).
It is by means of Empfindung or sense experience that
sentient beings are able to distinguish individuals from one another,
including, in some instances, individuals that share the same essence.
The form of experience is temporality, which is to say that whatever
is directly experienced occurs “now”, or at the moment in
time to which we refer as “the present”. Experience, in
other words, is essentially fleeting and transitory, and its contents
are incommunicable. What we experience are the perceivable features of
individual objects. It is through the act of thinking that we are able
to identify those features through the possession of which different
individuals belong to the same species, with the other members of
which they share these essential features in common. 
Unlike sense experience, thought is essentially communicable. Thinking
is not an activity performed by the individual person qua
individual. It is the activity of spirit, to which Hegel famously
referred in the Phenomenology as “‘I’ that
is ‘We’ and ‘We’ that is
‘I’” (Hegel [1807] 1977: 110). Pure spirit is
nothing but this thinking activity, in which the individual thinker
participates without himself (or herself) being the principal thinking
agent. That thoughts present themselves to the consciousness of
individual thinking subjects in temporal succession is due, not to the
nature of thought itself, but to the nature of individuality, and to
the fact that individual thinking subjects, while able to participate
in the life of spirit, do not cease in doing so to exist as
corporeally distinct entities who remain part of nature, and are thus
not pure spirit.
A biological species is both identical with and distinct from the
individual organisms that make it up. The species has no existence
apart form these individual organisms, and yet the perpetuation of the
species involves the perpetual generation and destruction of the
particular individuals of which it is composed. Similarly,
Spirit has no existence apart from the existence of individual
self-conscious persons in whom Spirit becomes conscious of itself
(i.e., constitutes itself as Spirit). Just as the life of a biological
species only appears in the generation and destruction of individual
organisms, so the life of Spirit involves the generation and
destruction of these individual persons. Viewed in this light, the
death of the individual is necessitated by the life of infinite
Spirit. 
Death is just the withdrawal and departure of your objectivity from
your subjectivity, which is eternally living activity and therefore
everlasting and immortal. (GTU 323/111) 
Arguing thus, Feuerbach urged his readers to acknowledge and accept
the irreversibility of their individual mortality so that in doing so
they might come to an awareness of the immortality of their
species-essence, and thus to knowledge of their true self, which is
not the individual person with whom they were accustomed to identify
themselves. They would then be in a position to recognize that, while
“the shell of death is hard, its kernel is sweet”
(GTU 205/20), and that the true belief in immortality is 
a belief in the infinity of Spirit and in the everlasting youth of
humanity, in the inexhaustible love and creative power of Spirit, in
its eternally unfolding itself into new individuals out of the womb of
its plenitude and granting new beings for the glorification,
enjoyment, and contemplation of itself. (GTU 357/137)
In light of the emphasis placed in his later works on the practical
existential needs of the embodied individual subject, it should be
noted that during his early idealistic phase Feuerbach was strongly
committed to a theoretical ideal of philosophy according to which
contemplation of and submersion in God is the highest ethical
act of which human beings are capable. Whereas in his later works
Feuerbach would seek to compel philosophy 
to come down from its divine and self-sufficient blissfulness in
thought and open its eyes to human misery, (GPZ
264/3) 
here he spoke instead of 
the painful whimpering of the sick and the last moans of the dying as
victory songs of the species [in which it] celebrates its reality and
victorious lordship over the single phenomenon. (GTU 302/
95)
The understanding of reason as one and universal embodied in the works
discussed in the preceding section also informs the approach taken by
Feuerbach to the history of philosophy in the three previously
mentioned books and a series of lectures that he produced during the
 1830s.[8]
 In his lectures on the history of modern philosophy Feuerbach
emphasizes that philosophical reflection is an activity to which human
beings are driven. The history of the philosophical systems
that this activity has produced, he argues, is conceived only
subjectively and thus inadequately as long as it is regarded as the
history of the opinions of individual thinkers. Because thinking is a
species-activity the philosophical systems that have arisen in the
course of the history of philosophy should be regarded as necessary
standpoints of reason itself. The Idea is not something first produced
by philosophical reflection. Rather, the individual thinker, in the
act of thinking, transcends his individuality and functions as an
instrument or organ through which the Idea actualizes one of its
moments, which is later reproduced in the consciousness of the
historian of philosophy. The activity of the Idea is experienced
subjectively as inspiration (Begeisterung). In producing
itself, the Idea does not pass from nonbeing into being, but rather
from one state of being (being in itself) to another (being for
itself). The Idea produces itself by determining itself, and human
consciousness is the medium of its self-actualization. 
Reason is nothing but the self-activity of the eternal,
infinite idea, whether in art or religion or philosophy, but this
activity is always the activity of the Idea in a particular
determination and thus also at a particular time, for it
is precisely according to the particular determinations of the idea
that enter successively into human consciousness that we differentiate
the periods and epochs of history. (VGP 11)
The emergence of new philosophical systems results on this view from a
necessity that is both internal and external. Certain philosophical
ideas are only capable of achieving historical expression under
specific historical conditions. Just as it was only possible for
Christianity to appear at that point in history when the ties of
family and nation in Greco-Roman antiquity were dissolved, so it was
only possible for modern philosophy to appear under specific
historical conditions. The beginning of the history of modern
philosophy must be located at the point at which the modern spirit
first begins to distinguish itself from the medieval spirit. The
dominant principle of the medieval period was the Judeo-Christian,
monotheistic principle, according to which God is conceived as an
omnipotent person through an act of whose will the material world was
created from nothing (ex nihilo). It is because nature, as
conceived from this standpoint, is excluded from the divine substance,
according to Feuerbach, that medieval thought showed no interest in
the investigation of nature. It is only where the substantiality of
nature begins to be rediscovered that the spirit of modernity
distinguishes itself from the medieval spirit. This occurs most
clearly where matter comes to be regarded as an attribute of the
divine substance, so that God is no longer conceived of as a being
distinct from nature but rather as the immutable and eternal imminent
cause from which the plenitude of finite shapes in nature pours forth.
This happens first among the nature philosophers of the Italian
Renaissance, and subsequently in the speculative reflections of Jakob
Böhme and in the system of Spinoza. Indeed, it is one distinctive
feature of Feuerbach’s view of the history of modern philosophy
that he thinks of it as beginning, not with Descartes, but with the
nature philosophers of the Italian Renaissance. Feuerbach insists upon
the speculative significance of Bacon’s philosophy of nature. It
is precisely in subjecting nature to experimentation, and thereby to
rational comprehension, that spirit raises itself above nature. But
while Feuerbach emphasizes the philosophical importance of experience
in the modern rediscovery of nature, he nevertheless insists that
empiricism lacks a “principle” of its own. Later he will
speak of the need for an alliance between German metaphysics and
“the anti-scholastic, sanguine principle of French
sensualism and materialism” (VT
254–255/165).
Feuerbach’s conviction that Christian faith is inimical to
reason and philosophy was strengthened by his own studies of the
history of modern philosophy, especially his studies of Leibniz and
Bayle. His monographs on these figures were written during the period
of controversy following the appearance of Strauss’s Life of
Jesus. Toward the end of the 1830s the Young Hegelians were
increasingly opposed on two fronts, by right-wing Hegelians such as
Friedrich Göschel, who insisted upon the compatibility of
Hegelianism and Protestant orthodoxy, and by representatives of the
so-called “Positive Philosophy”, who, taking their
inspiration from the late Schelling, emphasized the personality of God
as disclosed in the Christian revelation as the supreme metaphysical
principle (cf. Breckman 1999 and Gooch 2011). It is in light of these
developments that, beginning in the Leibniz monograph, Feuerbach
sought increasingly to distinguish from one another, and to
demonstrate the incompatibility of, what he refers to there as
“the philosophical standpoint” and “the theological
standpoint”, respectively. Feuerbach regards the theological
standpoint as “practical” because it imagines God as a
being separate from the world, upon which he acts according to
purposes similar to those that guide the actions of human beings,
rather than conceiving the world as a necessary, and hence rationally
intelligible, consequence of the divine nature. To be sure, for
Leibniz, there is nothing arbitrary about the divine will. God’s
will is determined by his infinite wisdom and goodness, which compel
him to choose to create the best possible world. But this attempt to
synthesize rational necessity and divine sovereignty remains in
Feuerbach’s view an unacceptable compromise. Like Tycho Brahe,
who sought to combine the Ptolemaic and Copernican astronomies,
Leibniz sought to reconcile the irreconcilable. In general, Feuerbach
regarded Leibniz’s theory of monads as an original philosophical
position that offers a genuinely novel conception of substance, and an
alternative to the mechanistic-mathematical Cartesian account of
motion, and thus constitutes an organic link in the developmental
sequence of historical philosophical systems. Feuerbach criticized
Leibniz, however, for not having derived the unity or harmony of the
monads from the nature of the monads themselves, and for appealing
instead to a theological representation of God as an alien, external
power who achieves this harmonization miraculously, and hence,
inexplicably. 
Although, considered superficially, Feuerbach’s study of Bayle
is a continuation of the line of inquiry pursued in his earlier
historical monographs, closer inspection confirms Rawidowicz’s
observation that this book marks an important turning point in his
intellectual development (Rawidowicz 1964: 62–62). The book is
full of digressions that go on for many pages without making any
reference to Bayle, which can produce an impression that it lacks a
clearly defined focus. In fact Feuerbach is here moving toward, and
building a case for, a claim that he articulates more explicitly in
succeeding years, namely, that the “practical negation” of
Christianity is a fait accompli insofar as the scientific,
economic, aesthetic, ethical and political values and institutions
that are constitutive of modern European culture are incompatible with
the demands of authentic Christian faith as expressed in the Bible and
in the writings of classical patristic and medieval authors, who are
either indifferent or inimical to the scientific investigation of
nature, the acquisition of wealth, the pursuit of artistic creativity
as an end in itself, and attempts to establish ethical and political
norms on the basis of universally valid rational principles rather
than the authority of revelation or of the Church.
Although the Protestant Reformation, in its rejection of clerical
celibacy, its affirmation of the vocation of the laity, and its
separation of temporal and spiritual authority, resolved the
contradiction between the spirit and the flesh that was characteristic
of medieval Catholicism, Feuerbach argues, it failed to resolve the
contradiction between faith and reason, or theology and philosophy.
Bayle’s historical significance for Feuerbach consists in his
uncompromising exposure of this contradiction, which, because it was
so deeply rooted in Bayle’s own character, he himself could only
resolve by embracing fideism. Feuerbach sought to further expose this
contraction in his 1839 essay, “On Philosophy and
Christianity”, in which he for the first time publicly
repudiated the Hegelian claim that philosophy affirms in the form of
conceptual thinking the same truths affirmed by religion in the form
of sensible representations. 
In a section of the preface to the second edition of The Essence
of Christianity (1843) that Eliot omitted from her translation,
Feuerbach reveals that he had sought in this book to achieve two
things: First, to attack the Hegelian claim for the identity of
religious and philosophical truth by showing that Hegel succeeds in
reconciling religion with philosophy only by robbing religion of its
most distinctive content. Second, 
to place the so-called positive philosophy in a most fatal light by
showing that the original of its idolatrous image of God
[Götzenbild] is man, that flesh and blood belong to
personality essentially. (WC 10–11) 
Appreciation of each of these objectives requires further
clarification of the historical context in which Feuerbach’s
book appeared, namely one year after the ascension to the Prussian
throne of the Romantic conservative, Friedrich Wilhelm IV, whose inner
circle of advisers consisted of devout aristocrats closely associated
with the neo-Pietist Awakening, who felt called to establish a
German-Christian state as a bulwark against the influence of
subversive ideas on the continent. 1840 also saw the death of the
Prussian minister of culture, Karl vom Stein zum Altenstein, who had
been a supporter of the Hegelian cause, and a bearer of the hopes of
the Young Hegelians both for academic advancement and for a Prussian
state informed by a liberal Protestant ethos amenable to progress in
the arts and sciences. The wedge driven by the outcry surrounding the
appearance of Strauss’s book between the right and left wings of
the Hegelian camp made this “center” position increasingly
untenable. The policies of Altenstein’s successor were aimed
instead at slaying the “dragonseed” of Hegelian pantheism
in the universities under Prussian jurisdiction.
By the time Feuerbach published his most famous book, The Essence
of Christianity (1841), in which he sought to develop “a
philosophy of positive religion or revelation” (WC 3),
he had begun to move away from his earlier idealistic pantheism. That
he nevertheless sought in this book to criticize both Hegelian
speculative theology and the positive philosophy from “the same
standpoint” taken by Spinoza in his Theologico-Political
Treatise (VWR 16/9; cf. WC 10–11) has
often been overlooked. At one point in the Treatise Spinoza
observes that the biblical authors 
imagined God as ruler, legislator, king, merciful, just, etc., despite
the fact that all the latter are merely attributes of human nature and
far removed from the divine nature. (Spinoza [1677] 2007: 63) 
In Christianity Feuerbach makes a similar distinction between
the metaphysical and personal divine predicates. God considered as the
theoretical object of rational reflection, or “God as
God”, is a timeless and impassible entity that is unaffected by
human suffering and ultimately indistinguishable from reason itself.
The consciousness of human nullity that is bound up with consciousness
of this being is in no way a religious consciousness; it is much more
characteristic of skeptics, materialists, naturalists and pantheists.
(WC 89/44) 
It is God’s personal predicates that concern the religious
believer, for whom God exists, not as an object of theoretical
contemplation, but of feeling, imagination, and prayerful
supplication.
Whereas the metaphysical predicates, which “serve only as
external points of support to religion” (WC 62/25), can
be thought of as ones that apply to the first person of the Trinity
(i.e., God in his abstract universality), the second person of the
Trinity, by virtue of his having subjected himself for the salvation
of humanity to a humble birth and an ignominious death, “is the
sole, true, first person in religion” (WC 106/51). The
doctrine of the Incarnation, Feuerbach argues against Hegel, is for
the Christian believer not a symbolic representation of the eternal
procession and return of infinite spirit into, and back from, its
finite manifestations, but rather “a tear of divine compassion
[Mitleid]” (WC 102/50), and, as such, the act
of a sacred heart that is able to sympathize with human suffering.
That God was compelled by his love for humanity to renounce his
divinity and become human Feuerbach takes as proof that “Man was
already in God, was already God himself, before God
became man” (ibid.), i.e., that belief in divine compassion
involves the attribution or projection onto God of a moral sentiment
that can only be experienced by a being capable of suffering, which
“God as God” is not.
The Essence of Christianity is divided into two parts. In the
first part Feuerbach considers religion “in its agreement with
the human essence” (WC 75), arguing that, when
purportedly theological claims are understood in their proper sense,
they are recognized as expressing anthropological, rather than
theological, truths. That is, the predicates that religious believers
apply to God are predicates that properly apply to the human
species-essence of which God is an imaginary representation. In the
second part Feuerbach considers religion “in its contradiction
with the human essence” (WC 316), arguing that, when
theological claims are understood in the sense in which they are
ordinarily taken (i.e., as referring to a non-human divine person),
they are
 self-contradictory.[9]
 In early 1842 Feuerbach still preferred that his views be presented
to the public under the label “anthropotheism” rather than
“atheism” (GW v. 18, 164), emphasizing that his
overriding purpose in negating “the false or theological essence
of religion” had been to affirm its “true or
anthropological essence”, i.e., the divinity of man.
Feuerbach begins The Essence of Christianity by proposing
that, since human beings have religion and animals don’t, the
key to understanding religion must be directly related to whatever it
is that most essentially distinguishes human beings from animals.
This, he maintains, is the distinctive kind of consciousness that is
involved in the cognition of
 universals.[10]
 A being endowed with such “species-consciousness” is able
to take its own essential nature as an object of thought. The capacity
for thought is conceived here as the capacity to engage in internal
dialogue, and thus to be aware of oneself as containing both an I and
a Thou (a generic other), so that, in the act of thinking, the human
individual stands in a relation to his species in which non-human
animals, and human beings qua biological organisms, are
incapable of standing. When a human being is conscious of himself as
human, he is conscious of himself not only as a thinking being, but
also as a willing and a feeling being. 
The power of thinking is the light of knowledge [des
Erkenntnis], the power of the will is the energy of character,
the power of the heart is love. (WC 31/3) 
These are not powers that the individual has at his disposal. They are
rather powers that manifest themselves psychologically in the form of
non-egoistic species-drives (Gattungstriebe) by which
individuals periodically find themselves overwhelmed, especially those
poets and thinkers in whose works the species-essence is most clearly
instantiated.
 [11]
 Such manifestations include the experiences of erotic and platonic
love; the drive to knowledge; the experience of being moved by the
emotion expressed in music; the voice of conscience, which compels us
to moderate our desires to avoid infringing on the freedom of others;
compassion; admiration; and the urge to overcome our own moral and
intellectual limitations. The latter urge, Feuerbach contends,
presupposes an awareness that our individual limitations are
not limitations of the species-essence, which functions thus
as the norm or ideal toward which the individual’s efforts at
self-transcendence are directed.
The individual human being is limited both physically and morally. Our
physical existence is limited in time and space. We are also
limited—and often painfully aware of our being so—in our
intellectual and moral capacities. But I only experience as a painful
limitation my inability to be and do things that others of my kind are
able to be and to do, so that in recognizing my own limitations I
simultaneously recognize that they are not limitations of the species.
If they were, either I would not be aware of them at all, or I would
not experience my awareness of them as painful. For example, I only
reprove myself for cowardice because I am aware of the bravery of
others, which I myself lack. I only reprove myself for my stinginess
because of my awareness of the generosity of others, which I myself
lack. The experience of conscience—taken in the broad sense as
an awareness of one’s moral and intellectual shortcomings and
inadequacies—presupposes species-consciousness in the form of an
awareness of the qualities that one finds oneself lacking but can
imagine oneself under other circumstances possessing.
Feuerbach’s central claim in The Essence of
Christianity is that religion is an alienated form of human
self-consciousness insofar as it involves the relation of human beings
to their own essence as though to a being distinct from themselves.
Although, in developing this claim, Feuerbach was clearly influenced
by Hegel’s account of Unhappy Consciousness in the
Phenomenology, Ameriks’ contention that 
Feuerbach’s philosophical doctrines […] can be understood
as little more than a filling out of the details of Hegel’s
scathing account of orthodox Christianity as a form of “unhappy
consciousness” (Ameriks 2000: 259) 
is problematic for several reasons. First, it overlooks the likelihood
of Hegel’s having understood his analysis of Unhappy
Consciousness to apply to the otherworldliness he associated with
medieval Catholicism, or perhaps to otherworldly religion more
generally, but not in any case to the type of Protestantism that he
regarded as “the religion of the modern age” (Hegel [1807]
1977: 14), and in which he found the sacred and the secular
reconciled. Second, it overlooks the fact that Feuerbach’s
appropriation of themes found in Hegel’s account of Unhappy
Consciousness occurs in the context of an explicit, albeit incomplete,
repudiation of Hegel’s philosophy of spirit. Unlike Hegel, who
conceives of Unhappy Consciousness as a moment in the development of
human self-consciousness that is also a moment in the
coming-to-be-for-itself of the absolute, Feuerbach has by this time
reached the conclusion that one cannot distinguish absolute spirit
from “subjective spirit or the essence of man” without, in
the end, continuing to occupy “the old standpoint of
theology” (VT 246–247). Third, it overlooks the
significance of Feuerbach’s emphasis on the importance for
grasping the essence of religion of precisely those subjective aspects
of religious consciousness (imagination and feeling) that Hegel
himself regarded as inessential or of secondary importance. Finally,
in connection with this third point, it overlooks the significance of
Feuerbach’s agreement with Spinoza against Hegel that
“faith […] requires not so much truth as piety”
(Spinoza [1677] 2007: 184).
In a short essay published 1842, in which he sought to clarify the
difference between his own approach to the philosophy of religion and
Hegel’s, Feuerbach suggested that this difference is most
evident in the relations in which each of them stands to
Schleiermacher, who famously defined religion as the feeling of utter
dependence. Whereas Hegel had “rebuked” Schleiermacher for
abdicating the truth-claims of the Christian faith by taking the
articles of faith as expressions of this feeling, Feuerbach says he
does so only because Schleiermacher was prevented by his
“theological prejudice” from drawing the unavoidable
conclusion that, “if feeling is subjectively what religion is
chiefly about, then God is objectively nothing but the essence of
feeling” (B 230). These comments fail to acknowledge
that, in The Essence of Christianity Feuerbach had conceived
of God as an alienated projection of the human species-essence, which
was said to include not only feeling, but reason and will, as well.
They nevertheless reflect Feuerbach’s generally overlooked
deployment against Hegel of resources derived from the philosophies of
feeling of Schleiermacher and
 Jacobi,[12]
 and they indicate the direction in which his thinking about religion
continued to move after the publication of The Essence of
Christianity, namely, away from an emphasis on
species-consciousness conceived along Hegelian lines, and toward what
Van Harvey has aptly referred to as the
“naturalist-existentialist” themes that predominate in his
later writings on religion (cf. Harvey 1995), which are discussed in
 Section 6
 below.
In notes for lectures on the history of modern philosophy that he
delivered in 1835/36, Feuerbach wrote that idealism is the “one
true philosophy”, and that “what is not spirit is
nothing” (VGP 139). Around the same time he
vigorously defended the “absolute method” employed by
Hegel in his Logic against its critics (GW 8:73).
Feuerbach himself referred to his early philosophical
“standpoint” as “the standpoint of pantheistic
identity” (GW 10:291). His efforts to extricate himself
from this standpoint were ongoing over the course of two decades,
though the extent to which they ultimately succeeded is debatable.
Whereas the young Marx saw Feuerbach as “the true conqueror
of the old philosophy”, the neo-Kantian historian
of materialism, F.A. Lange, could find in his “new”
philosophy only another iteration of the philosophy of spirit,
“which we encounter here in the form of a philosophy of
sensuousness” that lacks materialistic bona fides (Marx 1844:
80; Lange [1866] 1974: v. 2, 522).
In 1839, the same year that Feuerbach made his first public break with
Hegelianism in the essay, “Toward a Critique of the Hegelian
Philosophy”, he was still able to write that he missed in
speculative philosophy “the element of the empirical, and in
empiricism the element of speculation”, and to describe his own
method as an effort to conjoin both kinds of philosophical
“activity” into a form of “skepticism or
critique just as much of the merely speculative as
of the merely empirical” (GW 9:12). It was
only in 1842, between the time of the publication of the first (1841)
and second (1843) editions of The Essence of Christianity
(which happens also to have been a time of draconian censorship and
police surveillance) that Feuerbach became convinced of the need to
make a “radical break” with the speculative philosophical
 tradition.[13]
 This prompted him to report in the preface to the second edition of
his famous book that “the Idea” retained for him only a
practical significance as “faith in the historical
future”, and in the triumph of truth and virtue. In the realm of
theoretical philosophy proper he now considered himself, “in
complete opposition to the Hegelian philosophy”, a realist and a
materialist (WC 15). 
In two brief philosophical manifestos published in 1842 and 1843,
respectively, Feuerbach sought to “deduce”, through an
internal criticism of the “old” philosophy (culminating in
the Hegelian system), the “principles”
(Grundsätze) that would lay the foundation for a
“new”, naturalistic “philosophy of the
future”. After the publication of these two manifestos, however,
he turned his attention back to religion, claiming in the foreword to
the first volume of his collected works (1846) that it was only in his
book on The Essence of Faith According to Luther (1844) that
he came to appreciate the “truth and essentiality of
sensuousness [Sinnlichkeit]” (GW 10:187), and
thereby to overcome the “contradiction” between
speculation and empiricism in which his position in The Essence of
Christianity had remained mired. It is certainly the case that a
number of concepts that are central to the philosophical anthropology
with which Feuerbach sought to replace the “old”
philosophy, including the effort to “naturalize freedom”
undertaken in his final writings, were first introduced and developed
in writings on religion published in the 1840s and 1850s. Because of
this it’s difficult to neatly separate a discussion of
Feuerbach’s “new” philosophy from his later
theorizing about religion. Be that as it may, the first of these
topics will be explored in this section and the second in the
succeeding section. Feuerbach’s preliminary efforts in his last
active years to develop a drive psychology and to naturalize ethics
will be considered briefly in the final section.
One thing that distinguishes Feuerbach’s “new”
philosophy from other versions of modern empiricism and materialism is
his claim to have derived the “principles” of this
philosophy through a dialectical inversion of the Hegelian system. In
the “Theses” Feuerbach argues that, by
“positing” the human essence “outside of man”
in the ethereal realm of absolute spirit, the Hegelian philosophy
perpetuates the theological alienation of human beings from their own
essence, which he now explicitly equates with subjective spirit. The
re-appropriation of this abstracted essence by finite, corporeal human
subjects cannot be achieved “positively” [auf positive
Weg], but only through a “total negation” of the
Hegelian philosophy that will reveal once and for all the
incarnational telos of the history of philosophy and humanity
(VT 247). In this way, Feuerbach thinks, the hidden
“truth of Christianity” (VT 263) will finally be
realized in the form of an atheistic humanism that renounces the
fantastical consolations of religion in order to embrace the
historical tasks of human self-realization and the creation of the
political and cultural institutions that are conducive to it.
In 1846 Feuerbach published a number of “fragments” from
his unpublished papers intended to document the course of his
philosophical development. One of these fragments, entitled
“Doubt”, and dated 1827–28 (which is the time when
Feuerbach was writing his doctoral dissertation) seems already to
anticipate Feuerbach’s later critique of Hegel. In this fragment
we find him questioning the transition from the first to the second
part of Hegel’s tripartite philosophical system, i.e., the
transition from the logic to the philosophy of nature. The conceptual
process traced by Hegel in the logic, whereby the categories of
thought are successively deduced from one another, is driven by the
negativity of the logical determinations of each of these categories,
until the process culminates in the absolute Idea. But what negativity
remains within the absolute Idea to propel the transition from thought
to being unless it is that the purportedly “absolute” Idea
remains in some sense incomplete until it becomes incarnate in the
realm of the sensuous, i.e., nature. In that case, however, nature
itself (as the realm of the sensuous) is the hidden truth of the
Idea.
The claim for the identity of thought and being was the cornerstone of
the Hegelian philosophy in which Feuerbach finds the “old”
philosophy perfected, and one of the principal “theses” of
the new philosophy is its rejection of this claim. Feuerbach argues
that, because the concept of pure being with which Hegel begins the
Logic is an abstraction, in the end Hegel succeeds only in
reconciling thought with the thought of being, and not with being
itself. The new philosophy affirms that being is distinct from, and
prior to, thought, and that it is as various as is the panoply of
individually existing beings, from which it cannot be intelligibly
distinguished. 
Thought comes from being, but being does not come from thought.
[…] The essence of being as being [i.e., in contrast
to the mere thought of being] is the essence of nature.
(VT 258/168) 
To say that something exists in actuality is to say that it exists not
only as a figment of someone’s imagination, or as a mere
determination of their consciousness, but that it exists for itself
independently of consciousness. “Being is something in which not
only I but also others, above all also the object itself,
participate” (GPZ 304/40). In affirming the distinction
between thought and being, repudiating Hegel’s critique of sense
certainty, and affirming the claim that nature exists through itself,
independently of thought, the new philosophy also affirms the reality
of time and space, insisting that real existence is finite,
determinate, corporeal existence. Whereas in his lectures on logic and
metaphysics, and in his writings from the mid-1830’s, Feuerbach
had defended the Hegelian method of the logical Entwicklung
or development of the various moments of the absolute Idea, he now
argues that the concept of development entails temporality, so that a
non-temporal developmental process is a contradiction in terms. If
speculative philosophy is the philosophy of the infinite, the new
philosophy aims to disclose the truth of finitude by reversing the
path taken by speculation from the infinite to the finite, and from
the indeterminate to the determinate (VT 249).
Although, in the “Theses”, Feuerbach refers to
“speculative philosophy” as having been inaugurated by
Spinoza, restored by Schelling, and perfected by Hegel (VT
243), in Principles he locates the origin of this tradition
in the Cartesian philosophy, and specifically in “the
abstraction from the sensuous [Sinnlichkeit], from
matter” (GPZ 275/ 13) through which the conception of
the cogito first arose. Much of the content of Principles
consists of a truncated survey of the history of modern philosophy,
which purports to trace through a number of dialectical inversions a
necessary development from the rationalistic theism of Descartes and
Leibniz through the pantheism of Spinoza to the idealism of Kant and
Fichte, culminating in Hegel’s philosophy of identity. What this
survey is primarily intended to show is that the fundamental tendency
of this development has been toward the actualization and humanization
of God or, alternatively, toward 
the divinization of the real, of the materially
existent—of materialism, empiricism, realism,
humanism—[and] the negation of theology. (GPZ 285/ 22)
This survey is followed by a short “demonstration” of the
historical necessity of the new philosophy, which takes the form of a
critique of Hegel, and by the enumeration of several doctrines that
distinguish the new philosophy from the old.
Whereas earlier rationalists had conceived of God as being entirely
distinct from nature and possessing perfect knowledge untainted by
materiality, and had furthermore “placed the effort and labor of
abstraction and of self-liberation from the sensuous only in
themselves”, Feuerbach notes that Hegel was the first to
transform “this subjective activity into the self-activity of
the divine being”, so that, like the heroes of pagan antiquity,
God (or the Idea) must “fight through virtue for his
divinity”, and only comes to be for himself (or itself) at the
end of a long and laborious process (GPZ 296/32). This
process, as it is described by Hegel at the end of the Science of
Logic, involves the logical Idea 
freely releas[ing] itself … [into] the externality
of space and time existing absolutely on its own without the
moment of subjectivity. (Hegel [1812–1816] 1969: 843) 
What Feuerbach refers to as “the liberation of the absolute from
matter” is achieved as spirit gradually distinguishes itself
from nature before attaining to the awareness of itself as absolute.
Here, Feuerbach notes, “matter is indeed posited in God, that
is, it is posited as God”, and to posit matter as God is to
affirm atheism and materialism, but insofar as the
self-externalization of the Idea in nature is superseded in the course
of the coming-to-be-for-itself of the Idea in the forms of subjective,
objective and absolute spirit, this negation of “theology”
(i.e., of God conceived as an immaterial being distinct from nature)
is negated in turn. Hegel’s philosophy thus represents, for
Feuerbach, 
the last magnificent attempt to restore Christianity, which was lost
and wrecked, through philosophy … by identifying it with the
negation of Christianity. (GPZ 297/34) 
The old philosophy conceived of the cogito as “an abstract and
merely a thinking being to whose essence the body does not
belong” (GPZ 319–320/ 54). The new philosophy, by
contrast, affirms that, as a thinking subject, “I am a real,
sensuous being and, indeed, the body in its totality is my ego, my
essence itself” (ibid.). Although it remains unclear just what
Feuerbach could mean in claiming that “the body in its totality
is my ego”, elsewhere he says that to affirm that the ego is
corporeal “has no other meaning than that the ego is not only
active but also passive … [and that] the passivity of the ego
is the activity of the object” in such a way that “the
object belongs to the innermost being of the ego” (AP
150/142). Object and ego are, to use a Heideggerian term,
gleichursprunglich or “equiprimordial”. 
It is through the body that the ego is not just an ego but also an
object. To be embodied is to be in the world; it means to have so many
senses, i.e., so many pores and naked surfaces. The body is nothing
but the porous ego. (AP 151/143) 
If philosophical thought is to avoid remaining “a prisoner of
the ego”, Feuerbach insists, it “must begin with its
antithesis, with its alter ego” (AP
146/138). The antithesis of thought is sensation. Whereas in thinking
it is the object that is determined by the thinking activity of the
subject, in sense experience, he maintains, without much argument and
with apparently little concern for the epistemological problems that
preoccupied the British empiricists and Kant, the consciousness of the
subject is determined by the activity of the object, which functions
thus as a subject in its own right. What makes it possible for the ego
to posit the object is only that, in positing the object as something
distinct from itself, the ego is at the same time posited by the
object. If, however, the 
the object is not only something posited, but also (to continue in
this abstract language) something which itself posits, then it is
clear that the presuppositionless ego, which excludes the object from
itself and negates it, is only a presupposition of the subjective ego
against which the object must protest. (AP 147/ 139) 
It is not to the I, but to the not-I within the I, that real, sensuous
objects are given. Memory is what first enables us to transform
objects of sense experience into objects of thought, so that what is
no longer present to the senses can nevertheless be present to
consciousness. In doing so it allows us to transcend the limitations
of time and space in thought, and to construct from a multitude of
distinct sense experiences a conception of the universe as a whole,
and of our relations to the various other beings that exist in it.
Feuerbach continues to affirm that, unlike the animals,
“man” is a universal, cosmopolitan being, but he now
maintains that we need not ascribe to human beings any unique
supersensible faculty in order to affirm this truth, since 
wherever a sense is elevated above the limits of particularity and its
bondage to needs, it is elevated to an independent and theoretical
significance and dignity; universal sense is intelligence
[Verstand]; universal sensibility, mentality
[Geistigkeit]. (GPZ 336/69) 
What distinguishes humans from the animals is not their possession of
non-natural powers either of reason or volition, but the fact that
human beings are “absolute sensualists” whose powers of
observation and recollection extend to the whole of nature.
Although Feuerbach is most often associated with the slogan underlying
The Essence of Christianity, according to which
“theology is anthropology” (insofar as the predicates
attributed by Christians to God are in fact predicates of the human
species-essence), in a number of works on religion published in the
1840s and 1850s Feuerbach advanced explanations of the origin of
religious concepts and beliefs that are strikingly different from, and
apparently at odds with, the more familiar position put forward in
that book. The primary works in which Feuerbach advanced these new
theoretical proposals are the previously referenced Luther book
(1844), a short book entitled The Essence of Religion (1846),
the essay, “Belief in Immortality from the Standpoint of
Anthropology” (1847), the Lectures on the Essence of
Religion originally delivered in 1848–9, but first
published in 1851 (hereafter Lectures), and the
Theogony (1857). The question of the relationship between the
account of religion contained in The Essence of Christianity
and the views put forward in these later writings is a complex one,
the most penetrating analysis of which is to be found in Harvey
(1995). Here Harvey identifies five distinct “explanatory
principles” employed by Feuerbach in The Essence of
Christianity, among which he distinguishes those that are
conceived along Hegelian lines from those that tend instead toward the
“existentialist-naturalist” themes which predominate in
Feuerbach’s later writings on religion (Harvey 1995:
68–69). Harvey’s thesis is that, in those later writings,
Feuerbach in fact develops a new, bipolar model of religion that is
both incompatible with, and more compelling than, the earlier one,
which relied too heavily on abstract Hegelian conceptions that are no
longer viable. Whereas, in The Essence of Christianity, the
emphasis was on God as an alienated projection of the human
species-essence, and on the infinity and perfection of the species,
the new bipolar model sees religion as meeting deep-seated
psychological needs resulting from the contingency and precariousness
of the finite, embodied existence of individual human subjects seeking
to preserve themselves and expand their natural powers.
In a previously cited essay published in 1842, which was intended to
clarify the differences between Hegel’s philosophy of religion
and his own, Feuerbach referred readers seeking to evaluate his
argument in The Essence of Christianity to his
“Critique of the So-Called Positive Philosophy”, published
in the Halle Annals in December, 1838 (B 235). It
was there that Feuerbach first put forward the claim that all the
“determinations” (Bestimmungen) ascribed by the
positive philosophy to God are determinations either of “the
essence of nature” or of “the essence of man”
(KPP 204). This claim is consistent with subsequent
statements of Feuerbach’s, including his observation in the
Principles that “God, in the theological sense, is God
only as long as he is conceived as a being distinguished from the
being of man and nature” (GPZ 280/19). Here the
implication seems to be that, if it can be shown that attributes
ascribed by theists to God are attributes derived either from human
consciousness or from nature, then it will have been shown that God
has no existence apart from the existence of human consciousness and
of nature. Thus, even if it is true, as Harvey is probably correct to
argue, that the bipolar model of religion found in the later writings
does not merely supplement, but replaces, the position taken by
Feuerbach in The Essence of Christianity, these two distinct
explanatory enterprises can nevertheless be understood as alternative
strategies for making good on Feuerbach’s original claim that
the predicates of divinity can be reduced to predicates derived either
from the essence of nature or from the human essence. Also, while
Harvey is correct to point out that the human species-essence is
rarely mentioned in Feuerbach’s later writings, by 1851
Feuerbach had still not abandoned the claim that God conceived as a
personal being distinct from nature “is nothing other than the
deified and objectified spiritual essence of man” (VWR
28/21).
As Rawidowicz (1964: 113) and Ascheri (1964: 62) have both observed,
the break with the speculative tradition that Feuerbach signaled in
the “Preliminary Theses” and in Principles
corresponds to a notable change in his stance toward religion, if not
in his estimation of the truth-value of traditional doctrinal claims.
In his polemical essays of the late 1830s, and in The Essence of
Christianity, Feuerbach had unfavorably contrasted the
“egoistic”, practical standpoint of religion, which he
associated with the unrestricted subjectivity of feeling
(Gemüt) and imagination (Phantasie), with the
impartial, theoretical standpoint of philosophy, which he associated
with reason and objectivity. At the end of Principles,
however, he informs his readers that the new philosophy, without
ceasing to be theoretical, nevertheless has a fundamentally practical
tendency, and that in this respect it “assumes the place of
religion” and “is in truth itself religion”
(GPZ 341/73). This line of thought is developed somewhat
further in an unpublished manuscript where Feuerbach observes that, in
order to replace religion, philosophy must itself become religion in
the sense that “it must, in a way suited to its own nature,
incorporate the essence of religion or the advantage that religion
possesses over philosophy” (NV 123/148). Here Feuerbach
does not tell his readers what this advantage is, but in the
Lectures he claims that the difference between philosophy and
religion can be reduced to “the simple statement that religion
is sensuous and aesthetic, while philosophy is nonsensuous and
abstract” (VWR 20/13). Religion’s
“advantage” over the old philosophy, then, is presumably
it’s implicit acknowledgment of the “truth and
essentiality of sensuousness” and of human finitude, which it is
the task of the new philosophy to articulate explicitly.
When Feuerbach’s Luther book was first published in 1844,
its subtitle suggested that it was conceived of as an addendum
to The Essence of Christianity. Because, in the first edition
of that book, Feuerbach had relied heavily on quotations from
patristic and medieval works to substantiate his claims, some
theological critics had retorted that, while Feuerbach’s account
of Christianity might apply to Catholicism, it did not apply to
Protestantism. It was in responding to these critics that Feuerbach
turned his attention to Luther, and, in doing so, introduced a number
of concepts and themes that had not figured prominently in The
Essence of Christianity, but which he continued to develop in his
later writings, including both those devoted to religion, as well as
those devoted to other topics. Foremost among these concepts and
themes are Seligkeit or blessedness and the
Glückseligkeitstrieb or drive-to-happiness; “human
egoism” or human self-love; the feeling of dependence on nature;
and the powerful, theogonic (i.e., god-originating) wish to be free
from the limitations of nature by which the human drive-to-happiness
is restricted. 
Feuerbach begins the Luther book by conceding that no doctrine would
seem more clearly to contradict the central claim advanced in The
Essence of Christianity, namely, that Christians worship the
human species-essence, than does Luther’s doctrine, which is the
epitome of human self-abnegation insofar as it emphasizes the
depravity and contemptibleness of human nature in contrast to the
perfection of the divine nature. This appearance, however, is
deceptive; for, while it’s true that whatever Luther takes from
human beings he gives to God, since all that belongs to God belongs to
Christ, and all that belongs to Christ belongs to the Christian, it is
only on the surface that Luther’s doctrine is dehumanizing.
Whereas, in The Essence of Christianity, he had contrasted
the egoism and intolerance of faith (which he associated with the
false, theological essence of religion) with the altruism and
universality love (which he associated with the true, human essence of
religion), in the Luther book Feuerbach emphasizes that Christian
faith is faith in a God who is love, but the principal object of whose
love is humanity, so that this faith turns out to be an indirect form
of human self-love or self-affirmation. The Christian believer affirms
the existence of, as well as his or her confidence in, the goodness of
God, who has promised him or her blessedness or freedom from the
painful limitations of mortality. It is only because the Christian
believer “completes and satisfies himself in God”
(WGL 363/46) that God has everything that human beings lack.
Luther, with his emphasis on God’s being pro nobis or
“for us”, was “the first to let out the secret of
the Christian faith” (WGL 366/50), which is, at bottom,
the assurance 
that God is by his very nature concerned with man, […] that God
is a being not for himself or against us, but rather for us, a good
being, good to us men. (WGL 366–67/51) 
From this recognition Feuerbach goes on to develop an analysis of the
divine attributes, which he interprets in this context as “means
to the end of benevolence” (WGL 368/52). Here, and in
Feuerbach’s later writings, the concepts of blessedness and the
drive-to-blessedness seem to play a role analogous to the one played
by the concept of the species-essence in The Essence of
Christianity. Whereas, in the latter work, divine attributes such
as omniscience and perfection were said to be attributes of the human
species-essence, in the section on Seligkeit toward the end
of the Theogony, where Feuerbach develops a line of thought
first introduced in the Luther book, many of these same attributes are
said to characterize the state of blessedness itself. “God is
only the foreword, blessedness the text of Christianity. Or: The
mystery of divinity is first unveiled and revealed in the gospel of
blessedness” (T 308). The thesis here is that the
attributes of the Christian God are determined by the most fundamental
wishes of the Christian believer. For example, God qua
creator is first and foremost omnipotent, but omnipotence is ascribed
to God only because God must be omnipotent in order to be able to
exercise his benevolence toward believers by supplying them with what
they lack, including eternal life. There is no lack that cannot be
satisfied, and no ultimate harm that can befall, the person who is the
object of the benevolence of an omnipotent being. On this account, the
divine attributes are determined by human needs, and these are
determined in turn by the psychophysical constitution of humans as
beings who find themselves constrained by natural limitations from
which they have an urgent wish to be liberated. Belief in divine
omnipotence is motivated not by any specific wish, however, but rather
by “the unspecific over-all wish that there be in general no
natural necessity; no limitations, no opposition to the human being
and to human wishes” (WGL 372/59).
Feuerbach, whose understanding of Seligkeit or blessedness
seems to have been heavily influenced by Augustine’s account of
felicitas in The City of God, defines blessedness at
one point as freedom from sin, sensual drives, “the oppression
of matter”, death, and the limitations of nature in general
(WGL 403/103). Whereas the God of Christianity had previously
been identified by Feuerbach as an alienated projection of the human
species-essence, here God is defined instead as the realized
drive-to-happiness of the Christian believer. To say that belief in
God is motivated or caused by the human drive-to-happiness is not
necessarily to deny that attributes ascribed to God are attributes
derived from human nature, but it is in any case to affirm that the
ascription to God of the perfections of the human species-essence
serves an underlying psychological need that is itself determined by
the dependence of human beings upon nature, and their awareness of
this dependence in the form of powerful hopes and fears that give rise
to belief in supernatural agencies.
Two years after the publication of the Luther book Feuerbach published
another short book entitled The Essence of Religion, the core
ideas in which are further developed in the Lectures, where
Feuerbach explains that, because Christians themselves do not worship
such things as the sun and the moon, but instead worship “will,
intelligence, consciousness as divine beings and powers”
(VWR 27/20), he himself had “disregarded nature”
in his account of Christianity (VWR, 26/19). This had given
rise to certain unspecified but “preposterous”
misunderstandings, which he sought to correct by augmenting the slogan
encapsulating his doctrine from “theology is anthropology”
to “theology is anthropology ‘and
physiology’” (VWR 28/21). This modification
reflects a new emphasis in Feuerbach’s later writings on the
ontological dependence of human consciousness upon the physical human
organism, which itself exists only in relation to the natural order of
which it is a part—a relation mediated, or, to be more precise,
revealed, by the senses.
The Essence of Religion begins with the striking claims 1)
that the feeling of dependence is the “ground” of
religion, and 2) that the original object of this feeling, i.e., in
the history of religion, is nature. Feuerbach defines the feeling of
dependence as 
the feeling or consciousness of man that he does not and cannot exist
apart from a being that is distinct from himself, that he does not
have himself to thank for his own existence. (WR 4) 
This feeling can manifest itself negatively as fear, which Feuerbach
refers to at one point as “a feeling of dependency on an object
without which I am nothing, which has the power to destroy me”
(VWR 39/31), but it can also manifest itself in the form of
celebratory joy and exaltation. Feuerbach finds both of these powerful
emotions expressed in the act of sacrificial offering, which he takes
to be the most characteristic act of nature religions (as opposed,
presumably, to prayer as the characteristic act of
“spiritual”, i.e., monotheistic, religion). In addition to
filling a “gap” in the argument put forward in The
Essence of Christianity by emphasizing the dependence of
“the human essence” upon “the essence of
nature”, Feuerbach also sought in The Essence of
Religion to identify features shared in common by what he calls
“nature religions”, on the one hand, and
“spiritual” religions like Christianity, on the other, and
to clarify the relationship between these two kinds of religion.
Feuerbach uses the term “nature religion” to refer both
the pagan religions of classical antiquity, and the religions of
various tribal peoples whose beliefs and practices were described for
Feuerbach and his contemporaries by European travelers in journals
such as Das Ausland, from which Feuerbach derived a number of
the examples to which he refers in this book (cf. Tomasoni 1990:
10–11, 127–135). 
While the feeling of dependence is the ground of religion, what the
act of sacrifice aims at or seeks to achieve is freedom from the
restrictions of nature, or, alternatively, human independence. If
blessedness is the condition of not being restricted by the
limitations imposed by nature on all finite, corporeal individuals
subject to generation and corruption, then human blessedness can be
regarded as the final goal (Endzweck) of religion
(WR 34). The gods are the objects of worship and the
recipients of sacrifice because they are the benefactors of human
beings in the specific sense that they are imagined to have it in
their power to satisfy fundamental human wishes, including the wish
not to die. “Only a being who loves man and desires his
happiness [Seligkeit] is an object of human worship, of
religion” (VWR 71/60). The sacrificial act is motivated
by the experience of need (Bedürfnis), which involves
the simultaneous awareness both of one’s “non-being apart
from nature”, and of one’s existence as a self-conscious
being distinct from nature (WR 32). In the Lectures
Feuerbach claims that the feeling of dependence on nature is the only
“truly universal” designation for the “psychological
or subjective ground of religion” (VWR 39/31). This
continues to be the case even after nature has ceased to be the locus
of divinity, and the origin of the visible world is sought in the will
of a transcendent creator who brought forth the world into being from
nothing, and who is solely responsible for occurrences attributed by
polytheists to a multitude of divine agencies. The objective correlate
of the feeling of dependence, in the case of both polytheism and
monotheism, is the really existing things and people who are the
objects of various human needs, physical and psychological—needs
which Feuerbach implicitly recognizes, especially in the
Theogony, to be culturally determined.
Feuerbach’s description of the feeling of dependence as
involving the awareness 
that I am nothing without a not-I which is distinct from me
yet intimately related to me, something other, which is at
the same time my own being (VWR 350/311) 
reflects his understanding of nature as the totality of “the
beings [Wesen], things, [and] objects that man distinguishes
from himself and his products” (WR 4). Nature, in other
words, is the non-human world, devoid of consciousness, will and
sentiment. It includes such things as light, electricity, air, water,
earth, and the plants and animals upon which the existence of human
beings depends, but it also includes the human organism itself insofar
as the effects produced by it are produced unconsciously and
involuntary. Nature is the “cause and ground of man”; in
human beings nature “becomes a personal, conscious, intelligent
(verständiges) being” (VWR 29/21). To say
that human beings are dependent upon nature is to say, among other
things, that nature, which is devoid of consciousness and intention,
is what has caused human beings to exist, and that the same physical
processes that have produced the human brain have also produced human
consciousness. While all organisms are dependent upon nature for their
existence, human beings are distinguished from other organisms by the
extent of their conscious awareness of this dependence, which
Feuerbach finds expressed in the earliest forms of cultic activity,
including the earliest forms of nature religion focused, for example,
on the changes of the seasons, and in the offering of sacrifice to
divine beings associated with various aspects of the natural world.
Although nature is the original object of religion, this goes
unrecognized initially because human beings do not at first
distinguish themselves from nature or vice versa. The forces of nature
are instead personified, and naturally occurring events are attributed
to the human-like motivations of spirits and gods. Religion, according
to Feuerbach, exhibits the following contradiction: When it conceives
of itself theistically, it mistakenly thinks of God as a thoroughly
non-human being (i.e., one whose existence and attributes in no way
depends on the existence and attributes of human beings), and when in
conceives of itself as nature religion, it mistakenly attributes
consciousness and will to what is in fact entirely non-human.
Further analysis of the feeling of the dependence leads Feuerbach to
conclude that this feeling itself presupposes “egoism as the
ultimate hidden ground of religion” (VWR
91–92/79). Here he reasons that, if human beings were not
subject to powerful psychological drives which compel them to expand
and develop their natural powers, including most fundamentally the
drive-to-self-preservation, they would not experience the limitations
imposed upon them by nature as painful and restricting.
“Life is egoism” (EEWR 82)
insofar as the fundamental drive of all living things, including the
human organism, is the drive to self-preservation
(Selbsterhaltungstrieb). Nevertheless, what Feuerbach calls
“human egoism” doesn’t seem to be the same thing
either as psychological egoism (the claim that everyone always acts
from self-interest) or ethical egoism (the claim that
“good” is whatever serves my own interests). Feuerbach
writes that, by “human egoism” he means 
man’s love for himself, that is, love of the human essence, the
love that spurs him on to satisfy and develop all the impulses and
tendencies without whose satisfaction and development he neither is
nor can be a true, complete human being. (VWR 60–61/50)
This type of self-love, which warrants comparison with, but is not the
same as, Rousseau’s amour de soi, encompasses love of
one’s fellow human beings, apart from whom one cannot either
cultivate or satisfy the ethical, intellectual and aesthetic impulses
and capacities in which one’s essential humanity consists, and
to whose well-being one’s own is thus inextricably linked. 
Feuerbach’s book, Theogony according to the Sources of
Classical, Hebrew and Christian Antiquity (1857), is the product
of six years of close engagement with Hebrew, Greek, and Latin texts
from antiquity, and exemplifies the vastness of Feuerbach’s
humanistic erudition. Feuerbach considered it his “simplest,
most complete, mature work” (GW 20: 292). It may not be
a mere coincidence that the period of Feuerbach’s engagement in
these philological labors was the same period when one of his closest
correspondents was Emil Ernst Gottfried von Herder, the son of Johann
Gottfried von Herder, whose introduction to the study of theology
Feuerbach had read as a young man while he himself was learning Hebrew
grammar in preparation for his matriculation in the theological
faculty at the University of Heidelberg. Like the older Herder, who
conceived of the poetry of the Hebrew Bible as a product of the genius
of humanity in its childhood, Feuerbach turned to the Iliad and the
Odyssey, which he thought of as the Urstätten or
“original sites” of anthropology, and to the Hebrew
scriptures, for clues to the origins of belief in the gods and in God.
Large portions of the book consist either of 1) careful philological
analyses of individual passages selected, for example, from the Iliad
or the Odyssey, or from the creation accounts in Genesis, or else of a
verse from Pindar or Ovid, or a passage from the New Testament; or 2)
quotations from a wide range of Greco-Roman, patristic, rabbinical and
medieval sources which Feuerbach cites as evidence to support the
central explanatory claim of the book. This claim is that the
psychological origin of belief in the gods and in God is the powerful
human wish for happiness or blessedness conceived as a state of
freedom from the “limitations” (Grenze) that
nature imposes on human existence, which are experienced by the human
subject in the form of powerful feelings of hope and fear.
In seeking to substantiate the claim that the wish is the fundamental
religious phenomenon, Feuerbach analyzes several theophanies from the
Iliad in order show that the gods make their appearances in the epic
in response to petitions directed to them by humans. Insofar as the
ends toward which the actions of the gods in the Homeric epics are
directed are determined by the wishes of the mortals who invoke their
blessings and curses, the gods act as the representatives or deputies
of (Vertreter) of human self-love (T 12). “The
wish is a slave of necessity, but a slave with the will to
freedom” (T 47), and the gods are the imaginary
embodiment of human freedom from the restrictions of finitude.
Feuerbach arrives at this conclusion through his analysis of the acts
of petitionary prayer in the Iliad and their role in wish fulfillment,
and cites in this context the observation of the Byzantine Homeric
commentator, Eustathius of Thessalonica, that Homer allows no just
request made of the gods to remain unfulfilled. In the divine-human
relationship, it is the mortals who desire, strive, and will, and it
is the gods who complete or bring to fruition these human intentions
to the extent that the conditions for their satisfaction are beyond
human control (T 19). While the wish itself is a purely
subjective psychological occurrence, the completion of the action to
which a wish might give rise, or the achievement of the end toward
which the wish it directed, depends upon external circumstances that
may or may not be conducive to the fulfillment of the wish. It is
under such circumstances, where failure is a distinct possibility, and
a matter of urgency hangs in the balance, that the gods are invoked
and their blessings sought in order to bring some human endeavor to a
successful completion. The gods are beings who are able to do or know
what humans would like to be able to do or know, but cannot
(T 39). 
Religion does not originate, as philosophy does, from a theoretical or
speculative impulse to understand the world, but in a practical
concern to influence the course of events that transpire within it.
Belief in gods thus presupposes a desire that there should exist
beings capable of guaranteeing the success of human endeavors, and
faith is preceded by hope in the logical order of things religious. If
human beings did not have a powerful desire, say, to be liberated from
bondage or to avoid death, belief in the Promised Land or in
immortality would never have arisen. In biblical terms, faith in God
is trust in what God promises, but what is promised by God is what is
sought after or desired by human beings. The religious significance of
God’s promises is contingent upon their correspondence to
deep-seated human desires. Whereas, in The Essence of
Religion, Feuerbach referred to the feeling of dependence as the
“ground” of religion, he now attributes the psychological
origin of the gods to the wish. The wish, considered as an act of
striving for what remains beyond the limits of human power to achieve,
is theogonic in the sense that theophanies (i.e., manifestations of
the gods or of God) described in the Homeric epics and in the Bible,
considered as narrative events, occur as responses to powerful human
wishes or needs, or else as expressions of gratitude and celebration
in response to occasions where these needs are believed to have been
met through the cooperation or assistance of a divine agency
(T 32). The gods owe their existence to “sensualism and
materialism” insofar as they are the product of the material
needs of finite, embodied human subjects.
Interesting sections of the Theogony are devoted to analyzing
the role of the gods in the consecration of oaths, and to the origins
of conscience in the aggrieved will-to-happiness of the other.
Feuerbach attributes belief in divine justice to the wish that the
person by whom one has been harmed should suffer harm themselves
(T 103). He appeals to the mythological representations of
the furies and of Medusa as evidence of the “sensual”
origins of the voice of conscience (T 136), which presupposes
a powerful, involuntary sense of sympathy with the suffering of person
who has suffered, or stands to suffer from, one’s actions. It is
“only in his egoism that man has a criterion for distinguishing
between right and writing” (T 140). At one point in the
Theogony Feuerbach defines morality (Sittlichkeit)
as “the drive-to-happiness endowed with wisdom, the wise,
rational, healthy, normal, justified (gerechte)
self-love” (T 82). 
When human beings in the course of their history acquire new and
different wishes, they tend also to worship new and different
divinities. Whereas the ancient Greco-Roman pagans, and even the
ancient Hebrews, were mainly concerned to secure blessedness in the
form of long life and temporal prosperity, the early Christians sought
their blessedness in eternity or “eternal life”. Feuerbach
closely associates this shift from a concern with temporal blessedness
to a concern with eternal blessedness with the Christian emphasis on
creation ex nihilo, which he contrasts both with the Hebrew account of
creation as involving the forming and ordering of pre-existent
elements, and the limitation of the Greco-Roman gods to being able to
prolong the lives of mortals, and securing their blessedness in this
life, without being able to confer immortality upon them. The freedom
from natural necessity ascribed by early Christian thinkers to God is
interpreted by Feuerbach as an expression of the wish of these
Christians to be free themselves from the constraints of material
existence.
As noted in the preceding section, Feuerbach’s espousal of
sensuousness coincides with a movement toward nominalism that is
reflected in a shift of emphasis from the human species to the
individual human being in his later works on religion. One way that
this shift shows itself is in a striking change in Feuerbach’s
estimation of egoism. Among the many issues that remain unclear in
Feuerbach’s later writings is what the expression “human
essence” can mean for him once he has abandoned the
species-ontology of his earlier writings and declared himself a
nominalist. That pivotal question aside, it is at least clear that in
Principles, and in his later writings on ethics, Feuerbach
continues to emphasize the importance of inter-subjectivity and of the
I-Thou relationship, but that these are no longer conceived in
idealistic terms, as they had been in his earlier writings, including
his doctoral dissertation, where he spoke of thought as a
species-activity in which the individual thinking subject
participates. In his later writings on ethics Feuerbach continues to
affirm that human beings are essentially communal and dialogical
beings, both with respect to our cognitive and linguistic capacities,
and with respect to the range of moral sentiments we experience toward
one another, but the communality in which the human essence is
manifested is now said to be one that presupposes a real,
“sensible” distinction between I and Thou.
Undoubtedly the central concept in Feuerbach’s last works, which
include the essay, “On Spiritualism and Materialism, Especially
in Relation to the Freedom of the Will”, and an incomplete essay
on ethics, is the concept of the Glückseligkeitstieb or
drive-to-happiness. Toward the end of the Preliminary Theses,
after affirming that all science must be grounded in nature, and that
doctrines not so grounded remain purely “hypothetical”,
Feuerbach had gone on to note that this is especially true of the
doctrine of freedom, and he had assigned to the new philosophy the
task of “naturalizing freedom” (VT 262/172). This
is one of the tasks to which he applies himself in “On
Spiritualism and Materialism”, where he takes aim at
“supernaturalistic” philosophers, among whom he counts
Kant, Fichte and Hegel, who ascribe to human beings a noumenal or
universal will that is “independent of all natural laws and
natural causes and thus of all sensuous motivations
[Triebfedern]” (SM 54). In arguing that it is
possible for the will to be determined by the mere form of the moral
law, independently of any sensible inclination, Kant had identified
the will with pure practical reason. In doing so, Feuerbach argues, he
turned the will into a mere abstraction. For Feuerbach it makes no
sense to speak of a timeless will devoid of affect directed toward
some particular object.
The concepts of drive (Trieb), happiness, sensation and will
are closely interrelated in the account of agency that Feuerbach
sought to develop in these last writings. Feuerbach regards sensation
as the “first condition of willing” (M 366),
since without sensation there is no pain or need or sense of lack
against which for the will to strive to assert itself. At one point he
defines happiness as the “healthy, normal” state of
contentment or wellbeing experienced by an organism that is able to
satisfy the needs and drives that are constitutive of its
“individual, characteristic nature and life” (M
366). The drive-to-happiness is a drive toward the overcoming of a
multitude of painful limitations by which the finite, corporeal
subject is afflicted, which can include “political brutality and
despotism” (VWR 61/50). Every particular drive is a
manifestation of the drive-to-happiness, and the different individual
drives are named after the different objects in which people seek
their happiness (SM 70). Among the specific drives to which
Feuerbach refers in his later writings are the
drive-to-self-preservation, the sexual drive, the drive-to-enjoyment,
the drive-to-activity and the drive-to-knowledge. Although he does not
explicitly associate drives with the unconscious, Feuerbach does
anticipate Nietzsche and Freud in regarding the body as the
“ground” of both the will and of consciousness
(SM 153), and he emphasizes that action results from the
force with which a dominant drive succeeds in subduing other
conflicting drives that may reassert themselves under altered
circumstances (SM 91). Feuerbach also occasionally
distinguishes between healthy and unhealthy drives, though he has
little to say about the standard or criterion for making such a
distinction.
Whereas happiness involves the experience of a sense of contentment on
the part of a being that is able to satisfy the drives that are
characteristic of its nature, the inability to satisfy these drives
results in various forms of discontent, aggravation, pain and
frustration. The German word, “Widerwille”, means
disgust or repugnance, but literally it involves not-wanting or,
etymologically, “willing against”, and this, Feuerbach
contends, is the most rudimentary form of willing. 
Every malady (Übel), every unsatisfied drive, every
unassuaged longing, every sense of absence [i.e., of a desired object]
is an irritating or stimulating injury and negation of the
drive-to-happiness innate in each living and sensing being, and the
countervailing affirmation of the drive-to-happiness, accompanied by
representations and consciousness, is what we call “will”.
(M 367) 
Freedom of the will, as Feuerbach conceives of it here, is freedom
from the evils (Übeln) by which my drive-to-happiness is
restricted, and is contingent upon the availability to me of the
specific means required for overcoming these restrictions.
Another way that Feuerbach seeks to “naturalize freedom”
is by developing a naturalistic account of conscience according to
which the voice of conscience, which imposes restrictions on my own
drive-to-happiness, functions in doing so as the advocate for the
drive-to-happiness of “the I apart from me, the sensuous
Thou” (SM 80), who has been or stands to be harmed by
those actions from which I can have a moral obligation to refrain from
performing. Where there is no harm or benefit, Feuerbach contends,
there is no criterion for distinguishing right from wrong (SM
75–76). Feuerbach agrees with Schopenhauer in regarding
compassion (Mitleid) as a basic source of moral motivation,
but rejects Schopenhauer’s association of compassion with the
renunciation of the will to live. The purpose of morality and law is
to harmonize the drive-to-happiness of the various individual members
of a moral community. 
My right is the legal recognition of my own drive-to-happiness, my
duty is the drive-to-happiness of the other that demands recognition
from me. (SM 74) 
The moral will, as Feuerbach conceives of it here, is not a
disinterested will. It is rather “that will which seeks to cause
no harm because it wishes to suffer no harm” (SM 80),
and has come to identify its own interests with those of others.
Because sympathy for the suffering of others presupposes antipathy
toward my own suffering, whoever does away with self-interest (i.e.,
refuses to recognize moral value in actions motivated by
self-interest) does away at the same time with compassion
(Mitleid).