There a number of points that all Mādhyamika thinkers have in
common. In all of them one finds some version of the doctrine of two
truths, according to which there is a level of understanding that
consists of an accurate account of the world as it is experienced in
everyday life and another level of understanding that is conducive to
reaching the ultimate goal (paramārtha) of Buddhist
practice, namely, nirvana, understood as the absence of attachment,
aversion and delusion with no possibility of their return. There is
also broad agreement that language is limited to the everyday level of
understanding and that the truth of nirvana is beyond the reach of
language and of the conceptualization that makes language possible.
Where differences arise among Mādhyamika thinkers is on the
issue of how these two truths relate to one another. Does careful
verbalization and thinking do any good in bringing one closer to
nirvana, or is it invariably an obstacle? Is there any room within
Madhyamaka for clear thinking and carefully wrought argumentation, or
are all attempts to arrive at clear thought and rigorous argumentation
ultimately delusional and therefore to be abandoned along with more
obvious forms of delusion?
Another area in which Mādhyamakas differ from one another is in
their attitude toward the other main school of Mahāyāna
Buddhism, the Yogācāra school, which Mādhyamikas present
as advocating a kind of subjective idealism. Early Mādhyamikas
tended to refute the Yogācāra doctrine that all the contents
within awareness arise out of awareness itself and are thus
ontologically at one with consciousness. Later Mādhyamikas found
room for that view, usually by portraying Yogācāra as a
philosophy that prepares one intellectually and emotionally for the
difficult truth that all things are lacking in inherent natures and all
that we think of as knowledge is ultimately without grounding.
According to traditional accounts preserved in Tibetan and Chinese,
Āryadeva was born into the royal family in what is now Sri Lanka,
renounced his claim to the throne, took monastic vows, studied the
Buddhist scriptures for several years, and travelled to south India. He
reportedly became a direct disciple of Nāgārjuna. His
principal writing, the Catuḥśatakaśāstra
(Four Hundred Verse Treatise), was regarded as a Madhayamaka text and
was commented on by Candrakīrti and by prominent Tibetan
proponents of the Madhyamaka school.
The first hundred verses of the Four Hundred Verse Treatise deal
with four illusions that must be dispelled by someone striving to
achieve liberation from the root causes of dissatisfaction. The four
illusions are the beliefs that there are permanent things in the world
that escape destruction, that impermanent things can provide true
satisfaction, that satisfaction can be derived from intrinsically
impure things, and that satisfaction can be attained by being
preoccupied with oneself. These are standard themes in Buddhist
writings. The second set of one hundred verses also deal with standard
Buddhist themes, namely, cultivating altruistic motivations, ridding
the mind of the afflictions of desire, anger, and delusion, and
developing habits of ethical conduct. While the first half of the
treatise is essentially inspirational in nature, the second half
provides arguments meant to prove that all things are conditioned and
therefore impermanent, that nothing qualifies as an independent and
enduring self, and that there are no uncaused causes. Most of the
verses dealing with these topics are polemical in nature and are aimed
at refuting the doctrines of Brahmanical schools, Jainism and some of
the Buddhist scholastics. As is the case with other Mādhyamikas,
Āryadeva focuses most of his attention on showing the
incomprehensibility or absurdity of the doctrines under review. His
motivation for doing this is suggested in 8.10 (the tenth verse in the
eighth set of twenty-five), where he says attachment to one’s own
views and disparaging the views of others is an obstacle to nirvana,
and tranqillity is impossible for those who engage in doctrinal
disputes. His exercise in showing the untenability of various
positions, then, is presumably done not for the sake of refuting others
in order to establish his own position, but to help his readers break
the habit of firmly holding tenets.
An example of Āryadeva’s demonstrating an inconsistency
in a particular position is his critique of the view that there is a
permanent self. He observes that since a permanent self could not
undergo change, it could not be harmed or destroyed, and therefore it
is inconsistent for those who believe in such a self to promote ethical
guidelines against killing or harming others. While Āryadeva
endeavors in some chapters to show the inconsistencies in a number of
particular doctrines of the Sāṃkhya and Vaiśeṣika
schools, in the fourteenth chapter he provides a paradigm of an
argument that can be applied to any number of doctrinal positions. That
paradigm, which is familiar to readers of Nāgārjuna and other
Mādhyamikas, consists in showing that there is a problem in
attributing a given predicate to a subject, and in attributing the
negation of that predicate, and in attributing both the predicate and
its negation, and in attributing neither the predicate nor its
negation. For example, he argues that one cannot say that a pot is
single, for it has many characteristics, such as color, shape,
hardness, odor and so forth. It also cannot be said that the pot is
many pots, because none of the individual characteristics is a pot. It
cannot be said that the pot is a single whole with many
characteristics, because some of its components are material and
therefore capable of contact and location, while others, such as color
and odor, are immaterial and have no location; it makes no sense to say
that characteristics that have contrary natures form a coherent whole.
And yet to deny that a pot is either one or many is to deny that it
exists at all, for an existent thing must have either a property or the
absence of that property. Āryadeva’s statements of these
arguments in verse is laconic and often difficult to follow; therefore,
most readers who study his text do so with the help of one of the many
commentaries written by later Sanskrit or Tibetan
authors. 
Aside from a commentary entitled Akutobhaya (Afraid of
nothing), which is traditionally ascribed to Nāgārjuna but
the authorship of which is questioned by modern scholars, the earliest
extant commentary to Nāgārjuna’s MMK is the
Madhyamakavṛtti by Buddhapālita (ca 470–ca
540). The original Sanskit of this text is not known to exist, but it
is still extant in Tibetan translation. Buddhapālita’s
commentary, like Akutobhaya stays close to the text upon
which it is a commentary. The MMK is written in verse, and
Buddhapālita’s commentary places the words of the verse text into
standard prose word order and offers glosses to disambiguate
potentially confusing words.  Like the MMK itself, Buddhapālita’s
commentary does not offer a positive position but rather shows the
untenability of all the apparently possible solutions to the
philosophical questions taken up for examination. The principal method
of examining a position in MMK and in Buddhapālita’s commentary
is to show that unwelcome consequences are entailed by the position
under consideration.
An example of the approach used by Nāgārjuna and
Buddhapālita is their discussion of the relation between a cause
and its effect, the topic taken up in MMK 1.1. There are only four
possible relationships: the cause is the same as the effect, the cause
is different from the effect, the cause is both the same as and
different from the effect, or the cause is neither the same as nor
different from the effect. This fourth position would be tantamount to
saying that there is no cause, and that an effect therefore arises out
of nothing at all. Each of these four possibilities is rejected in
turn, each for a different reason. Buddhapālita argues that if an
effect were identical to its cause, then it would already exist as the
cause and would have no need of coming into being a second time.
Identity of cause and effect defeats the very idea of causality. If the
effect were different from the cause, on the other hand, then there would
be no constraints on what could arise out of what, so long as the cause
and the effect were different. The third possibility is untenable, says
Buddhapālita, since it is merely the conjunction of the two
hypotheses that have just been shown to be untenable. A proposition
consisting of the conjunction of two false propositions cannot be true.
The fourth possibility, like the first, undermines the very idea of
causality. Moreover, says Buddhapālita, it would render all
practice ineffectual; what he probably had in mind here was
specifically Buddhist religious practice, which is predicated on
identifying the root causes of dissatisfaction and then eliminating
those root causes so that dissatisfaction disappears.
Beyond showing the untenability of each of the relations that were
discussed as possible relations between the relata in a particular
situation, Nāgārjuna and Buddhapālita have little to
say. Opponents to the Madhyamaka school were critical of this
approach, saying in effect that there is little value in finding fault
with a philosophical view unless one is prepared to offer a better
view to replace the faulty one. As will become more clear in what
follows, it was precisely this issue—that is, whether there is a
value in simply finding faults in philosophical views—that
became controversial among Mādhyamikas.
The strongest challege to the commentarial tradition of
Buddhapālita came from Bhāvaviveka, whose approach to
Madhyamaka became the basis of what Tibetan Buddhists would many
centuries after the fact consider a subschool of Madhyamaka that
rivalled the subschool comprising those who followed
Buddhapālita.
Bhāvaviveka, who was also known as Bhavya and Bhāviveka,
was probably active in the middle part of the sixth century. His
commentary on MMK, entitled Prajñāpradīpa
(Lamp of Wisdom), now extant only in Chinese and Tibetan translations,
contains not only his interpretation of Nāgārjuna’s thoughts
but also critiques of Buddhapālita’s approach to Madhyamaka, about
which more will be said below, and critiques of the Buddhist abhidharma
tradition. Prajñāpradīpa also incorporates
critiques of such non-Buddhist schools as Sāṃkhya,
Vaiśeṣika and the Jains.
In addition to his commentary to MMK, Bhāvaviveka wrote an
important independent verse treatise on Madhyamaka entitled
Madhyamakahṛdayakārikā (Verses on the Heart of
Centrism) to which he provided a prose commentary called
Tarkajvālā (Flame of Reasoning). This combination of
works comprises eleven chapters.
As the titles of the chapters of this work show, Bhāvaviveka
was a student of most of the important movements in Indian philosophy
of his era and sought to stake out the place of the Madhyamaka school
within Buddhism as a whole. His understanding of Madhyamaka was
importantly different from Buddhapālita’s. Their different
approaches turned out to define two of the three important sub-schools
of Madhyamaka.
A distinguishing characteristic of Bhāvaviveka’s approach to
Madhyamaka is his conviction that a Mādhyamika should put forward
a positive argument for a position rather than merely showing the
inadequacies of other positions. His criticism of Buddhapālita was
focused primarily on that very point; Buddhapālita offered no
statement of what the Mādhyamikas believe but confined himself to
pointing out that what other people believe is untenable in one way or
another. To criticize the positions of others but not to venture to
state a position of one’s own was regarded by the Indian debate
tradition as a substandard use of argumentation called
vitaṇḍā, which literally means making an
attack. Bhāvaviveka was at pains to show that Mādhyamikas
could not legitimately be accused of this sort of philosophical
sniping. He affirmed that Mādhyamikas do have a conviction that
they are prepared to state and defend, namely, that all phenomena are
devoid of an inherent nature, that is, a nature that they have
independently. All phenomena are conditioned, and such natures as they
have are natures that they acquire through their conditions rather than
on their own. The concise Madhyamaka way of saying all this is to say
that all phenomena (dharmas) are empty
(śūnya). Since the Mādhyamikas believe that all
phenomena are empty, they owe it to their readers to provide reasons
for thinking that that is a reasonable thing to believe.
In providing arguments in favor of the conclusions accepted by
Mādhyamikas, Bhāvaviveka followed the example set by
Dignāga (fl. ca. 510), a Buddhist whose principal contributions
were in the area of epistemology and logic. Dignāga, following
with some modifications philosophers of the Brahmanical Nyāya
school, had devised a canonical form of presenting arguments, which
consisted in identifying a topic (pakṣa) and reasoning
on the basis of an observed feature of the topic that it also had
another feature not currently available for direct observation. The
stock example given in Indian logic is that if a particular mountain is
the topic, one can reason on the basis of observing smoke associated
with that mountain that there is also a fire associated with that
mountain. Attributing an unobserved feature to a topic on the basis of
an observed feature is legitimate only if one has previously observed
the feature used as evidence together with the feature being inferred,
and if one has never seen the feature used as evidence in the absence
of the feature being inferred. Dignāga’s method of presenting an
argument consists, then, in stating a topic (pakṣa) and
a property used as evidence (sādhaka-dharma) for a
property to be established (sādhya-dharma).
Bhāvaviveka followed this method in arguing for the conclusions of
which he claimed Mādhyamikas are convinced; he also criticized
Buddhapālita for failing to follow Dignāga’s method.
In his discussion of MMK 1.1, Bhāvaviveka makes the general
observation that when Nāgārjuna negates a proposition, he is
negating the entire proposition rather than negating just the
predicate. If one negates just a predicate, that leaves open the
possibility that some other predicate can suitably be applied to the
subject in question. Negation of a predicate in a proposition
presupposes the existence of the subject of the proposition, whereas
negation of the entire proposition need not rest on such a
presupposition. So when Nāgārjuna says that a phenomenon does
not arise from itself, one should understand that to be a way of saying
“It is not the case that a phenomenon arises from itself.”
If one were to construe Nāgārjuna’s statement as equivalent
to something like “The arising of a phenomenon is not from the
phenomenon itself,” then one would naturally take that to be
saying that the arising of a phenomenon is from something other than
itself. Alternatively, one might take it to be saying that the arising
of a phenomenon is not only from itself but rather from
something that is partly itself and partly something other than itself.
If one takes Nāgārjuna’s proposition to be a series of
conjoined propositions of the form “It is not the case that a
phenomenon arises from itself and it is not the case that a
phenomenon arises from something other than itself, and it is
not the case that a phenomenon arises from itself in cooperation with
something other than itself, and it is not the case that a
phenomenon arises from nothing at all,” then there is no paradox
involved in negating both a simple proposition and its contradiction.
It is therefore important to make it clear when Nāgārjuna’s
negations are sentential negations and when they are term-negations,
and this Buddhapālita failed to do.
Bhāvaviveka goes on to explain that Nāgārjuna
employed sentential negations in MMK 1.1, because he was trying to
establish a kind of “non-conceptual cognition,” that is, an
insight that cannot be expressed in words. The scope of this
non-conceptual insight is everything that is capable of being cognized.
In other words, Nāgārjuna’s insight was that everything that
one thinks one knows, every explanation one thinks one has to account
for one’s experiences, is flawed and must ultimately be abandoned. In
saying this, Bhāvaviveka is consistent with a number of important
statements in MMK and VV. Nāgārjuna had laid emphasis on the
claim that the Buddha had dealt out two kinds of truth, a quotidian
transactional or conventional truth (vyavahāra-satya,
saṃvṛti-satya) and a truth concerning the highest goal
(paramārtha-satya), namely, nirvana. Of these, only the
transactional truth is capable of being articulated in language. The
highest goal, consisting of a silence of the mind in which there is no
conceptual thinking, is naturally inexpressible in language, since
language is necessarily bound up with concepts. Some form of this view
was shared by all Mādhyamikas. Where they differed with one
another was on the issue of how the teachings of Buddhism, which are
communicated in language, relate to the highest goal of Buddhism, which
lies outside the scope of language.
Nāgārjuna wrote in MMK 18.9 that the defining
characteristics of reality (tattva, literally,
“thatness” or quiddity) are that it is not conditioned by
something other than itself, it is peaceful, it cannot be elaborated
through verbal elaborations, it is non-conceptual, and it is uniform.
In his commentary to that verse, Bhāvaviveka expands the meaning
of the verse by saying that anything that is not conceptual in nature
cannot be expressed through verbal elaborations or through any other
kind of sign. In other words, what is non-conceptual in nature cannot
be known indirectly, and knowledge gained through language is always
mediated and indirect. For this reason, reality is entirely outside the
range of language. That notwithstanding, says Bhāvaviveka, what
language can do is convey something about the general nature
of what is talked about. The statement that phenomena are lacking in
inherent natures, for example, does convey useful general information
about reality. Even though reality itself can be known only directly
through a non-conceptual awareness, language can be helpful in
conveying that very information, namely, that reality can be
apprehended only directly and not through language. That the
Mādhyamika has, and defends, the view that reality lacks inherent
nature means that the Mādhyamika is not merely engaging in
philosophical sniping of the vitaṇḍā
variety.
In his Tarkajvālā, in which Bhāvaviveka is
freed from the constraints of following Nāgārjuna’s texts and
puts forward his own approach to Madhyamaka, he states that the term
“highest goal” (paramārtha-satya) has two
aspects. One aspect is that it is free from volitional thought, pure
and beyond the reach of verbal elaborations. Another aspect is that it is
volitional in nature, connected with the accumulation of knowledge and
meritorious karma, and connected with verbal elaborations and with the
transactional knowledge of everyday life. By seeing the ultimate goal
in this way, Bhāvaviveka claims to give an account that leaves
reality intact as a uniform whole about which knowledge can be diverse
and incremental. This incremental nature of knowledge makes ample room
for the traditional Mahāyāna teachings of the gradated
bodhisattva path whereby one moves from the aspiration for
enlightenment to the gradual realization of enlightenment. A metaphor
that Bhāvaviveka uses for the Buddhist path is that it follows
verbal teachings which are like a ladder that one slowly ascends until
one can climb over the wall into non-conceptual direct awareness of the
peaceful reality of nirvana in which there is nothing to be wished for,
nothing to be understood and no hypothesis to be defended.
As is usual for the majority of Indian philosophers, very little is
known about the life of Candrakīrti. Modern scholars place him at
the beginning of the seventh century. His two best-known works are his
commentary to MMK entitled Prasannapadā
Madhyamakavṛtti (Clear-worded Commentary on Centrism), which
survives in Sanskrit as well as in Tibetan translation, and an
independent treatise called Madhyamakāvatāra
(Introduction to Centrism) available only in Tibetan translation.
Madhyamakāvatāra is a verse text to which
Candrakīrti provided a prose commentary. It is clearly an earlier
work than his commentary to MMK, since in that commentary he refers the
reader repeatedly to Madhyamakāvatāra for the full
arguments for the positions he endorses. Both
Prasannapadā and Madhyamakāvatāra have
been studied by modern scholars and a significant number of passages
have been translated into modern European languages. In addition to
those works, Candrakīrti wrote a number of commentaries to
relatively short texts by Nāgārjuna and Āryadeva.
At the beginning of his commentary to MMK, Candrakīrti offers
an extended criticism of Bhāvaviveka and a defense of
Buddhapālita against the criticisms of Bhāvaviveka. Many
centuries after he wrote, Buddhist scholastics in Tibet portrayed
Candrakīrti as the founder of one of the subschools of the
Madhyamaka that they perceived. Because Bhāvaviveka had advocated
for producing independent (svatantra) arguments for the view
that all phenomena are empty of inherent natures, the Tibetan
scholastics dubbed his subschool the Svātantrika school; because
Candrakīrti criticized that approach and advocated for being
content to show the unwelcome consequences (prasaṅga) of
all possible positions on any given philosophical issue, his subschool
was named by Tibetans the Prāsaṅgika school of Madhyamaka.
Although those terms were not used by Indian Mādhyamikas
themselves, it has become standard practice in modern scholarship to
portray the Madhyamaka school as comprising at least two subschools
with those names and to see Bhāvaviveka and Candrakīrti as
the founders of those two subschools.
The earlier of Candrakīrti’s two principal works,
Madhyamakāvatāra, has ten chapters, one for each of
the ten stages of the path of the bodhisattva. At each of these stages
the bodhisattva focuses attention on one of the virtues that are to be
brought to a stage of perfection (pāramitā). The
virtues to be perfected are generosity; good habits of thought, word
and deed; patience; courage; meditation; wisdom; proselytizing skill;
application of vows; strength of character; and transcendental
knowledge. The chapter dedicated to the sixth stage, at which wisdom is
cultivated to perfection, is the chapter in which Candrakīrti lays
out his most detailed exposition of the Madhyamaka school of
philosophy. Candrakīrti begins this chapter with the claim that
wisdom is like a sighted person who is capable of leading a group of
blind people safely to a destination; similarly, wisdom guides all the
other virtues to their destination of perfection. As for the content of
wisdom, it is the realization that no phenomena come into being.
Phenomena cannot arise from themselves, since that possibility would
make arising unnecessary or redundant; if a thing already exists, it
has no need to come into being. If, on the other hand, it were allowed
that one being might rise out of a being other than itself, then there
would be nothing to prevent one from saying that pitch darkness arises
out of light. Another way of looking at the issue of production from
causes is that the effect either already exists in the cause or it does
not exist. If it already exists, it has no need or coming into being.
If it does not exist, then it cannot be an agent that does the action
of coming into being; but if there is no agent, then there is no
action.
After showing that there cannot be any intelligible account of the
arising of phenomena, Candrakīrti acknowledges that in everyday
experience we encounter phenomena coming into being all the time. This
leads to a discussion of the two truths. The ultimate truth—that
is, truth concerning the highest goal—is that phenomena do not
come into being; the conventional transactional truth, on the other
hand, is that things do come into being and that their arising is
conditioned. This conventional truth can therefore be understood as a
kind of screen, an obstacle that stands in the way of seeing the
ultimate truth. In other words, the putative truths of quotidian life
are actually delusions that, if believed, prevent one from attaining
the wisdom that is capable of leading to the imperturbable peace of
nirvana. The truth of the highest goal cannot be conveyed in language;
it can only be manifested in silence. That notwithstanding, the Buddha
gave many teachings in words, so how is one to understand that? The
Buddha, said Candrakīrti, spoke according to the linguistic
conventions of the people to whom he talked. It is conventional to use
pronouns such as “I” and “you” and words like
“self”; without such pronouns, grammatically correct
sentences cannot be formed. It does not follow from grammatical
correctness, however, that those words used in sentences have
referents. The Buddha’s insight was that there is no self, and yet he
used the sort of conventional language that is commonly used by those
who do believe that there is a self. Similarly, even though the Buddha
realized that there are no phenomena coming into being and perishing,
he spoke the same kinds of sentences used by those who believe that
phenomena come into being through conditions and then perish when the
conditions that sustain them are no longer operative. If one is going
to use language at all, then one cannot avoid using words and
constructions that apparently commit one to accepting the
presuppositions upon which language rests. It is the task of the
Mādhyamika philosopher to expose those presuppositions as
untenable, to see that language is not grounded in realities but is
purely conventional in nature. The Buddha, knowing what kinds of
beliefs his listeners had, gave doctrines that helped people get past
their false beliefs. For example, to those who believed in an enduring
and unified and essentially independent self, says Candrakīrti,
the Buddha taught that the self is not to be found in any of the
aspects of being human that might be a candidate for being regarded as
a self; he taught that the self is not the body, the personality,
awareness, thoughts or feelings or anything else that arises through
causes and conditions, nor is there anything outside those things that
counts as a candidate for what people intuitively take to be their
selves. To people who were inclined to a materialistic monism, the
Buddha emphasized the importance of the mind as something that is
independent of the body. (About this, more will be said below.)
As was discussed above
 (section 4.2),
 Bhāvaviveka criticized Buddhapālita for failing to
state and defend the thesis of the Mādhyamikas. In the first
chapter of his commentary to MMK, Candrakīrti comes to
Buddhapālita’s defense and offers a sustained criticism of
Bhāvaviveka, and of the tradition of Dignāga on whom
Bhāvaviveka had based much of his approach. Bhāvaviveka’s
call for an independent argument in favor of a conclusion accepted by
Mādhyamikas, says Candrakīrti, is diametrically opposed to
what Nāgārjuna and Āryadeva had written.
Nāgārjuna had written in VV that he has no thesis to advance.
He had also written that he apprehends no objects at all and therefore
has no need to affirm or deny anything, and since he neither affirms
nor denies any proposition, he need not supply any reasons to justify
his stance. And Āryadeva had written that a person who makes no
claims, either that anything exists or that something does not exist,
cannot be refuted. Candrakīrti cites those passages with the
additional comment that Buddhapālita had understood the spirit of
Madhyamaka as set forth by those early Mādhyamikas. The
Mādhyamika, Candrakīrti goes on to explain, does not put
forward counter positions in opposition to the claims of other
philosophers; rather, he shows the problems involved in the positions
of others and argues only until the other philosophers realize the
inadequacy of their positions and become silent. In the process of
bringing others to silence, the Mādhyamika need not construct
formal arguments, nor need he be consistent in what he says. Following
Āryadeva’s observation, Candrakīrti says that the
Mādhyamika cannot be refuted, precisely because he has no position
to defend. If Buddhapālita had put forth arguments, then he would
have opened himself up to endless disputation; since, however, he knew
that the purpose of Madhyamaka is to bring all disputation, and indeed
all kinds of idle chatter, to an end, he wisely avoided putting forth
formal arguments that a persistent opponent might take as an invitation
to debate. If Bhāvaviveka had understood the point of Madhyamaka,
concludes Candrakīrti, he would not have made the criticisms he
made of Buddhapālita.
After offering his criticisms of Bhāvaviveka, Candrakīrti
addresses the school of Buddhist logic and epistemology founded by
Dignāga. The followers of this school did not present themselves
as Mādhyamikas, so Candrakīrti does not accuse them of having
failed to understand Nāgārjuna properly. He does, however,
confront them with having failed to supply a convincing response to the
radical critique Nāgārjuna had made of the very enterprise of
grounding convictions on indisputable foundations. He recapitulates a
passage of Nāgārjuna’s VV in which it is said that any
proposition that is supposed to be warranted must rest upon a
foundation of either direct experience or one of three kinds of
reasoning. But the very claim that a proposition is warranted by a
foundation is itself a proposition, and as such it must either require
a warrant of its own or be deemed self-validating. If it requires a
warrant of its own, the result will be an infinite regress of
propositions needing warrants; if it is declared self-validating, then
why not say of all propositions they are self-validating? Dignāga
and his followers went ahead and talked about the grounding of
propositions as if Nāgārjuna had never questioned the
enterprise. Unless they provide a clear and convincing response to what
Nāgārjuna said, there is no reason for anyone to take them
seriously.
One further Buddhist movement that Candrakīrti criticizes is
the Yogācāra school, which he presents as advocating a form
of subjective idealism. Their claim that the world of experience is
consciousness only and that the contents of consciousness cannot be
objects external to consciousness itself is supported by several texts
within the Mahāyāna scriptural tradition. Candrakīrti
explains these scriptures as examples of teachings that the Buddha gave
to counter a particular kind of commonly held wrong view. There are,
says Candrakīrti, those who mistakenly believe that all their
suffering is due to causes outside themselves; they see themselves as
unfortunate victims of a hostile world. The Buddha, wishing to make it
clear that the predominant factor in dissatisfaction is the way one
thinks about one’s experiences, said, in effect “It’s all in the
mind.” It would be a mistake to take that statement literally and
to conclude that nothing but consciousness exists and that the world of
experience that feels as though it is external to consciousness is in
fact produced by consciousness or is inseparable from consciousness. The
Yogācāra offers good reasons to show that the contents of
consciousness are conditioned and therefore are empty of inherent
existence, but they fail to appreciate that exactly the same can be
said of awareness itself. In other words, says Candrakīrti, the
Yogācāra philosophers fail to acknowledge that
everything, including consciousness itself, is empty.
In making the kinds of criticisms of other philosophers that
Candrakīrti makes, he repeatedly advocates for taking ordinary
experience seriously and at face value. In everyday experience, we feel
that things arise and perish because of causes and conditions, and we
feel that we are conscious subjects on whom an external world is
impinging. We communicate with one another in readily comprehensible
language. There is no reason to change any of that, no reason to
replace everyday language with a more precise technical language that
helps avoid misprepresenting the nature of things. At the same time, it
is important to be aware that it cannot be shown that things have fixed
natures and that there is no reason to believe about any of our beliefs
that they are grounded. The task of philosophy for Candrakīrti is
not to replace unwarranted beliefs with justified true beliefs, but to
break the habit of forming beliefs, declaring them to be true, and then
becoming attached to them.
According to traditional biographies, Śāntideva was born
the son of a king but abandoned the royal household for life as a
Buddhist monk. Best estimates of the time of his activity place him at
the end of the seventh century. His best-known (and most frequently
translated) work is Bodhicaryāvatāra (Introduction
to the practice of enlightenment), also called
Bodhisattvacaryāvatāra (Introduction to the practice
of the bodhisattva). He also compiled
Śikṣāsamuccaya, an annotated collection of
passages from Mahāyāna scriptures for students, and he
authored a commentary to Vasubandhu’s
Triṃśikā, a key text in the Yogācāra
tradition. Partly because he was a masterful stylist and wrote
delightfully beautiful Sanskrit verse, and partly because his work
exerted a strong influence on Tibetan Buddhism, Śantideva has been
the focus of a considerable amount of modern scholarship in Japan,
Europe and North America. All this makes him a good access point into
Madhyamaka philosophy for those who are not specialists in Indian
philosophy.
Bodhicaryāvatāra is a verse composition divided
into ten chapters, each dealing with a different aspect of the
traditional depiction of the bodhisattva’s career. The topics of the
ten chapters are as follows:
As is the case with most philosophical works written in verse,
Bodhicaryāvatāra is usually studied with a prose
commentary. Śāntideva himself provided no prose commentary to
his work, but a Sanskrit commentary by Prajñākaramati is
still extant and is usually consulted by those who translate the work
into English from the original Sanskrit. Śāntideva’s work is
also preserved in Tibetan translation and is furnished with several
Tibetan commentaries, which are routinely consulted by those who
translate Bodhicaryāvatāra into English from its
Tibetan translation.
Although beautifully written, Bodhicaryāvatāra
does not display much philosophical originality. Its principal
contribution is in offering a concise recapitulation of the currents of
Madhyamaka thought and of Madhyamaka arguments against
Yogācāra monism, which portrays consciousness as the ultimate
source of all realities. While that is generally the case, one
candidate for novelty occurs in earlier chapters of
Bodhicaryāvatāra, where Śāntideva provides
a line of argument that became standard in discussion of
Mahāyāna ethics. His claim is that pain and unhappiness are
by definition that which those who experience them wish to avoid. But
given that there are no inherent natures that distinguish one person
from another, or one kind of person from another kind, there is no
rational basis to prefer one’s own experiences and judgments to those
of anyone else or to prefer what one perceives as one’s own kind from
other kinds of people. It is fundamentally irrational to take an
interest only in one’s own pain and suffering; the only reasonable
approach is to be concerned with all the pain and unhappiness
of which one becomes aware and to try to eradicate all of it without
making artificial distinctions. Since, however, most of what anyone
finds painful and unpleasant arises from the conviction that some
objects of experience are inherently undesirable or impure, the best
strategy to follow in helping oneself and others overcome pain and
suffering is to show that there is no basis for the belief that some
objects are inherently undesirable or impure. That strategy also works,
of course, when unhappiness arises from the frustration of not getting
things that one falsely believes are inherently desirable and pure.
As was the case with Candrakīrti’s
Madhyamakāvatāra, Śāntideva’s
Bodhicaryāvatāra has the most to say about
Madhyamaka philosophy in the chapter on the pefection of wisdom. A key
verse in this chapter is 9.35, which says “When neither presence
nor absence stands before the mind, the mind, having no content, calms
down because of the absence of cognition.” This recapitulates a
point made by both Nāgārjuna and Candrakīrti that the
ultimate goal of Buddhist practice is nirvana, a stillness of the mind
in which there is no object being grasped as the focus of awareness, no
narratives (prapañca) being told to account for one’s
experience, no theorizing and no argumentation. At the outset of the
chapter on wisdom Śāntideva says that the ultimate truth is
of a reality that is not within range of the intellect; the intellect
operates only at the level of conventional truth. In this world there
are two kinds of human being, which Śāntideva calls ordinary
people (prākṛta loka) and meditators
(yogin). The ordinary people are those who see the world in
terms of presences and absences, being and non-being, but the
conventional truths in which they trade are set aside by the truths of
the meditators. The principal delusion of those who rely on
conventional truths is that they mistakenly believe that prospositions
conventionally accepted as truth are grounded in the natures of things.
Meditators, on the other hand, come to realize that things do not have
inherent natures. That things do not have inherent natures cannot be
established directly, but attempts to show that things do have inherent
natures can be shown to be faulty. One who has cultivated the intention
to become enlightened in order to lead others out of their
delusion-driven suffering uses language to help people realize the
limitations of language and conceptual thinking. In taking this
approach, Śāntideva is clearly following the lead of
Buddhapālita and Candrakīrti.
Jñānagarbha, who was most probably the teacher of
Śāntarakṣita, probably lived in the early eighth
century. Because his presentation of Madhyamaka incorporates much of
the terminology used by Dharmakīrti, a member of the
epistemological tradition founded by Dignāga, he is usually
portrayed as a follower of Bhāvaviveka’s approach to Madhyamaka.
Like his disciple Śāntarakṣita, Jñānagarbha
also incorporates aspects of the Yogācāra philosophy into his
presentation of Madhyamaka and can therefore be seen as a source of
inspiration to those who strove to find a synthesis of the two
principal schools of Mahāyāna Buddhism. He wrote a commentary
to a key Mahāyāna scripture,
Sandhinirmocanasūtra, which was one of the principal
sources of the Yogācāra philosophy. He is best known for an
independent treatise called
Satya-dvaya-vibhaṅga-kārikā (Verses on the
distinction between the two truths), on which he also provided a prose
commentary. The verse text along with its commentary can be referred to
together as Satyadvayavibhaṅga.
Like all the Mādhyamika thinkers who came before him,
Jñānagarbha regards it vitally important to have a clear
understanding of two kinds of truth, the conventional and transactional
truth of everyday life, and the truth that liberates one from
attachment, aversion and delusion, this liberation being the ultimate
goal (paramārtha) of Buddhism. In talking about these two
truths, Jñānagarbha draws liberally from the work of
Dharmakīrti, who had in turn built upon the epistemological
foundations laid by Dignāga. Dharmakīrti had said that
successful action is preceded by correct cognitions; what one deems to
be truthful is any cognition that motivates action that leads to
expected results. A true belief, then, is one that does not deceive one
by promising to lead to a desired goal and then failing somehow to lead
to that goal. A more positive way of expressing this, rather than
saying a true belief is non-deceptive, is to say that a true belief is
one that enables the realization of a goal
(artha-kriyā-samartha). It turns out, said
Dharmakīrti, that correct reasoning is instrumental in helping one
form beliefs that motivate successful action. Therefore, one can say
that conceptual thinking, when done carefully, can be of great value.
Even when one’s goal is to achieve nirvana by having a direct
experience of a still and peaceful awareness that is not conceptual and
therefore beyond the range of language, one can arrive at that goal by
learning to think carefully and clearly. Clear and careful thinking has
the capacity to identify which of the ideas that arise in consciousness
are ungrounded and delusional and therefore unlikely to motivate
successful action. Clear and careful thinking about what one hears
others say enables one to discard teachings that, if acted upon, are
unlikely to produce expected results and to follow teachings that, if
acted upon, will lead one to a desired goal, even the goal of the
stillness of a mind that is not dealing in narratives and concepts.
Without much modification, Jñānagarbha takes up
Dharmakīrti’s terminology and the convictions that go with it. So
Jñānagarbha, like Bhāvaviveka, sees value in
conceptual thinking and in careful thinking and speaking and sees less
of a need than Candrakīrti and Śāntideva saw in finding
a way to eliminate all conceptual thinking and theorizing.
Jñānagarbha’s indebtedness to the epistemological
tradition notwithstanding, he is still very much a Mādhyamika in
that much of his approach consists in showing the absurdities that lurk
menacingly inside all constructed theories. His notion of the ultimate
goal, like Candrakīrti’s, is a wordless and concept-free lucid
awareness, but he sees it as possible to reach that goal by using words
and thoughts intelligently. Moreover, he agrees with other
Mādhyamikas in his conviction that all thinking, even that which
can be called verdical because it leads to expected results, is based
on a presupposition that things have inherent natures—it is,
after all, almost impossible to talk without at least an implicit nod
in the direction of inherent natures and essences—and that that
presupposition is demonstrably false. So according to
Jñānagarbha rational thinking is simultaneously veridical,
in that it leads to expected results, and false, in that it is based
upon the demonstrably false presupposition that things that can be
named are namable because they have inherent natures. While language
operates within an ontology of causes and effects and various other
kinds of relationship, such as temporal and spatial relationships, it
can be shown that those relationships are all untenable if one thinks
about them carefully and investigates them deeply enough.
At the heart of Jñānagarbha’s argument against the
tenability of causality is his argument that none of the possible ways
of looking at the relation of conditions and their effects are
workable. There are four possibilities. Either many conditions produce
a single effect, or many conditions produce many effects, or a single
condition produces many effects, or a single condition produces a
single effect. His presentation of an explanation for why each of these
possibilities is untenable is in places terse and difficult to
decipher. A single thing, such as vision, cannot be the effect of many
conditions, such as the eye, visible color, an attentive mind and so
forth, he says, because the effect has the feature of being one, while
the causes are many, but there is nothing to account for what causes
the reduction of many things to one. Without some coherent account of
how a manifold can be reduced to a singularity, this hypothesis ends up
being merely an assertion. If one imagines that a manifold set of
causes produces a complex multiplicity of effects, then one is saying
in effect that each component of the complex cause is producing one
component of the complex effect, and this amounts to saying that there
are many instances of one cause producing one effect. On the other
hand, if one thinks that each aspect of the complex effect is a single
effect of the totality of features within the complex cause, then one
is saying that a single effect has many conditions, which has already
been ruled out. Moreover, one faces the problem of explaining how the
same totality of causes can have many distinct effects, each of which
is a feature of the complex effect putatively arising from the causal
complex. If one imagines that a multiplicity, such as the manifold
universe, arises out of a single cause, such as God or Brahman or
consciousness, then one must provide a coherent account of what causes
the differentiation among the many effects. What one would expect is
that some auxiliary condition combines with the single cause to produce
different effects; but if that is the case, then a single cause plus an
auxiliary condition is not really just a single cause. Finally, one
might imagine that a single cause produces a single effect, such as
when one momentary phenomenon perishes and in the act of perishing
gives rise to a subsequent momentary phenomenon of the same kind. That,
however, is impossible, since the putative cause must go entirely out
of existence before its successor can takes its place, and once the
preceding phenomenon has ceased to exist, there is nothing to cause its
successor to arise. Since none of the possible ways of explaining
causality turns out to survive close analysis, one can only conclude
that the very ideas of causality, and of arising and perishing, and of
unity and multiplicity cannot correspond to reality. Causality and
arising and perishing and all the various relations that furnish the
framework of conventional truth may be indispensable to conventional
truth, but they cannot be features of reality. Jñānagarbha,
like the Mādhyamikas who came before him, sees conventional truth
as a kind of screen or obstacle to the reality that becomes apparent
only to an awareness that is unencumbered by concepts and
narratives.
While it is difficult to find much reliable information about the
lives of most Indian philosophers, quite a bit is known about the life,
especially the later life, of Śāntarakṣita, details of
whose life were recorded by Tibetans when he went to Tibet in about 763
and became the first abbot of Bsam-yas monastery. He was reportedly
born into the royal family of what is now Bengal and spent his adult
life in various Buddhist monastic universities. It is clear from his
writings that he had studied all branches of Indian philosophy
extensively. He seems to have been a direct disciple of
Jñānagarbha, and his own disciple, Kamalaśīla,
was also an influential thinker. Together Śāntarakṣita
and Kamalaśīla, both of whom spent many years in Tibet, set
the tone for Buddhist scholasticism in the eighth century, and their
influence is felt in Tibetan Buddhism to this day. When
Śāntarakṣita died in 788, he was succeeded by
Kamalaśīla, who lived until 795.
Śāntarakṣita’s magnum opus is a composition entitled
Tattva-saṃgraha (Summary of reality), which contains
3645 verses. The work was provided with a prose commentary by
Kamalaśīla called
Tattva-saṃgraha-pañjikā. A modern edition of
the verse work and its commentary together runs to more than 1100
pages. Aside from its contribution to the development of Madhyamaka
thought, the work is also a valuable source of information about the
state of Indian philosophy in the eighth century. The work is divided
into twenty-six chapters, the topics of which are as follows:
In addition to Tattvasaṃgraha,
Śāntarakṣita wrote commentaries on Dharmakīrti’s
Vādanyāya (Methods of debate) and
Jñānagarbha’s Satyadvayavibhaṅga. His most
original contribution to the development of Madhyamaka philosophy is a
verse treatise called Madhyamakālaṃkāra
(Ornament of Centrism), which contains ninety-seven stanzas, to which
he also provided a prose commentary.
By the time Śāntarakṣita was active, the philosophy
of the Yogacāra school had become so influential that it could not
easily be dismissed. Whereas earlier Mādhyamikas wrote refutations
of the Yogācara doctrine, which they presented as a kind of
subjective idealism, Śāntarakṣita embraced it. Like
Bhāvaviveka and Jñānagarbha,
Śāntarakṣita adopted much of the terminology and the
logic and epistemology of Dignāga and Dharmakīrti and their
later followers. But whereas Bhāvaviveka had refrained from
following Dignāga and Dharmakīrti’s lead into Yogacāra,
Śāntarakṣita endorsed a kind of subjective idealism,
albeit as a stage that prepared one for the Madhyamaka doctrine of the
emptiness of all phenomena. Toward the end of
Madhyamakālaṃkāra, in verses 92–93, he
writes that by embracing the doctrine of mind only, one stops taking
external objects as real; then by embracing Madhyamaka, one realizes
that no objects at all have substance; then, taking the reins of
reasoning, one rides the chariot of both systems as a single great
vehicle (mahāyāna). The largest part of this
treatise—where the reins of reasoning are taken up—is
devoted to an extended version of the “neither one nor
many” argument that had been presented by
Jñānagarbha.
Madhyamakālaṃkāra begins with the
observation that if a phenomenon has an essential nature, then either
that nature is simple or complex, that is, it is either a single thing
or many things; there is no third possibility. This leads to
discussions of doctrines by several schools of Indian philosophy, both
Buddhist and non-Buddhist. Each of the schools examined posits at least
one entity that is completely uniform in nature and therefore has no
internal differentiations. Several schools posit a uniform entity that
is said to be the single source of all multiplicity. Drawing on
arguments by earlier Buddhist thinkers such as Dharmakīrti,
Śāntarakṣita argues that if there were a uniform,
permanent and unobstructed singularity, then everything it supposedly
causes would have to exist all the time. A cause is something in the
presence of which an effect arises and in the absence of which the
effect does not arise. But if a cause is permanent, then it is never
absent, so none of its putative effects can ever be absent. In a theory
that posits a single permanent cause of all things, there is no
satisfactory account of all the changes that are experienced in daily
life, nor is there any satisfactory account of temporal sequences or
the fact that things exist in some places but not in others. This
argument is applied to discredit the Sāṃkhya doctrine of
primordial matter, the Nyāya doctrine of God, and the
Vedāntin doctrine of Brahman. It is also applied to the
Yogācāra doctrine that all things arise from consciousness.
After arguing against the main candidates for singularity nominated by
the various schools, Śāntarakṣita turns his attention
to multiplicity. The very idea of multiplicity, he notes, only makes
sense if one is talking about a collection of singularities. Given,
however, that there are no singularities, there cannot be any collection
of them. This being the case, no inherent nature of any entity can be
either singular or multiple; if an entity has neither a singular nor a
multiple inherent nature, it has no inherent nature at all. In other
words, all phenomena are empty of inherent natures.