Margaret Lucas was born in 1623 in Colchester, Essex. She did not
receive a formal education in disciplines such as mathematics,
history, philosophy, and the classical languages, but she had access
to scholarly libraries and was an avid reader. She began to put her
own ideas to paper at a very early age, and although it was regarded
as unseemly at the time for a woman to be publicly intellectual, she
was able to be an intellectual in private in regular conversations
with her middle-brother John. This is noteworthy because John was
already a well-established scholar: a student of law, philosophy, and
natural science, he was fluent in Hebrew, Latin and Greek, and would
eventually become a founding member of the Royal Society (Whitaker
2002, 11–12). In 1643, seeking a life of independence, Lucas
applied to be a maid of honor at the court of Queen Henrietta Maria.
When the queen was exiled to France in 1644, Lucas accompanied her and
shortly thereafter met William Cavendish. They married in 1645, and
would remain in exile (in Paris, then Rotterdam, then Antwerp) until
the restoration of the crown in 1660 (Battigelli 1998,
1–10).
There are two reasons why it is important to mention the marriage of
Margaret Lucas and William Cavendish. One is that in the
mid-seventeenth-century it was unusual for a publisher to print the
philosophical and scientific work of a woman. Cavendish was a
sufficiently brilliant and impressive writer that she was able to
publish some of her work without assistance (Whitaker 2002, 154),
including her very first work [Poems and Fancies, 1653], but
some of her writings were published with the help of her
well-connected husband. The second reason why it is important to
mention the marriage of Lucas to Cavendish is that through the
“Cavendish Circle” meetings that he organized in the
1640s, she interacted with such figures as Thomas Hobbes, Rene
Descartes, Marin Mersenne, Pierre Gassendi, and Kenelm Digby (Hutton
1997a, 422–3; Whitaker 2002, 92–4; Clucas 1994,
256–64). But these philosophers would not engage with her
directly. Unfortunately and sadly for her and for us, she had no
written philosophical correspondence with any of these philosophers.
When they would not critically correspond with her in print, she
engaged their views critically in the form of a correspondence between
herself and a fictional third
 person.[1]
Cavendish lived and wrote in the thick of the mechanistic revolution
of the seventeenth century, though many of her views—about
thinking matter, the transfer of motion, and the nature of scientific
explanation—are largely anti-mechanistic, and in many respects
her arguments ran against the grain. In her own age, she was regarded
alternately as mad, pretentious, a curiosity, and a genius. She
finally received some much-wanted recognition from her male peers in
1667, when she was offered an extremely rare invitation to participate
in a meeting of the Royal Society, though to be sure she was regarded
as a spectacle by many in attendance (Whitaker 2002, 291–306).
She died in December 1673 and was buried at Westminster Abbey. Over
the course of her short life she produced a number of important works
in philosophy. These include Worlds Olio (1655),
Philosophical and Physical Opinions (1656), Philosophical
Letters (1664), Observations Upon Experimental
Philosophy (1666), The Description of a New World, Called the
Blazing World (1666), and Grounds of Natural Philosophy
(1668).
The central tenet of Cavendish's philosophy is that everything in the
universe—including human beings and their minds—is
completely material. Her commitment to this tenet is reflected
throughout her corpus:
According to Cavendish, none of the achievements of bodies are to be
traced to immaterial agents such as God, immaterial finite minds, or
substantial forms, because bodies have the resources to bring about
everything that they do on their own. Cavendish also holds that bodies
are ubiquitous and that there is no vacuum, because extensions of
space cannot be extensions of nothing but must be extensions of
 matter.[3]
 Every body is infinitely divisible (Cavendish 1668a, 125, 263;
Cavendish 1668b, 239), and all of the bodies in nature, at every level
of division, are intelligent and perceptive (Cavendish 1668a, 16, 156;
Cavendish 1668b, 7). As we will see, one of Cavendish's motivations
for accepting the latter view is that it makes sense of the order that
we encounter in the natural world.
Cavendish is aware that she is writing in a tradition in which the
prospect of thinking matter is not going to be taken seriously. In the
eyes of many of her contemporaries and predecessors, matter is not
only unintelligent, but also inert and utterly worthless. She
writes,
Cavendish does not accept a conception of matter according to which
matter is low-grade being. Her view that minds are corporeal is not
the view that minds are
Cavendish will argue that the processes that are traditionally
identified as material are wondrous and impressive and that the
processes that she would identify as material, but that others would
identify as immaterial, are even more so. As we will see, her view on
the sophistication of matter also informs other aspects of her
thinking – for example, her metaphysics of imagination, according to
which imaginings are not static pictures, but living figures that are
creative and able to take on a life of their own; and also her view of
the superiority of natural productions to human artifacts. According
to Cavendish, the latter are composed of bodies that are put together
quickly and do not have the same history of communication and
synchronization as the entities that compose a production of nature
(Cunning 2016, 185-196). When Cavendish says that ideas are material
images, or that natural productions are more sophisticated than
artifacts, she is not supposing a conception of matter according to
which it is static and inert and dead. Her own views employ some of
the language of the tradition – for example matter,
image, and idea – but she fleshes out her system in
a number of novel directions in part because she uses that language
very differently and argues that, traditionally speaking, it has been
very much abused.
Cavendish is working within a philosophical tradition in which the
doctrine that matter is self-moving and intelligent is almost
completely unintelligible. To those of her opponents who allow that
the doctrine can be entertained, it is unlikely at best, and
if true it is a terrible disappointment.
For example, in Plato we find the view that “the philosopher
frees the soul from association with the body as much as
possible” (Plato, 64e-65a). For Plato, souls are invisible and
intangible and hence indivisible and divine, and bodies are their
complete opposite (78b-80b). We know from an analysis of our concept
of body, and from our presumably related observation of the sudden
inactivity of things that die, that animated bodies have a soul and
that bodies on their own are inert (105c-e). A soul is obviously what
activates and enlivens a body, and the opposite of a soul, its body,
is “death” (105e). Our embodiment and our resulting
physical needs incline us to pursue sensible objects, but these are
not worthy of our attention, and they interfere with our ability to
attend to things that are.
We find a similar contempt for the body in prominent philosophers of
later ancient philosophy and in medieval and early modern philosophers
as well. In “On Beauty,” Plotinus speaks to “the
darkness inherent in matter” (Plotinus, I.6, 37). He praises the
sensible, but only to the extent that it imitates immaterial ideas and
minds:
Fire is still material, of course, and material things are no
substitute for things that are immaterial and (hence) divine (40).
Plotinus continues,
In a word, Plotinus thinks that we should do all that we can to
mitigate the unfortunate fact of our embodiment and instead engage in
philosophical reflection. A hundred years later Augustine repeats the
same view exactly:
For Augustine, body is so bad that sin consists in turning our
attention away from eternal things to things that are temporal and
corporeal (27). Augustine is working in the Christian tradition, and
it cannot be ignored that although Christ made a tremendous sacrifice
in giving up his body, the abandonment of the physical in favor of the
purely spiritual reads very differently through an Augustinian and
Platonic lens.
This same manner of thinking finds its way into the seventeenth
century as well. In the Cartesian (and very Augustinian and Platonic)
philosopher Nicolas Malebranche, we find the view that bodies are
“inferior things” that are essentially passive and inert
(Malebranche 1674–5, VI.ii.3, 447, 448). He brings together the
whole spectrum of themes that are advanced by his body-dismissing
predecessors. In Dialogues on Metaphysics and on Religion,
his spokesperson Theodore says to his opponent Aristes that our
embodiment is a burden and that we should neutralize it to whatever
extent we can:
For Malebranche, the search for truth is very literally a matter of
retreating to the study, where the possibility is minimized that we
will be distracted by the lures of the sensible world. In
Malebranche's (and Cavendish's) contemporary Ralph Cudworth we find a
similar disgust for the body. Cudworth argues that there is a
hierarchy of being that applies to creatures and that minds are at the
top. Bodies are dead and lowly, and are squarely at the bottom:
Cudworth is certainly aware that the bodies that surround us are
active and engage in behaviors that are orderly and (at least
apparently) teleological, but none of this is evidence that matter is
not dead. Cudworth concludes that because matter is dead, its
orderly and purposive behavior can only be explained on the assumption
that it is accompanied by a (necessarily immaterial) guide (Cunning
2010).
There are other philosophers in the seventeenth century who agree that
matter is a detestable sort of being, but conclude that it does not
exist, or at least that it does not exist as conceived by the
tradition. In Anne Conway we find the view that God would not, and did
not, create it:
For Conway, God creates only beings that are alive, and so the
everyday objects that surround us are something other than what
Plotinus, Malebranche and Digby had thought. There exists nothing that
is brute, inert, and unthinking, and instead there is a continuum of
creatures that exist on a spectrum from highly intelligent and active
to largely dim and dull. Cavendish agrees with Conway that nothing
answers to the traditional conception of matter, but unlike Conway she
is happy to say that matter surrounds us. Cavendish and Conway are for
the most part in agreement; she [Cavendish] simply rejects the
traditional conception of matter as inadequate, and then proceeds to
argue that the things that our concept of matter has always picked
out—the things that our language has designated as
‘material’—are something more. Unlike many of her
opponents, she is not disappointed by the result that minds are
material. She thinks on the contrary that it is a source of hope. For
example, if we appreciate that minds are corporeal, we will be able to
come up with better and more systematic and less groping treatments of
mental
 illness.[6]
 As evidence for her view, Cavendish points to the obvious facts that
a person's mood and energy are affected by nutrition (Cavendish 1663,
431–2), and that old age and injury to the brain can neutralize
some of our cognitive functions (Cavendish 1668b, 85–6, 113;
Cavendish 1663, 334–5). Cavendish is breaking with her tradition
and arguing that the fulfillment of a person is not a matter of
turning away from the body but understanding all of its dynamics and
embracing
 it.[7]
An important strand in Cavendish's argument for materialism is her
defense of the view that matter thinks. If she can successfully defend
this view, then the fact of the existence of thinking will not be
evidence against the view that everything is material. One of her
arguments for the doctrine of thinking matter begins with the
assumption that our minds are housed in our bodies. She assumes that
we are being serious when we say that our thinking takes place in the
head, and concludes that to the extent to which we are speaking
literally our thoughts must have figure and be spatially situated:
Since “[p]lace [is] an attribute that belongs onely to a
Body” (Cavendish 1664, 8), minds and their ideas are material. A
related reason that Cavendish offers in favor of the view that
thinking is material is that
Cavendish takes it to be obvious that ideas are located in the brain,
and she is thereby committed to the view that when a person travels
from one place to another, the person's mind partakes of motion as
well. Cavendish is appealing to the premise that there is no
immaterial motion as support her view that minds are material, and she
is implicitly assuming the premise that when a person travels from one
place to another, so do the thoughts that the person has along the
way. She writes: 
Here Cavendish is anticipating a line of argumentation that we later
find in Locke:
Locke only hints at the conclusion that minds are material, but
Cavendish by contrast is not concerned to pull any
 punches.[10]
 The thesis that matter thinks is an unrevisable element of her
philosophical system. It is not an unwelcome appendage but instead is
a straightforward consequence of tenets that she takes to be
obvious.
Pulling the two arguments together, modifications like motion and
location pertain only to bodies, and because our minds travel with our
bodies and are housed in them, they are material. Cavendish is in
effect trying to corner her opponent into explaining what the sense is
in which minds move or our housed in our brains if they are not
material. A figure like Leibniz is comfortable elucidating the nature
of (immaterial) minds in terms of the language of windows, dizziness,
ponds and spatial perspective (Monadology, sections 7, 21,
67, 57). Cavendish is insisting that the language of motion and
dimension applies to bodies alone.
Another argument that Cavendish puts forward for the view that
thinking is material is from mind-body interaction. First, she
presupposes a standard materialist premise: that nothing can interact
with or come into contact with a body but a body. She writes,
In fine, I cannot conceive, how a Spirit … can have the effects
of a body, being none it self; for the effects flow from the cause;
and as the cause is, so are its effects…. (Cavendish 1664,
197)
it is, in my opinion, more probable, that one material should act upon
another material, or one immaterial should act upon another
immaterial, then that an immaterial should act upon a material or
corporeal. (Cavendish 1664, 207)
This is a standard kind of argument that we find in philosophers
ranging from Lucretius to Gassendi to Spinoza to Searle: that things
cannot stand in causal relations with bodies unless they are material
 themselves.[11]
 Cavendish does allow that there are many instances in which bodies
are at a distance from each other but still stand in causal relations.
There are obvious cases like our perception of the sun, which had
better be far away if we are to be in a position to sense it, and also
cases like a shout of loud noise. But Cavendish holds that in the end
these amount to interaction by contact. She writes,
This is in fact a fairly controversial view to attribute to Cavendish
-- that interaction is always by contact. As we will see in more
detail later, she subscribes to an occasionalist doctrine of causation
that would appear to allow that causation often occurs at a distance.
For Cavendish, bodies never transfer motion to other bodies, but
instead a body always moves by its own internal motions. More
specifically, when the behavior of body A leads to a change in the
behavior of body B, B acts by means of motions that it already had. A
is thus the "occasional" cause of the change in the behavior of B; it
informs B of the motions that it would like B to undertake, but there
is no transfer of motion from A to B, because motion is always
inseparable from the body that has it. In the case of sense
perception, for example, an external body A does not stamp itself on a
sense organ B and transfer to it new motions by means of which B forms
an image of A. Instead, A presents an image of itself to B, and B
forms a pattern or copy of that image by means of motions that B
already had. The internal motions that are continuously present in a
"patient" body B may not always be overtly noticeable – for example,
there are the motions of the microscopic bodies that compose a table
or chair, which itself appears to be wholly at rest – but such
motions are continuously present in B, and on the occasion of an
"active" body A, they just take on a new direction.
Now we return to the controversial interpretive question about whether
or not Cavendish holds that interaction is always by contact. A reason
for thinking that she allows for action at a distance is that she is
committed to saying that, in cases in which we perceive an object that
is at a distance, the image that is formed via our sense organ is due
to motions that are entirely its own. However, a reason for thinking
that Cavendish holds that strictly speaking there is no action at a
distance is that in the above passage she suggests that apparent cases
of action at a distance in the end always involve "touch." There are
many other reasons to suppose that Cavendish does not allow action at
a distance. One is that, as we will see, there are a number of
passages in which she describes bodies as dominating and subordinating
bodies that are at a distance, and forcing them to act as they do, and
it is difficult to understand how these could be cases of domination
or subordination if the external body was merely presenting a
recommendation – or the equivalent of a stern talking-to – from
afar. In addition, if Cavendish holds that occasional causes are a
kind of trigger or occasion for the action of any "patient" body B,
then even if she supposes that motion is never transferred from one
body to another, she still needs a way to make sense of how an
occasional cause A signals or communicates to a body B how it would
like B to behave. As we will see, she defends a plenum metaphysic
according to which the universe is a continuum of perceptive bodies,
and so an obvious explanation that she can offer for cases of apparent
action at a distance is that the universe is a plenum of contiguous
and communicative bodies, and a given message is often patterned from
one body to the next to the next.
Cavendish subscribes to the view that interaction is always by
contact, and she aims to apply the view as well. Our bodies interact
with our minds, and so our minds must be material; but anything that
our minds detect must be material as well. Anything that we know,
anything that we try to explain, anything that we theorize about,
anything that we encounter, anything of which we can become
aware—these are all material. Cavendish writes,
Wherefore no part of nature (her parts being corporeal) can perceive
an immaterial; because it is impossible to have a perception of that
which is not perceptible, as not being an object fit or proper for
corporeal
 perception.[12]
[N]atural reason cannot know nor have naturally any perception or idea
of an Incorporeal being. (Cavendish 1668a, 78)
But as for Immaterial, no mind can conceive that, for it cannot put it
self into nothing, although it can dilate and rarifie it self to an
higher degree, but must stay within the circle of natural
bodies…. (Cavendish 1664, 69) 
Our minds are material, but the only things that they can come into
contact with and detect are things that are material as well. Even if
there happen to be immaterials in our environment, we cannot perceive
or form ideas of them, and hence the entities that we do
conceive and discuss are not these immaterials but something else.
Cavendish writes,
there may be supernatural spiritual beings or substances in Nature,
without any hinderance to Matter or corporeal Nature. The same I may
say of the natural material, and the divine and supernatural Soul; for
though the divine Soul is in a natural body, and both their powers and
actions be different, yet they cause no ruine or disturbance to each
 other….[13]
Nature is a corporeal substance, and without a substance Motion cannot
be, and without Motion opposition cannot be made, nor any action in
Nature…. (Cavendish 1664, 242)
Instead of trying to circumscribe every single existent and then offer
an account of each in turn, Cavendish assumes the existence of the
material objects in our local surroundings and argues that because our
minds detect them, our minds are material, as is everything else that
we come to encounter. Immaterial things might exist, Cavendish is
certainly conceding, but if so they are nothing to us, and are not
included in the domain of inquiry when we do metaphysics or
science.
Sometimes Cavendish comes close to saying something even stronger:
that material things are the only things that exist or are real. For
example, she writes,
If Cavendish holds that the only things that are real are things that
have dimension, she is not alone. Her contemporary Thomas Hobbes
argued along the same lines:
Cavendish does subscribe to the view that only material things are
real and
 substantial,[14]
 but she is not thereby committed to the view that the only existents
are material. She might hold that our word ‘real’ picks
out things that are tangible and spatial, but that there are other
existents as well. Cavendish suggests as much when she says that we
might be surrounded by immaterials, but that we cannot detect them.
She also emphasizes that when she denies the existence of immaterials,
she is merely denying the existence of natural immaterials
— she is saying that the ideas and minds that we detect and know
are a part of nature and hence are material. She writes,
all that is called Immaterial, is a Natural Nothing, and an Immaterial
Natural Substance, in my opinion, is non-sense…. (Cavendish
1664, 321)
Cavendish is committed to saying that the ideas and minds that we
encounter are a part of nature and are material. She is not thereby
denying the existence of immaterials simpliciter. She is committed to
the view that there are no natural immaterials.
A problem that arises, however, is that Cavendish also appears to be
committed to saying that human minds cannot perceive or detect
immaterials and that we cannot form ideas of them. For example, she
says that “when we name God, we name an Unexpressible, and
Incomprehensible Being” (Cavendish 1664, 315). Cavendish
suggests (very strongly) that we can think and speak of immaterials in
her remark that they might in fact surround us; she says that even if
they did, we would be none the wiser. But still the question remains
about how Cavendish can allow that we are able to think or talk about
immaterials at all, if we are not able to perceive or detect or have
ideas of them.
There are a number of ways that Cavendish might maneuver here. One
would be to defend the thesis that although our natural (and hence
material) minds can form no conception of an immaterial, there is
another aspect of our minds — an aspect that is not material
— and it can form conceptions of immaterials. Cavendish
hints at the thesis when she states that natural reason cannot have an
idea of an incorporeal being, leaving open that non-natural reason
could have an idea of an incorporeal being. A problem of course is
that Cavendish does not seem to be able to allow that natural reason
can have an idea of non-natural reason or that it can put forward the
thesis that non-natural reason can form conceptions of
immaterials.
Another maneuver would be to make a distinction between knowledge and
faith and argue that although our minds cannot detect immaterials or
have any evidence for their existence, there must be some way in which
our minds are able to conceive of immaterials (such as God), or else
we would not even be capable of faith. Cavendish writes for example
that
the rational [component of the mind] perceives some effects of the
omnipotent power of God; which effects are perceptible by finite
creatures, but not his infinite nature, nor essence, nor the cause of
his infiniteness and omnipotency. (Ibid., 90)
A problem of course is that if Cavendish is committed to the view that
natural reason can form no conception of an immaterial, then she can
allow that we have ideas of things that are the effect of an
immaterial cause, but it is difficult to see how we could have an idea
of that immaterial cause itself. So long as she "take[s] and idea to
be the picture of some object" (Cavendish 1668, 74) and so long as
immaterials cannot be captured in a figure or image, it would appear
that she is committed to saying that we can have no ideas of
immaterials at all.
A third maneuver that Cavendish could make is to say that when she
talks in the language of immaterials, she is using terms that she does
not take to be referential, but that are still serving an important
communicative role. For example, when she speaks of the immaterial
souls that might surround us, and the way in which they would be
nothing to us, she might be trying to make a point in the language of
her opponents. They speak in terms of immaterials, and
Cavendish might want to attempt to engage them. She says for example
at the start of Philosophical Letters,
A potential problem for the view that Cavendish is making this third
maneuver in all cases in which she uses the word "God" is that there
are texts outside of Philosophical Letters in which she uses
the word but is not directly responding to the view of a theistic
opponent. But she is also clear in numerous passages that we have no
idea of God or any other immaterials, and no idea of infinitude, and
so it is likely that in those texts she is responding to a presumptive
opponent, or perhaps just that she is being careful to articulate her
piety. 
Indeed, a final interpretive proposal is that in some cases Cavendish
might be using the language of immaterials to exhibit piety and
devotion. There is a further discussion of this proposal, and also of
the third maneuver, in section six below.
For Cavendish, philosophical inquiry is not a matter of attempting to
converge on an understanding of all that there is. It is instead a
matter of satisfying our curiosity as to the details of those things
that have already gotten (or that are capable of getting) our
attention. It is a matter of attempting to converge on what our
language has designated as ‘real’. There may be things
that are not material, but these cannot be the subject of
investigation (at least not by us). We cannot speak or think or
theorize about them. It would appear that strictly speaking we cannot
even make the assertion that these things might exist, as we
do not have any ideas of them. Cavendish speaks of them nonetheless,
and we are left with the interpretive question of why.
A final argument that Cavendish offers for the view that matter thinks
and is intelligent is from the orderly behavior of bodies. One of the
longstanding puzzles of seventeenth-century philosophy and science was
how to explain this behavior. Cudworth lays out the puzzle very
neatly. First, he offers a trilemma:
Cudworth settles on the third horn of the trilemma after ruling out
the other two. Bodies are dumb and dead, and so are not the source of
their own order, and it would be beneath God to attend to bodily
affairs Himself (Cunning 2003, 348–50). Cudworth also considers
a fourth option—that the orderly behavior of bodies is secured
by the existence of laws of
 nature.[15]
 He concludes that it is not an additional option after all but is
subsumed by the other three:
Here Cudworth is pointing out, and Cavendish will agree, that we do
not account for the orderly behavior of bodies by positing laws of
nature if we do not know what a law of nature is or how it operates.
On Cudworth's view, the orderly behavior of bodies is secured by
immaterial minds (or plastic natures) that attach to bodies and work
to keep them on the rails. In something like the way that our
(immaterial) minds intelligently guide our bodies, plastic natures
intelligently guide the bodies that compose the plant and animal and
mineral world. Cavendish agrees with a [highly modified] version of
this last statement. She will raise the objection, though, that minds
that move and come into contact with and attach to bodies must be
material themselves.
Like Cudworth, Cavendish generates her view on the orderly behavior of
bodies from a rejection of the Epicurean doctrine that the order that
we encounter in nature arises by chance. She writes,
Something is keeping bodies in line, according to Cavendish, and to do
its job it must be active and knowledgeable and perceptive. It cannot
be immaterial, however, and so
Cavendish rejects the view that matter is not capable of engaging in
orderly behavior on its own. It does not require the assistance of a
plastic nature, for example, and it is not clear how such a thing
could be of any help anyway. Cavendish is indeed shocked at the
temerity of those who think that we can speak intelligibly of an
immaterial divine being but then allow that some of its creatures
would be dead and barren. She writes,
Cavendish does not appear to allow that we can speak intelligibly of
God (or other immaterials), and so perhaps she is making the point
that if we could, we would conclude that whatever He would pack into
such a proxy He would have packed into bodies in the first
 place.[18]
 They would be knowledgeable of the order that they are supposed to
realize, and they would know the details of the bodies in their
 vicinity.[19]
Bodies have information about the bodies in their vicinity, according
to Cavendish, and this is in part because bodies are perceptive and in
part because the universe is a plenum of contiguous bodies that are in
a position to communicate with each other. Cavendish offers a number
of reasons for supposing that the universe is a plenum, including that
nothingness can have no properties and that God would not create
non-being. She writes,
Cavendish will have to be careful about putting any weight on this
last argument, if she also holds that we have no idea of God and no
ideas of any immaterials more generally, but she does make sure to
offer the additional argument that contains no theological premises.
The universe is a plenum of contiguous bodies, she supposes, and these
bodies are also perceptive and are in regular communication with the
bodies in their local environment. Bodies must be in communication
with each other, she thinks, if they are to exhibit the organized and
orderly behavior that they do.
Cavendish defends the view that the universe is a plenum of contiguous
bodies that are perceptive and intelligent. The view is in part a
reminder that the natural world is more active and vital than we might
have thought. Cavendish also leverages the view to generate a
distinction between natural productions, which she takes to be highly
sophisticated and intricate, and human artifacts, whose components are
often rushed together and, as a result, lack the history of
communication and collaboration that is found in bodies that humans
have left untouched. Cavendish says of the bodies of nature very
generally that
The bodies that compose an artifact are also natural bodies, of
course, and so they have a history of perception and communication
with the bodies with which they are standardly continguous, but human
artifice is often a matter of extracting such bodies from their normal
context and putting them in a position that is foreign and unfamiliar.
These bodies are still perceptive, but the combinations into which
they are forced to enter are not as well-functioning. An everyday
example that might shed light on Cavendish's thinking here is the
difference between an office staff of individuals who have a long
history of working together and a group of office workers that was
just recently assembled. Statistically speaking the first group would
be able to get a lot more done.
Cavendish expects in advance that artifacts would not be as
well-functioning as natural productions, but she points to examples as
well:
The language here from Cavendish is no doubt strong, and she is
overstating her case if she thinks that instruments and other
artifacts are bound to be defective in principle. She would be right
to note, however, that many of the instruments of her own time were
false informers, at least to some degree. She would also argue that
the best sort of artifact is one that incorporates bodies that have a
long history of communication and collaboration – that is, artifacts
that in large part are not artifacts, but that consist of components
that are already productions of nature (Cunning 2016, 185-196). She
singles the "perfect natural eye," for example, and she would argue
that one of the reasons that it is able to do what it does is because
of the complexity and coordination of the smaller bodies that enter
into it. If we create an artificial eye, Cavendish thinks, it had
better be made up of similar items. In that case, we should also be
careful for taking too much credit for our production, if we are
relying on work that had already been long underway. 
There are some potential problems with Cavendish's argumentation for
the view that matter thinks. For example, her argument that it is
inconceivable that minds could move and not be material might seem to
contradict another argument that features prominently in her system
(and that is considered more fully in section 4): namely, that most of
the things that happen in nature are beyond our capacity to
understand. In particular, Cavendish will argue that much of what
happens in the natural world is incomprehensible to us in the sense
that we do not understand why bodies have the brute capacities by
which they do all that they do. She considers the example of magnetic
attraction, for example, and familiar Humean examples like the ability
of certain foods to nourish, and she argues that although we do not
understand how or why bodies have the capacities that they do, bodies
have them nonetheless. She offers all of these examples in partial
defense of her view that matter thinks: we do not understand how it
thinks, but that is just a fact about us and what we are in a position
to find intelligible. Cavendish accordingly leaves herself open to the
objection that although we may not understand how minds could be
immaterial and also partake of motion, minds might in fact be
immaterial movers. Cavendish might reply to this objection by making a
distinction between things that are inconceivable in the (strong)
sense that there is a contradiction in our conception of them, and
things that are inconceivable in the weaker sense that we lack the
cognitive resources to understand them. She might argue that
immaterial motion is incoherent in the former sense. An opponent might
at the same time propose that our inability to understand how
immaterial minds and bodies could interact is no evidence that they do
not interact: instead, it is just evidence of our own cognitive
limitations. Cavendish would presumably reply that bodily interaction
must always involve contact and hence that material-immaterial
interaction is incoherent in the strong sense.
Another potential objection is in effect a reductio response
to Cavendish's argument that the bodies that surround us need to be
intelligent if they are to exhibit the order that they do. The
objection is simply that bodies are not intelligent, and so there must
be some other explanation for that order. Here Cavendish would just
bite the bullet – and insist that in fact it is not a bullet – and
respond that a number of the predications that we make of the objects
that surround us presuppose that those objects are perceptive
intelligent. We notice that ants and spiders engage in behaviors that
are smart and sophisticated (Cunning 2016, 70-79), or to use an
example that Cudworth likes, that the fingers of an “exercised
lutonist” are able to create beautiful music without being
conscious, and without the lutonist thinking about fingers at all
(Cudworth 1678, 157). We might point to other examples of expert
behavior that are more mundane, and we might reflect on how we can get
tripped up if we attempt to bring that behavior to the level of
attention. Cavendish herself supposes that a lot of skillful and
adaptive human behavior takes place below the threshold of
awareness:
Cavendish would anticipte that some of us might squirm at using
expressions like “muscle memory”, but she would worry that
when we do squirm, we are in the grip of a theory, and a theory that
has us denying the obvious. Cavendish is not opposed to appealing to a
background philosophy theory to help to make sense of particular
phenomena – but she does not want to deny the paradigm cases to any
such theory must be accountable.
A different objection that Cavendish faces is that there is something
odd in saying that minds move or that they are spatial. There are
plenty of figures in the history of philosophy who have posited the
existence of entities that are not in space, even though these
entities still in some way apply to, or are a part of, everyday
objects. Most famous, perhaps, is Plato's positing of the existence of
numbers, perfect geometrical figures, and other universal entities.
Here Cavendish and her opponents are presumably at loggerheads. There
may be something odd about saying that minds move, she would insist,
but there is something even more odd about saying that the entirety of
person partakes of motion without their mind partaking of motion as
well. Perhaps we have immaterial minds that exist in a non-spatial
Platonic realm, or that are otherwise non-spatial, but these are not
the minds that we have in mind when we are speaking of the earthly
entities that have imagistic and dimensional ideas and partake of
motion. Cavendish is in effect imploring us to take seriously that the
language of moving minds is only unusual against the background of an
impoverished conception of matter.
One of the objections that Cavendish has to address, courtesy of her
seventeenth-century opponents, is that the prospect of thinking matter
is unintelligible and thus that it is false that all of reality is
material. For example, Descartes insists that something is not a
property of a body unless there is a conceptual tie between it and the
essence of body:
For Descartes, shape is a property of bodies because something cannot
be a shape unless it is the shape of an extended thing. Motion is a
property of bodies because something cannot have motion unless it has
a location and so cannot have motion unless it is extended (Descartes
1644, II.25–27). Our thoughts and volitions, however, cannot be
conceived as having length, breadth, or depth. We find a similar
argument in the work of Malebranche:
For Malebranche, “the ways of being” of a body are
restricted to what can be understood as bearing relations of distance
to other things. It is impossible to conceive of a thought as having a
size, or as being a certain distance from another thought or from a
body, so a thought is not a body or the property of a body (Cunning
2006).
Cavendish could not disagree more. In tackling the question of the
nature of mind, her first order of business is to establish
that matter thinks. Only then does she consider the question
of whether or not we can understand how it thinks. She argues that we
do not and that it is not surprising that we do not, given that we do
not know the answer to hardly any of the how and why questions about
the things that we encounter in nature. For example,
For Cavendish, the fact that we do not understand how matter thinks is
not evidence that matter does not think. If it was, then we would have
evidence against the occurrence of many of the phenomena that we
encounter on a daily basis. Anticipating Hume, Cavendish is arguing
that particular causal relations are not known a priori, and
that if we did not have the relevant experience, every causal
connection would seem just as arbitrary as any other (Hume 1748, 112).
There is “Natural Magick” (Cavendish 1664, 299), according
to Cavendish, even in the case of things that we take to be wholly
unmysterious:
Here Cavendish is again pre-figuring Hume. The attraction of a magnet
is mysterious, she insists, but so is the power of fire, and the
“Knowledge we have of several things” is on a par. This is
a sustained theme throughout her
 corpus.[21]
For example, we do not understand why the bodies that are involved in
digestion would work together to digest, rather than to do something
else (Cavendish 1664, 358–9). Nor do we know why the bodies that
compose water and ice are transparent, when the bodies that come
together to form other beings are not (Cavendish 1664, 472). We can
speculate on these, but in the end
Thinking matter is no exception:
Bodies in the natural world clearly have capacities, Cavendish is
maintaining, and it is by such capacities that they do what they do.
We do not understand why a particular body or configuration of bodies
would have the particular capacities that it does, and there is no
special problem posed by the fact that we cannot understand how matter
thinks (Cunning 2006).
As we saw in Section 3, Cavendish's metaphysics is circumscribed
insofar as it does not aim to constitute a complete account of all
that there is. In addition, it will provide only limited accounts of
the things whose existence it does capture. Cavendish is fully aware
of the limits of her project, and indeed part of that project is to
motivate the view that we do not understand nearly as much as we
ordinarily presume (Clucas 2003, 202–4; Broad 2007,
496–7). Anticipating Hume yet again, and also Locke, she is
supposing that once we identify the line beyond which philosophical
inquiry is no longer productive, we will devote our energies
elsewhere, and to better effect. She writes,
For Cavendish and Hume, many of the sharpest minds are engaged in the
pursuit of goals that are in fact a dead end. These individuals could
be working on down-to-earth projects that benefit humankind generally;
and by expressing their nature in a more sustainable way, they would
be happier themselves. Another case is point is the attempt that
philosophers might make to offer wholly perspicuous definitions or
accounts of fundamental notions – like those of matter, motion,
divisibility, dependence, agency, and authority. Cavendish discusses
these of course, and indeed they are among the bedrocks of her
philosophical system, but she nowhere attempts anything like a
full-blown account of what they are. What she says about matter and
its properties is especially telling – 
For Cavendish, there will be no explication of the nature of motion in
terms of matter or vice versa, but that does not mean that she
supposes that we do not know matter or motion when we encounter them.
She supposes that we know these well enough to draw conclusions that
are relevant to our most pressing matters of concern, but she does not
think that in order to be able to identify instances (of motion,
etc.), we have to have in hand an account of each. The order of
approach would appear to be the other way around – a full-blown
account would have to do justice to incontrovertible paradigm cases;
but the identification of paradigm cases would not require that we
have in hand the more general theory that paradigm cases are supposed
to help us to generate. Cavendish appears to be thinking that if we
wait for a clear and full-blown account of our most rock-bottom
notions before we take on the pressing issues of the day, we will
never in fact get to them, and the discipline of philosophy will lose
its relevance if not its luster.
An interesting wrinkle in Cavendish's view of the orderly behavior of
bodies is her insistence that when bodies interact they do not
transfer motion to each
 other.[25]
 Instead, bodies communicate with each other about how to coordinate
their behavior, and each is then the source of its own motion. On the
assumption that properties cannot literally slide or hop from one body
to another, cases in which one body does take on the motion of another
body would be cases in which the second body also takes on the matter
that has that motion. But we do not observe a body to become more
massive when it is moved as a result of its contact with another body.
As Cavendish explains in her description of a hand that moves a
bowl,
Cavendish adds that “if it did, the hand would in a short time
become weak and useless, by losing so much
 substance….”[26]
 She instead proposes that when one body appears to move another, it
is simply an occasion or prompt for the second body to move on its
own. The second body moves in the right way in response to the first
body (and the other bodies in its vicinity), but only because all
bodies are intelligent and perceptive and (for the most part)
agreeable, and they communicate with each other about how to
 proceed.[27]
 A body B might appear to acquire new motion from a body A if body B
at first was still, or a body B might appear to be stationary after a
body A "stops" it from moving, but Cavendish supposes that bodies that
appear to be stationary are always quite active below the surface:
A given amount of motion is inseparably tied to the body that has it,
according to Cavendish, and so motion never transfers from a first
body to a second – unless of course the first body loses some of its
matter, in which case there is a transfer of motion, but only because
there is at the same time a transfer of matter. The motion that is
transferred is not transferred from the matter that has it; instead,
that matter and motion both transfer together. Cavendish supposes that
motion is never transferred on its own, but she also allows that a
body can redirect motions that another body already has. That is, a
body never transfers any amount of motion to a second body, but a body
can (and often does) redirect the motions of a second body. Bodies
indeed often dominate other bodies and force their motions to run
counter to what they would otherwise be:
A body never loses its motion, and motion is never transferred on its
own from one body to another, but a body can redirect the motions that
a second body already has, and in a way that might give the appearance
that motion has been transferred. Cavendish will allow appearances to
tell part of the story of a given body-body interaction, but she also
makes sure that any such story is informed by deeper metaphysical
considerations like that strictly speaking a body and its motion are
inseparable.
A given body never loses or acquires motion, according to Cavendish.
Bodies also have enough packed into them, she supposes, that there is
a sense in which they are the cause of their own perceptions. A
potentially counter-intuitive view, Cavendish would argue that the
available alternative accounts of perception make no sense at all and
that her own view is a close and more coherent cousin of the
prevailing (mechanist) view of her time. First, she rejects the
scholastic doctrine that perception of an object is a matter of
receiving from that object an immaterial image or species or form of
 itself.[28]
 Such a thing would have to travel from one object to another, and so
it would have to be material. Cavendish also rejects the mechanist
view according to which perception is a matter of unintelligent light
traveling from one body to another and then actively producing an
image of the first body in the mind of the second. She worries
that
The absurdity of the opinion needs no demonstration, but Cavendish
elaborates in just the ways that we would expect. The opinion is
absurd in part because it includes that sense organs are passive and
inert in the course of the production of sensory images. The opinion
is also absurd because the material medium that is light does not
carry within itself any image of the perceived object, and so it does
not bring along the resources to produce a perception of that object
specifically, or to produce any perception at all. In her own words,
Cavendish says that it is unlikely that
Cavendish instead argues that when one body perceives another, the
second body by its own power generates an image or
“pattern” of the first body. She writes,
For Cavendish, perception is an almost entirely active process.
Although the objects that we sense put constraints on the images that
we produce of them, we produce those images in their
 entirety.[29]
 Her mechanist opponents might raise the objection, and we might
object as well, that if Cavendish is right the power by which we
produce such images is mysterious and occult, and not at all
explanatory. Cavendish has a ready reply. According to the view of her
opponents, the microscopic bodies that affect our senses do not have
qualities like color or taste or smell, but they somehow are able to
make us have sensations of these. On this view, the color- and taste-
and odor-less microscopic bodies might serve as a kind of trigger, but
the production of the relevant sensations is due in large part to
dispositions and capacities that are found on the side of the
perceiver. Cavendish would agree that much of the work of a sensory
perception takes place in the perceiver. She would add that one of the
things that her opponents are overlooking is that, because motion is
always inseparable from the body that has it, the motions that enter
into the formation of a sensory image are the work of the perceiver as
well.
Cavendish holds that when one body appears to transfer motion to
another, the second body moves of its own accord, but does so in the
light of its communication with the first body. Commentators have
worried that even if we allow Cavendish the view that bodies are
active and vital and the source of their own motion, she has no way to
account for how it is that bodies communicate so successfully with
each other if nothing is transmitted between them. Bodies seem to
“suggest” (Detlefsen 2007, 168), or “induc[e]”
(O'Neill 2001, xxx), or perhaps they transmit “a sort of signal
that triggers the self-motion” of the body that moves
(Michaelian 2009, 47), but the question is how they do this. As
Detlefsen writes,
O'Neill points the way to an answer. First, she points out that even
though (for Cavendish) a body never transfers its motion to a second
body, it still serves as a partial cause of its movement (O'Neill
2001, xxx-xxxi). Cavendish says,
In line with the results of section three, Cavendish is applying the
view that bodies must come into contact with each other in order to
interact. She appears to hold that at the point of mutual contact one
body triggers the perceptual activity and self-motion of another, but
we are still left with the question of how the first body does this.
That is, we are left with the question of how the second body comes to
acquire all of the information that it needs to act in a coordinated
and orderly way. Cavendish does not make clear the process by which
this occurs (Detlefsen 2006, 232), but she gives us enough material to
allow us to speculate. She says that the second body forms a pattern
of the first body; it makes a “copy” of it (Cavendish
1668a, 187). If the second body makes a copy of the first, and if it
does so at the point of interaction, then one obvious proposal is that
the first body presents an image of itself at that point of
interaction. The second body then makes a copy of that image. It is
clear how this would work even in apparent cases of action at a
distance. The universe is a dense plenum of contiguous bodies that are
perceptive and that communicate with the bodies that surround
them:
In sense perception and other cases of occasional causation,
information passes through the air from one body to the next, but not
in the form of (unintelligent) light that stamps an impression on
passive and inert sense organs. Since the universe is a plenum,
information passes from an "agent" body to the air that surrounds it,
and the air then actively patterns an image of that body, and that
image is then patterned again – wash, rinse, and repeat – all the
way until the "patient" body is reached. Along the way, some of the
air will travel with a patterned image of the perceived object, and
some will communicate an image of the object to bodies that are
contiguous – all until the perceiver is reached. Cavendish is also
clear that part of what it is for a body to think and be intelligent
is for it to have
 self-knowledge,[30]
 and contiguous bodies would be regularly copying such information in
order to maximize the coordination of behavior. In many cases, that
information just happens to travel a lot farther.
Cavendish has to be to offering an account along these lines if she is
going to be able to reject as less plausible the views of her
scholastic and mechanist opponents. She herself thinks that qualities
like color and smell and taste literally exist in objects and that a
perceiving body patterns all of
 these.[31]
 Microscopic bodies are not able to literally produce the resulting
perception, and if they prompt the perceiver to produce that
perception on its own, they also make available to the perceiver an
image to serve as the basis for a copy of the perceived body along
with its wide range of features.
We have seen that Cavendish holds that natural reason cannot perceive
or have an idea of an immaterial being. She says in particular that
“as for Immaterial, no mind can conceive that” (Cavendish
1664, 69) and that “when we name God, we name an Unexpressible,
and Incomprehensible Being” (Cavendish 1664, 315). One way to
reconcile her view that we cannot have ideas of immaterials with her
numerous attempts to speak of God is to say that she is attempting to
speak in the language of her opponents. A problem, however, is that
there are passages in which she seems to want to be doing a lot more.
For example, she writes that,
I Sent you word in my last, I would not meddle with writing any thing
of the Divine Soul of Man, by reason it belongs to Faith and Religion,
and not to Natural Philosophy; but since you desire my opinion
concerning the Immortality of the Divine Soul, I cannot but answer you
plainly, that first I did wonder much you made me question of that,
whose truth, in my opinion, is so clear, as hardly any rational man
will make a doubt of it; for I think there is almost no Christian in
the world, but believes the Immortality of the Soul, no not Christians
onely, but Mahometans and Jews: But I left to wonder at you, when I
saw Wise and Learned Men, and great Divines, take so much pains as to
write whole Volumes, and bring so many arguments to prove the
Immortality of the Soul, for this was a greater Miracle to me, then if
Nature had shewed me some of her secret and hidden effects, or if I
had seen an Immaterial Spirit. Certainly, Madam, it seems as
strange to me to prove the Immortality of the Soul, as to convert
Atheists; for it is impossible, almost, that any Atheist should be
found in the World: For what Man would be so senceless as to deny a
God? Wherefore to prove either a God, or the Immortality of the Soul,
is to make a man doubt of either: for as Physicians and Surgeons apply
strengthening Medicines onely to those parts of the body which they
suppose the weakest, so it is with proofs and arguments, those being
for the most part used in such subjects, the truth of which is most
questionable.
Here Cavendish is stating quite straightforwardly that we can have
faith in the existence of immaterials, and in particular in the
existence of God, but that immaterials are not within the province of
natural reason. If so, Cavendish is reflecting the view that our best
and only interface with God is via faith; she is reflecting her
commitment to fideism.
A problem, of course, is that it would seem that a person would need
to have an idea of God in order to have faith that God exists.
Cavendish is clear that we can have an idea of the effects of
God's omnipotence, but she does not think that natural reason can have
an idea of an immaterial itself. We can have an idea that there is a
cause of these effects, but not an idea of what the cause is, or what
it is that makes that idea and idea of God as opposed to something
else. Cavendish might posit that we have supernatural and immaterial
souls and that these can have an idea of God, but the question again
is how she would be entitled to make suppositions about immaterial
souls. One of her aims in circumscribing the limits of natural
philosophy is presumably to make room for faith, but there is a worry
that she has gone too far in holding that we cannot have ideas of
immaterials. As Descartes remarks,
God is not to be conceived or understood, according to Cavendish, but
“is rather to be admired, adored and worshipped.” We do
not have any idea of Him, however, and so it is difficult to make
sense of how our intentional states could ever point specifically in
His direction.
Cavendish appears to be committed to the view that the only things of
which we can think or speak are the mundane things which surround us,
or things that can come into contact with them and us but that are
further off. In some passages, she refers to God and His infinitude in
order highlight the limits of human understanding. In these passages,
Cavendish might be speaking of God in ways that are in tension with
her view that we do not have ideas of immaterials. An alternate
explanation is that she might instead be attempting to rein in the
ambitions of natural reason. She writes,
Cavendish is clear in this passage that if a finite mind is able to
subsume a being under its necessarily limited ideas and categories,
then whatever that being is, it is not God. Our attempts to
investigate the ways and nature of God are hopeless, and accordingly,
we should restrict our faculties to a subject matter to which they are
appropriately
 fitted.[32]
 Even then, we should still be appropriately humble and fallibilistic.
Cavendish's criticism of the scientist William Harvey is a case in
point:
Here Cavendish is also referencing her view that matter is eternal,
which she thinks is an obvious consequence of the datum that it is
"impossible, to wit, that something should be made or produced out of
nothing" (Cavendish 1664, 53). Not wanting to ground her metaphysics
in ideas of God that we do not have, she does not want to venture that
God created matter out of nothing, and the only remaining option if
something cannot come from nothing is to suppose that it is eternal.
She wants to emphasize however that it is not heretical to say that
the matter out of which the earth and heavens are created has no
beginning of existence itself, and so in the passage immediately above
she highlights that there are no passages in scripture that deny that.
Cavendish is not the most humble philosopher, but she is careful to
exercise restraint when it comes to matters that our beyond our ken.
She is assuming that there is a difference between the domains that
our minds are capable of investigating and the domains that piety
suggests are not accessible to us. Infallibilism with respect to
either domain is inappropriate, but it is especially so with respect
to the
 second.[33]
In some passages Cavendish speaks of God to say that He is
inconceivable and inexpressible. In other passages she speaks of God
to say that our knowledge of His existence has to be via faith and not
natural reason. In other passages she speaks of God to highlight the
ways in which a finite mind should not expect to understand matters
that are beyond it. In other passages she speaks of God to offer
positive evidence for her view that everything in nature is material.
For example, she says that it follows from the premise that God is
good and just that He would make sure that all of His creatures would
be able to worship Him, and so would make sure that all of His
creatures had knowledge and perception (Cavendish 1664, 518–9).
She also speaks of God's creation of everything, including the
intellectual and perceptual capacities of matter, as a way of making
sense of the teleology that we find (and that given the features of
the creator we would expect to find) in
 nature.[34]
Cavendish is not entitled to offer these arguments, it would seem. If
she is not contradicting her view that we do not have ideas of
immaterials, or her view that God is outside the province of natural
reason, she might just be attempting to speak in the language of her
opponents to show that their own (putative) commitments entail that
her view is to be accepted instead. We know from her views on
occasional causation that causal interaction is not a matter of an
agent literally doing something to a patient, but of an
“agent” communicating with a “patient” and the
“patient” actively responding. In the case of some of the
arguments that she offers, she might just be assuming that the only
way that she can get a response from her opponents is to speak in
terms with which they identify. If so, she would have to discount the
arguments in question, as they could not be considered a part of
natural philosophy. The overall defensibility of her views would not
be affected so long as she had plenty of other arguments to offer
— arguments of the sort that can be thought and expressed.
For all of its apparent problems, one of the reasons that it is
important to remark upon Cavendish's view on our inability to conceive
of God is to highlight that even though she thinks that the organized
behavior of bodies is due to intelligence, she does not subscribe to
any version of a theory of intelligent design. There is a difference
between the thesis that the orderly behavior of bodies is due to the
intelligence and perceptual capacities of the bodies themselves and
the thesis that it is due to the intelligence of a designer. Cavendish
might add that either thesis has to posit the existence of intelligent
and perceptive matter. If God had created matter that was not equipped
with the resources to detect the matter around it and act in ways that
are coordinated, chaos would ensue almost immediately. Cavendish
is forced to admit that if matter is intelligent and
perceptive, there is no further explanation as to why it is
intelligent and perceptive, or at least not one that can be known by
natural reason. Intelligence and perceptive matter just is. It is
something that has always existed (Cavendish 1664, 14, 462) and that
has the resources within itself to bring about all the things that we
observe it to bring about on a daily basis. She would side with Hume
on the question of whether or not it is more likely that the only
beings that exist with such resources are immaterial:
For Cavendish, matter has a tremendous number of resources built into
it. If it is eternal, then we can offer no account of its origin, but
in this respect the competing thesis that God is the source of the
order in the universe is on a par. The latter thesis has additional
problems, however: if God is wholly immaterial, then it is not clear
how He could produce matter, or how He would be able to interact with
it once it was made (Cavendish 1668a, 199–200; Cavendish 1668b,
241; Detlefsen 2009, 430); and if God's supremacy is inversely
proportional to our finite ability to conceive of Him, it is difficult
to see how our confidence about His nature and operations could be
anything more than arrogance. Cavendish thinks that the view that
matter has always existed and is the source of its own order is not
only a contender, but is really the only option.
An issue of interpretation that arises in the attempt to reconstruct
Cavendish's social and political philosophy is that for the most part
the texts in which she addresses social and political questions are
not formal philosophical treatises but works of fiction. What is
regarded as her central work on political philosophy, Description
of a New World, Called the Blazing World, is a novel, and in
another central text, Orations of Divers Sorts, Cavendish
presents a multiplicity of opposing perspectives on social and
political topics: gender roles, virtue, war, and the proper form of
government, among others. Cavendish is indeed the author of
Blazing World, and she also makes an appearance as a
character, but it is difficult to be certain that all of the
conclusions and insights of the narrator are ones that Cavendish would
identify as her own. The interpretive problem is even worse in the
case of Orations, as there are as many as three or four
speeches that are offered on any given subject, and the speeches are
in some cases contradictory. Still, there are a few texts in which
Cavendish puts forward claims about social and political matters and
in which she is clearly speaking in her own voice — in
particular, World's Olio. We can use these claims to
determine which of the perspectives she is endorsing in her more
fictional work and to get a concrete sense of how she might follow up
on these (Boyle 2006, 253–254). 
Cavendish disagrees with Hobbes on a number of questions of natural
philosophy. For Hobbes, thoughts and sensations are motions in the
brain (Hobbes 1651, 27–28). For Cavendish thinking and
intelligence are basic features of bodies – they are basic features
that are ubiquitous in nature and that admit of no further
explanation. Nor would Hobbes agree with Cavendish that when bodies
interact their rational elements communicate with each other and
co-ordinate their behavior. But on questions of social and political
philosophy Cavendish and Hobbes to a significant degree align. Like
Hobbes, Cavendish holds that human beings are primarily motivated by
self-interest:
She adds that self-love is “the strongest Motion of the
Mind” (Ibid.). Also like Hobbes, Cavendish thinks that life
outside of civil society is so dangerous and chaotic that it does not
allow us to pursue our self-interest in a stable and consistent way.
Outside of civil society, we cannot secure food or shelter without
threat that they will be taken; we do not have, and we cannot create
and sustain, the infrastructure that enables commerce; we cannot make
plans; and the bulk of our energy is expended on security and safety
in the moment. Orations offers multiple perspectives on
social and political issues, but the emphasis on social stability is a
constant (Boyle 2006, 258 and 282–286):
As for Hobbes, for Cavendish the stability of civil society is not an
end in itself; it is instead a necessary condition for us to pursue
our self-interested projects and goals. If we remained in a state of
nature, we would be in perpetual fear. We would not be likely to live
very long, and we would not live well. We would not be healthy. We
would not be able develop our latent skills and abilities, and we
would not be able to engage in the activities of which those skills
and abilities are an expression.
Cavendish also agrees with Hobbes that civil society is most stable
and secure when it is ruled by a single individual who has absolute
power and sovereignty (Lewis 2001, 345; Boyle 2006, 282). She writes,
If a sovereign is to have absolute power, there is some risk of course
that they might use that power unwisely and in a way that does not
optimally promote peace and stability. Cavendish is worried however
about all of the alternatives. For example, democracy is not a
sustainable option: 
If the security and order of civil society is left in the hands of the
majority, or in the hands of a person who is selected by the majority,
there is too high a risk that society will return to chaos. Cavendish
also holds that power should not be in the hands of a smaller but very
talented and intelligent and sophisticated minority: she appears to
think that the likelihood is high that such a body will become divided
and govern ineffectively, perhaps because “It is the nature of
most of Mankind … to be Ungratefull, Malicious, Revengefull,
and Inhumane” (Cavendish 1662a, 259). The members of such a body
might be in perpetual conflict as a result of honest disagreement or
as a result of their ambition to have more power for themselves.
Cavendish concludes that the best prospect for security and stability
though to be sure this is not a guarantee — is to have all power
in the hands of a single
 individual.[35]
Cavendish does not get into a lot of detail about how the sovereign
should best bring about peace and security, but she does offer a
number of suggestions. In Blazing World, she depicts a scene
in which the Empress returns to her home world (from the Blazing
World) and saves her people from an enemy attack. The Empress is
depicted as possessing super-human abilities, as having the
all-encompassing breadth and reach and power of a god:
While still on Blazing World, the Empress had received intelligence
that her people were under attack and that their kingdom was likely to
be destroyed (90). The clear suggestion is that peace and security are
best secured and maintained if a country is governed by a sovereign
who is and is believed to be capable of the extraordinary. The
sovereign should not be selected by democracy, and ideally the
sovereign will be one of the few who is naturally born with the
talents that are requisite to do the job:
It is difficult to resist the thought that Cavendish is writing in
part with an eye to Hobbes and the problem of the fool (Hobbes 1651,
90). To the subject who thinks that it is rational to break the
covenants of civil society, and who thinks that he can get away with
it, Cavendish is suggesting that a capable sovereign would make sure
that subjects have reason to believe that the eyes and ears of the
sovereign are ubiquitous and that situations in which a subject
concludes that is he under the radar are likely to be situations that
the sovereign has had skillfully and majestically staged. Perhaps
Cavendish is also suggesting that there is no good Hobbesian response
to the problem of the fool in that she is fleshing out what a
sovereign would have to be to make the behavior of the
“fool” count as irrational, and how a sovereign cannot
realistically be anything close to that.
Cavendish also does not speak in a lot of detail about how a sovereign
is established or about the formation of a commonwealth. She appears
to assume that a sovereign will emerge from the among the most
powerful and talented and that the majority of people will come to see
subjugation as in their overall interest. She does however sketch some
parameters that she thinks a wise sovereign will keep in mind, and
these parameters tend to be in keeping with her occasionalist view
that things or persons have power not as a function of what they force
onto their objects but as a function of whether or not these objects
respond to the person or thing as requested. For example, Cavendish
says that a wise sovereign will be fair and consistent in the
application and enforcement of laws (Cavendish 1655, 112). The
sovereign will also be a model of virtue, and in a way that allows his
or her subjects to register that the highest forms of happiness and
pleasure do not in fact accompany the life of vice. (Cavendish 1664b,
114) A wise sovereign will also make sure that subjects have access to
letters and to education more generally — to poetry that softens
our animalistic and reactive side (Cavendish 1655, 64); to plays and
other representations that not only articulate and defend but also
exhibit the virtues and joys that come with enacting them; and also
philosophy and history (Cavendish 1655, 6). Cavendish writes,
One of the benefits of an education is that our minds become more
filled with information that helps us to navigate the world —
not only to achieve our local aims but to work toward the more global
result of peace and security (Boyle 2006, 285–287). Cavendish
does not think that we can achieve these aims blindly and by a brute
act of will. We need knowledge and familiarity with the ways of the
world, and we cannot come up with these by a brute act of will either.
Here it appears that Cavendish's view on occasional causation is
making a systematic appearance yet again. Ecosystems and other
collections of bodies are able to sustain themselves in existence, in
large part because of the skillful communication that takes place
between their members. A commonwealth will have a better chance of
surviving for the long haul if its members are prepared to listen to
each other and if they are in synchrony with respect to a larger aim
and if they have the wherewithal to respond to each other
intelligently and without resistance.
Cavendish would also recommend that a sovereign hold constant the
extent to which human beings are driven by the pursuit of public
recognition and fame. Cavendish herself thinks that our material minds
do not live on after we die and that, if we have immaterial souls that
continue to exist, we have absolutely no notion of these or how or why
we would identify with them. She thinks that deep down the rest of us
are suspicious as well:
Cavendish is very astute to point out the extent to which human beings
are motivated by a desire for public recognition. She saw the evidence
in her own day, and we can clearly see it in our
 own.[36]
 She can then argue that if generally speaking people are interested
in the promotion of peace and stability, one of the ways that an
individual will have a good chance at achieving fame is by engaging in
activities and projects that help to secure peace and stability. These
would include inventions, infrastructure, and the construction of
schools and libraries (Boyle 2006, 264). A wise sovereign will make
sure that such behavior is encouraged and that it is also
acknowledged. Not everybody is noble and exalted and impressive by
birth, and not everybody has all of the same talents (Cavendish 1655,
69; Cavendish 1662a, 27, 37–38), but there are still a number of
ways that any human being can contribute to peace and stability.
Society can be structured so that people can work to their own talents
and be acknowledged for what they do well — whether they be
scientists, philosophers, laborers, members of the military, writers,
or something else — and a wise sovereign would recognize all of
these achievements so that a person would not be motivated to secure
fame in ways that are more unseemly. We are remembered well if we do
our part to promote peace and social stability. And it is only if
society lives on, and is stable and orderly and civilized, that there
will be people who might remember us.
Another issue that comes up in interpreting Cavendish's social and
political philosophy is whether or not she is a feminist. It is
tempting again to look to her view on occasional causation to shed
light on her view of the proper roles for females and males. Cavendish
herself wanted to be a practicing scientist and philosopher, but
whether or not she could be so was a function not only of her
decisions but also of the receptivity of the surrounding world. She
could decide to be a scientist, but whether or not she would be a
scientist is up to a lot of additional factors — whether her
results are disseminated and discussed, whether they are published,
whether she is taken seriously and seen as authoritative, and whether
she is part of a larger scientific community. Alternately, she (or a
Cavendish in a nearby possible world) might decide to open a business,
or be a constable or barrister, but whether or not she is successful
would depend only in part on what she decides to do. To be a
businessperson she would need to have a customer base, and to be an
attorney she would need to be authoritative and believable in front of
those who deliver a verdict. Cavendish was not a prominent scientist
in her time; nor was she a prominent philosopher. She attempted to
correspond with Hobbes and others, but unlike the bodies that interact
in constituting the ecosystems of nature and other organic units,
these philosophers were not cooperative.
In her natural philosophy Cavendish argues that the behavior of bodies
is due in part to messages that are signaled from the
“agent” body and in part to the response of the
“passive” body and to whether or not the
“passive” body is appropriately hospitable. Some of the
texts suggest very strongly that her social and political philosophy
is informed by her view of the normal operations of nature. In
Blazing World, the Empress is transported from her home
planet and is pleased to find that the beings on the Blazing World
will interact with her and respect her authority. In real life, the
human males on earth would not engage with Cavendish, but the worm-men
and bear-men and bird-men and fish-men and ape-men have extensive
conservations with the Empress about the cosmos, the nature of matter
and mind, chemistry, and mathematics (29–42). At one point the
Empress seeks counsel from “the soul of one of the most famous
modern writers, as either of Galileo, Gassendus, Descartes, Helmont,
Hobbes, H. More, etc.” (67–68). She is informed, however,
that “they would scorn to be scribes to a woman” (68). The
atmosphere of the Blazing World is quite different from the atmosphere
on earth, and whether or not a person is a scientist or philosopher or
other authority is only in part dependent on what is happening on her
end.
Cavendish presents women as accomplished and successful in other texts
as well. In Bell in Campo, Cavendish has a group of women
form an army for the sake of showing men that women should be
“co-partners” in government, and “help rule the
World” (588–589). The women submit to a powerful
generalless, and together they defeat the enemy and save the male army
at the same time. The events in Bell in Campo are fairly
straightforward, but there might remain a question about Cavendish's
own attitude toward those events, and in particular about her attitude
toward the achievements of the female army. On the one hand, it is
reported in Bell in Campo that men take women to be “a
trouble in the Commonwealth” (588). In addition, the members of
the female army are rewarded for their achievements — rewarded
by the men in power — with the right to control their family
finances, and the freedom to wear whatever they choose. On the other
hand, Cavendish depicts the female army as being capable of doing what
a male army is normally commissioned to do, and as capable of doing
even more. Furthermore, she is depicting how males in power would in
fact respond (or how the males in her own world have responded) to a
circumstance in which a female army sweeps in to save the day. On one
reading, Cavendish herself is suggesting that men and women are not
equal in terms of the roles that they should perform and that men are
in important ways superior. On another reading, Cavendish is
reflecting that men are not superior to women but that the
achievements of women have always occurred in an atmosphere in which
men are heavily advantaged.
Some commentators have suggested that Cavendish leaves open the
question of whether or not women are inferior by training and
education or if they are inferior by nature (for example Boyle 2006,
278–281). It seems unlikely that Cavendish thinks that women are
inferior by nature if she depicts women as capable of the highest
levels of achievement in alternative possible worlds. Women are still
women in these alternative worlds; what is different is the
structure of the surrounding audiences with which men and women have
to contend. Cavendish herself was a remarkable person, as was the
Empress and the generalless of Bell in Campo. It is true that
women are depicted as exceptional only in Cavendish's fictional work
(McGuire 1978, 198; Boyle 2006, 279), and that might indicate that she
takes the idea of a skilled and capable woman to be fictional, but as
per her view on occasional causation she might just be reflecting in
these alternative worlds that what it is for an agent to be successful
is in part due to what the agent signals and in part to how its larger
environment is responsive. Cavendish might have thought (with Spinoza)
that an individual is not an island and that what it can do and cannot
do is to some degree a part of its physical and psychological
constitution and to a large degree a part of the lay of the land on
which the individual would act.
Cavendish does however encourage a very conservative set of behaviors
for women to perform, and again the question arises of whether she is
basing her view on some assumptions about the nature of women more
generally or if she has an eye to the environment in which women have
happened to find themselves. In World's Olio she emphasizes
the importance of the virtue of chastity, and also patience, humility
and being fashionable and constant (73). The list is expanded by one
of the speakers of Orations:
Here Cavendish might be reflecting how women ought to behave in any
possible world irrespective of the power and responses of the beings
that surround them. If she thinks that the nature of women is such
that women should be chaste and humble and quiet, then to the extent
that she thinks that other characteristics are higher and more exalted
she takes women to be an inferior part of the species. If she is
instead reading off of her own world what behaviors are regarded as
legitimate for women, then she is just describing the behavior that is
adaptive to that environment. The generalless of Bell in
Campo is not especially modest or temperate or quiet, but her
behavior would not “gain us praise” or “love in this
world” — the seventeenth-century environment in which
Cavendish thinks we find ourselves. But perhaps Cavendish thinks that
the generalless is operating counter to her own nature. Alternately,
if Cavendish is reading off of her culture how women would be most
wise to behave, then she might just be offering conservative advice
about how women can best flourish in the short material life that has
been allotted to them.
A final interpretive issue that arises for Cavendish is exactly how
the sovereign is supposed to have so much power and authority if power
and achievement are in large part a function of the responsiveness of
the surrounding world. A sufficiently powerful sovereign would have to
have full control of the military and other underlings, and these in
turn would need to be able to control the larger populace (James 2003,
xxv-xxvi). The sovereign would have to have enough power to force all
of these people to act in accord with his or her will, but in the
light of her view on occasional causation Cavendish is committed to
the view that all that a sovereign would be able to do is send a
signal or message to these beings in the hope that they would obey.
The sovereign might try to take steps to increase the odds that
underlings will abide by his message, but that would be a matter of
sending another message still. A sovereign cannot simply decree that
certain things happen: whether or not they happen is a function of the
responsiveness of the members of the commonwealth. For Cavendish, an
ecosystem holds together, but not because a single member imposes its
will on the others. Instead, the members work together as a group, and
if human beings are a part of nature, they would function under the
same constraints. If Cavendish is right, a sovereign has to be
extremely powerful to secure peace and stability, but what it is for a
sovereign to have power is to be wise enough to figure out which are
the messages that his subjects would accommodate (also Walters 2014,
180-182) 
Like many of her seventeenth-century contemporaries, Cavendish
subscribes to the view that the universe is a plenum of contiguous
bodies and that there is no empty space. We might wonder how
individual bodies would have any freedom or wiggle room to behave as
they please if they are so surrounded and tightly packed in. Cavendish
does defend the view that the bodies of nature are generally speaking
free; indeed the view is a pillar of her system. She writes for
example that
Bodies are free, Cavendish supposes, but she has not yet taken a stand
on whether the freedom of bodies is of a libertarian or a
compatibilist variety. She does not use these contemporary terms
herself, of course, and so the question is whether or not she cashes
out freedom in terms of a contra-causal power by which bodies possess
the ability to do otherwise than they do – again, even if she does
not use that language – or if she takes freedom to be a matter of the
wherewithal that a body has to act by the motions that are internal to
it and to keep those motions from being squelched or redirected by an
obstacle or hindrance. She nowhere speaks in these exact
terms either, but she does make some comments that are very
revealing.
For example, she defines voluntary motion as self-motion, and she
describes the freest bodies at those that are able to make their way
through the plenum with agility and without constraint. She
writes,
We might want to be more skeptical of this last passage, because
Cavendish is making a claim that makes reference to the nature and
activity of being of which she thinks we have no idea, but the claim
is still suggestive. Bracketing a miracle, nothing can happen in
nature other than it in fact happens, she is saying, but she also
supposes that bodies are still generally speaking free. They are free,
she indicates in the other two passages, when their activity and
behavior is not obstructed or constrained.
There are numerous passages throughout the corpus in which Cavendish
describes bodies as free, but there are just a few in which she
fleshes out what it is to which the freedom of a body amounts. In
these, her view is squarely compatibilist. There are also passages in
which address the issue of free will from a theological perspective --
where she considers whether or not an omniscient God would have
preordained all things from eternity or whether God would have left
the behavior of creatures more open (for example in Cavendish 1668a,
295-296, "Further Observations Upon Experimental Philosophy") – but
in these she is careful to suspend judgment. Her view appears to be
that bodies are free in the sense that for the most part the bodies
that surround them are cooperative and do not prevent them from moving
as they please, and that bodies are not free when other bodies
dominate them or otherwise force a redirection of their motions. Other
passages suggest a compatibilist reading of the free behavior of
creatures as well:
In a plenum of contiguous bodies, a body will sometimes redirect the
motions of a second body in way that that body resists, and in such
cases the behavior of the second body is not free. In other cases the
behavior of the second body is amenable to the redirection of motion,
and in yet other cases still, a body moves by way of motions that (of
course) are internal to it, and without any outside interference or
obstruction. In these cases the bodies are in effect cooperating with
each other, and the behavior of the second body is free – even though
it would not appear to have a contra-causal ability to do otherwise.
It has the motions that it has; it will not be the spontaneous source
of any new motion, nor will it acquire any new motion from other
bodies. It has the motions that it has, and it acts accordingly.
One potential objection to a compatibilist reading of Cavendish on
freedom is that there are numerous passages in her corpus in which she
says that bodies behave in a manner that is irregular. If bodies
exhibit irregularity and disorder, they would appear to be in
possession of a faculty of spontaneity, and Cavendish would appear to
hold that in at least some instances they exercise freedom of the
libertarian variety.
Here are some of the passages in which Cavendish speaks of
irregularities that occur in nature:
Cavendish certainly speaks of irregularities and disorder, but there
are also passages in which she steps back and says that what she has
in mind when she speaks of an irregularity is just an entity or event
that appears irregular to us against the background of our
expectations and conceptions. She says for example that
There are a couple of different ways to read the passages in which
Cavendish speaks of irregularities in nature. One is to count them up
and argue that because they outnumber the competing passages – and
they do – Cavendish holds that irregularities are real. Another is to
argue that she holds that there exist no irregularities at all. On
this approach, we would emphasize the passages in which she says that
we identify something as an irregularity when it runs counter
to our expectations. Any such passage would be treated as a kind of
meta-text that is instructing us how to read the passages in which
irregularities are introduced. In that case, Cavendish could speak of
irregularities in a million passages or even more, but if she also
tells us that all that she means by the term "irregularity" is
something that runs counter to our expectations, then there is no need
to count up the passages pro and con. They are all consistent with the
view that nature exhibits an exceptionless order. 
Cavendish holds that what it is for a being to be free is for it to
have the wherewithal to do as it pleases without obstacle or
interference. She holds that many beings are in fact unfree, because
they have goals and aims that the surrounding world of objects works
to thwart and prohibit. Cavendish's own goals of being a philosopher
and scientist and political leader are a case in point. In many of her
texts she proposes that an appropriate response to the obstacles and
constraints of the real-world plenum is to develop and employ our
faculty of imagination to model alternative worlds that are more
amenable to our values, interests, and needs. She suggests a number of
reasons why the construction of imaginary worlds might be of benefit:
(1) they allow us to experience a version of the life that we are
blocked from pursuing in the actual world; (2) they are enjoyable to
inhabit; (3) they allow us to hold onto the self with which we
identify when the actual world does not room for us to express it; (4)
they allow us to register for the record and for posterity why that
self was not a viable option.
Cavendish writes in "To all Noble and Worthy Ladies," a preface to
Blazing World, that if the real life blocks her from
embodying a life with which she identifies, she will construct an
analogue of that life in her imagination. She writes,
Cavendish supposes that imaginary worlds are enjoyable to inhabit.
Here she is reflecting a view that is uncontroversial, at least if we
take seriously the level of pleasure that individuals seem to secure
from getting lost in a book or play or other fictional realm. A person
will sometimes encounter a significant amount of frustration in their
day-to-day life, for example in their job or their personal
relationships, and that person might be quite impatient to return a
story in which they have been immersed. Cavendish herself suggests
that in a vividly imagined world can be a source of greater
satisfaction than the world that is in front of us:
Cavendish also has some of the characters in her fiction express a
similar view. In The Lady Contemplation, the main character
proposes that
We might concede that Cavendish is right that a fictional world can
often be a welcome alternative to our actual everyday affairs (also
Walters 2014, 167-168), but we might worry that she is overstating the
case if she supposes that we can be just as fulfilled imagining a life
with which we identify as we can by living it in fact. There is a
difference between inhabiting a world of fictional characters – for
example in an engrossing book or play – and inhabiting a world that
represents our own longing for a life that has been denied to us. To
inhabit the latter sort of world might just bring despair. Cavendish
does not appear to think so, however, but she might also be supposing
that there is pleasure in capturing for the record why a particular
world has been cut off from us, rather than just allowing ourselves to
dissolve into one of the lives that has been made available. She might
also be supposing that we can achieve an afterlife of fame if we write
about alternative worlds and what they have going for them, in a way
that helps them to come to be. If there is an alternative world that
is much more desirable than the one in which we find ourselves, a
written record of it might have both a personal and a social
impact.
Cavendish indeed speaks in a wide spectrum of texts of the ways in
which the seventeenth-century world that surrounds her is not as
accommodating to the pursuits and goals of women as it is to the
pursuits and goals of men. In some of these texts she says that the
climate for women has been so hostile that it is in fact true that
women do not have the same capacities as men: women are either denied
the relevant training and expertise, or they are not taken seriously
and their capacities are not allowed a platform. She writes,
In this last passage Cavendish is suggesting that one outlet for the
energies of an individual who is blocked from pursuing their more
outwardly directed aspirations is to write. In Blazing World,
Bell in Campo, and other texts, Cavendish indeed utilizes
that outlet to enact roles that are regularly denied to women in the
plenum of seventeenth-century England. The plenum does not allow women
to take on any number of roles, and it does not advance them the
opportunity to acquire the requisite skill and training and know-how.
But even if women did acquire that training, there is an
important sense in which they would still lack the capacities for the
roles in question. Consider the following scene that Cavendish
constructs in the Introduction to her Playes:
We might consider alternative cases that are just as easy to envision
-- a woman who is highly trained as doctor or attorney, but who does
not come across as sufficiently authoritative to a patient or jury; an
Asian-American who is a seriously talented actor but who cannot get a
role in a movie except as a caricature, if that is what audiences are
willing to see; a highly-trained African American carpenter who has
trouble getting hired to build a backyard fence or deck if that means
leaving him with a key to enter the house during the day; a figure
like Mersault in Camus's The Stranger, who would have easily
merited acquittal by self-defense if he had not come across as such an
outsider. In all of these cases, there are the motions that take place
on the side of the agent, and there are the motions that occur in the
outside environment. Cavendish is pointing out that our ability to
live a life with which we identify is a function of both kinds of
motion and that the second kind of motion is much more amenable to
some than to others. The judge and jury in all such cases do not
necessarily run through a conscious pattern of exclusionary reasoning
to single out the agent in question; there might just be a feeling of
discomfort, and often it is easiest to take the path of least
resistance.
There are number of explicit reasons that Cavendish suggests as to why
the construction of imaginary worlds would be of benefit. There are
additional reasons that she might have as well, but to posit these on
her behalf is a bit more speculate and requires further research. The
reasons include: (5) they allow us to model a picture of a world that
might come to be – that is, to model a route by which we might get
there, and to shine a light on otherwise invisible obstacles that
might be in our way; (6) they habituate other minds and ready them for
change that would otherwise feel sudden and abrupt; and (7) written
records of the most successful of our imaginings might survive and
secure us an afterlife of fame. Cavendish was fairly conservative in
her politics, but that does not mean that the she did not single out
particular phenomena for criticism, and it does not mean that she had
an in-principle aversion to social change. In passages that we have
considered, she certainly takes issue with practices that perpetuate
gender inequality, and she models science-fictional worlds that expose
how that inequality would be dramatically reduced if our own world
were very different. She also indicates in some passages that an
advantage of modeling alternative scenarios in imagination, as opposed
to straightforwardly imposing them on the world, is that certain kinds
of violence and unrest can be avoided. In the Epilogue to Blazing
World, she writes,
In this passage, Cavendish speaks to the way in which participation in
fictional stories does not lead to some of the difficult and
problematic consequences that would occur if those stories unfolded in
real life. We know that Cavendish witnessed the horrors of civil war
in her own time, and she might subscribe to the view that social
change needs to be gradual if it is to occur at all and not lead to
such consequences – in particular, to the kind of backlash that sets
progress back further still. Writing is no doubt a platform that can
make more malleable some of the resistance to social change. If a
tradition is predominant and entrenched, and a critical mass of
individuals benefit from its continued existence, the attempt to
overturn it in real life will be countered with at least as much
force. Imagination would appear to be more fluid, and over the long
haul a vividly entertained scenario might become so familiar as to be
innocuous. If we are the author of that scenario, we might even become
famous for playing a part to change the world. 
Cavendish's philosophical work was not taken very seriously in the
seventeenth century, but it is certainly relevant today. She is
presumably right to warn about the inconsistency in insisting that God
is utterly transcendent while being utterly confident in putting
forward claims about His nature. She has also anticipated a
contemporary emphasis on the study of the brain and body in addressing
mental health. In addition, she has made a contribution to the current
debate about whether or not our inability to understand how matter
thinks is relevant to the question of whether or not it does think
(McGinn 1999, 6–18; Chalmers 1996, 3–6; and Nagel 1974,
435–450). She is also important insofar as she anticipates the
arguments and views of early modern thinkers who are firmly in the
canon and who already secure a great deal of attention. Finally, she
offers extremely compelling insights into issues of agency and
authority. She argues that one of the reasons why an individual is
often unsuccessful in embodying a life with which they identify is
that, even if everything is in order on the side of their decisions
and talents and skills, there is often social and political corrosion
in the interface between their decisions and the world.