Mary Astell designed her metaphysics around an account of God and his
creation. She was a dualist, maintaining that the two kinds of
beings—minds and bodies—come in various degrees of
finitude and corruptibility: God is the infinite and incorruptible
mind; human minds and corporeal particles are finite, naturally
incorruptible beings; and human bodies and physical objects are
finite, naturally corruptible beings.
According to Astell, God is the “First Intelligence,” the
being whose nature is to be infinite in all perfections. Among his
perfections, Astell often lists wisdom, goodness, justice, holiness,
intelligence, presence, power, and self-existence. In keeping with
rationalist views of the period, Astell maintains that the correct
understanding of metaphysics turns on the correct understanding of
God.  For this reason, much of her work is dedicated to demonstrating
not only what God is, but also how a correct understanding of him can
be attained.
Her earliest such account is in A Serious Proposal to the
Ladies, where she demonstrates the existence, perfection, and
necessary creative power of God. She begins by giving an example of
the correct method for attaining knowledge, one similar to those
developed by Descartes in Discourse on the Method and Arnauld
and Nicole in Logic or the Art of Thinking (see section 2.3
of this entry). Her proof of God’s existence includes an account of
simple and composed ideas; clear and distinct perceptions, and obscure
and confused perceptions; adequate and inadequate ideas; proofs by
intuition and proofs by comparison of ideas; God’s perfections and our
ideas of God’s perfections; and the relation between ideas and terms
(Astell 2002, 176–182). In Christian Religion, she
frames other arguments for God’s existence in terms of what we can and
cannot doubt; God’s perfections and our ideas of God’s perfections;
causality; and the beauty of the created universe (Astell 1705,
7–10 [sections 7–10]).
At times, Astell privileges some of God’s perfections over others. In
Christian Religion, when stating her ontological argument for
God’s existence, she notes that “I find that the notion I have
of GOD, contains those and all other perfections.  Among which
Self-existence is most remarkable, as being the original and basis of
all the rest” (Astell 1705, 8 [section 7]). This claim is about
the order of ideas: her idea of God’s self-existence allows her
to understand his other perfections. A few lines later, she makes the
analogous claim about the order of reality: “And Self-existence
is such a Perfection as necessarily includes all other
perfections” (Astell 1705, 8 [section 8]).
Broad (2002a, 103) reveals evidence that Astell privileges God’s
wisdom and goodness over his omnipotence. There are two ways that
philosophers of the period thought about God’s attributes of wisdom,
power, and goodness. Some held “intellectualist” theories,
according to which God exercises his will in accordance with the true
nature of things; others held  “voluntarist”
theories, according to which God exercises his will to create both
things and the truth of things. In showing that Astell maintains an
intellectualist theology, Broad refers to a number of passages, one of
which is the following:
Throughout her texts, Astell is concerned with giving an account of
how created beings are individuated from each other. Ultimately, she
maintains that there are four kinds of created beings: minds, bodies,
mind–body unions, and the particles that compose bodies.
About finite minds considered on their own, Astell differs quite
radically from Descartes. In Discourse on the Method,
Descartes remarks that all minds have the same ability to reason (AT
2; CSM 111). According to Astell, on the other hand, God creates minds
with intrinsic differences. She gives a number of reasons for this
view. One has to do with the relationships that God wants minds to
have with each other: humans form community only if their minds have
different intellectual capacities. Another concerns the relationship
between created minds and God: minds were made to contemplate and
enjoy God, and God needs their adoration and love. But each mind is
limited and, thus, can only love God by adoring a limited amount of
his works. So God creates many minds, each with an ability to
understand a certain collection of truths, and in this way all of his
creation is attended to (Astell 2002, 144–146,
154–155).
Though Astell discusses minds as if they are sometimes isolated from
bodies, she maintains that human beings are mind–body
unions. She notes that we cannot comprehend the connection between the
mind and body: “We know and feel the Union between our Soul and
Body, but who amongst us sees so clearly, as to find out with
Certitude and Exactness, the secret ties which unite two such
different Substances, or how they are able to act upon each
other?” (Astell 2002, 148) The union between the mind and body
is mysterious; though we “know and feel” it, we
don’t have perfect knowledge of it or of how the mind and body
interact causally. In Christian Religion, Astell presents
this same position by way of a parallel between, on the one hand, our
lack of knowledge of the mind–body union, and, on the other
hand, our lack of knowledge about the relation between God and humans:
“Again, tho’ I do not understand the Philosophy of the
Union between the Divine and Human Nature; (neither do I comprehend
the Vital Union between my Soul and Body, nor how and in what manner
they are joyn’d, tho’ I am sure that so it is)
…” (Astell 1705, 51 [section 62]).
About how mind–body unions differ from each other with respect
to their abilities to reason, Astell sometimes implies that
experience, construed in a Lockean framework, may be the cause:
Her more common view, however, is a rationalist one, according to
which bodies impede minds from having perfect ideas: “For did we
consider what we Are, that Humane Nature consists in the Union of a
Rational Soul with a Mortal Body, that the Body very often Clogs the
Mind in its noblest Operations, especially when indulg’d”
(Astell 2002, 210). She also presents this view in the following
passage:
Here Astell, like other rationalists, valorizes the mind over the
body. The following passage illustrates another way Astell emphasizes
this point:
Whereas the body has merely an “instrumental” role with
respect to the mind, the mind has “dominion” over the
body, and a governing role over the passions. Humans should correctly
employ their minds and bodies so that they do not degenerate into
brutes, or conduct their lives as if they were angels.
Astell’s account of the mind–body union allows her to argue
against the popular view of the period about women, according to which
women do not demonstrate the same kinds of intellectual abilities as
do men because women are inherently more closely united to their
bodies than are men (Broad 2002a, 109). Equip with the rationalist
account of the mind–body union, Astell can show that the
uniformity of women’s inabilities is rooted not in their natures, but
arises because of social practices.  Thus the difference between the
abilities of women and men should be explained not metaphysically, but
epistemologically.  For this reason, I will leave a discussion of this
issue to section 2.3 of this entry.
In addition to developing an account of the mind–body union,
Astell also maintains that the mind and body are “really
distinct.” As she had a social reason for developing her account
of the mind–body union—namely, to argue against the popular
account of women’s nature—she also had a social reason for
constructing arguments about the real distinction between the mind and
body: by showing that the mind, unlike the body, is immortal, she can
illustrate to people, especially those who believe in the existence of
God, how God’s existence is important to them (Astell 1705, CR
246–247 [section 256]).
In presenting this account of the real distinction between the mind
and body in Christian Religion, Astell demonstrates first that
the mind is immaterial and then that it is immortal. She maintains
that the mind is immaterial in that it has no parts, and so is
indivisible. Given that it is indivisible, it is incorruptible, and so
immortal (Astell 1705, 247 [section 257]). Having ruled out the natural
annihilation of minds, Astell turns to the question of whether God
would supernaturally annihilate them. She argues that he would not, for
God does nothing in vain, thus he would not create something only to
annihilate it (Astell 1705, 248–249 [section 257–258]).
Within her discussion about the immortality of minds, Astell
contrasts minds with bodies, and different kinds of bodies with each
other. Unlike minds, human bodies and other physical objects have
parts, and so are corruptible. Such bodies differ from the particles
that make them up, which do not corrupt:
Here Astell embraces a view according to which physical objects and
human bodies are not ‘beings’ in the same sense that particles of
bodies are. In the next passage, she also reveals her view about the
individuality of physical objects: their ‘being’ is based on
appearances, not anything intrinsic within the objects themselves:
In the next passages, Astell presents a proof of the real
distinction between the mind and body. Her argument is similar to
Descartes’s insofar as she maintains that the nature of the mind
is thought and the nature of the body is extension (Astell 1705,
249–252 [sections 259–261]). (See Atherton, 1993, for a
discussion of Astell’s account of thought as the nature of the
mind.) In the sections that follow these, she uses her account of the
real distinction between the mind and body to formulate a critique of
Locke’s view about the possibility of thinking matter. Bryson
(1988), Squadrito (1987; 1991), Taylor (2001), O’Neill (1998a,
528–529), and Broad (2002a, 151–153) discuss these
arguments in detail.
In Letters Concerning the Love of God, Astell and John
Norris debate occasionalist and Cambridge Platonist accounts of the
relation between God and his creation. (See Wilson, 2004, for a
detailed discussion of this text.) The central issue at stake is the
claim made by Norris in Practical Discourses upon Several Divine
Subjects (1693) that we should love God because he alone is the
source of our sensation, and so the source of our pleasure, and so the
source of our good. Astell objects: our reason for loving God should
not depend on the occasionalist tenet about God’s direct causal
role in the universe. The issues in their discussion are the extent of
God’s causal role in creation, the causal powers of physical
objects, the workings of human sense perception, the mind–body
union, and the ways humans can and should love God and his
creation.
Astell and Norris agree on an account of human love, holding that
as bodies have motion so minds have love. A remnant of this parallel
is still with us in the twenty-first century, for we say metaphorically
that we are “moved” when we experience a shift in our
emotions toward a kind of tenderness. Broad notes that Astell and
Norris also agree that there are two basic kinds of love and that they are
differentiated in part with respect to the objects on which the love is
focused. On the one hand, creatures deserve “benevolence,”
which is marked by its disinterestedness and motivated by altruism and
charity; created things, after all, lack the causal power to ultimately
satisfy the desires of other created beings. On the other hand, God
merits “desire,” which is a love of something as our good.
Ultimately, he is the only one who has the causal power to ultimately
satisfy our desires. God does not need our benevolence, for he cannot
lack anything that we could give him (Broad 2002a, 119–120).
Astell and Norris’s shared views on love relate to their views on
causality. Occasionalists and Cambridge Platonists developed accounts
of causality in order to remedy a purported problem with Descartes’s
ontology. According to Descartes, God created two different kinds of
substances—mental and corporeal—that, on the one hand, are
“really distinct” from each other in virtue of their
essences, and, on the other hand, are sometimes united to form
mind–body unions. When so united, minds and bodies interact with
each other, for instance during sensation. The purported problem is
this: how can two substances that have completely different
essences—essences that render them “really distinct”
substances—interact with each other?
With an eye toward resolving this problem, Cambridge Platonists
retained an account of the interaction between the mind and body, and
presented a quite different interpretation of the number and nature of
substances that exist. Henry More, for example, maintained that, in
addition to the souls of God and living creatures, there is the
“Spirit of Nature,” which is the causal agent that allows
human minds and bodies to interact.
The occasionalist philosophers resolved the problem another way:
they agreed with Descartes that the mind and body are really distinct
because of their quite different natures, but they denied that there is
any interaction between them. Instead, they maintained that God
orchestrates a harmonious correlation between events of the mind and
events of the body, and he is the efficient (and so direct) cause of
human sensations.
Throughout Letters, Norris defends his occasionalism against
Astell’s critiques, which were based on Cambridge Platonist views
about the nature of the mind–body union. In the
appendix—written after Norris convinced Astell to allow him to
publish the letters as a volume—Astell presents two final
criticisms of Norris’s account. First, occasionalism makes much of
God’s creation vain: if God is the efficient cause of all of our sense
perceptions, then his creation of material objects is superfluous, for
they play no direct role in our sense perceptions (Astell, Norris
1695, 278–80). Second, occasionalism offends God’s majesty, for
according to it he repeatedly interferes in creation in order to move
bodies and create mental events. (Astell, Norris 1695, 278).  See
O’Neill (2007) for a history of these arguments in St. Thomas’
critiques of medieval Islamic occasionalists.
Astell’s own view about the causation of sensation involves an account
of a “sensible congruity” between features of external
bodies and powers of the soul that are employed in sensations. For
discussions of her account, as well as arguments about whether its
roots are in Descartes, Malebranche, or Norris, see Acworth (1979,
174, 178), Taylor (2001, 511–2), Broad (2002a, 109), and O’Neill
(2007).
Astell develops three themes common to rationalism: an emphasis of the
mind over the body; a theory of innate ideas as the origin of
knowledge; and a methodology that leads the novice from confusion to
clarity. In the section above on metaphysics, I addressed
Astell’s emphasis of the mind over body. In this section I will
reconstruct her accounts of mind, ideas, knowledge, belief, and
method.
Astell holds that the mind has two faculties: the understanding and
the will. The understanding is the capacity to receive and compare
ideas, and the will is the power of preferring and directing thoughts
and motions (Astell 2002, 205). Each faculty has a proper object: the
proper object of the understanding is truth, which has “being
from Eternity in the Divine Ideas” (Astell 2002, 137); the
proper object of the will is the good, which is God’s will
(Astell 2002, 206). When the understanding is healthy, it has
knowledge (Astell 2002, 130); when the will is healthy, it is
regular—that is, it is guided by the understanding (Astell
2002,205, 209). The task of the understanding is to govern the will
(Astell 2002, 130). 
Astell holds a nativism according to which there are not merely innate
ideas, but also innate inclinations. She explains that the innate
ideas are “rudiments of knowledge” (Astell 2002, 128) that
are “inseparable” from the understanding and are the
sources of our other ideas (Astell 2002, 205). In addition, she states
that we are born with inclinations that are “inseparable”
from the will (Astell 2002, 205).  She explains that our innate ideas
make us rational creatures.  Irrational creatures, on the other hand,
act according to the will of God and by mechanism. But equipped with
reason, humans are voluntary agents: we choose our actions according
to principles in the understanding, and we determine our wills (Astell
2002, 128). (For a further discussion of these passages, see Atherton
1993, 29–35, and Sowaal 2007, 228–31.)
Astell provides two accounts of ideas, one
general and one strict. In doing so, she presents her views on
knowledge and clear and distinct perceptions. Here is the general
account of idea:
In the general sense ideas—the immediate objects of the
mind—are required for knowledge. Here is the strict account of
idea:
Ideas in the strict sense represent what is distinct from the idea.
As such, ideas must be clear in order for them to afford knowledge. In
the following passage, Astell employs Descartes’s account of clear and
distinct perceptions from Principles of Philosophy, Part I,
section 45 (AT VIIIA 21–2; CSM I 207):
Astell differs from Descartes, however, in maintaining that we have
clear but not distinct (or perfect) ideas of God and souls. She holds
that though we can know some of the attributes of these substances, we
cannot know their true natures (Astell 2002, 173).
For Astell, though ideas can be confused, they are not the sources of
error. Rather, Astell locates falsity and error in judgments, and
often in language (Astell 2002, 169, 171). She holds that judgment
involves the comparison of two ideas and that sometimes we lack an
“intermediate idea” (a “middle term”) in order
to make a judgment (Astell 2002, 146–7, 172–3).
On this view, we can avoid error in judgment when we are careful in
separating and uniting ideas; we can avoid equivocation in language
when we only use words that have distinct ideas attached to them. To
do this kind of work, we need to first examine ideas about morality
and religion, separating what we find through metaphysical reflection
from what we have adopted by custom. Ultimately all reasonings and
deductions should begin from ideas that are clear and are “as
distinct as the nature of the subject will permit” (Astell 2002,
169–72).
Astell does not hold a “traditional” account of knowledge
as true, justified belief. Rather, on her view knowledge and belief
are ideas that are distinguished by origin, clarity, distinctness, and
the means by which they are affirmed. What follows is a reconstruction
of her discussion of these issues in Serious Proposal
(Astell 2002, 146–153).
Given the finitude of the human mind, it is limited with respect to
its reach, and it is diverse in its modes of thinking. Astell states the
following about the reach of the mind:
About the modes of thinking, she writes:
In addition to faith, science, and opinion, Astell also discusses
moral certainty and sensation. She notes that sensation is not so much
a mode of knowledge as it is a kind of being conscious (Astell 2002,
152).
Astell’s account of the modes of thinking is related to her view
about how we come to hold truths, of which there are two ways. The
first is marked by passivity: some truths are delivered to us. They
can be delivered to us by our own understandings, that is, by
intuition; or they can be delivered to us by authority. When truths
are delivered by intuition, we have ideas that are clear and distinct,
self-evident, indubitable, compel the will, and serve as first
principles. When they are delivered by authority they are dubitable,
confused, and lack self-evidence. The second way we come to hold
truths is marked by activity: such truths are drawn by demonstration
from other truths.
Science is our mode of thinking when we intuit a truth and when we
hold that truth because we have derived it (by reasoning and
deduction) from an intuition. In the latter case, we hold
“objects of science.” In both cases, we have
“knowledge.”
Faith is our mode of thinking when we hold a truth given to us by
authority and when we derive additional truths from such truths. In
both cases we hold “objects of faith” and we have
“belief.”
“Moral certainty” is our mode of thinking when we draw
ideas by demonstration from premises that are a mix of knowledge and
belief; “opinion” is our mode of thinking when we hold
ideas drawn either by bad argument or by an argument in which confused
ideas serve as premises.
Ideas attained through intuition are the highest form of knowledge.
These ideas are clear and distinct, self-evident, and indubitable;
further, these ideas compel the will. The “objects of
science” that are derived by demonstration from intuitions have
a very high epistemic status and command a firm assent. Though Astell
maintains that all beliefs are dubitable, as they lack self-evidence
as well as clarity and distinctness, she holds that objects of faith
can share the elevated epistemic status maintained by intuitions and
objects of science:
For Astell, the will, which is involved whenever we hold a truth, is
moved in different ways depending on the situation and the kind of
truth involved. When we hold a self-evident truth, our wills are
compelled by the clarity and distinctness of the idea: we
“see” the truth so clearly and distinctly that we cannot
doubt it; that is, we cannot but assent to it. On the other hand, when
a truth is delivered to us from an authority, and we do not have a
clear and distinct perception of the truth, then our wills are not
compelled by the idea. In such cases, if we are to affirm the idea, we
must move our wills ourselves. What is striking about Astell’s view is
that she maintains that we are as certain when we move our wills to
affirm objects of faith as when our wills are compelled to affirm
intuitions and objects of science.
However, this is not to say that we should intentionally move our
wills to affirm truths about which we can have clear and
distinct ideas when we do not currently have such clear and distinct
ideas. That is, those truths that are candidates for knowledge
(intuitions or objects of science) should known and not merely
believed. This is especially true with respect to what she calls
“the ideas of the philosophers”:
This connects to Astell’s view on wisdom: “to Know what is to be
Known, and to Believe what is to be Believ’d is the property of
a Wise person” (Astell 2002, 152). It also provides one of the
theoretical bases for Astell’s views on education.
One thread running throughout rationalism is the coupling of an
analysis of what prevents the novice from having knowledge with the
development of a method to lead the novice from confusion to knowledge
(see Nelson 2005). For example, Plato explains how the body confuses
the soul, and he illustrates how the dialectic can lead his
interlocutor to grasp the forms. Descartes agrees with Plato about the
body’s confusion of the soul, adding that scholastic teachings lead to
further confusion, especially in that they reinforce childhood
prejudice, which is rooted in an overemphasis on the senses. His
famous method of doubt is one instantiation of his general account of
method, encapsulated in the four rules he presents in Part II
of Discourse on the Method (AT VI 18–9; CSM I
20). In Discourse on the Method and Meditations on First
Philosophy, the meditator utilizes the method of doubt so she can
move from confusion and obscurity to clarity and distinctness.
Astell, too, provides an explanation of the novice’s initial confusion
and offers a method that can be employed to resolve the
condition. Astell’s position on these issues is especially interesting
in that she examines the female novice, theorizing an explanation of
what is specific about her initial confusion and constructing a method
tailored specifically for her.
As Astell sees it, the problem that faces the female novice is that
she has a diseased mind as the result of social conditioning. This
diseased mind manifests in part as a particular skeptical predicament:
she has a radical doubt about her nature, for she believes God made
her with a degraded reason. That is, she adopts the prejudice that she
is incapable of improvement because she is naturally proud and vain
(Astell 2002, 58, 62). Gripped with this skeptical predicament, she
has no desire to improve her mind, and she lacks an ability to
understand her perfections, which would otherwise guide her in living
a virtuous life (Astell 2002, 80–1, 200, 202, 228).
Another way Astell frames the problem facing women is in terms of an
account of the passions. She maintains that women, like men, are born
with both generosity and a striving for perfection.  Though Astell
does not say what she means by the term ‘generosity’, I
will assume she is using the term in the Cartesian sense. Descartes
writes:
Roughly, a person has generosity when she realizes that she is merely
her will and she has the resolution to use it well. For Descartes,
generosity is both a passion and a virtue. It is the keystone passion
in that when one has it, one does not have vices. This is so because
vices rest on a misunderstanding of what one is and what one’s goods
are.
Astell explains that because women are not provided with rich
metaphysical educations they do not develop the knowledge of what they
truly are (their wills), nor do they develop the resolution to use
their wills well. Instead, they focus on creating physical perfection
and also on the praises that accompany it. Thus they develop vanity
and pride, the “feminine vices” (Astell 2002,
62–64).  Ultimately, women’s salvation is at stake:
Astell’s overall project with respect to education is designed to
address this problem of salvation. If a woman does not learn to
separate her mind from her body while on earth—that is, if she
does not learn to perfect her rational capacities by forming clear and
distinct perceptions, thereby polishing her innate ideas and ordering
them correctly—she will not be able to separate her mind from
her body when she dies, and so her soul will not reach heaven. In this
way Astell’s rationalist education remedies a very practical problem
of the individuation of the body and soul at death. This elucidates
the kind of education Astell promotes: it is not preparation for a
career as a doctor, lawyer, curate, or scientist, nor is it the
precursor to what we today call a “liberal education”;
instead it is an education that teaches women how to cultivate
intellectual enjoyment and perfection, and ultimately generosity and
virtue.
Astell recognizes that women need to employ a method to aid them in
this metaphysical education. Women, especially those of the gentry,
have been raised to be idle and to concern themselves with frivolous
things. When they seek to better themselves, they do not know how and
are quickly discouraged: “they want [lack] the method of doing
it; they know not how to look into their Souls, or if they do, they
find so many disorders to be rectified, so many wants to be supplied,
that frightened with the difficulty of the world they lay aside the
thoughts of undertaking it” (Astell 2002, 124). Astell suggests
to women six rules that will aid them in their metaphysical
reflections (Astell 2002, 176–9).
Like many of Astell’s views and distinctions, these rules are ripe for
comparison with Descartes’s, as well as with those presented by
Arnauld and Nicole. Indeed, these rules are part of Astell’s version
of Arnauld and Nicole’s Port-Royal Logic, which she designs
specifically for women so that they can escape their everyday
skepticism; only once they resolve their skeptical predicaments can
they begin to embark on a project of reflection involving
philosophical skepticism, as Descartes presents it in Discourse on
the Method and Meditations on First Philosophy (see
Sowaal 2007).
The method encapsulated in these six rules is to be employed when a
meditator addresses a particular subject of inquiry. But even prior to
such reflections, Astell recognizes that the female meditator must
first disengage from the skeptical predicament. Women should learn to
maintain beliefs because they are self-evident, not because they once
held them. To do so, Astell suggests a number of strategies. One is
reflecting on how the former prejudices led to mischief, promoted
error, and hindered the free range of thought. Further, one should
reflect on how the prejudices provided a means for skepticism to take
root. For example, when one holds a belief, one often draws further
conclusions from it. But when one finds that the conclusion is false,
one often questions the whole group of claims, concluding that nothing
can be known (Astell 2002, 133–4). Here Astell’s treatment is
largely Cartesian.
However, Astell departs from a Cartesian project when she presents
another strategy the female meditator can use to release herself from
the skeptical predicament, one that involves reflection on
teleological arguments about the design of God’s creation (Astell
2002, 153–4, 168). These arguments are designed to help the novice
realize that God would not have created her so that she is naturally
defective, (naturally proud, vain, and unimprovable). Such reflection
will lead the novice to search for the perfections God has bestowed
upon her and the role they play in her life, as well as in her
community and creation as a whole. Through these considerations, she
will be drawn to the conclusion that she is a rational being who can
and ought to improve her rationality in order to fulfill God’s plan
for creation.
Ultimately the female novice will benefit from metaphysical reflection
on what truly exists—God, mind, and body—for such
reflection will result in her correctly understanding what she is and
how she stands in relation to God. A central aspect of this will be
her new comprehension of the understanding, the will, and the origin
of error. She will come to grasp that the limitation of the
understanding is not a defect, it is natural and necessary; thus,
while ignorance cannot be avoided, error can. She will realize that
the understanding is passive and that judgment—and therefore
error—belongs to the will. She will learn to suspend her
judgment until she has clarity and to direct her will to a good end
(Astell 2002, 159). With this new understanding of her will and her
new resolution to develop better habits in employing her will, her
generosity (which formerly degraded into pride, vanity) will be
restored, as will her virtue.