In addition to a short biographical entry in the Oxford Dictionary
of National Biography (Perkins 2004), the main source of
information about Shepherd’s life is a family memoire written by
her daughter and published for private use (Brandreath 1886). Shepherd
was born in Barnbougle Castle on the Primrose family estate
overlooking the Firth of Forth. She lived mainly there until her
marriage in 1808. While her brothers were sent to university, she and
her sisters were educated at home by private tutor. Her daughter
reports that in addition to teaching them Latin, geography,
mathematics, and history, he discussed many works on the foundation of
the truth of things. His pupils were encouraged to pursue whatever
subjects interested them. Mary is said to have written volumes of
metaphysical essays many of them critical of Hume and the Unitarian
doctrines of Joseph Priestly (Brandreath 1886: 28–9). In a
letter to Charles Babbage, she recalls having had an interest in the
reasoning used in proofs of mathematical theorems and exposing errors
of reasoning in a wide range of authors (quoted in McRobert 2000: vi).
Her published essays were written sometime later.
Shepherd’s dismay at the influence of Hume’s treatment of
causality can be traced at least to a controversy in Edinburgh which
began in 1802 when she was living nearby. The clergymen of the city
opposed the appointment of an eminent mathematician to a chair at the
University because of a passing favorable remark on Hume’s
account of causality. They thought it encouraged atheism whereas the
academic community insisted on the freedom of inquiry. With Hume back
in public view, Thomas Brown published a small tract critical of some
aspects of his doctrine but denying its supposed atheistic implication
(Brown 1805). It was well received and Brown went on to write a full
length book urging that causality implies nothing but the temporal
succession and regular conjunction of sorts of events; it was first
printed in 1818 and reprinted thereafter (Brown 1822). Shepherd
mentions the Edinburgh incident and the still growing influence of
Brown’s theory in the book she published in 1824. In her view,
it is evidence of the public’s susceptibility to the pernicious
influence of Hume on notions of causality. Both her books illustrate
its ill effects by discussing the conclusions and theories of Thomas
Lawrence, a controversial Lecturer in Physiology (Paoletti 2011: 49).
There is some evidence that Shepherd anonymously published a book
critical of Brown in 1819, the year after his treatise on causality
appeared. This is suggested by a note attached to a volume in the
Cambridge University Library which is included in the facsimile
reproduction of Shepherd’s philosophical works edited by
Jennifer McRobert. This book has two parts: one compares the causal
theories of Brown and Hume with observations “calculated to shew
the inconsistency of these theories”; its treatment of causality
is said to be inspired by recent developments in chemical science. The
other, titled “New Theory of the Earth”, proposes to
explain the origin of prominent features of the earth on the basis of
motions due to gravitational force, various conflagrations and
collisions. There may be a connection between the view of causality
urged in this volume and the books published under her name. But the
factual objections to Hume are tame in comparison with the logical
critique and ambitious metaphysical and epistemic system in the later
volumes. Although Shepherd’s authorship of the earlier book is
probable, it is not entirely certain. 
In the early 1820s, Shepherd accompanied her husband to Cambridge
while he studied for a master’s degree, awarded in 1823.
Although there seems to be no record of the people she conversed with
there, it might well be that William Whewell, who held a university
fellowship at this time, was among them. She also may have meet
Charles Babbage there; he was a friend of the couple later on and both
of them corresponded with him. If she met Whewell at this time, it
would be notable for several reasons. As the memoire records, it was
he who made one of Shepherd’s works a university text book. He
was deeply interested in devising a workable and productive method of
empirical inquiry, but it was not until 1860 that his theory of
scientific induction was accomplished (Snyder 2012). 
Even at the time Shepherd and her husband resided in Cambridge,
Whewell was the leader of a group of four friends who were undertaking
to reform the practice of the sciences. Taking Francis Bacon’s
The Great Instauration (1620) as starting point, they vowed
to work as philosophers and scientists to regularize the practice of
science, expand it, and orient it to the improvement of human lives.
Together with others, they had considerable success in this endeavor
over the next four decades. Of the four friends, three proposed
methods of induction for natural science, each of them opposed to that
of the others. Whewell’s methodology, which is the most fully
developed, is like Shepherd’s in being neither rationalist nor
empiricist, but combining ideas drawn from the mind itself with
empirical input. Whether or not Shepherd meet any one in this circle
prior to publishing her first book, she shared with them a deep
conviction that the current state of philosophy was inadequate to
support scientific inquiry. She undertook to put causal reasoning in
all areas of human endeavor including empirical research on firm
metaphysical and epistemic foundations (also McRobert 2002 under
 Other Internet Resources).
 
Her daughter writes that Whewell was a frequent guest of the couple
whose main residence was in London. He is listed as one of six friends
who were particularly attuned to Shepherd’s passion for abstract
metaphysical thinking. She also reports that he and Charles Lyle spoke
of her mother as “an unanswerable logician” (Brandreath
1886: 29). Sometime after Mary Shepherd’s death, Whewell is said
to have asked whether she had written essays that were unpublished
and, if so, advised they be brought to light. 
Shepherd’s two longer essays develop a doctrine of cause and
effect and the beliefs it underwrites. The shorter essays collected in
Shepherd’s second volume range over related specific topics
including: Berkeley’s philosophy, the co-incidence of extension
and color, the credibility of miracles, nature of final cause, and the
reason of single erect vision. In addition to works mentioned above,
there are three published works of Shepherd: critical remarks on the
metaphysics of John Fearn, a retired naval officer (Shepherd 1832); a
very effective reply to Fearn’s counter-critique of her
metaphysics; and an article on the single and erect object of vision
(Shepherd 1827b). In the present article, we will focus on her two
main philosophical works but consider some directly relevant material
from the shorter essays. 
Shepherd’s doctrines regarding causality are advertised as
contrary to those of David Hume. They are often presented in
connection with a theory of knowledge opposed to the radical
empiricism and nominalism of her primary
foil.[1] Where
Hume holds that common causal beliefs are due to acquired habits of
imagination rather than operations of reason, she urges they are
caused by reason. Where Hume holds that abstract ideas are impossible,
Shepherd insists that science and philosophical analysis are
impossible without them. Like Hume, she often uses
“reason” to refer to a cognitive faculty rather than a
sort of justification of belief (Garrett 1997; Owen 1999). But for
her, the faculty is the source of abstract ideas of cause, effect, and
continued existence, among others. Human reason is naturally disposed
to deploy these ideas when the youngest of children first begin to
perceive by sense (EPEU: 314). Some readers extract the metaphysics
from the attendant nativist theory of knowledge. But the texts offer
no non-question begging argument for her central metaphysical
doctrine. They assume the theory of causality they purport to
prove. This appears to be damaging unless her epistemology is taken
into account. As she sees it, the common convictions regarding cause
and effect are products of a natural predisposition of human reason;
this explains why we believe them.  Their origin does not justify
assent to them, but Shepherd undertakes to show that there is
justification for it. 
The primary tenet of her metaphysics is the causal principle: it is
necessary that a thing that begins to exist has a cause (hereafter
“CP”). The argument for this contentious claim begins with
a clarification meant to avoid the merely semantic connection of
“cause” and “effect”. To grasp the conditions
in which something begins to exist, one needs to abstract from
familiar things except with regard to the capacity for existence. With
this understood, it is a contradiction to suppose that something
begins to exist if nothing else exists because 
this beginning to exist cannot appear but as a capacity
some nature hath to alter the presupposed nonentity, and to act
for itself, whilst itself is not in being. (ERCE: 36) 
As I understand it: a beginning to exist is an act, or actualization,
of a capacity; an act is a property of some object; an object cannot
have a property if it does not exist; so nothing can begin to exist
without something else that acts. Although this is valid, the first
premise assumes what the argument is meant to prove by characterizing
a beginning of existence as an act of an object other than
 it.[2]
All derivations of the contradiction found in the texts have premises
formulated in the terminology of the theory of cause and effect
Shepherd
 urges.[3]
 Most of them refer to things that begin to exist as
“qualities” of objects (see the series of definitions,
ERCE: 63–4). According to the list of anti-Humean definitions:
“Necessary connexion of cause and effect is the obligation
qualities have to inhere in their objects” (ERCE: 63). A cause
is defined as 
such an action of an object, as shall enable it, in conjunction with
another, to form a new nature, capable of exhibiting qualities varying
from those of either object in separation from the other. This is
really to be a producer of new being. (ERCE: 63) 
That is, causation is a complex metaphysical configuration comprising:
(1) the antecedent existence of two or more objects which taken
together ground the capacity for the existence of some quality
Q when it does not yet exist and (2) a change in which the
objects unite to form a different object which determines the
existence of Q because Q necessarily belongs to it.
This model of causality is assumed in some way in every demonstration
that it is necessary that a thing that begins to exist have a cause.
Most of them presume that the idea of a thing not yet in existence is
the idea of the capacity for its existence. This is not the bare
logical possibility of something X, but the actual existence of
two or more things with the potential to actualize X. Under
this conception, it is a contradiction to suppose a thing that begins
to exist has no cause, but the key conception is taken for granted.
There is no effort to prove the highly contentions notion that a thing
that beings to exist must be preceded by the existence of the capacity
for its existence.  So the conclusion that a cause is necessary would
seem to be the natural product of nothing other than the human mind, a
tautology framed from ideas all of which originate in the faculty of
 reason.[4]
 It is commonly believed to be a necessarily true of the real world but
this remains to be justified.
According to Shepherd’s definition, causality is a compositional
determination relation. The pre-existing entities which combine to
form a cause are variously called “objects”,
“natures”, “masses of qualities”, and
“unknown circumstances in nature”, among other things. By
“objects”, Shepherd means things in natural kinds, e.g., a
fire, a log, and bread. In general, an object is a “mass of
qualities” which is or may be perceived by sense (ERCE: 64). The
object is “nothing distinct from its qualities” (ERCE:
161–2). “[I]n this union, Cause and Effect, are
synchronous, and they are but different words for the same
Essence” (ERCE:
 57).[5]
 Regarded in this way, a quality belongs to an object as a part
belongs to a whole, not that in which a predicate belongs to a
subject. But although cause and effect are one essence, there is some
difference between them: one is really productive of the
other. The cause determines the qualities included in the mass. In
effect, the ideas of cause and effect are two ways of representing the
same thing which are not entirely without basis in the thing. With
regard to the term “nature, it is sometimes used to stand for
the unknown causes of the sensory appearances which come to exist when
objects are perceived by sense. 
The productive aspect of an object is called a “power”,
defined as a productive principle, or “property which
lies in the secret nature of objects” and determines the
qualities which will be perceived if the object unites with various
other objects and the natures that constitute a perceiver (ERCE: 64).
Fantl (2016: 97) maintains that powers are basic in Shepherd’s
metaphysics suggesting that objects are fundamentally constituted by
activities, or forces of the sorts envisaged by Leibniz or Priestly.
Once an efficacious combination is formed it may unite with other
objects to form compounds productive of newly existing qualities. The
causes of most familiar phenomena are formed from a large number of
pre-existing objects and other circumstances (e.g., time) all of which
are required to produce the observed effect. But the objects from
which a cause is formed need not have qualities similar to those of
the newly constituted cause. None of the qualities going into the
compound may be retained and it may join with others to form many
different masses of qualities. Still compound natures such as plants,
animals, and the sentient principle (or mind) are not destroyed by
entering into a succession of mixtures. 
Shepherd does not contend that every change has a cause. The
metaphysical structure of a change and that of a cause are entirely
different. A change takes place over time and the relation between its
earlier and later stages is contingent. Shepherd argues that precisely
because Hume supposes that a cause and its effect exist in succession,
he precludes their having a necessary or efficacious connection
(Bolton 2010: 244). For
Shepherd, a change results in a cause if and only if it terminates in
a composite efficacious nature that did not exist when the change
began. So it might seem that her view cannot account for what Hume
purports to explain—the transition involved in a change. 
But it can offer a non-causal explanation of change: a change is the
consequence of the qualities of several different objects persisting
over some period of time. Qualities are simultaneous with their causes
but they need not be instantaneous or short-lived. Motion is a
quality. Several moving objects which continue to exist for some time
may arrive at a mutual configuration that produces qualities which did
not previously exist, e.g., several moving globs of paint and a canvas
collide. The collision is explained by the paths of the moving objects
prior to their union in an artistic composition. Shepherd contrasts
the necessary connection of cause and effect with a sort of necessary
connection between temporal antecedents and consequents (EASP: 131).
The latter is the invariable sequence of successive effects produced
by the same object meeting with several different objects in a regular
order, e.g., when eating bread, one typically has successive
sensations of yielding texture, taste, and fullness in the stomach. It
is necessary that if a piece of bread mixes with the sensory organs in
the usual order--hands, mouth and tongue, stomach—this series of
sensations occurs (EASP: 125–30).
A principle of induction is deduced from CP: it is necessary that
similar causes have similar effects (hereafter CPI). Suppose two
individually different causes are alike. If their effects were
different, they would not have a cause; this is impossible according
to CP. Often the same point is put this way: a difference must have a
cause. If the qualities of an object are different at one time than
another, the difference must have a cause; for the same reason, if
individually different objects differ in respect of the presence or
absence of any quality, the difference must have a cause. 
CP and CPI are used to argue that it is not possible that the course
of nature should change as Hume supposes
 [6]
 The argument assumes that natural kinds of objects are defined and
individuated by all the qualities that belong to the same mass, or
same cause. Shepherd rebuts Hume’s contrary claim by refuting
his examples. She allows the possibility that stuff that tastes like
salt and has sensible qualities otherwise like those of snow might
fall from the clouds, but CPI requires that the difference between
them has a cause. Each is an efficacious compound different in kind
from the other, and only one is properly called “snow”
(ERCE: 69). Again, Hume supposes nature might alter the “secret
causes” while keeping the sensible qualities the same, but this
is impossible according to CPI. In general, no matter how unexpected
the qualities collected in an object may be in the future, it cannot
alter the way qualities are determined to exist. 
On Shepherd’s theory, we perceive particular things by sense
because they affect the sensory organs and thereby produce sensations
that simultaneously begin to appear in consciousness. This prompts the
mind to implement “latent reasoning”: this sensation began
to exist; it must have a cause; so there is something that is its
cause. Reason need not rehearse this argument, but it attaches to the
sensation an idea that (purportedly) represents a particular thing
that causes the sensation. It is believed to exist, but only its
effect appears in consciousness. To be clear, the state in which a
person perceives an object by sense comprises several things: (1) an
object, or mass of qualities which can be perceived by sense, (2) the
mixture of the object with the mind and sensory organs of a perceiver,
(3) a sensation caused by this mixture which simultaneously begins to
appear in awareness, (4) an idea produced by reason which
(purportedly) represents the cause of the sensation and belief that
the cause exists. That said, a mass of sensible qualities is known
only as the cause of sensations which appear in consciousness. We are
acquainted with nothing but the sensations and have only an idea that
refers to something as its cause. So when sensible qualities are not
perceived and considered in abstraction from their effects on our
senses, they are “unknown powers or qualities” (ERCE:
46–7); “the positive nature and essence of unperceived
beings cannot be known” (EASP: 243). In sum, an operation of
reason prompted by a sensation that begins to exist in consciousness
generates belief that the sensation is caused by something else. 
In some circumstances, a person may form a reasonable belief that the
exciting cause of the appearance of a certain sensation at one time is
a certain object perceived by sense at a proximate time. The
“exciting” cause is the component of the entire cause
which is present just at the moment the effect occurs and absent
whenever it does not occur; other requisites of the cause are
relatively permanent conditions which may be known or unknown. A
belief that such-and-such an object is the exciting cause of
such-and-such effect arises from perception of similarities and
differences among successive sensations. This may prompt another
implicit rudimentary argument: this sensation has a cause; the cause
is some entity (perhaps consisting of several objects) that was not
present before the sensation appeared and was present at the moment it
appeared; there is one and only one thing of which this is true; so it
is the exciting cause of the sensation. Her example is finding that a
view is present in consciousness when you open your eyes and absent
when you close them. Because the position of the eyelids is the one
and only candidate to be the exciting cause, you are likely to believe
it is the active cause. Shepherd is well aware that such a belief
might be mistaken. Still, she maintains that we form many beliefs in
this simple way, and a great many of them turn out to be true. More
exacting purposes demand beliefs that are formed with more care (see
 5.1), but the basic reasoning
is the same. 
CPI licenses a different rudimentary argument. If a person believes
that one particular thing caused another, e.g., the mixture of samples
of blue and yellow pigment caused the quality green to begin to
exist; the inductive principle underwrites the inference that any
compound similar to the first must have a similar effect. To be sure,
it is often very difficult to collect evidence that two particular
things have similar natures, because natures do not appear in
awareness and it is impossible to examine all the effects of two
individuals in an effort to learn whether the unknown natures are the
same. Yet Shepherd explains that, under favorable conditions, we may
come to believe they are the same with a high degree of probability
(see
 § 5.1).
 The inductive reasoning just described is contrasted with
Hume’s explanation of causal inference in terms of the habitual
association of ideas and their liveliness. It is also compared with
views like that of Reid, followed by Brown, on which if we once
perceive that a thing of one kind follows a thing of another kind, we
immediately from the conclusive belief that all things of the first
kind are followed by those of the second. As Shepherd puts it, we give
undoubting assent to this law on the evidence of nothing but the law
itself; yet it has reference to actual things which everyone agrees
can only be known from experience. This is to believe without a reason
to believe, according to Shepherd (ERCE: 136–45; EASP: 144–5). To
her mind, a belief is irrational if not held for a reason. 
The inductive principle applies to mathematics as well as physics.
Shepherd takes arithmetical operations to be procedures for forming
numbers out of given numbers; each different number determines
somewhat different properties. Geometrical constructions are
understood in the same way. A demonstration is made on a diagram
constructed from lines drawn at various distances from each other. The
properties of the particular construction are known by inspection. The
move from a particular object to all things with similar constitutions
is licensed by CPI; Shepherd calls this “reasoning on an
experiment”. It is true that we are typically more certain of
general theorems of mathematics than laws of physics. Shepherd
explains that this is because we can often be more certain that two
figures or numerical values have been formed in the same way because
we construct them from known elements by known rules and procedures.
There are many questions about the details of her theory of
mathematical induction which have not, so far, been answered. To
mention just one, it is not clear whether the method applies just to
arithmetic and geometry or also the method of fluxions, and so
 on.[7]
It is notable that mathematical truths in fields to which CPI applies
are not conditional propositions without existential import. The
demonstration of such a truth must be based on a particular and
observable instance. Although there are standard procedures for
constructing different geometrical and arithmetical objects, the rules
do not suffice to deduce the properties of the result. They can be
known only from an actual implementation of the rules. The relational
orderings of positions in space, time, and among the numbers
inevitably affect the base cases of inductive conclusions. So Shepherd
maintains that the general truths of natural science which require
empirical evidence are necessary and the necessary truths of
arithmetic and geometry are believed on the basis of
experience. In this respect, Shepherd’s theory is like
that of Kant, but they differ over the reality of the entities known.
The second of Shepherd’s books purports to show that causal
reasoning is the source of common beliefs about the existence of the
external world, the mind, and the self and to justify them. The threat
of circular argument is acknowledged at the outset (EASP: xii). The
earlier volume maintains that human beings naturally believe CP and
CPI and apply them to things perceived to begin to exist. The later
EASP uses these principles to generate and justify belief in the
existence of objects external to the mind. The circle would be to use
the causal principles to prove the existence of external objects and
to take their existence to justify the assumption that CP has
instances in the real world. Shepherd’s response to the threat
is closely related to the justification for belief in the external
world her system affords.  In this section and the next, the various
beliefs produced by reasoning based on CP or CPI are discussed. We
postpone discussion of the circle and the issue of justification to
 section 5
 because the origin of all beliefs discussed in EASP is said to be
relevant to it. 
 Shepherd recognizes two basic cognitive faculties: sense, or the
ability to have sensations of all varieties, and understanding, or the
ability to reason from the occurrence of sensations. Whenever the mind
produces an idea, there is a sensation of it. Consciousness is the
genus of sensations; sensations are just entities of the sort that
appear in consciousness (EASP: 135). Its species include sensations of
sensible qualities, sensations of ideas of memory, ideas of
imagination, ideas of reason, and so on. Properly speaking, sensations
of ideas are of nothing but an idea and the idea refers to, or
represents, something considered to be different from the
sensation. They are not sensations of the thing ideas purport to
represent.  Sensations of the first sort, i.e. sensations of sensible
qualities, are sensations caused by qualities such as motion and color
with aid of the organs of sense.  We follow Shepherd in this use of
‘sensation’.  We also follow her in using
‘perception’ to mean the notice taken of sensations.  But
‘sense perception’ refers to cognition of external objects
by means of the senses.  
In general, the common beliefs to be explained arise from perception
of relations among the vast number of sensations that accumulate in
the course of experience. The perception of recurring patterns of
sensations stimulates implicit reasoning expressed by ideas that
represent their causes as having continued, external, and independent
existence. Belief that objects perceived by sense continue to exist
when not perceived is the topic of this sub-section.
According to Shepherd, we have, at every moment, the unacquired, or native, idea
of continued existence. The sensation (idea) of it attends all
sensations of the sort introduced by action of the organs of sense
(EASP: 13); I call these “sensory sensations”. When the
idea of continued existence is formed, it represents the cause of the
perceived constancy with which recurring patterns of sensory
sensations appear and disappear. When you look at a house while
walking by, a series of visual sensations appears and when you retrace
your steps a similar series appears in reverse order. More generally,
sensations of the motions of your limbs and sensory organs constantly
appear in conjunction with trains of sensory sensations which vary
with the location of your eyes, hands, and so on. Each different
sensation has a different cause. But repeated perception of the
constant conjunction of sensations of motions of the sensory organs
and sensory sensations prompts reason to generate the idea of the
continued existence of their causes in accord with the implicit
argument: unless things are created purposely in order to be ready to

appear, they must continue to exist ready to appear if suitably
related to organs of sense (EASP: 13–14). If it were the case
that the causes of sensory sensations arose and perished as the
sensations do, then sensible objects, bodily organs, space, time, and
everything else required for perception, would arise just when needed
for perception and perish immediately afterward. The argument is meant
to expose the utter absurdity of this. 
The fact is, according to Shepherd, most people believe that their
sensations have continued existence, even though they readily
allow that pleasures, pains, and various other sensations cease to

exist when they disappear from consciousness (EASP: 9). She denies
that sensations that exist unperceived can be understood. It is rather
imagination that associates sensations with ideas that represent
objects perceived by sense as existing unperceived. The mind has no
resources for thinking of such objects except under the form of their
sensory appearances. Although the error in supposing sensations exist
unperceived can be exposed, this hardly prevents our frequently
falling into it. Yet this is not entirely unfortunate, as Shepherd sees
it, because it is the means by which we acquire structural as well as
existential knowledge of the external world (see
 § 5.2).
 
External existence contrasts with internal existence. Shepherd has a
layered definition of this pair of notions. In the first instance,
internal existence pertains to the capacity for sensation in general,
that is the mind, or power of thought and feeling. External existence
pertains to the exciting cause of any particular sensation (EASP: 40).
In context of CP, nothing that satisfies one of these definitions can
satisfy the other. A mixture of both is necessary for the existence of
a sensation. Now sensations are nothing other than appearances in
consciousness, realizations of the general capacity for sensations,
i.e., the mind. With this in view, Shepherd advances the thick notion
of internal existence: an entity is thickly internal just in case one
and only individual can be conscious of it. A thing is thickly
external, then, just in case it can be perceived by more than one
human being. The thick distinction marks the difference between what
is private and what is public.
The thick distinction divides the subjective and objective components of
sense perception. As Shepherd notes, philosophers take very different
views on this division, citing Malebranche, Leibniz, Reid, and
Berkeley. She contends that we tend to adhere to the inner-outer
distinction just described because it is produced by the natural
mental activity of making causal inferences from the perception that
sensations begin to appear in consciousness. In this sub-section, we
consider the details of the origin of this inner-outer distinction and
belief in the external existence of sensible objects. 
In view of the fact that we cease to be conscious of anything in
dreamless sleep, it is evident that all sensations begin and cease to
exist. There must be some continually existing cause capable of
renewing them as we believe. The present question is how the continued
entity which enters into the causes of all one’s sensations,
without exception, is to be conceived. The ears, nose, and other
organs of sense are objects of perception which we believe to exist
when unperceived. But they are not the continued cause that is wanted
because sensations that occur in dreams have exciting causes which do
not continue when these sensations cease to exist. The continually
existing cause of all renewed sensations whatsoever must be a subject
of change that pre-exists and is altered by whatever sensations appear
in consciousness. The mind thus comes to be conceived as a general
capacity for sensation external to all its sensations, independent of
them, and ready to be altered by any exciting cause that mixes with it
–a thinly internal existent. Shepherd observes that
“I” always refers to something abstract. 
As for the common belief that objects of sense perception have
external existence, it is said to arise from little more than the
implicit reasoning that refers sensations induced by the sensory
system to objects that continue to exist. The addition is that the
sensory organs are supposed to act mechanically, to have contact with
objects with which they join in causing sensations. The mechanical
character of the interaction of sensory organs and objects of sense
perception is taken to imply that the objects can be perceived by
conjunction with the sensory systems of more than one human being if
more than one exists. 
The factors that make us believe in external existence of objects of
perception are said to suffice for assent to their independence.
Belief that objects are perceivable by more than one human being tends
to produce belief that their existence is independent of any
particular human being. A second source of belief in independence is
that we infer that while objects exist unperceived they undergo
change; a fire viewed at one time and again an hour later may have
died down in the meantime. The most important source is that we
perceive objects whose sensory appearance is very like that of
ourselves. We suppose the appearances are caused by things like
ourselves and infer that they are like us in having sensations and
thoughts. Since their thoughts and sensations are not perceived by us,
this leads to the belief that their existence is independent of ours. But
although Shepherd clearly maintains that these arguments affect our
credence, none of them is definitive proof that objects are
independent of an individual mind.
The phenomena of dreams are sometimes raised as an objection to the common
beliefs about the existence of sensible objects because we may believe
that the illusions of a dream have continued, external, and
independent existence. This is reason to doubt the existence of all
perceptual objects unless we have better evidence for their reality
than we have for that of the seeming objects of dreams. Shepherd
dispatches the objection, but with a proviso. She maintains that the
sensations that occur in dreams are just like those that occur in
waking experience. But when dreaming, a person’s ability to
amass a large number of sensations is limited. When awake, a person
can discover that the seeming objects of dreams do not “fulfill
their definitions” by moving the eyes, hands, and so on. We
think of perceptual objects as belonging to various kinds to which we
give names and definitions. Shepherd maintains that a general name
such as “apple” is defined in terms of its sensible
qualities--round, juicy, sweet smelling, etc.--and its effects when
compounded with other sorts of objects-- providing nourishment if
eaten, turning brown if exposed to air, and the like—and its
capacity to be perceived by more than one human being; that is, the
definition includes all the object’s sensible effects,
qualities, and powers. If we dream of an apple, we wake up to find
nothing that can be felt, tasted, or perceived to interact with other
objects as things properly called “apple” do; this shows
it wasn’t real. On the other hand, the more evidence we have
that a purported object appears and behaves as apples do, the more
probable the belief that the supposed apple exists in the world.
Provided that we can detect the illusions of dreams on this basis, the
fact that we dream is no reason to doubt beliefs about the existence
of sensible objects in general. 
Nevertheless, there is a remaining doubt about the independence of
objects of perception from a perceiver. Shepherd claims this is the
only possible doubt with regard to CPI: experience
cannot show that there is no unperceivable dependence relation among
all the masses of qualities an individual purportedly perceives (EASP:
117–8). If this is the case, then all of these masses have a
bond of interdependence with the cause of one person’s dreams,
causes which are internal to this person. So, the demise of this one
individual will dissolve the universe. Causal reasoning is of no use
against this possibility, because if it obtains, the independence of
causes in general is compromised. Ignorance on this point is grounds
to doubt that any object is independent of the existence of one
individual; yet no one can apprehend that this is so.  We confront a
dilemma: either the universe is dependent on a single human mind or
the universe contains something else and causal reasoning has scope in
which to prove the existence of many minds, human beings, and other
sensible objects. She claims that all human beings immediately reject
the former, and have no second thoughts about it. She seems to regard
it as an unfailing psychological pre-disposition. 
The phenomenon of dreams is used to highlight the difference between
her notion of the sensible world and George Berkeley’s. He
defines a sensible thing as nothing but a collection of sensations.
Shepherd complains that this definition is incomplete because it
excludes properties of continued and external existence. This is why
Berkeley’s doctrine is both unconvincing and difficult to refute
according to her diagnosis. Atherton (1996) argues that she
misunderstands Berkeley’s Idealism. The occurrence of dreams is
overlooked by Reid and others who maintain that extension, motion, and
other primary qualities are not sensations, but real qualities
existing externally and independently. The fact that extension and
motion appear just the same in dreams as in sense experience shows
that they are sensations in experience, too. Motion and extension are
capable of causing sensations to which we give the same names, but the
causes of sensations cannot be sensations according to Shepherd.
Mind, as we saw, is the capacity for sensation in general. All
sensations begin and cease to exist while mind is understood to be the
continually existing cause that enables sensations to arise when mixed
with various exciting causes. What is called “self”
according to Shepherd is a particular mind that has the general
capacity for sensations including those caused in part by organs of
sense; a self is a mind united with a living body. 
Shepherd starts by explicating the notion of self. She contends that
whenever we are awake, we have sensations of our own existence, life,
and the extension of the body; ideas of their causes are formed by the
usual inference. Organs of sense have no special part in causing
sensations of the sort just mentioned; rather the living body does. We
consider this body (as it is unperceived) to be the source of pleasure
and pain and to be bounded by the skin. What is called
“self” in addition to the mind is contained within the
skin. Shepherd concludes that the notion of self is “the notion
of the conscious sensation of the extension of the body and of a
sufficient cause for life and sensation in general” (EASP: 62).
All the elements of what is called “self” are implied by
this notion— general capacities for sensation and life (the mind and body) and the sensations of one’s own existence, life, and the extension of the body. 
According to Shepherd, the idea of the continued existence of
self has its origin in the perception that the sensation of life is
interrupted by dreamless sleep and then resumed; we refer the renewal
as effect to a cause that continues to exist. The cause is identified
as the conjunction of the power to sustain life and the powers of
memory and sensation. The power of memory is the ability to form ideas
of memory. Ideas of memory are complex. On Shepherd’s analysis
they contain: fainter sensations attended by the idea of the cause of
their originals’ being remote, the perception of a lapse of
time, and the perception of one’s own existence going on between
the moment of original impression and the present faint sensations.
This explanation is evidently so far incomplete. The main difficulty
is to explain the perception of a lapse of time. 
Shepherd subjects this perception to analysis: the fainter sensations
are attended by the idea of the present moment and the past moment is
only remembered in the present. She maintains that awareness of the
present moment and memory of the past moment inspires reasoning to
this effect: there must be a continued being in nature capable of
uniting the two moments. We saw that time, as she understands it, is a
continued existence comprising successive moments. So the perception
of a lapse of time between a present and past sensation is the idea of
the continued existence of time relative to which the present and
remembered sensations are ordered.
Returning to an idea of memory, it contains: (1) the idea of a present
sensation, (2) the idea of a fainter sensation that is now remembered,
(3) the idea of time as a continued existence, and (4) the idea that
the present sensation and the remembered sensation are ordered by
virtue of being simultaneous with earlier and later moments of
time. In addition, it contains (5) the perception of one’s own
existence during the interval between the original perception and the
present one.  This is nothing other than perception of the continued
existence of oneself, i.e., the conjunction of two capacities that
constitute the self.  Their continued existence is inferred from the
necessity that these standing causes continue to exist when they are
not conjoined with the active causes of particular sensations.
In sum, the origin of belief in the continued existence of self is
causal reasoning which produces a conjunction of three ideas. These
are the idea of the general capacity for sensations including those
caused by use of the organs of sense, the idea of the capacity to
sustain life, and the idea of the power to form ideas of
memory. Accordingly, belief in the continued existence of self is just
belief that the three capacities referred to by these ideas are
continued. They are part of the cause of the sensation of one’s
existing over time, but it is interrupted.  According to Shepherd, the
identity of self is constituted by nothing other than the continued
existence of the union of the the three capacities (EASP:
154–4). There is no persisting particle, she observes. 
On Shepherd’s theory, the human mind and body are different
essences (EASP: 155–6). This is because the mind is the capacity
for sensation in general and the body is the continually existing
cause of sensations of extension and solidity in the mind. The former
is the capacity for sensations of extension and inextension, solidity
and lack of resistance to motion, whereas the latter is the exciting
cause of just one member of each pair of mutually contrary sensations.
So they are different essences. For this reason, it seems possible in
the abstract that the mind and the body should exist separately, but
Shepherd reports that the fact of the matter has not been settled. In
practice, sensation is never known to take place without the essence
that causes sensations of extension. Indeed, the living body,
particularly the brain, seems to be integral to the cause of sensation
in the species man. She urges that this does not preclude the
probability of resurrection after death because there may be matter
finer than that which composes the present human body which is capable
of causing sensations when conjoined with the human mind (EASP:
157–9). 
In a short essay on the mind’s capacity to form a design,
Shepherd confronts the question how, if at all, the mind can cause
motion in the body: how can a state of a conscious being—that of
conceiving a design and willing to implement it—determine the
motion of the body to this end? (Essay XIII, EPEU: 403–05). She
explains that when a person forms a plan and decides to carry it out,
the conscious state is united with whatever bodily qualities co-exist
with it. The union begins a bodily motion directed to an end by the
mind. The bodily part of the union is the cause of the beginning of
motion; it is necessary that this cause be similar to whatever impulse
causes other motions. Since we are not conscious of the cause, but
only the design and volition, it is impossible for us to know its
nature. Yet in this respect, the cause of voluntary motion is no more
mysterious than any other cause. We are acquainted with the effects
the living body has on our consciousness, but have no knowledge of its
nature unperceived. 
Shepherd maintains that the evidence of the existence of sensations is
immediate and incontrovertible; they are felt and their existence is
nothing more than the feeling (EASP: 142). The conclusion of reasoning
from the existence of sensations to that of some cause or other is
equally certain. But inferences with regard to the existence of
particular causes of specific kinds are liable to error both with
regard to reasoning and lapse of memory. As a result, the evidence we
have that a supposed object of a specific kind exists, e.g., an apple
rather than a crab apple, consists of items of unequal evidential
value. 
Three sorts of evidence relevant to the existence of an apple are
mentioned: perceptions of its several sensible qualities, perceptions
of its effects in conjunction with objects of various sorts, and
indications of the manner in which it was formed. The evidence we have
that, say, a seeming particular thing is an apple might include
perceptions of its round figure and pleasing taste, observations of
its turning brown after exposure to air, and report of its having been
picked from a tree. Let’s call this group of traits
“T”. To evaluate this evidence, Shepherd invokes
the notion of the “apparent cause”. The apparent cause in
the case in question is an object of the kind apple. There is a
certain regularity with which active causes that belong to the kind
apple exhibit traits T. There may be one or more other kinds of
objects that are found to have traits T with greater or less
regularity. Although things in these other kinds satisfy part of the
definition of the apparent cause, they do not satisfy the
remainder.
Shepherd’s idea is that the evidence that the object in question
is an apple should be weighed by the known regularity with which
traits T belong to exciting causes that are apples. If the
known regularity is unfailing, the evidence on hand makes it highly
probable that the object in question is an apple and will behave in
all circumstances as apples do. In case the known regularity of the
union of T and an apple holds in some, but not all cases, the
probability that the object is an apple conferred by the evidence
should be proportioned to the ratio of the number of particular cases
in which the regularity holds to the number of cases with traits
T; this might involve ratios such as that between apples and
pears in our area. Shepherd says we should be skeptical that the
conjunction of T with apples holds in a particular case, but
the degree of skepticism should be no greater than the irregularity of
their conjunction. Yet it is possible that an apple might not exhibit
some qualities in the definition of an apple because, although the
difference would have a cause, the circumstances might indicate
conjunction with a miraculous act intended for a certain end (EASP:
144–7). 
On this theory, the evidence for one perceptual belief consists in
part of other perceptual beliefs. For instance, the belief that a
purported apple is a real apple may find evidential support from
perceptual beliefs about what happens when it is exposed to air. It
may happen that belief that one object exists supports believe that
another does and it, in turn, supports believe that the first exists.
For instance, the claim that there is a fire might be based on the
observation that it was caused by steel striking flint; but then the
external existence of the steel and flint might be confirmed by
observing that their concussion caused fire. Shepherd notes that
someone might think this is arguing in a circle. To put it
differently, it might seem to us that every perceptual belief receives
its evidential value from nothing but other perceptual
beliefs.  Shepherd sees it differently. Other perceptual beliefs are
relevant only because we understand that if the actual cause
of, say, a purported fire is the apparent cause, then it is necessary
that the unknown cause at work in the purported case has all the
qualities in the definition of fire. So CP and CPI are foundational in
Shepherd’s theory of probable belief. Still, we just saw that
the probability that the apparent cause of a given effect is the
actual cause depends on other perceptual beliefs (ERCE:
124–5). 
Sensations are appearances; their causes are not, but because we are
bound to think of them in the guise of sensations, philosophical
analysis is needed to pry them apart. The former are inner and the
latter outer. Objects of perception must remain unknown in the manner
in which sensations are known. Because a sensation is essentially an
appearance to consciousness, it cannot be like anything other than a
sensation in essential respects. However, Shepherd insists that
sensations have inessential properties that are shared by beings of
other sorts, such as variety (EASP: 163–4). There must be as
much variety among the causes of sensations as there is among the
sensations; otherwise CPI would fail. So although  sensations can be
intrinsically like nothing but sensations, relations among sensations must have a
likeness to relations among their causes. 
The most interesting examples are collections of sensations each of
which varies from all the others in the same respect, e.g., warmth,
length, or duration. Sensations vary “in kind and degree”,
as Shepherd puts it. All the sensations in the first collection just
mentioned are alike in being warm, but differ in respect of degrees of
warmth. It follows that their causes are alike in respect of some
general property that admits of degrees and different in its degrees.
The external gradable property cannot possibly be like a sensation,
but it imparts an order among its grades which is like the order among
their effects. As Shepherd says, the causes of sensations must have
“the same proportions, in relation to each other among
themselves, as the effects have to each other” (EASP:
28–9). So time, the continuously existent nature that has a part
in causing sensations that arise successively, consists of positions
with mutual relations proportional to the relations among the
corresponding sensations. Time is, then, capable of being measured by
the idea of a continued external object that undergoes changes of a
sort deemed suitable to measure the changes in other externally
existing things. The durations of the perceptions of, say, beats of a
pendulum thus serve to measure the durations of the beats that cause
them. The grades of difference between elements on the corresponding
sides can be as small or large as observation and reason require. In
addition to similarity, variety, and proportionality, and contrariety are
mentioned as a relation common to sensations and their causes: the
causes of sensations of motion and rest, solidity and lack of
resistance to motion, extension and inextension, red and blue,
different places, etc. must be related as contraries. 
The isomorphism of sensory sensations as a whole and their respective
external causes as a whole enables us to have a sort of inferential
knowledge about sensible objects in addition to their existence. The
order and comparison of sensations provides information about the
external world in all those respects in which there is structural
similarity between the two domains. Although there are in principle no
limits to the abstract similarities that might be discovered by
students of nature, Shepherd stresses similarities that are
sufficiently close to being complete and exact that we need do little
more than attend to relations exhibited by accumulated masses of
sensations in order to comprehend them. This is the advantage of our
natural tendency to associate objects of perception and the sensations
under which we are bound to think of them. It obscures the
metaphysically important distinction between inner and outer
existence, but it facilitates descriptive knowledge of the external
world. Shepherd illustrates this by an analogy with algebra. Just as
algebraic signs stand for unknown quantities which can be
“measured, valued, and reasoned upon by their signs”, so
sensations are signs for their causes which exist under relations
similar to those we observe, calculate, or demonstrate in the domain
of sensations. As mentioned, we typically give sensations and their
causes the same name. So we may speak, think, and reason about
external objects as if they really existed under the forms in which
they appear (EASP: 27–8, 47–9, 161–6). Shepherd
finds it important to observe that no part of this arrangement is
subject to skepticism: the relation between sensations and what they
signify is assured by CP and CPI; relations among sensations are
assured by observation and reasoning, and their interpretation is
assured by the proportionality that, according to CPI, must hold among
causes, considered as a whole, and the sensations they effect,
considered as a whole. 
We said that Shepherd mentions at the beginning of her second book
that there might seem to be circularity in her procedure (EASP:
Preface). The earlier volume argues for the causal principles and
maintains that they regulate all speculative and practical belief. The
second essay uses these principles to explain the origin of belief in
the existence of the external world, and then claims this belief is
justified. This might seem to be circular, as if the assumption that
the causal principles have instances in the world were used to prove
the existence of the external world which was taken to prove the
assumption. But Shepherd maintains her procedure is not circular. She
explains that the “justness” of these beliefs could not be
fully established before it was shown that all sensations whatsoever
are believed to be successive effects of various causes: 
the relation of cause and effect when fully known and established,
affords the only method of proof in our power, for the knowledge of
external existence. (EASP: xiv–xv) 
This is the business of EASP, to show that belief of the causal
principles generates a system of beliefs about the external world
which is justified by merits conferred on the system as a whole. These
are not, or need not be, merits in relation to truth. The text makes
no attempt to provide a reason to think the causal principles which
found the system are metaphysically necessary truths about what
exists. We saw that she does not mean to say that God is bound by it.
The veracity of God is not offered as warrant of the metaphysical
truth of CP; indeed, the existence of God is proved by it (EASP: 150;
EPEU: 348). 
This is the justificatory argument as interpreted in this
 article.[8]
 We assume the causal principles are true of whatever suddenly appears
to exist; to do otherwise would be to contradict what we are naturally
inclined to believe.  This is psychologically impossible but
epistemically unwarranted. We need only this natural inclination and
the series of sensations arising and perishing in consciousness to
form beliefs with regard to the continued, external, and independent
existence of objects perceived by sense. Causal reasoning provides an
accessible reason to assent to these beliefs; so the system comprises
existential beliefs that come up to the standard of rationality
Shepherd endorses. In addition, causal reasoning about the existence
of objects of various kinds provides opportunity to assemble evidence
which makes it highly probable that human beings other than oneself
exist and objects such as apples and fires exist. As it happens, the
opportunity has been largely realized in our experience so far. This
enables us to make reasonable predictions about the qualities that
things of various kinds will exhibit on the basis of observing only a
few of their qualities. This has the considerable merit of allowing us
to plan and act with reasonable confidence. Causal inference also
produces and provides reason for belief in an almighty deity and the
comforts that brings.  These advantages justify beliefs produced by
the natural, practically unavoidable assumption of CP and CPI. These
advantages are all the more striking in view of fact that Hume’s
theory of belief in the external world has none of them and the
epistemologies of Reid, Brown, and Stewart lack at least one of them.