Stirner was born Johann Caspar Schmidt on 25 October 1806, the only
child of lower middle class Lutheran parents living in Bayreuth.
“Stirner” was originally a nickname, resulting from a
large forehead, exaggerated by the way he pushed back his hair, and
only later — in the form of “Max Stirner” —
adopted as a literary pseudonym and his preferred name. His father
died when Stirner was only six months old, and he was brought up by
his mother (who subsequently remarried) and then later, when his
mother moved from Bayreuth, by an aunt who looked after him in order
that he could continue his schooling at the renowned local Gymnasium.
Stirner subsequently pursued his undergraduate studies, with little
notable academic distinction, at the universities of Berlin, Erlangen,
and Königsberg. At Berlin, he is known to have attended three
lecture-series given by G.W.F. Hegel (1770-1831): on the philosophy of
religion; on the history of philosophy; and on the philosophy of
“subjective spirit” (which concerns the structures and
processes of individual psychology).
Towards the end of his university career, Stirner devoted much of his
time to “family affairs”, possibly a euphemism for his
mother’s deteriorating mental health. In 1832, he returned with
his mother to Berlin, and sought, with qualified success, to train as
a teacher. (Stirner’s mother was committed to a mental home in
1837 and she would eventually outlive him by three years.) A period of
private study and irregular work followed, including eighteenth months
working unpaid as an Latin teacher. During this time he married Agnes
Butz (1815–1838), a member of his landlady’s family. In
August 1838, Agnes died giving birth to a still-born child. Edgar
Bauer (1820–1886) would later record that Stirner had told him
that, having once caught sight of his first wife naked, he was unable
to touch her again.
Between 1839 and 1844 Stirner maintained something of a double life in
Berlin. He obtained a position at a well-regarded private girls’
school, and spent the next five years teaching history and literature,
establishing a reputation as a polite and reliable teacher in the
process. Away from his teaching post, however, Stirner began to
frequent the more avant-garde of Berlin’s intellectual haunts.
He used the reading room of the novelist Willibald Alexis
(1798–1871), spent afternoons at the Café Stehely, and
from 1841 onwards was a regular visitor to Hippel’s wine bar on
the Friedrichstrasse. The last of these was the main meeting place of
“the free”, an increasingly bohemian group of teachers,
students, officers, and journalists, under the loose intellectual
leadership of the left-Hegelian Bruno Bauer (1809-1882). The latter
had recently been dismissed from his teaching post at the University
of Bonn, following an official inquiry into the orthodoxy of his
writings on the New Testament. This group included Marie
Dähnhardt (1818–1902) who became Stirner’s second
wife (and the dedicatee of The Ego and Its Own). In this
unconventional environment, and despite his calm and unassuming
personal appearance, Stirner gained a reputation for his hostility to
religion, intolerance of moderation, and ability to provoke fierce
argument.
Stirner’s earliest published writings date from this time in
Berlin. In addition to some short and unremarkable pieces of
journalism for the Rheinische Zeitung and the Leipziger
Allgemeine Zeitung, these writings include a knowing review of
Bruno Bauer’s anonymous and parodic attack on Hegel in The
Trumpet of the Last Judgement (1842) and an article on pedagogy
entitled “The False Principle of Our Education” (1842).
The latter, in particular, adumbrates some of the themes of his own
later work; for example, contrasting the training of individuals to an
alien calling with the cultivation of the predisposition to become
“sovereign characters”). During this period, Stirner is
said to have occasionally alluded to a book that he was working on,
but it seems that few of his associates took its existence seriously.
The impact of The Ego and Its Own on these left-Hegelian
circles was considerable as well as unexpected. Stirner began serious
work on the book in early 1843 and finished it in the middle of 1844.
The Ego and Its Own was published by the Leipzig bookseller
Otto Wigand (1795–1870) in an edition of a thousand copies.
Although dated 1845 the book appears to have been widely available by
November of the previous year.
Measured by the reaction that it produced, The Ego and Its
Own might be described as a critical success. The book was widely
reviewed, and attracted attention from such figures as Bettina von
Arnim (1785–1859), the doyenne of the Berlin literati, and Kuno
Fischer (1824–1907), later a distinguished neo-Kantian historian
of philosophy. The book also generated responses from many of its
left-Hegelian targets: Bruno Bauer, Ludwig Feuerbach
(1804–1872), Moses Hess (1812–1875), Arnold Ruge
(1802–1880), and others, ventured into print in order to defend
their own views against Stirner’s polemic. (Stirner’s
various replies to some of these critics are discussed in Section 3
below.) 
However, The Ego and Its Own was neither a popular nor a
financial success. Stirner had left his teaching post shortly before
the book was published, and, by 1846, was reduced to advertising in
the Vossische Zeitung for a loan. Stirner had squandered much
of his second wife’s inheritance, and Marie Dähnhardt left
him towards the end of the same year. Many years later she was traced
to England by Stirner’s loyal biographer, the poet and novelist
John Henry Mackay (1864–1933). She refused to meet Mackay in
person but wrote to him portraying Stirner as a very sly man whom she
had neither respected nor loved, and describing their relationship
together as more of a cohabitation than a marriage.
From 1847, Stirner’s life was characterised by social isolation
and financial precariousness. He remained detached from contemporary
events — for example, he seems to have largely ignored the
revolution of 1848 — and his daily life was dominated by
domestic routine and economic hardship. Stirner continued to write
intermittently, but commentators have generally found his later work
to be of little independent interest; that is, of little interest
apart from its disputed potential to illuminate The Ego and Its
Own). He translated into German some of the economic writings of
Jean-Baptiste Say (1767–1832) and Adam Smith (1723–1790),
and may have written a series of short journalistic pieces for the
Journal des oesterreichischen Lloyd. In 1852, he contributed
some material to a History of Reaction, consisting mainly of
excerpts from other authors, including Edmund Burke (1729–1797).
Stirner’s strategy for economic survival in this period involved
repeatedly changing addresses in order to evade his creditors,
although not quickly enough to avoid two brief periods in a
debtors’ prison in 1853 and 1854.
In May 1856, still living in reduced circumstances in Berlin, Stirner
fell into a “nervous fever”, reputedly after being stung
in the neck by an insect. Following a brief remission, he died on 25
June (aged 49 years and 8 months). His death went largely unnoticed by
the outside world.
There looks to be a fairly stark contrast between the often
melodramatic and provocative tone of Stirner’s best-known work,
on the one hand, and the rather more mundane, sometimes poignant,
events of his somewhat solitary life, on the other. However,
commentators have frequently tried to link his life and philosophical
views together. John Henry Mackay, for instance, emphasizing the
“ataraxic”dimension of The Ego and Its Own,
portrayed Stirner’s life as an authentic embodiment of the
emotional detachment that the egoist must cultivate in order to avoid
being enslaved by his own passions and commitments. Even the pathos of
Stirner’s death was said to reflect the egoist’s refusal
to love life, or fear death, excessively.(Mackay 1914: 212.) Such
claims are not without interest, but the lack of direct evidence
regarding Stirner’s own interior life makes them difficult to
evaluate and endorse. 
Modern readers hoping to understand The Ego and Its Own are
confronted by several obstacles, not least the form, structure, and
argument, of Stirner’s book.
Much of Stirner’s prose—crowded with aphorisms, emphases,
and hyperbole—appears calculated to disconcert. Most striking,
perhaps, is the use of word play. Rather than reach a conclusion
through the conventional use of argument, Stirner often approaches a
claim that he wishes to endorse by exploiting words with related
etymologies or formal similarities. For example, he associates words
for property (such as “Eigentum”) with words
connoting distinctive individual characteristics (such as
“Eigenheit”) in order to promote the claim that
property is expressive of selfhood. (Stirner’s account of
egoistic property—see 2.4 below—gives this otherwise
orthodox-looking Hegelian claim a distinctive twist.)
This rejection of conventional forms of intellectual discussion is
linked to Stirner’s substantive views about language and
rationality. His distinctive style reflects a conviction that both
language and rationality are human products which have come to
constrain and oppress their creators. Stirner maintains that accepted
meanings and traditional standards of argumentation are underpinned by
a conception of truth as a privileged realm beyond individual control.
As a result, individuals who accept this conception are abandoning a
potential area of creative self-expression in favour of adopting a
subordinate role as servants of truth. In stark contrast, Stirner
insists that the only legitimate restriction on the form of our
language, or on the structure of our arguments, is that they should
serve our individual ends. It is the frequent failure of conventional
meanings and received forms of argument to satisfy his interpretation
of this criterion which underpins the remorselessly idiosyncratic form
of Stirner’s prose.
The Ego and Its Own has an intelligible, but scarcely
transparent, structure. It is organised around a tripartite account of
human experience, initially introduced in a description of the stages
of an individual life. The first stage in this developmental narrative
is the realistic one of childhood, in which children are
constrained by material and natural forces such as their parents.
Liberation from these external constraints is achieved with what
Stirner calls the self-discovery of mind, as children find the means
to outwit those forces in their own determination and cunning. The
idealistic stage of youth, however, contains new internal
sources of constraint, as individuals once more become enslaved, this
time to the spiritual forces of conscience and reason. Only with the
adulthood of egoism do individuals escape both material
(external) and spiritual (internal) constraints, learning to value
their personal satisfaction above all other considerations.
Stirner portrays this dialectic of individual growth as an analogue of
historical development, and it is a tripartite account of the latter
which structures the remainder of the book. Human history is reduced
to successive epochs of realism (the ancient, or pre-Christian,
world), idealism (the modern, or Christian, world), and egoism (the
future world). Part One of The Ego and Its Own is devoted to
the first two of these subjects (providing a negative critique of the
past), whilst Part Two is concerned with the third of them (providing
a positive account of the future).
In both individual and historical forms, the second stage of this
developmental narrative is presented as a negation of the first, and
the third stage, in turn, as the negation of that negation. The
triadic structure of this argument has been read as confirming
Stirner’s Hegelian formation and commitments (Stepelevich:
1985), but might also be seen as embodying a self-conscious parody of
Hegelianism. In this context, Stirner has plausibly been understood as
offering both a provocation and a knowing attempt at humour, utilising
a dialectical structure in order to advance his own anti-Hegelian
position. (De Ridder: 2008.)
Part One of The Ego and Its Own is backward-looking, in that
it is concerned with the ancient and modern worlds rather than with
the future, and negative, in that its primary aim is to demonstrate
the failure of modernity to escape from the very religious modes of
thought which it claims to have outgrown. The bulk of Stirner’s
genealogical account is devoted to the modern epoch, and he only
discusses the ancient world insofar as it contributes to the genesis
of modernity. In both cases, however, the majority of his examples are
taken from the realm of cultural and intellectual affairs.
Cumulatively these examples are meant, not only to undermine
historical narratives which portray the modern development of
humankind as the progressive realisation of freedom, but also to
support an account of individuals in the modern world as increasingly
oppressed by the spiritual. For Stirner, the subordination of the
individual to spirit—in any of its guises—counts as
religious servitude.
Stirner’s account of the historical development of modernity
largely revolves around a single event, the Reformation. He attempts
to show that, from the perspective of the individual, the movement
from Catholic to Protestant hegemony is not a liberating one, but
instead constitutes both an extension and intensification of the
domination of spirit. The Reformation extends, rather than contracts,
the sphere of religious control over the individual because it refuses
to recognise the distinction between the spiritual and the sensuous.
Rather than preventing priests marrying, for example, Protestantism
makes marriage religious, thereby extending the sphere of the
spiritual to include the sensuous. The Reformation also intensifies,
rather than relaxes, the bond between individuals and religion. The
more inward faith of Protestantism, for example, establishes a
perpetual internal conflict between natural impulses and religious
conscience. In a typically vivid and combative metaphor, Stirner
describes this internal conflict in the individual as analogous to the
struggle between the population and the secret police in the
contemporary body politic.
Stirner’s claim that the modern world reproduces, rather than
abolishes, religious modes of thought provides the opportunity for a
sustained attack on the writings of his left-Hegelian contemporaries.
Ludwig Feuerbach, in particular, is singled out for failing to
overcome the subordination of the individual to spirit.
The centrality of the critique of Feuerbach to Stirner’s project
is clear from the form of The Ego and Its Own which embodies
a structural parody of Feuerbach’s best-known work. Where the
two halves of Feuerbach’s Das Wesen des Christentums
had been entitled God and Man — with the first
attacked and the second celebrated —the two corresponding parts
of Stirner’s opus are named Man and I. More
substantively, Stirner seeks to challenge the progressive verdict on
Feuerbach’s achievement. He maintains that the celebration of
Feuerbach for having completed the critique of religion, is not merely
mistaken but nearer the opposite of the truth. Far from undermining
religion, the Feuerbachian problematic is said to reproduce and
amplify its central features.
For Feuerbach, the primary error of Christianity was that it took
human predicates and projected them into another world as if they
constituted an independent being. He saw religious belief as a
necessary step in the progress of humankind to self-understanding.
More precisely, it was through transformative criticism —
recovering the correct relation of subject and predicate from its
inversion in Christianity — that we first come to understand
what human nature is. Moreover, Feuerbach maintains that, once
liberated from their otherworldly form, these essential human
characteristics — and especially perhaps our love for others
— would come to form the basis of the unalienated social and
political life of the future. This emancipatory ambition also helps to
clarify Feuerbach’s insistence that he should be seen as a
friend, and not an enemy, of religion; in particular, he sought not to
destroy Christianity, but to liberate its content from otherworldly
forms. This claim is also at the heart of his distinctive — and
perhaps idiosyncratic — denial that he was an atheist. Feuerbach
maintains that true atheism requires the rejection not only of God as
subject, but also of those predicates — love, wisdom, justice,
and so on — traditionally associated with divinity.
Stirner might be said to pick up this, perhaps idiosyncratic,
characterisation of “true atheism” and run with it.
Stirner maintains that religion, properly understood, is characterised
by the subordination of the individual to “spirit” in any
of its guises. Consequently, the rejection of God as a transcendental
subject leaves the essential character and failing of religion intact.
Feuerbach’s perfectionist problematic, Stirner remarks, might
have altered “the tinsel” (the divine subject)
but it leaves “the main thing” (the divine predicates)
unchanged (56). (Page references in parenthesis are to the 1995
Cambridge edition of The Ego and Its Own cited in the
Bibliography below.) The sacred is allowed to remain, if not as God,
then as “Man with a capital M” in
Byington’s inspired English rendering of Stirner’s
“Der Mensch”. In short, rather than describing
human nature as it is, Feuerbach is said to have deified a
prescriptive account of what being human involves. As a result, the
real kernel of religion, the positing of an “essence over
me” (46), has been left intact. Indeed, Stirner suggests that
Feuerbach’s achievement was to have effected a “change of
masters” (55) which actually made the tyranny of the divine over
the individual even more complete. First, it extends domination,
because this new deity is no longer the preserve of the faithful, but
can possess everyone, believers and unbelievers alike. And, second, it
intensifies domination, because the scrutiny of our own conscience is
much harder to evade than that of a transcendental subject that a
flutters “over our heads as a dove” (86).
Stirner extends this critique to the work of all the left-Hegelians,
including those with whom he had associated in Berlin. Although they
disagree about the content of human nature—for “political
liberals” like Arnold Ruge human nature is identified with
citizenship, for “social liberals” like Moses Hess human
nature is identified with labour, and for “humane
liberals” like Bruno Bauer human nature is identified with
critical activity—all the left-Hegelians are said to have
reproduced the basic Feuerbachian error: separating the individual
from his human essence, and setting that essence above the individual
as something to be striven for. In contrast, Stirner maintains that
because it has no universal or prescriptive content, human nature
cannot ground any claim about how we ought to live. His own
intellectual project—which he describes as an attempt to
rehabilitate the prosaic and mortal self, the
“un-man”(124) for whom the notion of a calling is
alien—is intended as a radical break with the work of these
contemporaries.
It may seem obvious that Stirner subscribes to a resolutely
anti-perfectionist position here. However, this obvious reading has
been challenged. Stirner certainly rejects what might be called
“essentialist perfectionism”; that is, ethical theories
which value certain characteristics of the individual precisely
because they realise some aspect of human nature. However, he
nonetheless continues to embrace a character ideal, a picture of a
self-ruling individual whose perfection is valuable apart from any
happiness or pleasure that it might bring. The Stirnerian egoist must
not only avoid submission to external powers, but must also cultivate
a kind of emotional detachment towards their own thoughts and
feelings, ensuring that the latter do not subjugate the egoist, or
make the egoist an instrument of their own realisation. The
interpretative suggestion here is that an “anti-essentialist
perfectionism” survives in this ideal of character, in
Stirner’s celebration of the “un-man” and the
egoist. (Leopold 2019.)
Part Two of The Ego and Its Own is forward-looking, in that
it is concerned with the egoistic future rather than the ancient or
modern worlds, and positive, in that it aims to establish the
possibility that Stirner’s contemporaries could be liberated
from the tyranny of religion.
Stirner’s account of the developing historical relationship
between the individual and society is advanced in a series of
parallels which are designed to portray egoism as the embodiment of a
more advanced civilisation. At one point, he takes the early modern
idea of a social contract, in which progress consists of a move from
an individualistic state of nature to a communal civil society, and
neatly inverts it. It is membership of society, and not isolation,
Stirner suggests, which is humankind’s “state of
nature” (271), an early stage of development whose inadequacies
are, in due course, outgrown. Elsewhere, he describes the developing
relationship between the individual and society as analogous to that
between a mother and her child. As the individual (the child) develops
a mature preference for a less suffocating environment, they must
throw off the claims of society (the mother) which seeks to maintain
them in a subordinate position. In both cases, Stirner draws the
lesson that the individual must move from social to egoistic
relationships in order to escape subjection.
What is meant by “egoism”, however, is not always clear.
Stirner is occasionally portrayed as a psychological egoist, that is,
as a proponent of the descriptive claim that all (intentional) actions
are motivated by a concern for the self-interest of the agent.
However, this characterisation of Stirner’s position can be
questioned. Not least, The Ego and Its Own is structured
around the opposition between egoistic and non-egoistic forms of
experience. Indeed, he appears to hold that non-egoistic action has
predominated historically (in the epochs of realism and idealism).
Moreover, at one point, Stirner appears explicitly to consider
adopting the explanatory stance of psychological egoism only to reject
it. In a discussion of a young woman who sacrifices her love for
another in order to respect the wishes of her family, Stirner remarks
that an observer might be tempted to maintain that selfishness has
still prevailed in this case since the woman clearly preferred the
wishes of her family to the attractions of her suitor. However,
Stirner rejects this hypothetical explanation, insisting that,
provided “the pliable girl were conscious of having left her
self-will unsatisfied and humbly subjected herself to a higher
power” (197), we should see her actions as governed by piety
rather than egoism.
It would also be a mistake to think of Stirner as advocating a
normative proposition about the value of self-interested action as
ordinarily understood. Stirnerian egoism needs to be distinguished
from the individual pursuit of conventional self-interest. In The
Ego and Its Own, Stirner discusses the important example of an
avaricious individual who sacrifices everything in pursuit of material
riches. Such an individual is clearly self-interested (he acts only to
enrich himself) but it is an egoism which Stirner rejects as one-sided
and narrow. Stirner’s reason for rejecting this form of egoism
is instructive. He suggests that the avaricious man has become
enslaved to a single end, and that such enslavement is incompatible
with egoism properly understood.
Stirnerian egoism is perhaps best thought of, not in terms of the
pursuit of self-interest, but rather as a variety of individual
self-rule or autonomy. Egoism properly understood is to be identified
with what Stirner calls “ownness [Eigenheit]”, a
type of autonomy which is incompatible with any suspension, whether
voluntary or forced, of individual judgement. “I am my
own”, Stirner writes, “only when I am master of myself,
instead of being mastered … by anything else” (153). As
already noted, this Stirnerian ideal of self-rule has external and
internal dimensions, requiring not only that we avoid subordinating
ourselves to others, but also that we escape being “dragged
along” (56) by our own appetites. In short, Stirner not only
rejects the legitimacy of any subordination to the will of another but
also recommends that individuals cultivate an ideal of emotional
detachment towards their own appetites and ideas.
Judged against this account of egoism, characterisations of Stirner as
a “nihilist”—in the sense that he rejects all
normative judgement—would also appear to be mistaken. The
popular but doubtful description of Stirner as a
“nihilist” is encouraged by his explicit rejection of
morality. Morality, on Stirner’s account, involves the positing
of obligations to behave in certain fixed ways. As a result, he
rejects morality as incompatible with egoism properly understood.
However, this rejection of morality is not grounded in the rejection
of values as such, but in the affirmation of what might be called
non-moral goods. That is, Stirner allows that there are actions and
desires which, although not moral in his sense (because they do not
involve obligations to others), are nonetheless to be assessed
positively. Stirner is clearly committed to the non-nihilistic view
that certain kinds of character and modes of behaviour (namely
autonomous individuals and actions) are to be valued above all others.
His conception of morality is, in this respect, a narrow one, and his
rejection of the legitimacy of moral claims is not to be confused with
a denial of the propriety of all normative or ethical judgement. There
is, as a result, no inconsistency in Stirner’s frequent use of
an explicitly evaluative vocabulary, as when, for example, he praises
the egoist for having the “courage” (265) to lie, or
condemns the “weakness” (197) of the individual who
succumbs to pressure from their family.
Two features of Stirner’s position emerge as fundamental. First,
he values “ownness” not as one good amongst many, but as
the most important good, a good which trumps all others. Second, he
adopts an account of self-rule which is incompatible with the
existence of any legitimate obligations to others, even those which an
individual has voluntarily undertaken; thereby rejecting perhaps the
most familiar way of reconciling individual autonomy with the
existence of binding obligations. In short, Stirner appears to value
individual self-rule above all else, and he interprets that self-rule
in a stringent and idiosyncratic manner.
The consequences of Stirner’s position appear extreme and
far-reaching. As the example of morality suggests, egoists are likely
to find themselves in conflict with some cherished social institutions
and practices. Stirner consistently associates (non-egoistic) society
with relationships of “belonging”, which he treats as
involving the subjugation of individuals. For example, he maintains
that “the forming of family ties binds a man” (102).
(Stirner never appears to consider seriously the possibility that
belonging might, at least potentially or in some cases, have more
positive associations; for example, of being at home or of feeling
secure.) Confronted with the conflict between egoism and
“society”, Stirner is not prompted to re-examine his
commitment to, or understanding of, self-rule, but instead confidently
denies the legitimacy of those conventional institutions and
practices. Two examples of this response may suffice.
On Stirner’s account, there is a necessary antipathy between the
egoistic individual and the state. This inevitable hostility is based
on the conflict between Stirner’s conception of autonomy and any
obligation to obey the law. “Own will and the state”, he
writes, “are powers in deadly hostility, between which no
‘perpetual peace’ is possible” (175). Since
self-rule is incompatible with, and valued more highly than, any
obligation to obey the law, Stirner rejects the legitimacy of
political obligation. Note that this rejection stands irrespective of
the foundation of that political obligation, and whatever the form of
the state. “Every state”, Stirner insists, “is a
despotism, be the despot one or many” (175). Even in the
hypothetical case of a direct democracy in which a collective decision
had been made unanimously, Stirner denies that the egoist would be
bound by the result. To be bound today by “my will of
yesterday”, he maintains, would be to turn my
“creature”, that is “a particular expression of
will”, into my “commander”; it would be to freeze my
will, and Stirner denies that “because I was a fool yesterday I
must remain such” (175).
Promise-keeping is another early victim of this commitment to, and
understanding of, self-rule. Stirner associates the institution of
promising with illegitimate constraint, since the requirement that
duly made promises be kept is incompatible with his understanding of
individual autonomy. Stirner rejects any general obligation to keep
promises as just another attempt to bind the individual. The egoist,
he suggests, must embrace the heroism of the lie, and be willing to
break even his own word “in order to determine himself instead
of being determined” (210). Note that Stirner’s enthusiasm
is reserved not for those who break their word in the service of some
larger spiritual goal (as Luther, for example, became unfaithful to
his monastic vows for God’s sake), but rather for those
individuals who are willing to break their word for their own
sake.
As well as a negative account of the institutions and practices that
egoists must reject as incompatible with autonomy, The Ego and Its
Own also contains some positive suggestions about the possible
shape of egoistic relationships which do not conflict with individual
self-rule. In particular, Stirner provides a brief sketch of what he
calls the “union of egoists [Verein von
Egoisten]” (161).
The egoistic future is said to consist not of wholly isolated
individuals but rather in relationships of “uniting”, that
is, in impermanent connections between individuals who themselves
remain independent and self-determining. The central feature of the
resulting union of egoists is that it does not involve the
subordination of the individual. The union is “a son and
co-worker” (273) of autonomy, a constantly shifting alliance
which enables individuals to unite without loss of sovereignty,
without swearing allegiance to anyone else’s “flag”
(210). This union of egoists constitutes a purely instrumental
association whose good is solely the advantage that the individuals
concerned may derive for the pursuit of their individual goals; there
are no shared final ends and the association is not valued in itself.
In his reply to “Stirner’s Critics”, he imagines two
heart-warming street scenes to illustrate egoistic union: in the
first, children happen upon each other and spontaneously engage in the
“comradeship of play [Spielkameradschaft]”; and,
in the second, Moses Hess (one of the critics in question) bumps into
friends before adjourning for a drink, not out of loyalty, but in the
expectation of pleasure. (Stirner 1914: 295-6.)
Stirner sometimes seems torn as how best to elucidate this basic
account of egoistic social relations. At least, in The Ego and Its
Own, his elaboration of egoistic relations can appear to take
divergent paths.
In the first, and least typical, of these moods, Stirner strives to
avoid suggesting, at least too strongly, that his views might have
radical and unforeseen consequences. More precisely, he seeks to
suggest that certain familiar and worthwhile relationships (such as
“love”) might continue into the egoistic future. This
suggestion is presumably aimed at making that future appear more
attractive, not least to those attached to these familiar and
worthwhile relationships. 
That said, it is far from certain that all of the relationships that
he mentions would survive intact from their reincarnation in egoistic
form. Consider, for example, Stirner’s contrast between two
different kinds of love: the “bad case” where
“ownness” is sacrificed, and egoistic love in which
self-rule is retained. Egoistic love allows the individual to deny
themself something in order to enhance the pleasure of another, but
only because their own pleasure is enhanced as a result. The object of
egoistic love, in other words, remains the individual themself. The
egoist will not sacrifice their autonomy and interests to another, but
rather loves only as long as “love makes me happy” (258).
At one point, Stirner characterises this relationship as one in which
the individual “enjoys” the other (258). The description
is a revealing one, since enjoying another person and loving them
would appear to be rather different matters. Loving another person in
the conventional (and non-egoistic) sense might be thought to include
the desire to promote the welfare of that person, even when it is not
in our interests, or when it conflicts with our own wants and
happiness. In this respect, it stands at some distance from
Stirner’s account of egoistic love. The point here is not a
terminological one—Stirner rightly cares little whether we call
egoistic love “love” and “hence stick to the old
sound” (261) or whether we invent a new vocabulary—but
rather that a world without this experience would be an unfamiliar and
impoverished one. Stirner has not obviously succeeded in establishing
that this particular familiar and worthwhile relationship would
survive reestablishment on egoistic premises.
In the second, and more predominant, of these moods, Stirner
celebrates the radical and unfamiliar consequences of adopting an
egoistic order. Indeed, in places, he seems to revel in acknowledging
that his views have startling consequences from which few of his
readers will take any solace. This is one of the sources of the
melodramatic and provocative tone of parts of The Ego and Its
Own.
Stirner describes the appropriate relation between the egoist and
their objects — which include, of course, other persons as well
as things — as a property relation. The egoist properly stands
in a relation of “ownership” to the wider world. This
notion of “egoistic property” is not to be confused with
more familiar juridical concepts of ownership (such as private
property or collective ownership). These more familiar forms of
property rest on notions of right, and involve claims to exclusivity
or constraints on use, which Stirner rejects. Egoistic property is
rather constituted by the “unlimited dominion” (223) of
individuals over the world, by which Stirner appears to mean that
there are no moral constraints on how an individual might relate to
these persons and things. Stirner sometimes describes the resulting
association between people as involving relationships “of
utility, of use” (263). The egoist, he suggests, views others as
“nothing but—my food, even as I am fed upon and turned to
use by you” (263). Stirner embraces the stark consequences of
this rejection of any general obligation towards others, insisting,
for example, that the egoist does not renounce “even the power
over life and death” (282). Over the course of the book, he
variously declines to condemn the officer’s widow who strangles
her child (281), the man who treats his sister “as wife
also” (45), and the murderer who no longer fears his act as a
“wrong” (169). In a world in which “we owe each
other nothing” (263), it seems that acts of infanticide, incest,
and murder, might all turn out to be justified.
At one point, Stirner acknowledges that few readers of The Ego and
Its Own will draw any comfort from his vision of an egoistic
future, but insists that the welfare of this audience is not of any
interest to him. Indeed, Stirner suggests that, if he had been
motivated by a concern for others, then he would have had to conceal
rather than propagate his ideas. As it is, Stirner maintains that even
if he had believed that these ideas would lead to the “bloodiest
wars and the fall of many generations” (263) he would still have
disseminated them.
At the time of his death, Stirner’s brief period of notoriety
was long over, his book had been out of print for several years, and
there was little sign that his work might have any longer term impact.
Since then, however, The Ego and Its Own has been translated
into at least eight languages, and appeared in over one hundred
editions.
Subsequent interpretations of Stirner have often followed contemporary
intellectual fashion. For example, at the beginning of the twentieth
century, Stirner was frequently portrayed as a precursor of Friedrich
Nietzsche (1844–1900), as having anticipated, if not influenced
— it is far from certain that Nietzsche had read Stirner’s
work— both the style and substance of Nietzsche’s
work.(Carus 1914: 74–99.) In the 1960s and early 1970s, Stirner
was rediscovered as a forerunner of existentialism, whose
anti-essentialist concept of the self as a ‘creative
nothing’ had affinities with the notion of human nature employed
by Jean-Paul Sartre (1905-1980). (Paterson 1971.) More recently,
Stirner has been identified as a nascent poststructuralist (linked not
least with Gilles Deleuze (1925–1995)), rejecting the idea of a
universal human nature, employing a genealogical critique of humanist
discourses of power and identity, and opposing various forms of
state-centric thought. (Newman 2009.) These parallels are often
plausible and interesting, although the sceptic might suspect that
they reveal changing historical enthusiasms as much as they illuminate
aspects of Stirner’s philosophical and political thought.
The historical influence of Stirner’s work is perhaps more
plausibly located in two different contexts. Concerning its
contemporary impact on the intellectual life of Vormärz
Germany, The Ego and Its Own had a destructive impact on
Stirner’s left-Hegelian contemporaries, and played a related and
significant role in the evolution of the thought of Karl Marx.
Concerning its longer term historical influence, Stirner’s
best-known work has become a founding text in the political tradition
of individualist anarchism.
Stirner’s insistence that his radical Hegelian contemporaries
had failed to break with religious modes of thought prompted most of
the leading left-Hegelians to defend their own work in public against
this attack. In perhaps the most important of these replies, Feuerbach
— who appeared defensive and irritated (suspecting Stirner of
trying to make a name for himself at his own expense) — was
widely seen as struggling to maintain a besieged and outdated
position. Bruno Bauer also offered a critical response, seeking to
defend his own philosophy of self-consciousness against what he saw as
Stirner’s inadequate form of subjectivity. (Moggach and de
Ridder, 2013.) Stirner replied directly to three of these
left-Hegelian reviews—the defence of Bauer’s “humane
liberalism” by “Szeliga” (the pseudonym of Franz
Zychlinski (1816–1900)); the defence of socialism by Moses Hess;
and the defence of Feuerbach by Feuerbach himself—in an article
entitled “Stirner’s Critics” (1845). In this
confident rejoinder, Stirner reiterated some of the central themes of
The Ego and Its Own and clarified the character of his own
commitment to egoism. Stirner may also have provided a final reply to
contemporary critics in a pseudonymous article entitled “The
Philosophical Reactionaries”, in which the author responds to a
young Kuno Fischer. (The caution is needed since the identification of
“G. Edward” as Max Stirner is plausible but not
incontrovertible.) 
Stirner’s work also had a significant impact on a then
little-known contemporary associate of these left-Hegelians, one Karl
Marx. (Stirner mentions Marx indirectly, in a footnote which treats
him as something like a radical Feuerbachian.) Between 1845 and 1846,
Marx collaborated with Friedrich Engels (1820–1895) on a group
of manuscripts now usually called The German Ideology, which
included a fierce and sustained attack on their erstwhile
philosophical contemporaries. Most of these texts were not published
at the time, and it was 1932 before this critical engagement with the
work of Bauer, Feuerbach, and Stirner, appeared fully in print. The
account of Stirner contained in the so-called The German
Ideology takes up over three hundred pages of the published text
— abridged editions often omit much of this dense but
fascinating material — and, although Marx is remorselessly
critical of Stirner’s position, it scarcely follows that The
Ego and Its Own was without influence on the former’s
ideas. Not least, Stirner’s book appears to have been decisive:
in motivating Marx’s break with the work of Feuerbach (whose
considerable influence on many of Marx’s earlier writings is
readily apparent); in making Marx reconsider the role that concepts of
human nature should play in social criticism; and in forcing him to
think more clearly about how far communism should be, in some sense,
individualistic.
Finally, and over a longer period of time, the author of The Ego
and Its Own has become best-known as a member of, and influence
upon, the anarchist tradition. In particular, Stirner’s name
regularly appears in historically-orientated surveys of anarchist
thought as one of the earliest and best-known exponents of
individualist anarchism. The affinity between Stirner and the
anarchist tradition lies in his endorsement of the claim that the
state is an illegitimate institution. His elaboration of this claim is
an interesting and distinctive one. (Leopold 2006) For Stirner, a
state can never be legitimate, since there is a necessary conflict
between individual self-rule and the obligation to obey the law (with
which the legitimacy of the state is identified). Given that
individual self-rule trumps any competing consideration, Stirner
concludes that the demands of the state are not binding on the
individual. However, he does not think that individuals have, as a
result, any general obligation to oppose and attempt to eliminate the
state (insofar as this is within their power). Rather the individual
should decide in each particular case whether or not to go along with
the state’s demands. Only in cases where there is a conflict
between the autonomy of the egoist and the demands of the state, does
he recommend evading the requirements of law. That said, whilst
individuals have no duty to overthrow the state, Stirner does think
that the state will eventually collapse as a result of the spread of
egoism. The cumulative effect of a growing egoistic disrespect for
law, he suggests, would be to “scuttle” the “ship of
state”. (54) Anarchists influenced by Stirner’s
individualism and his suspicion of the state can be found in several
European countries. In Great Britain, his ideas influenced Dora
Marsden (1882–1960), and her journals The New Freewoman
and The Egoist. In America, James L Walker (1845–1904),
author of The Philosophy of Egoism was interested in, and
influenced by, Stirner’s thought, although the best-known
anarchist admirers of the latter in America were in the circle which
formed around Benjamin R. Tucker (1854–1939) and the remarkable
journal Liberty (founded in 1881). (Welsh 2010:
117–225.) It has often been individualist anarchists who were
responsible for keeping Stirner’s ideas available to others,
providing many of the editions and translations of his work.
Stirner is unlikely to have regretted these disputes about the nature
and influence of The Ego and Its Own. In considering various
interpretative accounts of the Bible, he declines to adjudicate
between the judgement of the child who plays with the book, the Inca
emperor Atahualpa (c.1502–1533) who threw it away when it failed
to speak to him, the priest who praises it as the word of God, and the
critic who dissects it as a purely human invention. The plurality of
interpretations of his own work might well have amused Stirner and
encouraged him in his view that there could be no legitimate
constraints on the meaning of a text. Stirner once described himself
as writing only to procure for his thoughts an existence in the world,
insisting that what subsequently happens to those ideas “is your
affair and does not trouble me” (263).