Max Horkheimer was born into a conservative Jewish family on
February 14, 1895, the only son of Moritz and Babette Horkheimer.
 A successful and respected businessman who owned several textile
factories in the Zuffenhausen district of Stuttgart (where Max was
born), Moritz Horkheimer expected his son to follow in his footsteps.
 Thus Max was taken out of school in 1910 to work in the family
business, where he eventually became a junior manager.  During
this period he would begin two relationships that would last for the
rest of his life.  First, he met Friedrich Pollock, who would
later become a close academic colleague, and who would remain Max’s
closest friend.  He also met Rose Riekher, who was his
father’s personal secretary.  Eight years Max’s senior, a gentile,
and of an economically lower class, Riekher (whom Max called “Maidon”)
was not considered a suitable match by Moritz Horkheimer.  Despite
this, Max and Maidon would marry in 1926 and remain together until her
death in 1969 (Wiggerschaus 1994, p. 41–44).
In the spring of 1919, after failing an army physical, Horkheimer
began studies at the University of Munich, and transferred to the
University of Frankfurt a semester later.  At Frankfurt he
studied psychology and philosophy, the latter with the neo-Kantian
philosopher Hans Cornelius.  He also spent a year, on Cornelius’s
recommendation, studying in Freiburg with Edmund Husserl.  After
an abortive attempt at writing a dissertation on gestalt psychology,
Horkheimer, with Cornelius’s direction, completed his doctorate in
philosophy with a dissertation titled The Antinomy of Teleological
Judgment.  Upon completion of the degree he was offered an
assistantship under Cornelius, and thus definitively set off on an
academic career rather than continuing in his father’s business.
 In 1925 Horkheimer completed his Habilitation with a work titled
Kant’s Critique of Judgment as a Link between Theoretical and Practical
Philosophy, and took a position as Privatdozent, or lecturer, at
Frankfurt.  During this time he would lecture extensively on 18th
and 19th Century philosophy, with his research interests moving more in
line with Marxian themes (Wiggerschaus 1994, p. 44–47).
The most important moments of Horkheimer’s early academic career
would come in 1930.  In July he was appointed Professor of Social
Philosophy at Frankfurt, and in October made the director of the
Institut für Sozialforschung (Institute of Social
Research).  The Institute began as a Marxist study group
started by Felix Weil, a one-time student of political science at
Frankfurt who used his inheritance to fund an institution that would
support his leftist academic aims.  Along with Pollock (who
also completed a doctorate in Frankfurt, writing on Marx), Horkheimer
became acquainted with Weil, and took part in the activities of the
Institute from the beginning.  The Institute formally opened in
1924 under the direction of the Austrian Marxist scholar Carl
Grünberg, who became ill quickly after taking the post.
 While Pollock was more closely associated with the Institute
during the Grünberg period, he supported his friend for
the directorship (on the early history of the Institute, see Jay 1996,
ch. 1).  On January 24, 1931, Horkheimer delivered his inaugural
lecture for the chair of social philosophy and directorship of the
Institute, titled “The Present Situation of Social Philosophy and the
Tasks of an Institute for Social Research.”  This lecture, and
several essays written by Horkheimer in the early 1930s, would develop
a conception of interdisciplinary social research that was meant to
guide the activities of the institute during Horkheimer’s tenure as
director.
This program was obstructed from the very beginning by
social-political unrest.  In the time between Horkheimer’s being named
Professor of Social Philosophy and director of the Institute in 1930,
the Nazis became the second largest party in the Reichstag.  In the
midst of the violence surrounding the Nazis’ rise, Horkheimer and his
associates began to prepare for the possibility of moving the
Institute out of Germany.  Shortly after Hitler was named Chancellor
in 1933, the Institute in Frankfurt was closed and its building seized
by the Gestapo. Horkheimer was also relieved of his professorship and
directorship in early 1933, and relocated to Geneva, where the
Institute had opened a satellite office.  In 1934 Horkheimer moved to
New York, where one of Pollock’s assistants had been negotiating an
agreement for the Institute with the department of sociology at
Columbia University.  In July of 1934 Horkheimer accepted an offer
from Columbia to relocate the Institute to one of their buildings.
Having received American citizenship in 1940, Horkheimer would
continue to live and work largely in New York until 1941, when he
moved to the Los Angeles area (for a thorough history of the
development of Horkheimer’s thought up to this point, see Abromeit
2011).  With the Institute splintering between New York and
California, Horkheimer concentrated his energies on his own work,
including the collaborative efforts with Theodor Adorno that
produced Dialectic of Enlightenment. 
With the end of WWII, Horkheimer gradually considered moving back to
Germany.  In April 1948, he returned to Europe for the first time,
to lecture in various cities, including as a visiting professor in
Frankfurt. His full return to Germany would follow shortly, and in July
1949 he was restored to his professorship at the University of
Frankfurt.  The following year the Institute would return as well.
 After returning, Horkheimer would focus on administrative work,
reestablishing the Institute and serving two terms as University Rector
in the early 1950s.  In 1953 he was awarded the Goethe Plaque of
the City of Frankfurt, and would later be named honorary citizen of
Frankfurt for life.  His academic activities also continued
throughout the 1950s, and included a period during which he served as a
regular visiting professor at the University of Chicago.  His work
would slow, however, once he retired in 1958 to the Swiss town of
Montagnola.  Max Horkheimer passed away on July 7, 1973, at the
age of 78. 
The theoretical viewpoint that oriented the work of the Institute of
Social Research, most famously known as “critical theory,” was largely
developed by Horkheimer in various writings in the 1930s (most of which
were published in the Institute’s journal, the
Zeitschrift für
 Sozialforschung).[1]
 In the earliest works Horkheimer used the term
“materialism,” rather than critical theory, to name his
philosophical viewpoint.  Though his early texts do not directly
mention Marx as much as one might expect (perhaps for reasons of
political expediency), it is clear that this theory draws great
inspiration from Marxian thought (see Borman 2017 for further 
discussion of Horkheimer’s early materialism and its connection to 
Marx).  Horkheimer’s materialism is not
systematically presented in those early essays; rather the
epistemological, methodological, and moral concepts that were to
orient the work of the Institute are developed through a variety of
texts. What follows is an attempt at a reconstruction of Horkheimer’s
program for the Institute, which draws on elements from various essays
of the early 1930s.
One can begin to piece together Horkheimer’s materialist method by
examining the 1931 inaugural address. There he presents most of the
main themes of his early philosophy in the context of describing what
the Institute was to accomplish under his leadership. As he notes at
the beginning, social philosophy must interpret the various phenomena
associated with human social life.  But along with this fairly obvious
point, he asserts that “social philosophy is confronted with the
yearning for a new interpretation of a life trapped in its individual
striving for happiness” (p. 7).  This introduces perhaps the
most fundamental element of Horkheimer’s view.  Social philosophy must
connect with the practical aim of alleviating suffering.  But it is,
after all, still a theoretical enterprise, and he would emphasize that
the work of the Institute would amount to “a reformulation...of
the old question concerning the connection of particular existence and
universal Reason” (pp. 11–12).  Along with the emphasis on
suffering, the proper interpretation of reason would play a crucial
role in Horkheimer’s thought.
Early in the inaugural address he lays out a quick, and critical,
history of modern German social philosophy that fixes on Hegel.
Hegelian social philosophy is criticized for
“transfiguring” oppression; individual human experience,
with all its suffering, is given sense insofar as it is fit within a
rational, overarching conception of the movement of the “eternal
life of Spirit” (pp. 4–5).  Horkheimer rejects this kind
of metaphysical view because it seeks to cover over the reality of
human suffering.  But he is not unreservedly critical of
metaphysics. After criticizing Hegelian social philosophy, he notes
that in reaction certain strands of social research eschewed
philosophy entirely.  This leads to Horkheimer’s criticism of the
excessive specialization of the (in this case social) sciences.  Due
to this specialization, scientific researchers omit any broader
examination of the social roots, and social meaning, from their
inquiry.  At least metaphysical thinking recognizes the need to
present a comprehensive view that can make sense of the social whole.
The twin critiques of metaphysics and science provide a space for
Horkheimer to present his own view.  The aim of materialist social
research is to combine specific empirical studies with more
comprehensive theorizing, and thus overcome these problems. Horkheimer
finishes by noting that this research will be aimed at the elucidation
of the links between economic structure, psychology, and culture, such
that the work of various social scientists and theorists can be
brought together to forge an empirically informed picture of society
that might replace such previous metaphysical categories as Universal
Reason or Spirit.
Thus construed, we can use the themes presented in the inaugural
address as a guide for the further examination of Horkheimer’s early
thought.  Four elements become key: the emphasis on suffering and
happiness, the role rationality plays in emancipatory movements, the
combined critiques of metaphysics and positivism, and the methodology
of interdisciplinary social research.  Each of these four is
examined in more depth in the four subsections below. 
As noted, the rejection of Hegelian social philosophy in the inaugural
lecture is tied to a broader rejection of metaphysics, which will be
discussed in more detail in §2.2.  At the root of the rejection
of “transfiguration,” however, is a very basic point.  No
social philosophy that denies the singular import of suffering, and
the corresponding desire to overcome that suffering, can properly
grasp human social reality.  Thus, in the 1933 essay
“Materialism and Metaphysics” Horkheimer writes that
“man’s striving for happiness is to be recognized as a natural
fact requiring no justification” (p. 44).  Prior to any critique
of metaphysics, materialism rests on the basic recognition of
suffering and the desire for happiness.  Suffering and happiness are
in some sense “properly basic”; their significance is
evident, in no need of justification, and foundational to materialist
social theory. 
The talk of both “suffering” and “happiness”
suggests that Horkheimer oscillated between pessimistic and optimistic
renderings of this foundational idea.  The pessimistic side of this
view, with its conception of human life as shared suffering, was
present in Horkheimer’s thought from very early in his life. In the
novellas and diary entries written from 1914–1918 and later
published as Aus der Pubertät (From Puberty), this
pessimism is prominent (see Schmidt 1993, 25–26). This is in
part due to the early influence of Schopenhauer’s “metaphysical
pessimism” on Horkheimer’s thought, and Horkheimer himself would
emphasize that Schopenhauer was his first philosophical role model
(Horkheimer 1968, p. ix).  It is noteworthy (especially given the link
here to Horkheimer’s critique of metaphysics), that for Schopenhauer
this “metaphysical” view is tied to the concrete need to
interpret the world in a way that can help humans understand and deal
with their suffering (on this point, and Horkheimer’s relation to
Schopenhauer’s thought in general, see Schmidt 1993).  Metaphysical or
not, this view is based on the notion that life is marked by pain.
The optimistic rendering comes to the fore in the above quote from
“Materialism and Metaphysics” insofar as the desire for
happiness is emphasized.  But the optimism should not be
overestimated, because happiness is construed in a solely negative
manner.  The oppressed are motivated not by some positive conception
of happiness, but by the hope of freedom from suffering. This
individual desire for happiness can further manifest itself as the
moral sentiment of compassion, wherein we desire the happiness of
others (Horkheimer 1933b, pp.
34–35).[2]
The desire to overcome one’s own suffering, combined with the feeling
of compassion, should help motivate the oppressed to join together to
work for positive social change.  But even this optimistic note is
tinged with a pessimistic note, as “the aim of a future happy
life for all” arises only “out of the privation of the
present” (Horkheimer 1933b p. 34); it is the existence of
current shared suffering that could lead to revolutionary social
change.
Along with Schopenhauer, Horkheimer’s thoughts on suffering owe a
great deal to Freud.  The notion that human beings have an inner
drive to overcome suffering is taken from Freud’s early libido theory
(see Held 1980, pp. 43–44 and 197–198).  Horkheimer’s most direct
analysis of Freud in the 1930s is found in “Egoism and Freedom
Movements” (especially pp. 103–106), and the Freudian conception of
inner drives will further mark Horkheimer’s later work, as will be
shown in §4.2 below.  In the 1930s Horkheimer was also
influenced by Erich Fromm, who was a member of the Institute at the
time; for example, shortly after the claim in “Materialism and
Metaphysics” that the desire for happiness is a natural fact, Fromm’s
work is referenced.  It is noteworthy in this regard that Fromm’s
work from this period aimed to broadly draw together Freudian and
Marxian views.  This connection can be seen in the link between
the desire for happiness and emancipation, as discussed in the next
section.
When focusing on the affective nature of suffering, happiness, and
compassion in Horkheimer’s view, one might get the sense that he is
relying on a sort of emotivism that shuns reason.  But there is a
strongly rationalistic strand present in Horkheimer’s early work that
is tied directly to his views on positive social change.  In fact,
he describes suffering as resulting from a lack of rational social
organization, and proposes that any attempt to improve society must
involve making it in some way more rational.  This view is in turn
tied to the broadly Marxian element in Horkheimer’s early work, as
capitalism is criticized for creating the irrational social conditions
that lead to suffering.
To a large extent, this problem of irrationality is described as a
social coordination problem.  Insofar as it is individual human
beings who suffer, and who desire happiness, individual welfare is a
crucial matter.  This is made clear by the critique of Hegelian
“transfiguration,” which is problematic partly because it subsumes
individual suffering and happiness within the absolute.  At the
same time, individual welfare is still dependent upon a broader social
basis, so the life of society as a whole is pertinent to the search for
happiness.  But capitalism has created a situation wherein people
are made to focus on their own individual welfare, without considering
anything other than “the conservation and multiplication of their own
property” (1933b, p. 19).   Social needs are thus handled through
various disorganized activities focused on individual needs, which in
turn inadequately deals with the social basis of individual welfare,
thus detracting from individual welfare.  This kind of critique is
found in some form in many of Horkheimer’s early essays (see, for
example, 1934c, pp. 247–250 and 1935b, pp. 162–170).
Such an argument is made particularly clearly in “Materialism
and Morality,” where Horkheimer discusses idealist, and predominantly
Kantian, conceptions of morality.  One main thread of the rather
intricate argument made there is that there is a tension in Kant’s
view, insofar as he places a radical emphasis on the individual will,
but also makes that will beholden to the universal law described in
terms of the kingdom of ends.  This tension supposedly comes from
the bourgeois socio-economic context in which Kant lived:
This passage makes it clear that the coordination problems
associated with the “bourgeois epoch” (i.e. the capitalist period) are
problems of irrationality.  Furthermore, it makes clear that the
solution to these problems is to be found in the formation of a more
rational social order, which is described in terms of a socialist
planned economy.  This point, then, provides the space where
Horkheimer can link his own materialist theory, and the work of the
Institute, to the broadly Marxian aim of emancipation through
overcoming the capitalist order.  Because “the wretchedness of our
own time is connected with the structure of society” (1933b, 24) a
social theory that could make that structure’s
irrationality explicit could help overcome that wretchedness.
 Furthermore, that irrationality needs to be made explicit to the
classes who suffer the most from it, so they can take proper action.
 So Horkheimer’s view connects generally to the
Marxian view of the proletariat as a critical force in history, but
unlike (on certain interpretations, at least) Marx, he does not see
history as necessarily moving the proletariat to “critical
consciousness” because of the irrationality inherent in capitalist
socio-economic arrangements. Rather, various social and economic forces
keep the proletariat from recognizing its potential; for example there
is a split between the unemployed, who suffer most from capitalism but
are disorganized, and the workers who can be organized, but fear losing
their jobs (Horkheimer 1934a, 61–65).  The proletariat
requires the help of the theorist.  That theorist must engage in a
special kind of activity, however, which (as the next section will
show) must steer clear of two opposing errors.
One can get a sense of what Horkheimer means when criticizing
metaphysics by looking at “Materialism and Metaphysics.” There
metaphysics is described in relation to Wilhelm
Dilthey’s doctrine of “world views.”  For
Dilthey, human beings engage in metaphysics in an attempt to explain
the enigmatic elements of human life.  In this attempt, certain
characteristics of experience are emphasized and developed into
coherent world views that have putatively universal validity, and
describe the significance of the world and human life (pp. 10–17).
 So “metaphysics,” in this sense, amounts to a kind of
intellectualized, theoretically elaborated attempt at turning partial,
finite experiences into a comprehensive view of nature and human
experience.
For Horkheimer, theories of this type are in part problematic because
“knowledge of the infinite must itself be infinite”
(Horkheimer 1933a, p. 27).  But human beings are only capable of
finite knowledge, and can only pay attention to changing historical
conditions.  If insights into the absolute are impossible, there is no
known ultimate order of things that grounds all other forms of
knowledge.  Along these lines Horkheimer criticized Max Scheler’s
metaphysical anthropology for holding that all human works and
achievements could be described in terms of some basic structure of
human nature (Horkheimer 1935b, p. 153).  Rather than pursuing an
interest in understanding human existence, Horkheimer argues,
metaphysics obscures the proper understanding of human life.  Many of
Horkheimer’s early essays aim to show how the works of various
philosophers, past and present, are troubled in this way.  For
example, along with the criticism of Dilthey in “Materialism and
Metaphysics” and the criticism of Scheler in “Remarks on
Philosophical Anthropology,” there are (among others) critiques
of this type that attack Kant in “Materialism and
Morality,” and Henri Bergson in “On Bergson’s Metaphysics
of Time.” 
In each case, however, Horkheimer was not solely critical, and there
is a positive element that Horkheimer finds in metaphysics that serves
as a transition to his critique of science.  For example, in the
1932 essay “Notes on Science and the Crisis,” he applauds “postwar
metaphysics, especially that of Max Scheler” for developing “a method
less hindered by conventional narrowness of outlook” (p.6).
 Similarly, in the 1934 essay “The Rationalism Debate in
Contemporary Philosophy,” Horkheimer agrees with Dilthey and Bergson
(and also Nietzsche, all three under the aegis of Lebensphilosophie)
insofar as they critique scientism and formalistic rationalism.
 Metaphysics is, in general, right to try to engage in some form
of synoptic theorizing, although it takes it too far. But the opposite
extreme, of which Scheler, Dilthey, and Bergson are critical, fits with
Horkheimer’s conception of the state of the sciences.
The critique of the sciences developed in the early texts moves
along two lines.  First, the sciences are criticized for being
overly specialized.  For example, in the inaugural address
Horkheimer complains of “chaotic specialization” (p. 9).  The
danger of focusing on technical minutiae is that researchers become
insulated from one another, and lose the ability to use one another’s
resources.  The result is a lack of unification and overall
direction.  Just as he favors a planned economy, Horkheimer wants
the “setting of tasks” in scientific research to be brought under
rational control, so empirical researchers can work together toward
broader ends.  Second, as noted in “Notes on Science and the
Crisis,” science “has no realistic grasp of that comprehensive
relationship upon which its own existence and the direction of its work
depends, namely, society” (p. 8).  All human work, be it in the
sciences or anything else, depends on a broader context which supports
it, and the activities that are associated with the social interests
prevalent at any given time affect the direction of scientific
research.  There is no “view from nowhere” from which empirical
research begins, but only socially situated standpoints.
 Horkheimer expands on this point to argue that when empirical
research misses its social roots, it also misses the effects the
“direction of its work” might have on society.  Science has a
responsibility to society that can only be filled if its various
research efforts are knit together within a more comprehensive
framework that takes society and its improvement as its object.
This is largely repeated in other works that criticize “positivism.”
 The fact that the Frankfurt School mounted a strong critique
of positivism is quite well known, in part because of the
so-called “Positivismusstreit” of the 1960s, and Horkheimer also uses
the term frequently, especially in his later works.  The
critiques of science and positivism make the same basic
 points.[3]
 Consider the critique of logical positivism in the 1937 essay “The
Latest Attack on Metaphysics.”  There Horkheimer argues that insofar
as logical empiricism “holds only to what is, to the guarantee of
facts” (pp. 133–134), it tries to insulate the individual sciences
from broader interpretation.  Thus positivism disconnects science from
society and robs it of its emancipatory possibilities, because brute
facts can only grasp the present, and the possibility for changing the
status quo in the future is lost.
The crucial point to note is that the critiques of metaphysics and
science work together, and are meant to open up a space between the two
where materialist social research should operate.  Philosophy
maintains metaphysics’ goal of producing a synoptic view of human life,
but it does so in a merely provisional way, which is open to empirical
research that genuinely follows the contours of history.  Science,
on the other hand, maintains its rigorous empirical methods, but must
open itself up to the role it plays in the broader social framework.
 In the inaugural address, Horkheimer thus claims that there must
be a “continuous, dialectical penetration and development of
philosophical theory and specialized scientific practice” (p. 9).
Horkheimer’s conception of interdisciplinary social research is rooted
in, broadly construed, both empiricist and realist views.  Horkheimer
speaks often of such research as aiming at “facts,” as
seen in §2.1 when he refers to the desire for happiness as a
natural fact. This connects to a kind of realism seen most directly in
the 1935 essay “On the Problem of Truth.”
“Materialism” he tells us, “insists that objective
reality is not identical with man’s thought,” and truth is
determined by the “relation of the propositions to
reality” (pp. 189, 194). But this realism has to be qualified;
materialism is distinguished from idealism through the appeal to an
objective reality outside of our thinking, but it is further separated
from metaphysical realism by its recognition that our knowing is
historically bounded. Along these lines, Horkheimer admits to holding
to a correspondence theory of truth, but notes that:
This correspondence is neither a simple datum [nor] an immediate
fact...Rather, it is always established by real events and human
activity. Already in the investigation and determination of
facts, and even more in the verification of theories, a role is played
by the direction of attention, the refinement of methods, the
categorical structure of the subject matter—in short, by human
activity corresponding to the given social period. (p. 190)
Here we find Horkheimer’s epistemological considerations echoing his
critique of science.  Presumably the “real events and human
activity” that grasp objective truth involve empirical research.
But because (as discussed in the critique of science) empirical
research is always tied to a social context, one must see that the
truths it reveals are conditioned by the “human activity
corresponding to the given social period.” Knowledge is always
affected by the historical changes in our methods noted. But more than
theoretical or methodological changes that shift scientific theories,
Horkheimer sees knowledge as being marked by our practical
interests. This is why a strong metaphysical conception of reality is
unavailable to us; all thinking is marked by practical and theoretical
interests that are partial and subject to historical change.
But this point cannot be taken too far; truth is neither wholly
determined by our practical interests nor by theory-dependent
conditions of verification. When it is claimed that truth is dependent
on the “relation of propositions to reality,” Horkheimer
means both of those to be given equal weight. While the weight put on
“propositions” (or better, human conceptual activity)
removes the possibility of a metaphysical theory of reality, it does
not remove reality.  But because all inquiry into truth is
historically and socially mediated, it is constantly open to
adjustment.  This points out why the “continuous, dialectical
penetration” of philosophy and science spoken of in the
inaugural address is necessary.  Objective truths have to be grasped
empirically, and the work of the specialized sciences is thus
necessary to determine the truth of the current state of society.  But
“truth is advanced” only when “human beings who
possess it stand by it unbendingly, apply it and carry it through, act
according to it, and bring it to power against the resistance of
reactionary, narrow, one-sided points of view” (Horkheimer
1935a, p. 4).  This requires that empirical research be saved from
“chaotic specialization,” and interpreted through an
adequate theoretical framework.  It is noteworthy in this regard that
toward the end of the inaugural lecture, Horkheimer states that it is
appropriate for the head of the Institute to also hold a chair in
social philosophy, as was not the case with his predecessor who worked
in the “specific discipline” of political economy.  For
Horkheimer, it was properly the job of the philosopher to plan out and
guide the interdisciplinary work of the Institute.
Historical exigencies kept the Institute’s early researchers from
implementing this program.  They did press on with their empirical and
theoretical efforts during the time of upheaval in the 1930s,
producing various small studies in the Zeitschrift für
Sozialforschung, and the larger Studies on Authority and the
Family.  It is clearly the case, however, that there were many
difficulties in carrying out the empirical research that was used in
those studies (see the historical discussion of this period in
Wiggerschaus 1994, 149–156).  Even if we set aside the
historical difficulties that beset the Institute during this time,
there is still reason to question whether Horkheimer’s
interdisciplinary program could have been carried out successfully.
One might doubt, for example, that the philosophers who formed the
core of the Frankfurt School, including Horkheimer himself, were
actually open enough to the sciences.  Jay 1996 (pp. 130–131),
Wiggerschaus 1994 (p. 151), and Wolin 1992 (pp. 56–58), argue
that they were not, such that their theoretical works (especially
in Studies on Authority and the Family) were not really
integrated with the empirical studies.  Perhaps more damningly,
Bonß 1993 argues that this failure comes from faults internal to
Horkheimer’s methodological and epistemological considerations such
that “the interdisciplinary claim amounts to no more than an
external formula for integration” (p. 118).  This seems fair
insofar as Horkheimer spent a great deal of energy claiming that
empirical and theoretical research should be combined, and explaining
why they should be combined, but did very little to explain how
they would be so combined.  It remains to be shown if one might
reactivate Horkheimer’s intentions while providing a better
explanation of how such integrated research might actually work.
Clearly, however, Horkheimer would come to gradually doubt the
efficacy of such a program; one can begin to trace out this shift by
examining the 1937 essay “Traditional and Critical Theory”
(this separation of the 1937 essay from the earlier
“materialist” works roughly follows arguments in Dubiel
1985). 
To an extent, Horkheimer’s materialist theory is encapsulated in his
most famous and widely-read essay from the 1930s, “Traditional
and Critical Theory.” The essay is often referred to as being
“programmatic,” highlighting the notion that it summarizes
the philosophical and methodological views that were meant to guide
the work of the Institute (see, for example, Schmidt 1993, p. 34, and
Ingram 1990, p. 108).  This is not wrong, but can be misleading if
overemphasized.  At the same time as it summarizes the earlier work,
“Traditional and Critical Theory” evinces a transition to
Horkheimer’s later critiques of reason and enlightenment (a similar
point is made in Benhabib 1986, pp. 149–163).  The most obvious
change occurs in the name Horkheimer gives to his favored view, as he
shifts from “materialism” to “critical
theory.” But the changes are more than cosmetic.  For example,
the critique of “traditional theory” subtly shifts the
terms of the critiques of metaphysics and positivism.  Also, the role
of the theorist vis-a-vis society changes.  In part, this prefigures
later views. 
The titular forms of theorizing correspond (as noted at the beginning
of the 1937 “Postscript,” p. 244) to those found in
Descartes’ Discourse on Method and Marx’s critique of political
economy, respectively.  So the overarching point of the essay can be
summarized fairly succinctly; it describes a form of
“traditional” theory that follows Descartes’ methodology,
examines the weaknesses of such theory, and then opposes to
traditional theory a superior Marxian “critical” theory.
The critique of traditional theory largely follows the earlier
critique of the sciences and positivism, and in this sense is a
summation.  Again, the fact that the sciences do not recognize their
presence in a broader social framework is emphasized.  Traditional
theory misses the fact that that “bringing hypotheses to bear on
facts is an activity that goes on, ultimately, not in the savant’s
head but in industry” (p. 196).  “Savant” is the
derisive term Horkheimer uses throughout the text to refer to the
traditional theorist, and the savant does not recognize that the
economic (and thus currently capitalist) structure of society shapes
scientific work.  The savant further misses the suffering caused by
that social structure, and the fact that science is complicit in this
oppression.  Critical theorizing, on the other hand, is “a human
activity which has society itself for its object” (p.  206); it
overcomes the blindness of the savant by openly and purposely
examining the way in which theory is immersed in a particular
historical and social setting, and it seeks to critique that social
setting for emancipatory effect.  This relies on a form of immanent
critique, tied to the suffering of the oppressed; the theorist must
seize on the meaning of the experience of the oppressed and develop it
into a coherent critique of existing society.  To this end Horkheimer
notes that if the critical theorist’s “presentation of societal
contradictions is not merely an expression of the concrete historical
situation but also a force within it to stimulate change, then [the
critical theorist’s] real function emerges” (p. 215).
This general symmetry with the earlier program belies certain
important changes to the theory, however.  The very beginning of the
text, which discusses traditional theory, shows a subtle shift from
the earlier work.  Traditional theory is first linked with the natural
sciences, for which “theory” involves a set of logically
linked propositions that are consonant with empirical facts.  The
logical coherence of such a set of propositions is then emphasized,
and connected to Descartes’ method.  Horkheimer goes on to suggest
that such a conception of theory has an inherent tendency to move
toward “a purely mathematical system of symbols.” Formal
logic and reasoning thus become a main target of criticism.  This is
not a radical departure from Horkheimer’s earlier critique of science,
since, for example, in “Notes on Science and the Crisis,”
he objects to the rigid, mechanistic character of the scientific
method. But the earlier texts focus more on a problem that is external
to the sciences.  There is no coherent “setting of tasks”
prior to the engagement in empirical research, and the results of
empirical research are not knit into a broader theory that can have
emancipatory intent. The earlier essays largely ask for the sciences
to go about their normal business within an interdisciplinary setting
that would correct these problems.  In “Traditional and Critical
Theory,” on the other hand, the critique strikes more directly
at the formalism inherent in the sciences’ own methodology, such that
the problem is internal to the sciences.  This provides one clear
transitional point, insofar as formalism will be a primary object of
critique in Horkheimer’s writings from the 1940s.  
Another interesting shift is that the critique of metaphysics largely
falls out of the picture.  For some commentators, metaphysics is
folded, along with science, into traditional theory (see Brunkhorst
1993, 74).  But this does not seem entirely correct, because in the
midst of criticizing positivism, Horkheimer notes that there is,
“lurking” in positivism’s emphasis on facts,
“something like a reaction against the alliance of metaphysics
and oppression” (p.  232).  This claim hearkens back to the
notion, described in places like “Materialism and
Metaphysics,” that scientific attention to facts, when properly
construed within materialist research, can keep philosophy from
overlooking actual human suffering.  But such references are few, and
Horkheimer does shift the discussion of science in such a way that it
takes over parts of his earlier critique of metaphysics.  For example,
he criticizes the sciences, in a manner that is not common in earlier
essays, for the way they subsume facts under universal concepts
(pp. 224–226).  This critique of universal concepts is tied to
the critique of formalism; Horkheimer finds fault in the fact that the
sciences relate facts to concepts in terms of the “relation of
classes to instances” which can be “accomplished by a
simple deduction” (p.225).  Critical theory is then contrasted
with this overly simplified universal-particular relation insofar as
it constantly reexamines the relation of facts to universal concepts,
and sees them as fitting together in a dynamic relationship that must
be carefully charted.  The implication is that logical formalism leads
the sciences to form static universals into which all particulars can
be neatly placed.  Since the sciences are attending to facts in
engaging in such an operation, the critique does not exactly match up
with the criticism that metaphysics turns a blind eye to the world.
But as those facts are misconstrued through formalism, the upshot of
the critique is the same; actual social existence has not been
adequately incorporated into theory because of the creation of a false
universal.  This formalism is contrasted with the fact that critical
theory is “the unfolding of a single existential judgment”
(p. 227).  Displaying the contradictions inherent in capitalist
society, and fixing on possibilities for emancipatory change, does not
involve the scientific subsumption of facts within a logically ordered
conceptual system.  It rather involves unfolding and elaborating on an
insight that one initially acquires simply by existing in (with
“existing in” taken in the robust sense of living and
acting in) that society.  
The way this point is construed displays the most crucial difference
between “Traditional and Critical Theory” and its antecedents.
 Horkheimer’s attitude toward the possibility of social change is
less optimistic, and the critical theorist is described as having a
somewhat antagonistic relationship with the oppressed.  This fits
with a general shift in the Frankfurt School’s work from the 1930s to
the 1940s corresponding to a lack of faith in the possibility of
emancipatory social change.  In his 1937 essay “Philosophy and
Critical Theory,” (which he wrote largely as a response to and
counterpart with “Traditional and Critical Theory”) Herbert Marcuse
rhetorically asks what happens “if the development outlined by the
theory does not occur? What if the forces that were to bring about the
transformation are suppressed and appear to be defeated?” (Marcuse
1937, 63)  “Traditional and Critical Theory” is worried precisely
with these questions.  For a variety of reasons, including obvious
social and political exigencies, Horkheimer and his associates would
become less and less confident that the oppressed classes could become
a force for change.  Horkheimer clearly did not believe that
compassion and the desire to overcome suffering could, on their own,
motivate social change.  Consider the assertion in
“Traditional and Critical Theory” that
while the oppressed strive for happiness they do not know how to
achieve it, so the theorist must step in and help the oppressed come
to critical consciousness.  “Even the
situation of the proletariat is…no guarantee of correct
knowledge” (pp. 211–215); the significance of suffering is
not always evident to those who experience it, and it is the job of the
social theorist to elaborate on this significance in such a way that it
can have practical effect.  “Traditional and Critical Theory”
holds out the hope that this task is possible, but it is noteworthy
that the critical theorist is described as being set over against the
oppressed, as “it is the task of the critical theoretician to reduce the
tension between his own insight and oppressed humanity in whose service
he thinks” (p. 221).
Horkheimer would become less and less confident that the tension
could be so reduced.  He also ominously notes that while the
“commodity economy” might at first usher in a period of progress,
“after an enormous extension of human control over nature, it finally
hinders further development and drives humanity into a new barbarism”
(p. 227).  This passage states the main themes that would dominate
Horkheimer’s work in the 1940s, which would be marked by an increasing
pessimism in the ability of rational, theoretical activity to halt that
drive toward barbarism.
In the late 1930s, Horkheimer described all of his efforts as
working toward a project on dialectical logic (Wiggerschaus 1994,
177).  This “dialectics project” would, through many twists and
turns, develop into ideas presented primarily in two books published in
1947.  Horkheimer was the sole author of Eclipse of Reason,
which appeared originally in English. The book incorporates and
expands on a series of lectures delivered at Columbia University in
1944, and, as Horkheimer writes in its preface, presents “in
epitome some aspects” of his work with Adorno from that time (p. vi).
 That work with Adorno would also produce Dialectic of
Enlightenment, a collaborative text that was first published in
1947, after having been distributed as a limited edition typescript in
1944.  It would become the most famous work of the “first
generation” of the Frankfurt School, and is surely the work most
commonly associated with Horkheimer’s
 name.[4]
 The rest of this section will review the major themes of Horkheimer’s
work from the 1940s, considering both Dialectic of Enlightenment and
Eclipse of Reason together.
It is noteworthy that the text of Eclipse would eventually be
published in German as “Zur Kritik der instrumentellen
Vernunft” (“On the Critique of Instrumental
Reason”).  Both Eclipse and Dialectic are nuanced
texts that present a number of themes, but if there is one overarching
theme to the work from the 40s it is, as that German title suggests,
the critical description of how reason collapses into irrationality
through its emphasis on instrumental concerns.  What is at stake here
is made most clear by the first chapter of
Eclipse, which is straightforwardly titled “Means and Ends.”
 Instrumental reason is interested only in determining the means
to a goal, without reasoning about ends in themselves.  In
Dialectic, the Enlightenment is largely equated with the advance of
instrumental reason, and through instrumental reason, Enlightenment
turns against itself.  This is noted in the very beginning of
the text: “Enlightenment, understood in the widest sense as the advance
of thought, has always aimed at liberating human beings from fear and
installing them as masters. Yet the wholly enlightened earth is radiant
with triumphant calamity” (p.1).
While the strong emphasis on instrumental reason’s domination of
nature (which will be more fully discussed in §4.2) is new
to the work of the 1940s, it picks up on themes present in Horkheimer’s
earlier work.  A prominent component (particularly in Dialectic)
of the critique of instrumental reason is a critique of formalistic
rationality, which evokes the criticism of the Cartesian mathematical
method in “Traditional and Critical Theory.”  On the face of it,
one might question the necessary link between “formal” and
“instrumental.”  But Horkheimer and Adorno equate formalism with
the drive to make nature calculable, and calculability is assimilated
to usefulness.  Thus formalistic reason becomes a species
instrumental reason.  Along similar lines, the critique of
positivism is repeated in Eclipse (pp. 40–62).  All parts of
nature that cannot be calculated and formalized fall out of the
Enlightenment’s scientific picture of the world.  This scientific
picture is further reproduced through activities which seek to dominate
nature, thus instrumental-scientific activity creates a reality to fit
this picture.  The inexorable drive of instrumental reason causes
this distorted picture to be seen as the only true picture of the world
(Horkheimer 1947a p. 33).   
Moreover, all elements of society, not just scientific research, are
touched by the progress of instrumental rationality.  Motivated by
self-preservation, people seek protection from various powerful groups
(sometimes called “rackets,” see Schmid Noerr 2002, and
Stirk 1992 ch.  6).  Instrumental rationality causes society to
fragment into these various competing cliques.  But this fragmentation
is attended by cultural homogenization, as displayed by the chapter in
Dialectic titled “The Culture Industry: Enlightenment as Mass
Deception.”  The general thrust of that chapter is that
instrumental rationality has assimilated culture to an industrial
model, which leads to a leveling and homogenizing of that culture.
 At points, this homogenizing move is described as though it is
necessarily all-encompassing, as when the authors write that “anyone
who resists can survive only by being incorporated.  Once
registered as diverging from the culture industry, they belong to it as
the land reformer does to capitalism” (p. 104).  
Eclipse also presents a slightly different view of instrumental
reason, which is equated with “subjective reason,” and
contrasted with “objective
 reason.”[5]
 At the beginning of “Means and Ends,” Horkheimer notes
that “the average man will say that reasonable things are things
that are obviously useful,” and then notes that it is through
“classification, inference, and deduction…the abstract
functioning of the thinking mechanism,” that one is to determine
what is thus reasonable (p. 3).  Usefulness is further equated with
whatever works in favor of one’s self-preservation.  This is why
instrumental reason is subjective reason; it is thought oriented to
the subject’s preservation.  Objective reason (which Horkheimer
largely associates with history’s great metaphysical systems from
Plato to German Idealism), on the other hand, seeks to root truth and
meaning, which should be the proper ends of thought, within some
comprehensive totality.  Objective reason is interested in ends, while
subjective reason is interested only in means. Subjective reason thus
falls into incoherence, because as the drive toward self-preservation
becomes more and more all encompassing, any real conception of the
significance of what is to be preserved is lost. Subjectivity is so
oriented toward self-preservation that the drive toward
self-preservation is the only end left.  An interesting comparison can
be drawn here with the earlier critique of capitalist social
arrangements discussed in §2.2 above.  There the similar point is
made that the drive to fulfill self interests is ultimately self
defeating.  But there is a crucial difference; in the works from the
1930s this is clearly said to be the fault of irrationality, and it is
supposed that more rational social arrangements could overcome the
problem.  In the works from the 1940s, rationality itself is
impugned.
This description of subjective reason thus displays one way in which
reason works against itself, and so falls into irrationality.  A more
famous way that this movement is displayed is through one of the
primary themes of Dialectic, viz. that “myth is already
enlightenment, and enlightenment reverts to mythology” (p.
xviii). Myth is already enlightenment insofar as myths are already an
attempt to control nature; “myth sought to report, to name, to
tell of origins, but therefore also to narrate, record, explain”
(p. 5).  The interpretation of the Odyssey in Excursus I serves as a
concrete example of this point.  In general, the Odyssey maps out and
rationally orders ancient myths, and shows how humanity, in the person
of Odysseus, goes about submitting the mythological to rational
control (pp. 35–40).  Just as myth prefigured enlightenment,
enlightenment in turn becomes myth insofar as our abstract categories
become reified, leveling their relation to nature and thus making them
untrue.  This is the case, for example, with the formalistic
scientific picture of the world mentioned above; “the mythical
scientific respect of peoples for the given reality, which they
themselves constantly create, finally becomes itself a positive fact,
a fortress before which even the revolutionary imagination feels
shamed as utopianism” (p. 33).
Instrumental rationality necessarily involves the domination of
nature.  Taken in its most straightforward sense, this point has
become something of a commonplace.  As the sciences developed during
the enlightenment period (and earlier, insofar as myth was already
enlightenment), technology also developed, at the service of
self-preservation.  Technology involves making over nature for human
purposes.  This movement ends up thwarting human preservation,
however, insofar as the destruction of nature involves the destruction
of humanity.  This now fairly common line of critique is complicated
in Horkheimer’s work from the 1940s, however, because instrumental
rationality’s distortion of “outer nature” (nature taken in the most
straightforward sense), is directly tied to the repression of “inner
nature.”
The concept of “inner nature” is tied to the Freudian libido theory
already mentioned in §2.1 above.  Our inner life is
most immediately, or “naturally,” marked by various drives,
particularly the desire for pleasure (which would be akin to the desire
for happiness discussed above).  On the Freudian view ego
development involves the suppression of these various drives (along
these lines Horkheimer directly mentions Freud in Eclipse in discussing
the way the child relates to the superego which embodies the principles
of father-figures; see p. 75).  While the development of the ego
is necessary, undue repression of our inner drives leads to
pathological results.  In Excursus II of Dialectic, this
repression of inner nature is related to Kant’s moral theory, insofar
as it specifies that the will should follow reason against inclination.
 This complete denial of inclination by calculating reason finds
its fullest expression (in an ironic suggestion that would surely
horrify Kant) in the writings of the Marquis de Sade.  Pleasure, in
Sade’s orgies, is submitted to rigorous order, such that the
rationalized pursuit of pleasure takes precedence over pleasure itself
(pp. 66–69).  And importantly in this case it is not only the
inner desires that are subjugated; others people are subjugated in
the process of subjugating pleasure to organization.  This is one
instance of Horkheimer and Adorno’s broader claim that the domination
of nature leads to the domination of human beings.
The same points are made in Eclipse in the chapter “The
Revolt of Nature,” where the domination of inner nature is
described as following necessarily from the domination of outer
nature.  Instrumental reason leads us to dominate outer nature by
taking outer nature to be meaningless apart from the way it can
satisfy the prerogatives of our self-preservation.  But this further
requires that our desires must be construed in such a way that they
can provide a clear guide for the technological and industrial
activity that makes use of outer nature.  In this case,
“domination becomes ‘internalized’ for domination’s
sake.  What is usually indicated as a goal—the happiness of the
individual, health, wealth—gains its significance exclusively
from its functional potentiality” (p. 64).  Lohmann 1993
suggestively sums up Horkheimer’s point by referring to the domination
of outer and inner nature as a process of
“desubstantialization” (p. 392).  This connects clearly
with the contrast between objective and subjective reason discussed
above.  Nature loses its objective meaning, or in this sense, its own
“substance”; not only in the case of outer nature, but
also in the case of inner nature, because of the functionalization of
our desires and drives.  Eclipse construes this in terms of a
loss of autonomy, which would involve our creatively developing drives
and desires into ideal ends that could orient the ways we act on our
environments (see, for example, 66).  This can make sense of the
somewhat unique interpretation in Dialectic of Odysseus telling
the cyclops that he is “Nobody” (p. 53).  As we reduce our
inner nature to instrumental functions, we lose any strong sense of
self, and thus lack the inner substance in a manner that makes us,
metaphorically, into nobodies.
The upshot of these views seems to be that reason is
self-destructive in a way that limits the very possibility of a
rational critique of reason.  It is fairly common to interpret the
work from the 1940s as being so totalizing in its critique that it
closes all avenues for finding in reason the possibility for any
emancipatory critique of society (Habermas is the most famous exponent
of such a critique, see for example his 1984, pp. 366–399).  One
can certainly find much pessimistic rhetoric in both Dialectic and
Eclipse that supports such a notion.  But there are also elements
of the text that hint at the possibility for positive social change,
such that the emancipatory aim of earlier critical theory is not
entirely lost.
The emancipatory aim is not lost, but it is perhaps obscured.  In the
first essay of Dialectic, it is noted that “a true praxis
capable of overturning the status quo depends on theory’s refusal to
yield to the oblivion in which society allows thought to ossify”
(p. 33).  That “theory” and “thought” are so
emphasized is important.  Relatedly, Horkheimer disavows, in the
preface to Eclipse, the idea he should present a program of
action, because “action for action’s sake is in no way superior
to thought for thought’s sake, and is perhaps even inferior to
it” (p. vi).  This does not necessarily separate thought from
action, of course, and the quote from Dialectic speaks of a
“true praxis.” But genuinely emancipatory action is said
to depend on correcting problems of thought first, such that
Horkheimer would stress thought for thought’s sake.  Correcting these
problems would require freeing reason from instrumentality, which
would mean eschewing formalism.  But this does not mean eschewing
reason, if there can be a kind of knowing that uses rational concepts
while at the same time moving beyond the static form of concepts
associated with scientific thinking.  Such a view is closely
associated with Adorno’s later work (see the entry in this
encyclopedia on Adorno, Zuidervaart 2008).  It is sometimes argued
that the unusual literary style of Dialectic itself is meant to
exemplify such an attempt at escaping the ossification of thought (for
an interpretation that generally takes such a view, see Honneth 2007).
Along somewhat similar lines, modern art might have emancipatory
potential, in its ability to express something of the current state of
society through means other than formal reasoning.  This is, again, a
view that is commonly associated with Adorno’s thought.  But
Horkheimer also presents such a view, especially in his 1941 essay
“Art and Mass Culture.” There culture is criticized in a
manner similar to the discussion of the culture industry
in Dialectic, and a largely pessimistic picture of the
restrictive and homogenizing role of contemporary mass culture is
presented.  But Horkheimer does note that some art can break free of
this and still help the human being “conceive of a world
different from that in which he lives.” Such works (Horkheimer
mentions Joyce’s literature and Picasso’s Guernica) can do so
only negatively, however, by displaying the difference between the
human being and his or her “barbarous surrounding”
(p. 278; on Horkheimer’s views on art see Jay 1993).  In the case both
of non-ossifying thought and modern art, the emancipatory potential is
found only in traces, presented in an esoteric and perhaps abstruse
manner.  Such a conception of “emancipation” now seems to
be somewhat separated from the experience of the proletariat, and is
possibly evidence of elitism (see Heller 2002).  Whatever one makes of
these criticisms, it is clear that Horkheimer was less than sanguine
regarding the possibility of positive social change.
Horkheimer does suggest another avenue for emancipatory social
change, however.  He notes in Eclipse that “there are some forces
of resistance left within man,” and that “the spirit of humanity is
still alive, if not in the individual as a member of social groups, at
least in the individual as far as he is left alone” (p. 95).
 Unsurprisingly given the tone of the text as a whole, much of
what follows that passage discusses the difficulty of separating
oneself from the homogenizing forces of society.  But Horkheimer
does suggest that it is possible to engage in a kind of non-conformism
(without much of a description of what it would be like), which comes
through the “spontaneity of the individual subject” (p. 99).  The
emphasis on individual action is tempered, however, through the
emphasizing of a point that brings the latter parts of Eclipse back to
one of Horkheimer’s earliest views; solidarity can be formed through
the experience of shared suffering, and philosophy should “translate
what [those who suffer in the face of oppression] have done into
language that will be heard” (p.109).  How this happens is unclear,
as is the connection between individual acts of non-conformism and
solidarity.  One might also doubt the reliance on the power of
the compassion.  For a  thorough discussion of
Eclipse that examines these potential problems, see Lohmann 1993.
 Whatever one makes of these points, it is clear that this
emphasis on suffering is the thread that ties all of the periods of
Horkheimer’s work together, as it would continue to be present in
Horkheimer’s last works.
With his return to Frankfurt the year after the publication of both
Eclipse of Reason and Dialectic of Enlightenment,
Horkheimer’s academic production would largely consist of essays and
lectures.  He also left a number of unpublished texts from the period,
including a set of notes and aphorisms published shortly after his
death (along with a set of aphorisms from the early 30s titled
Dämmerung) under the name Notizen 1950 bis 1969.
 There is no real systematic unity to these writings (Habermas
1993, p. 51 even refers to them as “shot through with contradictions”),
but there are common themes that can be explored.
One can, for instance, trace out Horkheimer’s late views on the tasks
of critical theory.  In a remark in Notizen from
1957–1958 titled “Critical Theory,” he pursues the
idea mentioned in the preface to Eclipse that philosophy need
not be immediately related to practical action.  Philosophy
“holds up a mirror to the world” but “it is no
imperative” (p. 148).  It is as though Horkheimer wants to guard
against a caricature of his earlier views as blindly equating theory
and practice.  But there is also a very pessimistic note sounded when
Horkheimer says that philosophy “has replaced theology but found
no new heaven to which it might point, not even a heaven on
earth” (p.  148).  Horkheimer touches on these same themes in
his 1956 conversations with Adorno in which they preliminarily
discussed producing a new (never finished) joint work.  In the
transcripts of those conversations (which were published in 1989 as a
part of Horkheimer’s collected works with the title
“Diskussion über Theorie und Praxis”) one
finds Horkheimer continually stressing the importance of linking
theory to practice without reducing the former to the latter.  And
while he does at points seem to hold out a vague hope for such a
combination of theory and practice, he also pessimistically claims
that “it is easy to believe that the whole of world history is
just a fly caught in the flames” (p.39).  Because of this
pessimism, critical theory takes on a primarily negative task.  In
another note from a collection dated 1966–1969 titled “On
Critical Theory” he continues with the idea that no positive
conception of the good can be formed, but “if one wishes to
define the good as the attempt to abolish evil,” such a view can
be formed, and “this is the teaching of Critical Theory”
(p. 237). 
The negative conception of critical theory is closely related to the
renewed interest Horkheimer showed in Schopenhauer in his last works.
Schopenhauer is said, in the 1961 essay “Schopenhauer
Today,” to be “the teacher for modern times”
(p. 81).  This is in part because Schopenhauer’s work grasps the need
to focus on the suffering of the present as it is, without covering it
over with a false philosophical conception of the good.  To a certain
extent this repeats the earlier emphasis on suffering and rejection of
metaphysics.  But these points work in a much more pessimistic
direction, because, “according to Schopenhauer, philosophy does
not set up any practical aims” (p. 80).  It rather focuses on
correctly grasping suffering.  Schopenhauerian pessimism also connects
with an interest in negative theology in Horkheimer’s late work.  In
1935, he would write that the religious belief in another world of
perfect justice, when uncoupled from “the inhibiting religious
form” amounted to a positive force for social change (Horkheimer
1935c, p.  131).  In his late writings this combination of criticism
of organized religion and respect for the desire for the “wholly
other” would be further developed (see Siebert 1976).  In
religious beliefs, if not in organized religion, Horkheimer would find
a desire for a better world that never forgets the suffering of this
world (see, for instance, Horkheimer 1963).
The overall tenor of Horkheimer’s last writings has led some to
criticize him for falling into a backhanded form of conservatism (see,
for example, Bronner 1994, pp. 88–92).  This criticism makes
some sense, especially when one considers the political climate of the
late 1960s that served as a backdrop for his latest work.  It is
pertinent, along these lines, that he was generally opposed to the
radical student movements, and he supported (with much qualification)
the Vietnam War as an attempt to halt the totalitarian movement of
Chinese Communism (on these points see Stirk 1992, 178–181).
But Horkheimer did not give up on the possibility of radical action
entirely.  For example, Notizen ends on something of a positive
note by ( in the note “For Nonconformism”) holding out
hope that the “critical analysis of demagogues” might aid
the practical work of those who are attempting to create
non-conformist collectives that work against current society.  But the
primary possibility for hope discussed in Horkheimer’s later work is
compassion, as seen at the end of the 1961 essay “The German
Jews”:
In a way, this passage sums up the aim of all of Horkheimer’s work,
early to late.  The task of education, and the task of the
critical theorist, is to foster such compassionate sensitivity to
injustice.