The philosophical analysis of emotions was introduced by Plato and
developed further by Aristotle. In the fourth Book of his
Republic, Plato famously divided the soul into three parts:
the rational part (logistikon), the spirited part
(thumoeides), and the appetitive part
(epithumêtikon). This terminology was also used by
Aristotle and later ancient philosophers, even though its
philosophical background assumptions varied. The Latin terms for the
corresponding parts were intellectus, irascibilis
and concupiscibilis. Plato’s view of emotions was
basically negative, with the exception of love in the
Phaedrus and the educational capacity of the spirited part in
the Republic and the Laws. He regarded the emotions
as irrational reactions of the lower psychosomatic levels of the soul,
of which the appetitive part sought sensual pleasure and avoided
suffering and the spirited part was the seat of self-affirmation and
aggression. The immaterial reasoning part was the subject of knowledge
and rational will. It was meant to govern the emotional parts by
reducing the activity of the appetitive part as much as possible and
controlling spontaneous suggestions of the spirited part and
habituating it to supporting good conduct. Plato supplied the
emotional parts with a measure of non-intellectual cognitive
evaluation with respect to perceptual representations and took them to
be accompanied by pleasant or unpleasant feelings and related
action-initiating impulses. Plato’s main reason for this
tripartition was the phenomenon of acrasy: while the undisturbed
knowledge of right conduct makes people behave accordingly,
uncontrolled lower impulses may draw them in other directions, most
typically toward immediate pleasures or aggression. 
The various aspects Plato associated with the dynamic movements of the
lower soul were more systematically discussed in Aristotle’s
theory of emotions as part of the human condition. Aristotle developed
a detailed model for analyzing the psychological structure of
occurrent emotions, which included four basic aspects, most
extensively discussed in the section on emotions in the second book of
the Rhetoric. First, the cognitive element is an
unpremeditated evaluation (belief or phantasy) that something positive
or negative happens or may happen to the subject or to someone else in
a way which concerns the subject. Second, the affective
element is a subjectively felt pleasant or unpleasant feeling about
the content of the evaluation. Third, the dynamic element is
a behavioral impulse towards action which typically accompanies
emotional evaluation. Fourth, there are typical physiological
reactions such as the changes in the heartbeat. (For emotions in Plato
and Aristotle, see Cooper 1999; Fortenbaugh 2003; Lorenz 2006; Price 2010; Dow
2015.)
The compositional approach has been very influential in Western
thought. As for the first element, practically all ancient and
medieval theories were cognitive, associating some kind of evaluative
representation with an emotion as its principal constituent. While the
Stoics, following their reason-centered rationalist psychology, argued
that it is philosophically sufficient to treat emotions simply as
mistaken value-judgments, it was more common in ancient and medieval
times to follow the view of Plato and Aristotle, who distinguished
between the non-emotional intellectual power and the lower emotional
parts of the soul, which were eliminated by the Stoics. This was the
prevailing medieval view until the Franciscan conception of the
passions of the intellectual faculty of the will (Knuuttila 2004).
As distinct from Plato’s control model, Aristotle proposed that
education may change the emotional dispositions so that their
affective evaluations and inclinations support the quest for the good
life instead of disrupting it. This was the basis of his theory of the
virtues, which included the good emotional habits of the sensory soul
and the good habits of the practical reason. As part of his
philosophical psychology, Aristotle developed a considered theory of
how the rational part may co-operate with the powers of the sensory
part (Irwin 2017). 
Plato and Aristotle presented some lists of emotions, the most
extensive being in Aristotle’s Rhetoric II.1–11
(cf. Plato, Timaeus 69d; Laws I.644c-d; Aristotle,
Nicomachean ethics II.5, 1005b21–23), but they did not
develop any systematic taxonomy of emotions except considering some as
the affects of the appetitive part and some of the irascible part.
Because of the feeling aspect always being associated with an
emotional representation, Aristotle sometimes distinguished emotions
on the basis of whether the emotional evaluation was pleasant or
unpleasant; see also Aspasius’ commentary on the Nicomachean
ethics (41.28–43.32). The first elaborated taxonomy was put
forward by the Stoics, who divided emotions into four basic types,
depending on whether the object was regarded as a present or future
good or a present or future evil:
The Stoics produced longer lists of particular emotions included in
these four types. (See Pseudo-Andronicus of Rhodes, Peri
Pathôn, ed. Glibert-Thirry, I.1–5; Diogenes Laertius
VII.110–14; Stobaeus II.90.7–92.17.) The fourfold
classification was quoted in many well-known works, such as
Augustine’s The City of God (XIV.5–9) and
Boethius’ Consolation of Philosophy (I.7,
25–28, and it was
generally known in medieval times, although the Stoic explanation of
emotions as such did not garner followers. 
A well-known part of Stoic philosophy is the philosophical therapy of
emotions (therapeia) described in works by Cicero, Seneca and
Epictetus. Stoic therapy aimed at apatheia, the extirpation
of emotions, as a consequence of learning to see things in accordance
with the Stoic conception of rational reality without self-centered
commitments. Emotions were typically regarded as false judgments about
the value of things and the behavioral reactions to them. The Stoics
often described the types of emotion by referring to their typical
psychosomatic reactions, but the positive beliefs about the propriety
of these expressive movements and corresponding actions were regarded
as irrational. The elements of the Stoic therapy were known in later
Latin philosophy through Cicero’s Tusculan
disputations, Seneca’s On anger and some Christian
sources. Other Hellenistic philosophers such as Plutarch generally
followed the psychology of Plato and Aristotle, arguing for the
moderation of the emotions (metriopatheia). The Stoic
apatheia was regarded as impossible because of the emotional
part of the soul and as inhumane insensitivity with respect to other
people. Plotinus and his Neoplatonic followers argued for
apatheia, though this did not involve the disappearance of
the emotional part—earthly emotions became useless in higher
Neoplatonic spheres (see Nussbaum 1994; Sorabji 2000). 
The Alexandrian theologians Clemens and Origen combined Stoic and
Platonist ideas, arguing that freedom from emotion was part of
Christian perfectibility and the precondition for divinization through
participation in divine love (agapê). This mystical
union was described in highly emotional language, but supernaturally
caused spiritual feelings as experiences of the apathetic soul were
not called simply emotions. John Cassian made this combination of
divine love with freedom from mundane emotions known in Western
monasticism. It was employed in influential treatises by Gregory the
Great and Bernard of Clairvaux. While this approach was also present
in the Cappadocian fathers and Augustine, they stressed the importance
of Platonic control and moderation in everyday life to their
non-monastic audience. 
The monastic literature on mystical ascent developed introspective
analysis of subjective feeling, which Bernard of Clairvaux called the
sense of being affected by divine action (sentit intra se
actitari, Opera II, 10, 28–29; Köpf 1980:
136–174). Many later theologians such as Albert the Great and
Thomas Aquinas wrote commentaries on the Pseudo-Dionysius’s
works (late fifth century), which taught on mystical experience from
the point of view of Christian Neoplatonism.  (For ancient Christian
discussions, see Hadot 1995; Knuuttila 2004; for Augustine, see also
Byers 2013; Gao 2018; for Gregory the Great, see Straw 1988; Humphries
2013; for medieval commentaries of Pseudo-Dionysius, see Coakley and
Stang (eds., 2009); Blankenhorn 2015.
Monastic psychology also made use of the originally Stoic doctrine of
first movements, which Origen, followed by Augustine and many others,
applied to the Christian conception of sin. The Stoic idea, described
by Seneca in On Anger (2.1–4), was that even apathetic
people might react quasi-emotionally on exceptional occasions, but
this was not really an emotion because it did not involve judgmental
assent. Augustine taught that sinful thoughts which easily and
frequently came to mind because of original sin became sins through
a subsequent assent (Expositio quarundam propositionum ex Epistola ad
Romanos, 2066).
According to Augustine’s influential doctrine of sin, the
original fall was followed by shame, which Adam and Eve felt when they
found themselves being moved by the movements of the lower soul and
the body, the functions of which they as rational beings should
control. Original disobedience of the higher part of the soul founded
the functional mode of the inherited original sin in the sense of
penal disobedience of the lower part, the relative autonomy of which
continuously reminds humans of their shameful condition of not being
what they should be and demands continuous control (Augustine, De
civitate Dei, XIV.23). Augustine held that spontaneous emotional
agitations are emotions even though they do not involve an assent to
the emotional evaluation or its behavioral suggestion. In his view,
the Stoics did not refer to these representations as emotions because
of their sinful pride, which prevented them from realizing the
weakness of the fallen soul in themselves (De civitate Dei
IX.4). Augustine thought that the occurrence of evil thoughts and
desires is not directly under voluntary control. The temptations are
therefore not accountable sins (culpa) before one can in
principle expel them from the soul. If this is not immediately done,
they can be regarded as being freely consented to (as all sins are)
(De sermone Domini in monte,
12.34–35). Augustine’s doctrine of sin was later developed
into a detailed theory of the modes of assent as the degrees of venial
and mortal sin. As distinct from Augustine, sinfully oriented first
movements were increasingly regarded as venial sins even before a free
choice. This was also the view of Aquinas. See Knuuttila 2004:
178–192.
Apart from the first sinful movements, love and compassion were other central emotions in medieval theology. Misericordia was a Latin translation of the term eleos used in Greek philosophy and literature. In the Vulgate translation of the Bible, the term misericordia was used of divine mercy as well as of a human emotion of sorrow for the misery of another. Compassio was not a Classical Latin word, but it came to be employed by some Christian authors and then increasingly used. The reason for this new terminology was apparently the need for an unambiguous word that would apply to the human part of the meaning of misericordia which continued to be used as a term with divine and human references. (See Konstan 2001: 106; Konstan 2006: 201-216.) It was usually assumed that God has no emotional sorrow or pity and no other emotion for that matter. Augustine wrote that “pity (misericordia) is a kind of compassion (compassio) in our hearts for the misery of others which compels us to help them if we can” (De civitate Dei IX.5). Gregory the Great’s understanding of compassion was similar to that of Augustine, and he treated it as a Christian sentiment which is included in the virtue of charity love. Because of the influence of Gregory’s works, compassion became a central notion in medieval theology (Straw 2013; Coolman 2008). Quoting Augustine’s definition, Aquinas explains that compassion is an emotion which as such is ethically neutral. When it is connected with charity, it becomes an affective part of misericordia (mercy), a virtuous concern for the miseries of others (Summa theologiae II.2.30). Aquinas writes that a person should be compassionate in affect and helpful in effect (Summa theologiae II-2.45.6, ad 3). (See also Miner 2016.)
While the works of Augustine, Cassian, and Gregory the Great were
among the main sources of the discussion of emotions in early medieval
literature, new non-religious impulses were supplied by the
Latin translations of some philosophical and medical works. One of
these was the translation of the Arabic medical encyclopedia of
‘Alī ibn al-‘Abbās al-Mağūsī (in
Latin Haly Abbas), which contained various remarks on the emotions
based on Galen’s medical philosophy. The first partial
translation by Constantine the African (c. 1080) was called the
Pantegni and the complete translation by Stephen of Antioch
(1127) the Regalis dispositio. Elements of ancient
medical and philosophical theories of the emotions were also included
in Nemesius of Emesa’s De natura
hominis (17–21) from the late fourth century and John
Damascene’s De fide orthodoxa from the eighth century,
the latter being much influenced by Nemesius’s work. These treatises were translated into Latin in the eleventh and twelfth centuries. An
important early medieval psychological source-book was the sixth book
of Avicenna’s Shifā’, translated into Latin
in the middle of the twelfth century by Gundisalvi and Avendauth.
This translation was called Liber de Anima or Sextus de
naturalibus. Avicenna’s work influenced the terminology of
early commentaries on Aristotle’s De anima, which
became the principal textbook of psychology in the middle of the
thirteenth century; Aristotle’s work was translated c.
1150 by James of Venice and 1267 by William of Moerbeke. 
Drawing from Aristotelian and Neoplatonic psychology, Avicenna
distinguishes between the functions of the soul by attaching them to
special powers or faculties. The most relevant in this connection are
sensory moving powers and internal senses: common sense, imagery
(retention of sensations), estimation, memory, and imagination
(separation and combination of sensory forms). Inner senses are
non-perceptual apprehensive powers of the sensory soul (De
anima IV.1, 1–11; IV.3, 37–40). The moving power of
the sensory soul is divided into a commanding power and an executive
power, the former of which is the center of emotions. The executive
moving power operates through the nervous system and the muscles. It
is moved by the commanding moving power, the acts of which are
triggered by an occurrent evaluation of estimative power and
accompanied by bodily affections as well as behavioral changes,
provided that the executive moving power is also actualized. If the
commanding act is strong enough, the executive power is necessarily
actualized in animals, but not so in humans because they can prevent
the impulse of the executive moving power by their will. The will is
the moving power of the immaterial intellectual soul. Together with
practical intellect, it should control the emotions (De anima
I.5, 94; IV.4, 54–56, 59).
The sensory commanding faculty is divided into concupiscible and
irascible parts. The reactions of the concupiscible power are desires
for things taken to be pleasurable, and the reactions of the irascible
power are desires to defeat adversaries and repel harmful things
(De anima I.5, 83; IV.4, 56–57). The objects of
emotions are recognized as emotionally relevant by the estimative
power. By this power, the sheep judges that the wolf is to be avoided,
“even though the exterior sense has not previously perceived
it”. Avicenna calls the representations of the estimative power
“intentions”. The recognition of the intentions is often
instinctive in animals, but it is mostly conscious and
pre-intellectually conceptual in humans (De anima I.5, 86,
89; IV.1, 7; IV.3. 37–39; see also Black 2000; Hasse 2000: 130–141: Perler 2012). As an occurrent
emotion involves acts of separate faculties, there must be some kind
of governing awareness which combines these acts (De anima
V.7, 158–159; Kitāb al-najāt 2.6.15, trans. Rahman, 64–68); cf. Toivanen and Yrjönsuuri 2014:
441–442).
Avicenna’s theory includes all elements of Aristotelian
compositional theory, but he uses the behavioral suggestion as the
central factor. For this reason, he does not include pleasure or joy
among the concupiscible or irascible emotions, regarding them as
affective apprehensive acts. Somewhat strangely, he adds pain or
distress to the irascible motive acts such as fear and anger,
apparently thinking that they are moving acts and not merely
apprehensive (De anima IV.4, 57–59).
While there are emotions common to humans and animals, the human
estimative faculty is also a sensory reason, which qualifies its
recognizing emotional intentions. Hope and fear with respect to not
yet actualized future things, shame at wrong action, and wonder at
unusual things presuppose conceptualization that animals lack. It is
also human to express wonder by laughing and anxiety by weeping
(De anima V.1, 69–76). Avicenna discusses emotions also
in his Canon of Medicine, translated into Latin by Gerard of Cremona in the
twelfth century. His medical approach to the cardiac and spiritual
affects shows similarities to that of the Pantegni. See Knuuttila 2004.
Early medieval medical theory of the emotions concentrated on the
Galenic ideas of the humors and the system of the spirits, the
vitalizing spirits in the heart and the psychic spirits in the nerves
and the brain. In the Pantegni (Theor. VI.110–114), the physical
aspects of the emotions were dealt with as slow or quick movements of
the vital spirits towards the heart or away from it. (See also the translation by Stephen of Antioch, V.38, p. 69.) This led to a
popular medical classification of emotions:
John of la Rochelle, a Franciscan theologian, referred to this scheme
as a commonly known model in his Summa de anima (1235 [1995:
262]). It was presented as a table with brackets in the
sixteenth-century handbook of Jacob Wecker, Medicinae utriusque
syntaxes [1576, I.3, p. 181]. For a fourteenth-century formulation,
see Maino de Maineri, Regimen sanitatis 3.8, Paris 1506, f.
38v. (Cf. Gil-Sotres 1994.) 
Avicenna’s account of emotions was addressed in Dominicus
Gundisalvi’s De anima, which consisted to a great
extent of texts from the Latin translation of Avicenna’s De
anima by Gundisalvi and Avendauth. Almost half of
Gundisalvi’s quotations from Avicenna’s account of the
sensitive motive acts concern the relationship between the
concupiscible and irascible powers and the changes in the heart and
the spirits. These were found interesting by the early
thirteenth-century Latin authors John Blund and David of Dinant. They
took the medical account of the physical aspect of emotions as
causally primary, somewhat similarly to the James-Lange theory of
emotions, but this was not an influential view (John Blund,
Tractatus de anima, 25.380; David of Dinant, Fragmenta
Quaternulorum, 36–39, 67–68).
Twelfth-century taxonomical discussions pertained to the division
between concupiscible and irascible emotions, which proved to be
cumbersome to many authors. A more simple but influential division is
found in the small treatise on the nature of love by Hugh of St. Victor
(d. 1141), in which he defined love (amor) as a pleasure of
the heart which is directed to an object because of that object. It is
first a directed affection (affectio) which becomes desire
(desiderium) when it moves the subject towards the object and
joy (gaudium) when the longing finds its fulfilment (De
substantia dilectionis 82, 86). A similar tripartite sequence of
appetitive acts was used in thirteenth-century classifications of
concupiscible passions. In his The Twelfth Patriarchs,
Richard of St. Victor (d. 1173) operates with a list of seven
emotions which is not found in other authors: hope, fear, joy,
distress, love, hatred, and shame (see Palmén 2014). 
Isaac of Stella (d. 1177), a Cistercian theologian, presented an
Augustinian classification which combined the Stoic fourfold table
with Platonist concepts as follows
(Isaac of Stella, Letter on the Soul, 1878d, trans. in McGinn
1977). Isaac’s classification was quoted in the influential
twelfth-century pseudo-Augustinian treatise De spiritu et
anima (782; cf. 814, trans. in McGinn 1977) and through it in
Philip the Chancellor’s Summa de bono (748–749).
Before Isaac, the Stoic classification of emotions and the Platonic
division of the soul were presented together in William of St. Thierry’s De natura corporis et animae (trans. in
McGinn 1977), without an explanation of how they are related to each
other (2.88–91). Distress is an irascible emotion in
Isaac’s classification, as in Avicenna, but Isaac was influenced
by the Latin tradition in which concupiscible emotions are directed to
good objects and irascible to harmful ones (Knuuttila 2004: 229).
William of St. Thierry writes that anger and love are good irascible
dispositions of a pious soul and match together because of the fervor
of love and the hatred of vices. Bernard of Clairvaux similarly
classified joy and anger as irascible passions. (Opera V,
358–359). For the Cistercian list of affects, see also Boquet
2005.
These considerations show some uncertainty about how to combine
various classificatory ideas. When Aristotle’s account became
better known in the early thirteenth century, it was realized that the
twelfth-century divisions between concupiscible and irascible emotions
were not compatible with Aristotle’s idea of the contrary
emotions of the same part of the soul. (See John Blund’s
somewhat complicated attempt to solve this problem in Tractatus de
anima 18–22.) An influential new taxonomic idea was
introduced as a solution in the 1220s. (See the anonymous treatises
De anima et potentiis eius, 47–48, and De potentiis
animae et obiectis, 159, 164, as well as Philip the Chancellor,
Summa de bono, 161). It was held that the objects of the
contrary concupiscible acts were simply pleasurable or painful, and
the objects of the irascible acts were also arduous (arduum),
difficult to obtain or to avoid.
A detailed early thirteenth-century classification on the basis of the
notion of arduum with contrary emotions was developed in John
of la Rochelle’s Summa de anima. He regarded emotions
as the acts of two moving powers, the concupiscible and irascible,
both with several types of reaction divided into contrary pairs. The
concupiscible pairs are associated with the contrary dispositions of
liking (placentia) or disliking (displicentia) and
irascible emotions with strength (corroboratio) and weakness
(debilitas). These correspond to different types of
estimative acts which are their causes. The new systematic idea was to
use these dispositions of feeling and corresponding behavior reactions
as classificatory principles. The emotions of the concupiscible power
are classified as follows:
Pity and envy were treated as different forms of other-regarding
distress in Nemesius of Emesa (c. 19) and John Damascene (c. 28); for
pity, compassion and mercy, see also Aquinas, Summa theologiae
II-2, 30. Love as liking with respect to another person’s
prosperity was also a traditional characterization (cf. Aristotle,
Rhet. II.4). The somewhat less used idea of hate as liking
with respect to another person’s troubles was included in Calcidius’s Latin list of emotions in his commentary on the  Timaeus (216–217). Liking and disliking were also used as principles in
Radulfus Ardens’s late twelfth-century classification that
otherwise was closer to the approach of Isaac of Stella (Speculum
universale, book V).
Of irascible emotions with the “arduous and difficult
objects”, ambition and hope pertain to future honor and
prosperity, hope involving the belief that they will be achieved. The
opposites of these are poverty of spirit and desperation. Three emotions,
pride, lust for power, and contempt, are associated with attempts to
strengthen one’s social rank and power. The opposite of pride
and lust for power is humility, and the opposite of contempt is
reverence. Of the acts directed towards evil things, courage is a
desire to meet the enemy with confidence, anger is a desire for
revenge, and magnanimity is rising up against evil. Three forms of the
flight from evil are somehow opposites of courage: penitence toward
past evil things, impatience with present evil things, and fear of
future evil things.
See Summa de anima, 256–262; Knuuttila 2004:
230–236; Knuuttila 2016. A more theological discussion of concupiscible and
irascible emotions is found in William of Auvergne’s roughly
contemporary De virtutibus, chs. 16–18. For a twelfth-century treatise on pride and humility, see Bernard of Clairvaux, On the Degrees of Humility and Pride (Opera III, 13–59). 
Following Avicenna’s faculty psychology and the new division
between concupiscible and irascible emotions, Albert the Great and
Thomas Aquinas treated emotions as acts of the sensory moving powers.
While Albert employed the Stoic-based classifications of Nemesius of
Emesa and John Damascene in his works (De homine q.
66–67; De bono 3.5.2–3), Thomas Aquinas put
forward a new taxonomy (Summa theologiae II-1, 22–48)
which was probably influenced by John of la Rochelle. Albert argued
that emotions should be regarded as qualities as Aristotle described
them in Categories 8 (De bono 3.5.1, 3.5.3). Aquinas
defended the characterization of them as movements of the soul,
finding the basic classificatory principles of emotions in
Aristotle’s doctrine of contrary movements in Physics
V.5. Bonaventure differed from these authors in relativizing the
difference between sensory and intellectual moving powers and
attributing emotions to the intellectual soul in a proper sense and
not merely metaphorically as was traditionally done. In addressing the
soul of Christ in the third book of his Commentary on the
Sentences, Bonaventure argues that there were concupiscible and
irascible parts in Christ’s intellectual will as well as
passions of joy and distress. Similar ideas were also put forward
earlier in the so-called Summa Halensis (Bonaventure,
Sent. III.16.2.1 (354); III.33.1.3 (717); see also Prentice
1957; Vaura 2017). Even though Bonaventure’s account remained
sketchy, it influenced the Franciscan view of the emotions of the will
that came to be more systematically analyzed by John Duns Scotus.
In discussing emotions in Summa theologiae II-1.22–48,
Aquinas first divided them in terms of their generic objects: the
concupiscible emotions react to what seems good or evil at the sensory
level, whereas the irascible emotions react to arduous sense-good and
sense-evil. The sensory moving faculties are activated by objects
through cognition, and the modes of the resulting emotional movements
serve as further qualifications in defining particular emotions. In
employing the Avicennian conception of the estimative power that
grasps the emotionally relevant aspects of objects, Aquinas says that
this could be called particular reason in humans (Summa theologiae I.78.4) The recognizable evaluative property (such as being dangerous) could be called the formal object of emotion (Summa
theologiae II-1.43.1; cf. Kenny 1963: 189; King 2011).
In his attempt to classify emotions with the help of Aristotle’s
physical theory of movements, Aquinas distinguishes between two types
of the contraries of movements: the approach to something and retreat
from it, and movements associated with contrary endpoints. The
contrary movements of the concupiscible power are of the second type,
towards contrary ends (sense-good and sense-evil). The contrary
movements of the irascible power are of the first type, with respect
to the same objects.
Aquinas classifies (1) love, (2) desire and (3) pleasure or joy as the
three self-regarding concupiscible emotions with respect to the
sense-good; the contrary movements with respect to sense-evil are (4)
hate, (5) aversion and (6) pain or distress. As for the irascible
emotions, the arduous future sense-good may give rise to (7) hope or
(8) despair, the arduous future sense-evil to (9) fear or (10)
courage, and the arduous present sense-evil to (11) anger—this
is without a contrary pair (Summa theologiae II-1.
24.2–4, 25.2; see also King 1999.) 
Aquinas’s attempt to combine the Avicennian view of emotions as
the act of the sensory moving power with Aristotle’s doctrine of
movement involves some theoretical problems. In distinguishing between
love, desire and pleasure as the incipient movement, actual movement,
and rest, Aquinas treats emotions as the behavioral changes that the
moving power is supposed to cause rather than the moving acts
themselves (Summa theologiae II-1. 25.2; for moving acts, see
30.2; 23.4.) This is confusing, but he apparently assumes that the
various acts of the moving power could be distinguished as causing
various behavioral movements if these are not prevented. Aquinas also
distinguishes between the formal constituent of emotion, which is the
generic content of emotional evaluation, and the material constituent,
which is the particular intentional object, and further between the
movements of the moving power that constitute the form of emotions
with respect to their material constituents such as the movements of
the heart, the spirits and the humors (Summa theologiae II-1.
28.5, 30.2, 43.1, 44.1). The behavioral movements to which Aristotle’s
physics is applied are not mentioned in these contexts. Emotions are
essentially psychosomatic in Aquinas, and thus not possible for
bodiless beings such as God and angels (Summa theologiae
II-1.22.3). 
As for pleasure and distress, Aquinas explains that while one might
speak about a stone as loving its natural place and desiring to be
there, it does not make sense to speak about the pleasure or pain of a
stone because it does not feel. He holds that pleasure or distress is
a pleasant or unpleasant awareness and this is an aspect of emotions
in general since some kind of pleasure is involved in positive
emotions and some kind of pain in negative ones (Summa
theologiae II-1.43.1). Giles of Rome, who mostly followed
Aquinas’s taxonomy, remarked that pleasure and distress as
emotions are states of having moved rather than movements. He also
wanted to add meekness, an opposite to anger in Aquinas’s
taxonomy (see Marmo 1991). 
Aquinas’s discussion of emotions, the most extensive in medieval
literature, involves detailed terminological, psychological and
ethical remarks on each emotion type. Like all medieval authors,
Aquinas argues that the intellectual soul should keep emotions under
strict control, but he also criticized the Stoic apatheia and Plotinus’s version of the freedom from emotions (Summa theologiae II-1.24.3, 59.2, 61.5). As
in Aristotle, the virtues of the sensory soul are habits to feel
emotions in accordance with the judgments of practical reason.
Emotions themselves do not provide a sufficient guidance for a good
life. Aquinas’s theory and taxonomy were very influential until
the seventeenth century. (For medieval discussions from Avicenna to
Aquinas, see Knuuttila 2004; for Aquinas, see also
King 1999, 2002, 2010, 2011; Lombardo 2011; Miner 2009;
Murphy 1999; for the discussion of the sensory passions in Christ, see
Gondreau 2002; Madigan 2007.)
John Duns Scotus regarded the taxonomies based on the notion of
arduousness as artificial and criticized the influential Avicennian
idea that there are “intentions” in things which can be
grasped by an estimative power and then move the motive power. He
argued that representations of a certain kind cause learned or
instinctual behavioral changes in some animals and others in others,
this being a matter of law-like fact. A sheep naturally flees from a
wolf which it perceives, not its inner hostility recognized by the
inner sense as in Avicenna; it even flees from a peaceful sheep which looks like a
wolf (Ordinatio I.3.1.1–2, p. 43–44; III.15,
42–43, p. 495–496; III.34, 35–38, p. 193–196;
cf. Perler 2012). The influential part of Scotus’s approach to
emotions was his systematic discussion of the Franciscan position of
postulating the passions of the will, which appears in the discussion
of the emotions of Christ. This was also where Scotus developed his
theory of emotions. According to Scotus, when one is aware of the
actuality of what was desired or its contrary, “there follows a
passion of the will, joy or distress, which is caused by the object
present in this way”. These passions are not directly caused by
free will (Ordinatio III.15, 48, p. 498). Even though joy or
distress are acts of the will in the sense of being actual states of
the intellectual moving power, they are passions in the sense of
having an external efficient cause and not being free acts of the
will. This corresponds to the traditional view of emotions as passive
reactions. 
Scotus’s longer list of the factors which are sufficient to
cause distress as a passion of the will involves the apprehension that
what takes place is (1) what one actually wills against, (2) against
the natural inclination to happiness (affectio commodi) even
though no particular act of will is actual, (3) against sensory
desire, (4) in accordance to what is reluctantly willed in
circumstances in which the opposite is preferred but cannot be
achieved (velleitas). There are corresponding factors which
are sufficient to cause pleasure, the other passion of the will
(Ordinatio III.15, 60, p. 505). The intellectual soul is
consequently regarded as very emotional—its feelings are changed
by the influence of actual volitions or nolitions as well as by the
inclinations of the will and the sensory part of the soul. Since these
states considerably influence people’s activities as motivations
or hindrances, moral education should give strength to the natural
inclination to justice (affectio iustitiae) and good moral
habits. New habits of will change the condition for feeling pleasure
and distress (cf. Boulnois 2003; Knuuttila 2012; Drummond 2012).
Scotus treated liking and disliking (complacentia and
displicentia), the unpremeditated first orientations of the will
and necessary concomitants of its other acts, as analogous to sensory
emotional reactions except that they were free acts. These not yet
efficacious acts could be directly controlled, as distinct from the passions of the will. John Buridan, who otherwise followed
Scotus’s analysis, stated that liking and disliking were not
free acts and in this respect were similar to sensory emotions
(Quaestiones super decem libros Ethicorum, X.2).
Buridan’s revision increased the number of non-free emotional
phenomena of the will, but the tendency to apply emotion terminology
to the will took other forms as well. Ockham followed Scotus’s
view of pleasure and distress as the passions of the will, though he
restricted their conditions to the first and fourth case in
Scotus’s list. But he also explained that “a passion is a form distinct from a cognition, which exists in the
appetitive power as its subject and requires a cognition for its
existence” (Quodlibet II.17, p. 186).
If this was a considered view, it made all occurrent volitions
passions, whether free or not (see Hirvonen 2004; Perler 2017). Is
Ockham speaking about passions or “pseudopassions”? King (2012) and Miner
(2009) use this term in discussing Aquinas’s remarks on
volitions as dispassionate passions. Since Ockham often employed
Scotus’s account of pleasure and distress as the passions of the
will, it is possible that his definition of passion was somewhat
sketchy and not meant to introduce a new semantics for the term
“passion” after all. However, Adam Wodeham, his younger
colleague and collaborator, argues that volitions and nolitions are
evaluative cognitions to which all human passions can be reduced
because of the unity of the soul. An occurrent volition or nolition
has a cognition as a partial cause to which the evaluation pertains.
This cognitive account of emotions shows some similarities with the
Stoic theory, but there seems to be no historical connection to it
(Lectura secunda, prol. q. 1, secs. 2, 5–6; d. 1, q. 5,
secs. 4–5, 11; cf. Knuuttila 2004: 275–282; a different
interpretation in Pickavé 2012). 
Many theologians criticized the postulation of the real distinction
between love and pleasure in beatific vision (fruitio) by
Scotus and Ockham who argued for this position because love is a free
act of the will, but pleasure is not. The opposite view was
particularly stressed by Peter Auriol who held that all intellectual
pleasures are free acts of the will and love and pleasure are
indistinguishable in the fulfilment of beatific vision. Auriol was
followed by Wodeham and Walter Chatton with respect to the fruition,
but not with finite objects. Scotus and Ockham offered various
examples for the distinction between the fulfilment of love and the
experience of pleasure, one of these being the successful action of
the evil angel without pleasure (see Kitanov 2014).
Late medieval philosophical compendia on emotions includes Peter of
Ailly’s influential Tractatus de anima (c. 1380), which
eclectically employs the views of the anonymous thirteenth-century
compilation of the views of Albert the Great, Summa
naturalium, and Gregory of Rimini’s brief remarks on the
theories of Scotus, Ockham, Auriol, and Wodeham on the passions of the
will and the relationship between love and pleasure. Ailly’s
work was one of the sources for introductions used in psychology
teaching at the universities such as the Erfurtian treatises by John
of Lutrea and Bartholomeus Arnoldi of Usingen in the late fifteenth-
and early sixteenth-century (Kärkkäinen, 2009). Usingen
applied the Buridanian version of the psychology of 
complacentia and displicentia and regarded them as
non-accountable first movements (Saarinen 2011: 106–107). John
Gerson’s treatises on emotions included long lists of passions
classified under the eleven types of Aquinas’s taxonomy
(Oeuvres IX, 1–25, 155–61).
Medieval theories of emotions were also discussed in many influential
sixteenth-century scholastic works such as Gabriel Biel’s
Collectorium on Peter Lombard’s Sentences and
the commentaries on Aquinas’s Summa theologiae by
Cardinal Cajetan, Bartholomé de Medina, and Francisco
Suárez, often comparing the theories of Scotus and Aquinas.
John of la Rochelle’s taxonomy of emotions was also known
through a paraphrase in Gregor Reisch’s popular early
sixteenth-century encyclopedia Margarita philosophica
(12.4–5). Among the most discussed medieval theories in early
modern thought were Aquinas’s taxonomy on emotions and
Scotus’s theory of the passions of the will, both commented on
by Suárez (King 2002; Knuuttila 2004, 2012).