When one chooses through one’s free will to live ‘honorably and
rightly’ in accordance with divine law, one can reasonably be
thought to live a moral life. Despite the human ability to reason
according to divine principles, the human condition does not permit the
attainment of moral perfection through natural means alone. Augustine
asserts that only through grace, sent freely by God to assist the human
will can one achieve true moral goodness. Prudence, which is the
ability to choose good and avoid evil, intellectual contemplation,
moral and political virtue, friendship, education and character (all
essential elements in Aristotle’s ethics) are subsumed in Augustine’s
moral theology under the command to love God. For Augustine the
complexity of Greek moral thought can be reduced to the simple rule of
conformity to divine law. 
Despite the contributions of Anselm in the eleventh century on
questions concerning free choice, divine foreknowledge and
predestination, and Peter Abelard’s startling assertion in the twelfth
century that morality arises from the agent’s intention alone, it is
not until the thirteenth century that a scientific approach to human
moral reasoning takes shape. Aristotle’s Nicomachean Ethics,
newly translated into Latin, provide a philosophical basis on which a
fresh examination of Augustine’s doctrines could be based. The first
great medieval commentary on Aristotle’s ethics, which was the result
of Albert the Great’s teaching activity at the Dominican House of
Studies in Cologne, marks the beginning of ‘moral science’
in the Middle Ages. Albert’s careful exposition of Aristotle’s text and
his clarification of the concepts of natural law, moral reasoning and
human virtue, and its influence on his most famous pupil, Thomas
Aquinas, led directly to a consideration of the question of practical
reasoning in the Middle Ages.
The notion of medieval practical reason can be investigated in two
ways: 1) in light of the distinction between practical and theoretical
sciences in the writings of the medieval university masters in the
thirteenth and fourteenth centuries; 2) in comparison to the modern
understanding of practical reason as described by Immanuel Kant. The
first method allows for a strict adherence to the texts themselves,
wherein the concept of ‘ratio practica’ is strictly limited
to a type of philosophical reasoning. The second approach permits a
deeper philosophical consideration of the parallels between the
medieval understanding of the nature of moral goodness and the modern
view of the will as practical reason. Both approaches are helpful in
gaining a fuller understanding of the meaning of practical reason in
the Middle Ages.
In its strictest sense the term ‘practical reason’
(ratio practica) refers specifically to a type of reasoning,
which is analogous to the deductions of speculative or theoretical
science. When discussing human knowledge of the precepts of natural law
Thomas Aquinas argues that these commands are related to practical
reasoning as the first principles of demonstration are related to
speculative reasoning; in each science there are certain principles of
demonstration which are known in themselves (principia per se
nota). These principles, which comprise the universal laws of
moral behavior direct all subsequent moral reasoning. Thomas bases his
theory of correct reasoning on the human ability to discover an
underlying order in any field of inquiry. The order of reasoning which
determines metaphysical knowledge is derived from a recognition of the
principle of non-contradiction. Reasoning from the notion that being
and non-being are contradictory terms, a metaphysician argues for
certain conclusions about the nature of being. In practical reason one
begins with the principle that all human acts are directed to an end
and then comes to recognize the fundamental element of ethics to be
‘do good and avoid evil’:
Although Albert sees a closer connection between prudence and practical
reason than Thomas (“prudence and practical reason have the same acts
in that reason gives the act while prudence informs the act by reason
of justice, expediency and honesty.” De bono # 443), Albert
essentially agrees with Thomas’ description of the method of practical
reasoning (Super Ethica, VI, 7, pp. 436–437). 
Thomas argues from the basic principle that what is a good always
has the nature of the end to the conclusion that human beings seek to
discover particular good acts as consequences of the determined end.
Since practical reason mimics the deductive process of theoretical
reasoning, the term, ‘ratio practica’, primarily
refers to a type of human knowledge. There is, however, a fundamental
difference between the conclusions of theoretical and practical
science:
Since the goal of practical reason is action not knowledge, the
truth attained by the intellect must be caused by its conformity to
right desire. There can be no necessary science of practical reason,
since virtuous activity allows for variety and derivation from the
universal rule in particular instances. Moral matters, which are within
the domain of practical reason, are varied and inadequate
(deformis), and cannot therefore provide the certainty which
is expected in theoretical reasoning. If we are to have any science of
practical reason at all, we must be content to apply the principles to
various conclusions and proceed from rough arguments which demonstrate
truth in a general way.
The variety and differences among the will’s acts lead Thomas
Aquinas to use the term ‘ratio practica’ specifically to
distinguish the method of moral reasoning from that of strictly
scientific knowledge:
Albert argues that despite the similarities in method between the two
types of reasoning, the force of a practical conclusion depends more on
a particular desire than a universal principle. Since human desires
differ so greatly, moral arguments are merely general and imperfectly
formulated. (Super ethica, VI, 16, p. 491). These distinctions
which are derived from Aristotle’s analysis of the nature of human
knowledge, do not approach the understanding of science found in the
philosophy of Kant. For Kant, speculation does not, and cannot, give us
knowledge of being, nor should we begin with being as the object of
science, as is seen in the medieval principle of existential
non-contradiction. Kant restricts speculative science to a
consideration of the laws of appearance. Practical science, or
practical reason, in Kant’s philosophy, however, is concerned with
freedom rather the natural good or the human end. Kant’s practical
reason attains the kind of rigor, based on pure a priori
principles, which would be impossible in the ethics of Aristotle,
Albert and Thomas who are content with a science of practical reason
whose domain is contingent and changeable acts. The secure foundation
which Kant sought for every moral choice would be considered beyond the
scope of practical reason as formulated by the medieval commentators on
Aristotle’s ethics. 
Despite their enthusiastic reception of Aristotle’s works, the
medieval moralists did not grant him complete authority in moral
reasoning. The flexibility of Aristotle’s ethics, which Thomas himself
acknowledges, did not lead medieval writers to construct a moral theory
which, like Aristotle’s, is based on societal norms, tradition and
human actions. The medieval moralists sought a more secure foundation
for determining ethical action than Aristotle’s appeal to the man of
practical wisdom (phronimos). A modern author recognizes the
tensions that exist in medieval ethical theory when he writes of Thomas
Aquinas: ‘How is it that Aquinas can seem so Aristotelian in his
description of human action and yet be so Augustinian in his insistence
on the need for conformity to the eternal law?’ (Westberg, 34).
The answer to this question lies the account of the genesis of the
human moral act and the conditions for its rectitude. Practical reason
requires a foundation more secure than the accepted practice of human
actions. In the search for that basis, Thomas and his contemporaries
construct a theory of practical reason far more complex than the mere
designation of a type of intellectual reasoning; it becomes an account
of the nature of moral goodness itself.
The designation of the will as rational appetite, its end as
goodness and its relationship to the intellect are well-known features
of medieval followers of Aristotle and need not be treated at length
here. What is of more interest in a discussion of practical reason is
the analysis of those first principles which regulate moral reasoning.
Thomas in developing the ideas of his former teacher, Albert, insists
that the will must be moved by an end that is perceived as good.
(S. th. I–II, 6, 1 & 8, 1; Super ethica, VI, 7,
pp. 436–437). More specifically he argues that:
Even though the intellect moves the will by presenting the object to be
desired, the will itself has a natural inclination toward the good. The
ultimate human end, or supreme good, is beatitude, the perfect,
all-encompassing human good. Such a supreme good could never be
perceived by practical reason as evil. (S. th. I–II, 13, 6
& 10, 2 ad 3; Super ethica, VI, 17, p. 497). The
determination of the human end as beatitude says very little about the
first principles of practical reason upon which specific moral
judgments should be based. When the will desires, it seems to want more
specific objects than the vague longing for beatitude. Thomas and
Albert specify their theory of volition by means of the doctrines of
natural law, synderesis, and prudence. 
The source of the first principles in any science is a critical
element in determining the validity and nature of that science. In
moral reasoning the origin of the principles of actions not only
reveals the understanding of the nature of goodness, but directs also
all subsequent analysis as well. In Thomas’ theory of practical reason
the first principle of human actions is that of law:
 

The dictates of natural law have a direct bearing on the
attainment of human fulfillment.  Despite an overly optimistic view of
how Aristotelian happiness leads to eternal beatitude, R. McInerny
(p. 34) recognizes the connection between natural law and the goal of
human life: “Of course natural law cannot be discussed without
presupposing what was said earlier about the ultimate end.  The
precepts of natural law have to do precisely with the end.  In its
proper sense, a precept is command to do precisely what will lead to
an end.” McInerny views the Aristotelian admonition to regard
beatitude as possible only insofar as it pertains to human beings to
be an admission that the ideal of happiness can only be imperfectly
attained in this life.  This statement allows for Thomas to subsume
what Aristotle had to say of the good life into a richer vision of the
ultimate goal that overcomes the vicissitudes of life (McInerny,
p. 33). This interpretation is common among those who wish to see an
orderly prgression from the life of virtue to perfect beatitude, but
Thomas’ position is more complex. Thomas’s comments on Aristotle’s
text rightly distinguishes between happiness in its essential activity
and a type of earthly beatitude that includes the benefits of good
fortune.  On Aristotle’s own position concerning human moral
perfection Thomas claims that the Philosopher left the question open
because he did not deem it entirely within the sphere of
philosophy. The role of prudence in the production of human happiness
becomes more restricted in Thomas’ theory than it does in Aristotle’s
ethics, since the prudential person must follow the logical
progression from the principles of natural law to the deduction of
specific actions.  The freedom of the practically wise person to chose
a life with elements from practical and theoretical activities is
restricted by the obligation to pursue the precepts of eternal law
(Celano, 2007).
Albert formulates this position succinctly when he says, “prudence is
regulated by divine and human law.” (Super ethica, VI, 4, p.
417). While no other law than the dictates of practical reason guides
human choices, the eternal law (lex aeterna) primarily and
principally orders a human being to the end and determines the
corresponding means. As a result, acts that are at odds with the
eternal law must always be considered as contrary to the dictates of
practical reason. (S. th. I–II, 71, 6 ad 3). 
The insistence upon the binding force of eternal law and the natural
human inclination towards, and participation in, it (which is called
natural law) marks a decisive step away from Aristotle’s ethics of
phronesis. The ground of moral action is no longer thought to
be the conformity of conduct to that of an outstanding person
(phronimos); it is found in an external and universally
binding source (eternal law). The process of correct practical
reasoning is governed, and measured, by the conformity of acts to the
precepts of this law:
The recognition of the principles of natural law allows practical
reason to demonstrate how a human being naturally participates in
eternal law according to its common principles. 
Developing ideas found in Albert’s work, Thomas argues that the will
must be determined by its acceptance of the dictates of practical
reason, which necessarily conform to the precepts of natural law:
The content of the precepts, the way they are known and their
influence on volition are the final elements in the natural law theory
of practical reason. The assertion that natural law reflects eternal
law gives little indication as to its specific precepts, but it does
indicate that according to the order of natural inclinations an order
of the precepts of natural law exists. There is in a human being, as
in all other types of being, a primary inclination to
self-preservation.  It is, however, in the discussions of synderesis
that Thomas and Albert most clearly identify those principles which
are the foundation of human moral reasoning. Synderesis was introduced
into Latin by Jerome, perhaps as a variant of the Greek term,
‘syneidesis’ (insight), and has no meaning
whatsoever in Greek. While Albert compares the moral principles of
synderesis to the innate natural seeds of law (seminaria
iuris), Thomas defines synderesis as “the law of our
intellect insofar as it is a habitus containing the precepts
of natural law which are the principles of human acts.”
(S.th. I–II, 94, 1, ad 2). In an earlier work Thomas
explains synderesis either as a natural habit similar to the habit of
principles, or as the power (potentia) of reason with such a
habit. He sees little difference in these two designations, since each
describes the universal natural ability of reason to recognize the
first principles of morality. The parallels to speculative reasoning
that marked practical reasoning are also a feature of deriving
conclusions from the dictates of synderesis. Thomas’ claim that the
function of synderesis is to recognize universal moral laws leaves
little doubt that he understood the first principles of practical
reason, natural law and synderesis to be the same:
The specific dictate of synderesis which refers to the eternal law
is that one must obey God; the primary imperative with respect to the
natural law is that one should avoid evil and seek the good. These
principles are obviously not mutually exclusive, ‘but the dictate
of reason to pursue good is rationally and necessarily derived from the
command to obey God.’ Synderesis is the ability of reason that
never errs in the recognition of those universal rules of moral action,
since a denial of their universal validity contravenes human reason.
Reason can, however, err in the application of the universal principle
to a particular action. Moral wrong is then the result of an imperfect,
or false, deduction from the principle. So properly speaking, error is
not ascribed to universal principles (synderesis), but rather to
conscience which may incorrectly apply a universal judgment. (De
veritate, q. 16, a. 2, ad 2; Super ethica VI, 7, p.
441).
The ability to apply correctly the principles of practical reason to
specific acts in particular circumstances is the function of the
intellectual virtue of prudence, defined succinctly as recta ratio
agibilium. Prudence “represents the agent’s ability to deliberate,
decide and properly to order the process of practical reason to
action.” (Westberg, p. 187). Prudence does not, however, direct the
will infallibly to right conclusions. Since it merely directs choices,
but does not determine them, the will can be said to remain free.
Thomas argues that the will can choose freely in three ways, although
it could never express a desire contrary to the primary moral rule of
pursuing good. The will can be mistaken 1) with respect to its own act
in that it can either will or not will; 2) with respect to its object
in that it can either want or not want a particular thing; 3) with
respect to what is ordered to the end insofar as it wills a particular
good or evil act. (De veritate, q. 16, a. 2, ad 2 & q. 16,
a. 1). Thomas’ description of the will’s freedom seems at times to be
overwhelmed by his insistence upon the will’s determination by the
human intellect. This theory of freedom seems to consist merely in the
human tendency for faulty reason, since both Albert and Thomas think it
unlikely, or even impossible, for a human being to choose contrary to
knowledge of the first principles and their application to particular
circumstances:
For Albert the delight that arises from intemperate desire does not
corrupt the natural habit of prudence, but rather its rule, when
prudence fails in drawing the proper moral conclusion. In other words,
no one can act contrary to the universal principles of morality, but
only in their particular application. (Super ethica, VI, 7, p.
441). 
According to these views human freedom could never lead a human
being to act contrary to his own interests. To choose against the
principles of natural law would not constitute freedom, but rather
foolishness. Although the will’s natural inclination to pursue the good
presented by the intellect does not compel the will to act, the
moralists of the natural law theory think it psychologically impossible
to choose something incompatible with a properly deduced conclusion of
practical reason:
The ethics of natural law, with its impressive union of the Augustinian
theory of eternal principles and the Aristotelian method of moral
reasoning, did not remain long unchallenged. Franciscan theologians,
John Duns Scotus and William of Ockham, were especially critical of a
theory which they considered too restrictive of human freedom. Although
Scotus and Ockham never produced treatises specifically devoted to
moral theory, the main lines of their critiques may be sketched from
their theological works. 
Scotus’ main concern in his arguments against the intellectualism of
Albert’s and Thomas’ ethics is his doctrine of the supremacy and
freedom of the human will. He claims that there could be no basis for
judging an action right or wrong if the will were not free to choose
against the dictates of the intellect. The will, even if it should act
‘with reason’ still is able to choose between opposite
courses of action that lie within its power; the intellect however, has
no power of self-determination, since it must assent to what it
recognizes as true. Only the will acts freely, for it has the power of
self-determination. Scotus argues that a theory of practical reason in
which judgments about actions were restricted to the type of reasoning
characteristic of speculation not only restricts freedom, but also
removes any basis for merit or blame. If the moral agent must act in
accordance with intellectual deduction, then he can only be praised for
his intellectual prowess, and not for his moral goodness.
Scotus is influenced by Aristotle’s assertion that the end of
practical knowledge is truth in agreement with right desire. For Scotus
this philosophical expression of the natural law leads him to assert
one fundamental universal moral principle: ‘God should be
loved’. This law is so deeply rooted in human reason that even
God’s power cannot release a human being from its obligations. This
principle allows Scotus to view his moral theology as consistent with
Aristotle’s ethics, since reason leads man to obey God’s commands. The
will necessarily and perpetually seeks happiness and the will naturally
desires its own perfection. The primary universal command informs the
will’s natural desire for perfection, and so particular actions,
regardless of circumstances, are judged in accordance with the will’s
conformity to the precept to love God.
Scotus’ primary consideration as a moral theologian is the nature of
freely determined volitional choices. Only secondarily does he consider
the goodness of the desired end of the action. When the will freely
chooses in accordance with right reason only then can the act be
considered morally good. Scotus does have some difficulty explaining
the relationship between the will and the intellect. If a human being
realizes intellectually that the most desirable goal is union with God,
it seems that human intellectual reason would compel him to pursue such
an end. If the will does not act in agreement with the rationally
derived first principle then it must be necessarily wrong. It is
thereby difficult to see how the will’s absolute freedom can be
maintained.
Faced with such a dilemma, Scotus argues that although the will
pursues an object rationally determined by the intellect, this does not
mean that the will is conditioned by ‘natural necessity’.
The apprehension of a possible action is offered to the will as
something neutral, while the will remains always free.
(Ordinatio, IV, d. 46). In Scotus’ view the natural law is
comprised of self-evident a priori principles, whose validity
the intellect immediately recognizes from the coherence of terms. The
will then is naturally inclined to assent to their dictates, but is not
compelled to do so. For Scotus the clearest expression of natural law
is the decalogue, which directs all human actions towards the
attainment of beatitude. The commands of natural law are not good
merely because they are commanded, but are commanded because they are
good. (Ordinatio IV, 17) Scotus considers the first two
commandments, that God must be worshipped and revered, to be absolutely
unalterable. God himself could never negate such moral principles and
human beings are morally bound to their adherence.
Despite his unrelenting criticisms of many of Scotus’ positions,
William of Ockham’s moral theology develops, rather than dismisses, the
main lines of Scotus’ ethical deliberations. Ockham too is concerned
primarily with the preservation of volitional freedom, both divine and
human. Ockham specifically rejects the theory of natural law for
determining human acts invariably toward an intellectually determined
end. His insistence upon the dignity of human nature and the absolute
power of the will for self-determination leads Ockham to reject his
predecessors’ morality of natural law. Ockham’s critique of the
metaphysics of common nature was not limited to logical and
metaphysical speculation; it pertains also to his moral doctrine,
wherein the will must be free even to choose ‘evil which is
neither really or apparently good.’
The autonomy of the will is so great that it can absolutely refuse
to pursue beatitude even when it is presented either as a general or
particular idea. Even after death (in patria) the will can
refuse to desire its own perfection. Volitional freedom is absolute in
Ockham’s moral theology; it can be defined as a natural inclination to
an end, only insofar as it is an observed general human tendency. The
human will can just as easily reject its end, as it can pursue it.
(Ordinatio I, d. 1, q. 6).
The natural foundation of morality, so essential to Albert and
Thomas and still an important element of Scotus’ thought, is rejected
by Ockham in favor of a more complete notion of volitional freedom.
Still Ockham does not advocate an ethics of relativism. The basis for
human moral judgments lies in the will’s conformity to divine commands.
Impressed by Scotus’ dictum, ‘Deus nullius est debitor’
(God is indebted to no one), Ockham extends the power of God to
reformulate all moral laws. Not only can the commandments that regulate
human interactions be altered, but also those that determine the
relationship between God and man. God could command human beings to
hate him and such a precept must be considered as morally binding.
Ockham’s use of the more common language of medieval moral theory does
not prevent him from emphasizing the contingency of human morality. His
belief in the power of human reason to discern the rational principles
of an ordered life cannot overcome his desire to preserve the unlimited
power of God, on whose will all moral principles depends and are
subject to change. Both Scotus and Ockham construct a moral theory of
volitional freedom, rather than one that they believe to be the moral
determinism of Aristotle and his followers.
The question remains as to how the doctrine of practical wisdom
relates to the general moral theory of medieval thinkers. Writers such
as Eckhart and Taler rejected Aristotelian virtues in favor of more
religious ones, acceptance (Gelassenheit) and detachment
(Abgeschiedenheit), but even Thomas Aquinas had difficulty
incorporating the rational theory of practical wisdom into his overall
understanding of the moral life. Confronted with the conflicting claims
of Aristotelian Ethics and the Augustinian doctrine of grace, he
asserts in a sermon to young Dominicans:
When faced with a clear choice between the two often conflicting
moral doctrines Thomas, like his contemporaries, preferred the
religious doctrines to the rationally based ethics of practical
wisdom.
The earliest thirteenth-century interpretations of Aristotle’s notion
practical wisdom emphasized the intellectual nature of moral virtue.
The pre-1250 commentators on the NE understood phronesis  as
a means whereby a human being could be united to the supreme good,
happiness.  These early interpreters of Aristotle made the moral life
an essentially passive one, in that the  felix  is elevated
to happiness by divine causality.  With the appearance of the work of
Robert Kilwardby, Albert the Great, and Thomas Aquinas a deeper
understanding of Aristotle’s moral thought infused the commentaries of
the second half of the thirteenth century.  These thinkers, however,
were also troubled by the relation between felicitas and
prudentia.
Thomas follows the lines sketched by his former teacher, and
transforms the nature of Aristotelian ethics into a moral doctrine
that is more easily aligned with Christian moral theology. Albert and
Thomas were not content with the unspecified nature of the principles
of the moral syllogism as described by Aristotle.  They left the
formal structure of the Aristotelian moral act the same, but altered
the content by adding the specific formulations of the fundamental
principles of natural law that direct all action toward the human
good.  The moral agent is no longer free to determine from the
observation of customs and practices the principles of actions that
direct the practical syllogism.  The precepts of natural law, which
are recognized through the natural power (Albert), or the natural
habit (Thomas), of synderesis, ensure a universally binding
code of conduct.  Prudence becomes a mechanism whereby one deduces
specific actions from determined laws.  The science of morality
becomes closer to speculative theory because of the unerring process
of determining singular decisions from universal commands.  The
Franciscan critics of the intellectualism of the Dominican
commentators on Aristotle emphasized the volitional nature of the
will’s desire for goodness.  Despite their agreement that all human
moral actions lead ultimately to union with God, the commentators
differ upon the natural moral means by which such a union is
caused.
The final question remains: can the medieval explanations of
practical reason be aligned with Kant’s description of practical
reason? Kant’s well known definition of practical reason is:
For Kant the aim of moral philosophy is to discover ideas and
principles that would constitute as pure a concept of will as possible
and not to determine the actions and conditions of willing, which are
mainly the concerns of psychology (Grundlegung, Intro., XII).
The good will is good not through its result or its capacity to attain
a predetermined end, but only by means of the willing itself.
(Grundlegung, I, 3). The will’s ability for self-determination
according to universally binding laws conveys the objectivity demanded
by the proper concept of reason. Since a rational nature declares
itself by the self-imposition of the end, morality is the relationship
of actions to the autonomy of the will; and this autonomy is the
relation of the will to the most universal mandating
(Gesetzgebung) possible. (Grundlegung, II, 83 &
85–86). The will purified of any inclination and desire for an ulterior
end is the proper matter for practical reason. 
The differences between Kantian and medieval theories of practical
reason are obvious even from such a short description of their
elements. The adherence of Albert and Thomas to the Greek view of human
nature led them to their conviction of the will’s natural inclination
toward the good. Such a notion permits Thomas to advise us to seek
naturally what is useful to us. (De veritate, q. 24, a. 8).
What is truly advantageous to human beings must always be conducive to
attaining the human end, beatitude; utility in this sense will always
be a reliable guide to correct moral choice. Thomas claims that every
thing to which man has a natural inclination human reason apprehends as
good. For Kant human beings cannot be permitted to pursue their
inclinations which are to be viewed as subjective desires. Such desires
lead to moral error at least as often as they produce right action. The
objectivity of the pure concept of the human will precludes the
recognition of human inclination as a measure of human goodness.
Despite their insistence upon volitional freedom, which in some
aspects anticipates Kant’s thought, Scotus and Ockham argue that the
true measure of morality lies in the conformity of the human will with
the commands of God. Such precepts may change if God so desires and so
Scotus and Ockham produce an ethics quite different in spirit from that
of Kant’s theory of universal imperatives. Ockham in his rejection of
the intellectual basis for morality argues that an act in total
conformity with right reason may not be virtuous, since God could
possibly create such an act without human volitional consent. The act
would be completely rational and in conformity with divine commands,
but would lack any merit or virtue. For Ockham the goodness of any
action lies completely in the will’s desire to obey divine commands
(De connexione virtutum, III, 11). When Kant describes
practical reason as a necessary law for all rational beings, whose
actions are always to be judged according to maxims completely bound to
the concept of the will of a rational being, one may see parallels to
the Franciscan doctrine of the autonomy of the will. As Thomas and
Albert describe the genesis of moral action as a process in which
practical reason has the ability to accept, understand and obey the
principles of a universal law consonant with human nature, they
approach Kant’s description of the dignity of the will more closely
than those who insist upon the necessity for adherence to the possibly
arbitrary precepts of God. Practical reason as the desire for the good
as good, as expressed in the first principle of natural law or
obedience to divine commands, and the conformity of the will through
free choice to the universally binding principles of practical reason
indicate that in some important elements of their moral theories
medieval philosophers approach the spirit of Kant as they move away
from the legacy of Aristotle.