‘Medieval philosophy’ refers to philosophy in Western
Europe during the “medieval” period, the so called
“Middle Ages.” The notion of a “Middle Age”
(or plural “Middle Ages”) was introduced in the fifteenth
century for the period between the decline of classical pagan culture
in Western Europe and what was taken to be its rediscovery during the
Renaissance. The first known documented use of the expression (in the
form ‘media tempestas’) is from 1469 (Robinson [1984], p.
748).[1]
The originators of the notion of the Middle Ages were thinking
primarily of the so called “Latin West,” the area, roughly
speaking, of Roman Catholicism. While it is true that this region was
to some extent a unit, culturally separate from its neighbors, it is
also true that medieval philosophy was decisively influenced by ideas
from the Greek East, from the Jewish philosophical tradition, and from
Islam. If one takes medieval philosophy to include the Patristic
period, as the present author prefers to do, then the area must be
expanded to include, at least during the early centuries,
Greek-speaking eastern Europe, as well as North Africa and parts of
Asia Minor.
The chronological limits of medieval philosophy are likewise
imprecise. Many histories of medieval philosophy (like many syllabi
for courses on the subject) begin with St. Augustine (354–430),
though some include second- and third-century Christian thinkers (see
Marenbon [2007], p. 1), whereas Pasnau ([2010], p. 1) speaks of a more
recent “consensus on when and where to place the beginnings of
medieval philosophy, understood as a project of independent
philosophical inquiry: it begins in Baghdad, in the middle of the
eighth century, and in France, in the itinerant court of Charlemagne,
in the last quarter of the eighth century.” At the other end of
the period, things are even more imprecise. Robinson ([1984],
pp. 749–50) amusingly summarizes the
situation:[2]
Still, it is perhaps most useful not to think of medieval philosophy
as defined by the chronological boundaries of its adjacent
philosophical periods, but as beginning when thinkers first started to
measure their philosophical speculations against the requirements of
Christian doctrine and as ending when this was no longer the
predominant
 practice.[3]
 This view allows late ancient and early medieval philosophy to
overlap during the Patristic period; thus Proclus (411–85)
belongs to the story of ancient philosophy, even though he is later
than Saint Augustine (354–430). Again, this view accommodates
the fact that late scholasticism survived and flourished even in the
Renaissance. Thus Francisco Suárez (1548–1617), who can
arguably be regarded as the last chapter in the history of medieval
philosophy, was contemporary with Francis Bacon
(1561–1626). Nevertheless by c. 1450, at the latest, radically
new ways of doing philosophy were clearly emerging.
This perhaps generous interpretation of the chronological limits of
medieval philosophy implies that it lasted at least from the Greek
patristic author Justin Martyr (mid-second century) until well into
the fifteenth century—more than half the entire history of
philosophy generally. Clearly there is much to be discussed.
Here is a recipe for producing medieval philosophy: Combine classical
pagan philosophy, mainly Greek but also in its Roman versions, with
the new Christian religion. Season with a variety of flavorings from
the Jewish and Islamic intellectual heritages. Stir and simmer for
1300 years or more, until done.
This recipe produces a potent and volatile brew. For in fact many
features of Christianity do not fit well into classical philosophical
views. The notion of the Incarnation and the doctrine of the Trinity
are obvious cases in point. But even before those doctrines were fully
formulated, there were difficulties, so that an educated Christian in
the early centuries would be hard pressed to know how to accommodate religious views into the only philosophical tradition
available. To take just one example, consider pagan philosophical
theories of the soul. At first glance, it would appear that the
 Platonic[4]
 tradition would be most appealing to an early Christian. And in fact
it was. In the first place, the Platonic tradition was very concerned
with the moral development of the soul. Again, that tradition saw the
highest goal of a human being as some kind of mystical gazing on or
union with the Form of the Good or the One; it would be easy to
interpret this as the “face to face” encounter with God in the next
life that St. Paul describes in 1 Cor. 13:12. Most important of all,
Platonism held that the soul could exist apart from the body after
death. This would obviously be appealing to Christians, who believed
in an afterlife.
On the other hand, there was another crucial aspect of Christianity
that simply made no sense to a Platonist. This was the doctrine of the
resurrection of the dead at the end of the world. Platonism allowed
for reincarnation, so there was no special theoretical problem for a
Platonist about the soul’s reentering the body. But for a Christian
this resurrection was something to look forward to; it was a
good thing. This would be incomprehensible from a Platonic
viewpoint, for which “the body is the prison of the soul,”
and for which the task of the philosopher is to “learn how to
die” in order to be free from the distracting and
corrupting influences of the body. No, for a Platonist it is best for
the soul not to be in the
 body.[5]
A Christian would therefore have a hard time being a straightforward
Platonist about the soul. But neither could a Christian be a straightforward
Aristotelian. Aristotle’s own views on the immortality of the soul are
notoriously obscure, and he was often interpreted as denying it
outright. All the harder, therefore, to make sense of the view that
the resurrection of the dead at the end of the world is something to
be joyfully
 expected.[6]
This problem illustrates the kind of difficulties that emerge from the
above “recipe” for medieval philosophy. Educated early Christians, striving to reconcile their religion in terms of the only philosophical traditions they knew, would plainly have a lot of work to
do. Such tensions may be regarded as the “motors” that
drove much of philosophy throughout the period. In response to them,
new concepts, new theories, and new distinctions were developed. Of
course, once developed, these tools remained and indeed still remain
available to be used in contexts that have nothing to do with
Christian doctrine.  Readers of medieval philosophy who go on to study
John Locke, for instance, will find it hard to imagine how his famous
discussion of “personal identity” in the Essay
Concerning Human Understanding could ever have been written if it
were not for the medieval distinction between “person” and
“nature,” worked out in dealing with the doctrines of the
Incarnation and the Trinity.
While the influence of classical pagan philosophy was crucial for the
development of medieval philosophy, it is likewise crucial that until
the twelfth and thirteenth centuries almost all the original Greek
texts were lost to the Latin West, so that they exerted their
influence only indirectly. They were “lost” not in the
sense that the texts were simply unavailable but in the sense that
very few people could read them, since they were written in the wrong
language. As the Western Roman Empire gradually disintegrated, the
knowledge of Greek all but disappeared. Boethius
(c. 480–545/526) was still fluent in Greek, but he recognized
the need for translations even in his own day; after him Greek was
effectively a dead language in the West.  There were still some
pockets of Greek literacy, especially around such figures as Isidore
of Seville and the Venerable Bede, preserving and transmitting ideas
of ancient learning, but making little impact on medieval
philosophical thought.
In the case of Plato, the Middle Ages for all practical purposes had
only the first part of the Timaeus (to 53c), hardly a typical
Platonic dialogue, in a translation and commentary by a certain
Calcidius (or
 Chalcidius).[7]
 The Timaeus contains Plato’s cosmology, his account of the
origin of the cosmos.
There were also translations of the Meno and the
Phaedo made in the twelfth century by a certain Henry
Aristippus of
 Catania,[8]
 but almost no one appears to have read them. They seem to have had
only a modest circulation and absolutely no influence at all to speak
 of.[9]
There had been a few other Latin translations made even much earlier,
but these vanished from circulation before the Middle Ages got very
far along. Cicero himself had translated the Protagoras and a
small part of the Timaeus, and in the second century Apuleius
translated the Phaedo, but these translations disappeared
after the sixth century and had very little effect on
anyone (Klibansky [1982], pp. 21–22). As Saint Jerome remarks
in the late-fourth or early-fifth century, in his Commentary on
the Epistle to the Galatians, “How many people know Plato’s
books, or his name? Idle old men on the corners hardly recall him”
(Migne [1844–64], vol. 26, col. 401B).
This state of affairs lasted until the Renaissance, when Marsilio
Ficino (1433–99) translated and commented on the complete works
of Plato. Thus, except for roughly the first half of the
Timaeus, the Middle Ages did not know the actual texts of
Plato.
As for Plotinus, matters were even worse. His Enneads (the
collection of his writings) were almost completely unavailable. Marius
Victorinus is said to have translated some of the Enneads
into Latin in the fourth century, but his translation, if in fact it
really existed, seems to have been lost soon
 afterwards.[10]
For Aristotle, the Middle Ages were in somewhat better shape. Marius
Victorinus translated the Categories and On
Interpretation.  A little over a century later, the logical works
in general, except perhaps for the Posterior Analytics, were
translated by Boethius, c. 510–12, but only his translations of
the Categories and On Interpretation ever got into
general circulation before the twelfth century. The rest of Aristotle
was eventually translated into Latin, but only much later, from about
the middle of the twelfth century. First there came the rest of the
logical works, and then the Physics, the
Metaphysics, and so on. Essentially all the works had been
translated by the middle of the thirteenth century (Dod [1982]). This
“recovery” of Aristotle in the twelfth and thirteenth
centuries was a momentous event in the history of medieval
philosophy.
Still, while it is important to emphasize this absence of primary texts
of Greek philosophy in the Latin Middle Ages, it is also important to
recognize that the medievals knew a good deal about Greek philosophy
anyway. They got their information from (1) some of the Latin
patristic authors, like Tertullian, Ambrose, and Boethius, who wrote
before the knowledge of Greek effectively disappeared in the West, and
who often discuss classical Greek doctrines in some detail; and (2)
certain Latin pagan authors such as Cicero and Seneca, who give us
(and gave the medievals) a great deal of information about Greek
philosophy.
During the first part of the Middle Ages, Platonic and neo-Platonic
influences dominated philosophical thinking. “Plato himself does not
appear at all, but Platonism is everywhere,” as Gilson has said.
(Gilson [1955], p.
 144.[11])
 This situation prevailed until the recovery of Aristotle in the
twelfth and thirteenth centuries. Hence, even though it is sometimes
still done, it is quite wrong to think of medieval philosophy as
mainly just a matter of warmed-over commentaries on Aristotle. For
most of the Middle Ages by far, Aristotle was of decidedly secondary
importance. This of course is not to deny that when Aristotle did come
to dominate, he was very dominant indeed and his influence
was immense.
“Patrology” or “patristics” is the study of
the so called “Fathers (patres) of the Church.”
In this sense, ‘fathers’ does not mean priests, although of
course many patristic authors
were priests. Neither does it does mean “fathers” in the
sense of “founding fathers,” although many patristic authors were
likewise foundational for everything that came afterward. Rather
‘fathers’ in this sense means “teachers.” See, for example,
St. Paul: “For though you might have ten thousand guardians in Christ,
you do not have many fathers. Indeed, in Christ Jesus I became your
father through the gospel” (1 Cor. 4:15 [NRSV]). In early Christian
usage, the term ‘father’ was applied primarily to the
bishop, who had preeminent teaching authority within the Church. But
gradually the word was extended until, much later, it came to include
all early Christian writers who were taken to represent the authentic
tradition of the Church (Quasten [1950–86], I, p. 9). The
patristic period is generally taken to extend from the immediately
post-Apostolic authors to either Gregory the Great (d. 604) or Isidore
of Seville (d. 636) in the Latin West, and to John of Damascus
(d. 749) in the Greek East (Quasten [1950–86], I, 1).
 By no means all patristic authors are of philosophical
significance, but many of them definitely are. By far the most
important is Saint Augustine (354–430) (see the entry on
 Saint Augustine). Augustine is certainly
the most important and influential philosopher of the Middle Ages, and
one of the most influential philosophers of any
 time:[12]
Yet despite his philosophical preeminence, Augustine was not, and did
not think of himself as, a philosopher either by training or by
profession. By training he was a rhetorician, by profession first a
rhetorician and teacher of rhetoric, then later Bishop of Hippo
(modern Annaba, or French Bône, in what is now northeast
Algeria), where his concerns were pastoral and theological.  As a
result, few of his writings contain what we would think of as purely
philosophical
 discussions.[13]
What we find instead in Augustine is a man who is a
“philosopher” in the original, etymological sense, a
“lover a wisdom,” one who is
searching for it rather than one who writes as if he has
found it and is now presenting it to us in systematic, argumentative
form.
After Augustine, the first thinker of philosophical note was Boethius
(c. 480–524/525) (see the entry on
 Anicius Manlius Severinus Boethius).
Boethius is no doubt best known today for The Consolation of
Philosophy, a dialogue in five books between Boethius and
“Lady Philosophy,” an allegorical figure who appears to
him in a vision while he is languishing in jail under sentence of
death for treason. Boethius had occupied a high station in society and
government. He was born into a family with an excellent old Roman
pedigree, and rose to a position of immense power and influence in the
Ostrogothic kingdom under Theodoric. Although for a while he was
conspicuously successful, he nevertheless eventually fell into
disfavor, was charged with treasonable conspiracy having to do with
the Emperor Justin in Constantinople (Boethius claims he was
innocent), was arrested and finally
executed.[14] In
the Consolation, Boethius and Lady Philosophy discuss the
problem of evil and the fickleness of fortune—a particularly
pressing issue for Boethius, given the circumstances under which the
work was written.
But although the Consolation is justly famous, both in our
own day and in the Middle Ages, Boethius’s long-term importance
probably rests more on his translations and commentary activity. For
Boethius was well educated, and was one of the increasingly rare
people in the West who knew Greek well, not just the language but the
intellectual culture. He came up with the lofty goal to translate
Plato and Aristotle into Latin, write commentaries on the whole of
that material, and then write another work to show that Plato and
Aristotle essentially said the same thing:
No doubt this plan would have proved unmanageable even if Boethius had
not been executed in his mid-forties. In particular, while the
Consolation certainly shows a knowledge of the
Timaeus, Boethius does not appear to have actually translated
any Plato at all, despite his intentions. He did, however,
translate Aristotle’s Categories and On
Interpretation, together with Porphyry of Tyre’s
Isagoge, a kind of “introduction” to Aristotle’s
 Categories.[15]
 He also appears to have translated the other works in Aristotle’s
Organon (except perhaps for the Posterior Analytics,
about which there is some doubt), but the fate of those translations
is obscure; they did not circulate widely until much later (Dod
[1982], pp. 53–54).
In addition to his translations, Boethius wrote a number of logical
treatises of his own. These are, first of all, a commentary on
Aristotle’s Topics, which is no longer extant. Whether or not
he translated the Posterior Analytics, there may have been a
commentary on it, but if so it has not survived and did not have any
influence (Ebbesen [1973]). The same goes for a possible (incomplete)
commentary on the Prior Analytics (Obertello [1974], I, pp.
230–32).  More important were a series of commentaries (one on
the Categories, two each on On Interpretation
and on Porphyry’s Isagoge, and one on Cicero’s
Topics) (see the entry on
 medieval theories of categories),
 together with several other works on categorical and
hypothetical syllogisms, logical “division,” and on the differences
between Aristotle’s and Cicero’s Topics (Chadwick [1981],
Gibson [1981], Obertello [1974]). Together all these logical writings,
both the translations and the others, constitute what later came to be
called the “Old Logic” (= logica vetus). Some of the
works were more influential than others. But basically, everything the
Middle Ages knew about logic up to the middle of the twelfth century
was contained in these books. As a result, Boethius is one of the main
sources for the transmission of ancient Greek philosophy to the Latin
West during the first half of the Middle Ages.
Boethius is also important for having introduced the famous “problem
of universals” in the form in which it was mainly discussed throughout
the Middle Ages (see the entry on
 the medieval problem of universals).
He also proved to be influential in the twelfth century and afterwards
for the metaphysical views contained in a series of short studies
known collectively as the Theological Tractates.
After Boethius, as the classical Greco-Roman world grew ever more
distant, philosophy—and to some extent culture
generally—entered a period of relative stagnation, a period that
lasted until after the year 1000. There was one short-lived bright
spot, however, the late-eighth and early-ninth century court of
Charlemagne (768–814) and his successors, the so called
“Carolingian” period. The major philosophical figure in this period
was John Scottus
 Eriugena[16]
 (c. 800–c. 877), an Irish monk who was at the court of Charles
the Bald around 850 (see the entry on
 John Scottus Eriugena).
 Curiously, the knowledge of Greek was still not
quite dead in Ireland even at this late date, and Eriugena brought a
knowledge of the language with him.  At the Carolingian court,
Eriugena translated several Greek works into Latin, including the very
important writings of Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite (more on him
below), a work by Maximus Confessor (also known as Maximus of
Constantinople, c. 580–662), and Gregory of Nyssa’s (died
c. 385) On the Making of Man (= De hominis
opificio). Eriugena also wrote several other works of his
own.
Among his translations, the writings of Pseudo-Dionysius are surely
the most important and influential (see the entry on
 Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite).[17]
 The true identity of the man we call “Pseudo-Dionysius” is unknown,
but he lived probably in the late-fifth century, somewhere in the
Greek-speaking near East, and was very much influenced by the late
neo-Platonist Proclus. Whoever he was, he claimed to be a
certain Dionysius who is reported to have been among the philosophers
on the Areopagus in Athens when St. Paul went there to preach (Acts
17:19–34). Most of the audience on that occasion laughed at Paul
and his novel doctrines.
Damaris and the “others” have disappeared without a trace, but our
unknown later author pretends to be the Dionysius mentioned
in this passage.
The Pseudo-Dionysian writings consist of four treatises and a series
of ten letters. The most philosophically important of them are the two
treatises On the Divine Names and On Mystical
Theology. Through them the Latin West was introduced to what is
sometimes called “darkness mysticism,” the tradition that interprets
mystical experience not in terms of an “intellectual vision” (compare
Plato’s Allegory of the Cave, where the Form of the Good is described
as the dazzling sun), but in terms of the will rather than the
intellect, darkness rather than light. (Compare later mystical
expressions such as “dark night of the soul,” “cloud of
unknowing.”)
It is also mainly through these two treatises that medieval philosophy
got the still familiar view that there are three ways of talking about
God, by trying to say what he is like (the via affirmativa),
by saying instead what he is not (the via negativa),
and by a kind of “combined” way that speaks of God with affirmative
predicates, but with some kind of mark of superexcellence (the via
eminentiae, “God is more than good, more than
wise.”).
Among Eriugena’s own writings, the two most important ones were surely
On the Division of Nature (= De divisione
naturae or, under a Greek title, Periphyseon) and On
Predestination (= De praedestinatione), both very
strongly influenced by the neo-Platonic texts Eriugena was
translating. Both works were condemned, On Predestination
soon after it was written. On the Division of Nature is a
large, systematic work in four books, presenting a vision of reality
in strongly neo-Platonic terms. The unfamiliarity of this kind of
thinking in Western Christendom, which was strongly influenced by
Augustine, no doubt contributed to his later reputation of being a
heretic.
After its brief “renaissance” during the Carolingian period, education
and culture declined once again for roughly another 200 years. Then,
shortly after the turn of the millennium, things began to revive. The
Germanic “barbarian” tribes that had so disturbed the late Roman
empire had long since settled down, and the later Viking raiders had
by this time become respectable “Normans.” Trade began to revive,
travel became relatively safe again, at least compared to what it had
been, new cities began to emerge, and along with them new social
arrangements began to develop. Education was part of this general
revival, and with it philosophy. The major medieval philosophers
before the year 1000 are probably fewer than five in number (depending
on how generously one wants to take the word ‘major’). But
after 1000 their numbers grow exponentially. It is no longer possible
to treat them individually in chronological order; indeed, it is
difficult to keep track of them all. As time goes on, the
complications and the numbers only increase.
Simultaneously, philosophy becomes increasingly technical and
“academic.” Anselm of Canterbury (1033–1109) represents a major
transitional figure (see the entry on
 Saint Anselm).
 His writings are not yet laden with the
technicalities and jargon that make so much later medieval philosophy
formidable and inaccessible to the non-specialist. And yet his
writings are philosophically “argumentative” in a way much earlier
medieval philosophy is not and that looks much more familiar to
present-day readers.
Anselm is no doubt best known as the originator of the
famous “ontological argument” for the existence of
 God.[18]
 But he wrote much else besides, on many philosophical and theological
topics. His writings abound in subtle and sophisticated reasoning;
indeed, they illustrate the increasing role of “dialectic” in
philosophy and theology. In Anselm’s hands, theology begins to develop
into an argumentative discipline, less exclusively a matter of
“scripture studies” and spirituality and increasingly a matter of
systematic exploration and presentation of doctrine. This development
grows even more pronounced after Anselm.
By the early twelfth century, the revival of education that had
begun shortly after the millennium was in full swing. During the first
half of the century, the most important philosopher by far was
undoubtedly Peter Abelard (1079–1142) (see the entry on
 Peter Abelard). He was also one of the
most colorful figures in the entire history of philosophy. His affair
with Héloise and his consequent castration are the stuff of
legend, and his controversy with the much more traditional Bernard of
Clairvaux (1090–1153) has only enhanced his reputation among
those who have viewed him (with considerable oversimplification) as a
champion of reason over authority. His autobiographical Story of My
Adversities (= Historia calamitatum) is a “good
read” even today, and is one of the most intensely personal documents
of the Middle
 Ages.[19]
Abelard represents the full flower of “early medieval philosophy,”
just before the new translations of Aristotle and others transform
everything. It is important to realize that, except for the works of
Pseudo-Dionysius, which do not appear to have had an important role in
Abelard’s thinking, he had access to no more of the original sources
of philosophy in the ancient world than anyone else in Europe had had
since the time of Boethius. Yet his philosophy is strikingly original.
His views on logic and what we would call philosophy of language are
sophisticated and novel; indeed, he is a serious contender for the
title of the greatest logician of the entire medieval period, early or
late. He is one of the first nominalists, and certainly the first
important one. His writings on ethics put a new and very strong
emphasis on the role of the agent’s intention rather than
exterior actions. He also wrote on theological topics such as
Trinity.
Abelard’s writings further amplify the tendency, already seen in
Anselm, to increase the use of reasoning and argumentation in
theology. But whereas Anselm had managed to deflect criticisms of this
new approach in theology, Abelard’s disputatious personality alarmed
those who were more comfortable with the older style. He was subject
to ecclesiastical censure during his lifetime, a fact that no doubt
contributes to the relatively few explicit citations of him in the
later Middle Ages. Nevertheless, it is undeniable that his influence
was widespread.
Throughout this early medieval period, we find many writers, usually
of a broadly “Platonic” persuasion, who deal with philosophical topics
in an unsystematic but far from shallow way that does not clearly
distinguish philosophy from theology, or for that matter from “wisdom
literature” generally. Frequently their views are presented by
arguments that amount to an appeal to a “vision” of how things are
(“Look, don’t you
 see?”).[20]
 This is simply a general although not universal observation about
these authors, and should not be regarded as a philosophical
limitation or defect. After all, some of the world’s most important
philosophy has been presented in such a “visionary” way.  Consider the
role of “intuition” in twentieth-century phenomenology, for example,
not to mention Parmenides’s poem (where the philosophy is presented by
a goddess) and much of Plato’s philosophy, including the Allegory of
the Cave.
There are many exceptions to this generalization.  Boethius’s logical
commentaries, for example, are purely philosophical and frequently
genuinely argumentative, even if they are often obscure and
inaccessible to modern readers. Eriugena’s On the Division of
Nature, while definitely “visionary,” is nevertheless quite
systematic in its structure. And by the time of Anselm, the role of
logical argumentation is beginning to grow. Certainly for Abelard the
above generalization fails entirely.
Nevertheless, a big change is about to occur. Prior to Abelard,
philosophy in the Middle Ages had not been an exclusively academic
affair. It had been addressed for the most part to any well educated
reader interested in the topics being discussed. Boethius’s
Consolation, for instance, or almost any of Augustine’s or
Anselm’s writings, could profitably be read by any literate person.
Soon, however, this all changes. Philosophy becomes an increasingly
specialized discipline, pursued by and for those whose livelihood is
found only in educational institutions. Philosophy and theology become
more clearly distinguished from one another; both become more
systematic, rigorous and precise. These virtues are accompanied by an
increasingly technical jargon, which makes so much late-medieval
philosophy intimidating and formidable to non-specialist readers. By
the same token, this increasing technicality diminishes the overall
sense of moral urgency one finds for example in Augustine’s
Confessions or Boethius’s Consolation.
As with the previous generalization, this one should not be regarded
as a philosophical fault of the later authors; it is simply a
different way of doing philosophy. As David Hume knew, there are two
styles of philosophy, each with its own advantages (An Enquiry
Concerning Human Understanding, § 1). What we see in passing
from the earlier to the later Middle Ages is a transition from one to
the other.
As part of the cultural revival described above, and from the
late-eleventh century on, there was a new and increasing interest in
having translations of previously unavailable texts, not all of them
philosophical by any means. No doubt this new interest was prompted in
part by Western Europe’s exposure to the Greek and Islamic world
during the First Crusade (beginning in 1095). But, for whatever
reason, new translations soon began to appear from:
The Spanish translators worked from Arabic texts. In the case of
Aristotle, they used Arabic translations of Aristotle’s Greek,
sometimes with an earlier Syriac link in between. After such a
circuitous route, it is no less than amazing that the Latin Europeans
were able to understand anything at all of these newly available
Aristotelian works. Eventually the extensive and thorough commentaries
by the Moorish Ibn Rushd (in Latin, Averroes, 1126–98) were
translated from Arabic as well. These commentaries were extremely
important in shaping the late medieval understanding of Aristotle,
although some of the views contained in them became highly
controversial.
By the end of the twelfth century, almost all of Aristotle’s works
available today had been translated into Latin and, together with the
commentaries and other newly translated texts, gradually began to
circulate. By the mid-thirteenth century, they were widely known. The
first things to spread were the remaining logical writings of
Aristotle’s Organon, those not already widely known from
Boethius’s translations some six hundred years previously. These new
logical writings, as distinct from the “Old Logic” (= Logica
vetus) stemming from Boethius, became known collectively as the
“New Logic” (= Logica nova). After them, the
Physics, Metaphysics and other Aristotelian writings
gradually became known.
This relatively sudden injection of so much new and unfamiliar
material into Western Europe was a stunning shock, nothing less than
revolutionary. It was no longer possible for philosophers and
theologians to regard their task as simply one of deepening and
elaborating traditional views that had come mainly from the Church
Fathers and other familiar and approved authorities. It was now a
matter of dealing with an entirely unfamiliar framework, with new
ideas, accompanied by powerful arguments for them, some of which ideas
were plainly unacceptable to a Christian—for example,
Aristotle’s rejection of anything like divine providence, and his
views on the eternity of the world (see the entry on 
 William of Auvergne).
As part of the revival that began after the turn of the millennium,
new forms of education began to emerge in Western Europe.  In general,
we may distinguish four main types of educational practices in the
Middle
 Ages:[22]
Monastic schools. These were schools that had
been regularly associated with monasteries ever since the sixth
century.  Much of Anselm’s most important work, for instance,
including the
Proslogion containing his “ontological argument,”
was penned at the monastic school of Bec in Normandy. Abelard in
his Story of My Adversities describes how, at least according
to Abelard’s telling, his teacher William of Champeaux
(c. 1070–1121) was driven out of Paris by Abelard’s superior
dialectical skills and retired to the abbey of Saint Victor, where he
“founded” (or at least reorganized) what came to be known
as the School of Saint Victor. This was another one of these monastic
schools. The masters of this school became quite well known in their
own right in the later-twelfth century. They are collectively known as
the “Victorines.” The most important of them are:
Individual “masters.” Beginning in
the mid-eleventh century, individual scholars would occasionally set
up a “school” of their own and gather students around
them. Such schools were sometimes itinerant, and depended entirely on
the appeal of the teaching “master.” Perhaps the closest
analogue to this arrangement would be the modern “martial
arts” schools one often finds in present-day cities. The
practice declined after c. 1150. Abelard conducted such a
“school” at Melun in the very early eleventh century, and
seems earlier to have attended a similar “school”
conducted by a certain Roscelin (c. 1045–c. 1120), a
controversial nominalist whose writings have mostly not survived, but
who had in effect been accused by Anselm of out-and-out tritheism on
the doctrine of the Trinity.
Cathedral schools. These were schools associated
with the official church of a bishop, and played a role similar to that
of the monastic schools for monasteries: they trained young clerics and
occasionally others as well. Before William of Champeaux left Paris as
the result of Abelard’s criticisms of his views, he had been teaching
at the cathedral school of Paris (see the entry on
 William of Champeaux).
 The so-called “School of Chartres”
may likewise have been such a cathedral
 school.[23]
 The scholars there were
especially interested in that portion of Plato’s Timaeus that
was circulating in Calcidius’s translation (see
 above),
 and in the metaphysical implications of
Boethius’s Theological Tractates. Important figures associated
with the School of Chartres include Bernard of Chartres (died c. 1130),
Thierry (= Theodoric) of Chartres (died c. 1150), and Gilbert of
Poitiers (= Gilbert de la Porrée, Gilbertus Porreta, c.
1085–1154). John of Salisbury’s (c. 1115–80)
Metalogicon is an invaluable source of information about all
these and many other thinkers from the first half of the twelfth
century (John of Salisbury [1955]; see
 John of Salisbury).[24]
 Cathedral schools flourished c. 1050–c. 1150.
Universities. Parliament and the
“university” are arguably the two great medieval
institutions that have survived more or less intact to the present
day. (The Church may be counted as a conspicuous third, depending on
one’s views about the Reformation and Counter-Reformation.)
Frequently, universities grew out of cathedral schools. Thus, the
cathedral school at Paris developed by the early-thirteenth century
into the University of Paris. An important cathedral school drew
students from all over Europe. Such a school became known as
a studium generale. Some of these studia generalia
survived and became known as “universities.” At first, the
term ‘universitas’ referred simply to the
“entirety” or “universality” of scholars, both
faculty and students, associated with the school. As the term
gradually came to be used, a “university” was one of these
major, international schools that was distinguished from others by its
possessing an official charter (granted by a royal or ecclesiastical
authority), a set of statutes, and an established form of governing
itself.
The University of Paris was the premier university in Europe in the
thirteenth century. Its statutes were officially approved by the papal
legate Robert de Courçon in 1215. The official founding of the
University is usually put at this date, although it is clear that the
statutes existed earlier. Oxford and Cambridge also date from the
early-thirteenth century, although their period of greatest vigor in
the Middle Ages came in the late-thirteenth and early-fourteenth
century. Toulouse was founded in 1229 by papal charter. Salamanca was
founded by royal charter in 1200. There were also universities in
Italy; indeed, Bologna was the first university in all of Europe, and
had the peculiarity of being a student-run university.
Universities were divided into “faculties.” The four most common
ones were the faculties of arts, law, medicine, and theology. Most
universities had arts faculties, in addition to one or more of the
others. The arts faculty was for the basic training of students, before
they proceeded to one of the “higher” faculties. In effect, the arts
faculty was the equivalent of the modern undergraduate program. As for
the “higher” faculties, Bologna was primarily a university for the
study of law. Others were best known for medicine. Paris had all four
faculties, but the faculty of theology was considered the highest of
the four.
In the medieval university, philosophy was cultivated first and
foremost in the arts faculty. When the newly translated works of
Aristotle first appeared at the University of Paris, for instance, it
was in the faculty of arts. The works were clearly not law or
medicine.  (Some of them might be stretched a bit to count as
medicine, but these were not the ones that were influential first.)
Neither were they theology in the traditional sense of “Sacred
Doctrine,” although some of Aristotle’s writings had important
consequences for theology. Some of these consequences were thought to
be dangerous for Christian doctrine, and they were. In 1210, a
provincial synod at Paris ruled that Aristotle’s “natural
theology” could not be “read” in the faculty of arts
at Paris. To “read” in this context means to
“lecture on.” It did not mean that students and masters
couldn’t study and discuss these works in private. In 1215, when
Robert de Courçon approved the statutes of the University of
Paris, one of them forbade the arts masters from lecturing on
Aristotelian metaphysics and natural science.  In 1231, Pope Gregory
IX ordered that the works prohibited in 1210 not be used until they
could be examined by a theological commission to remove any errors. In
1245, Innocent IV extended the prohibitions of 1210 and 1215 to the
University of Toulouse. Despite these bans, study and discussion of
Aristotle could not be stopped. By the 1250s, people were openly
lecturing on everything they had of Aristotle’s.
Why were these prohibitions issued? In part it was out of a genuine
concern for the purity of the faith. Aristotelianism was thought, and
rightly so, to be theologically suspect. Besides, European academics
were just getting acquainted with most of Aristotle, and at this early
stage of their acquaintance they weren’t altogether sure just what he
meant and what the implications were. A “go slow” approach
was not an altogether unreasonable course of action to adopt. On the
other hand, it cannot be denied that some of the basis for the
prohibitions was simply a resistance to new ideas.
By their very nature, universities brought together masters and
students from all over Europe and put them in close proximity. Not
surprisingly, the result was a “boom” in academic study, including
philosophy. Already in the twelfth century, and certainly by the
early-thirteenth, it is futile even to attempt anything like a
sequential narrative of the history of medieval philosophy. Instead,
the remainder of this article will mention only a few of the major
figures and describe some of the main topics that were discussed
throughout the medieval period. For a more complete picture, readers
should consult any of the general histories in the
 Bibliography
 below, and for details on individual authors
and topics the
 Related Entries
 in this Encyclopedia,
listed below.
Histories of medieval philosophy often treat Thomas Aquinas
(1224/25–74), John Duns Scotus (c. 1265–1308), and William
of Ockham (c. 1287–1347) as the “big three” figures
in the later medieval period; a few add Bonaventure (1221–74) as
a fourth.  Although there is certainly ample justification for giving
special emphasis to these authors, it would be misleading if one thought
one could get even a fair overall picture from them
alone. Nevertheless, the list is instructive and illustrates several
things.
First of all, not one of these three or four authors was French.
Aquinas and Bonaventure were Italian, Scotus—as his name
implies—was a Scot, and Ockham was English. All but Ockham spent
at least part of their careers at the University of Paris. This
illustrates both the preeminence of the University of Paris in the
thirteenth century and the increasing internationalization of education
in the later Middle Ages in general. But it also illustrates another
odd fact: the relative absence of Frenchmen as major players on the
philosophical scene during this period, even at the premier university
in France. There are certainly notable exceptions to this perhaps
contentious observation (see for example the entries on
 Peter Auriol,
 John Buridan,
 Godfrey of Fontaines,
 Nicholas of Autrecourt,
 Peter John Olivi,
 Philip the Chancellor, and
 William of Auvergne),
 but with the arguable exception of Buridan, surely
none of them is of the stature of the four mentioned above.
The fact that Buridan has not been generally acknowledged in the
same rank as the four “greats,” even though he is certainly a
formidable contender, points to an important feature of the
twentieth-century historiography of later medieval philosophy. Buridan
was what is known as a “secular master.” That is, although he was a
priest, he did not belong to any of the religious
 “orders.”[25]
 Beginning in the early-thirteenth century, several new orders were
founded, notably the Franciscans (1209) and the Dominicans (1216), both
of which became very prominent in late medieval universities. Aquinas
was a Dominican, while Bonaventure, Scotus, and Ockham were
Franciscans.
Religious orders tend to keep good records, including the writings
of their members, so that historians of medieval philosophy typically
have more material to work with for authors in the various orders than
they do for “secular” figures like Buridan. Besides, other things being
equal, orders understandably prefer to “champion their own” in academic
as in other matters, and when the academic champion comes relatively
early in the history of his order, he can come to be regarded as
representing the order’s authentic “position,” thereby influencing the
views of later members of the
 order.[26]
 In this way, Aquinas soon
became the semi-“official” philosopher and theologian of the
Dominicans, a status that was enhanced in 1879 in Pope Leo XIII’s
encyclical Aeterni Patris, which called Aquinas “the chief and
master of all the scholastic doctors,” and urged that preference be
given to Thomistic doctrine in Catholic schools (see the entry on
 Saint Thomas Aquinas). As a result, Aquinas
enjoyed a far greater authority in the late-nineteenth and the first
half of the twentieth century than perhaps he ever did in the Middle
Ages. To some extent, Bonaventure likewise came to be regarded as
representing typically Franciscan views (see the entry on
 Saint Bonaventure), and later on Scotus was highly
respected and often favored among the Franciscans (see the entry on
 John Duns Scotus). Ockham is a special
case. He was a controversial figure, mainly because of political
disputes with the Pope that embroiled his later life (see the entry on
 William of Ockham).
 Nevertheless, as one of their own, the Franciscans have
always been interested in him and in his writings.
The upshot of all this is that major late medieval philosophers,
like Buridan, who did not belong to a religious order have often
suffered from neglect in standard histories of medieval philosophy, at
least until fairly recently. Another neglected secular master was Henry
of Ghent, a very important late-thirteenth century figure who has
turned out to be crucial for understanding much of Duns Scotus, but
whose views have only in the last few decades begun to be seriously
studied (see the entry on Henry of Ghent).
For that matter, even many important and influential late medieval
philosophers who did belong to religious orders are still virtually
unknown or at least woefully understudied today, despite the labors of
generations of scholars. Their works have never been printed and exist
only in handwritten manuscripts, written in a devilishly obscure system
of abbreviation it takes special training to decode. It is probably
safe to say that for no other period in the history of European
philosophy does so much basic groundwork remain to be done.
Medieval philosophy included all the main areas we think of as part
of philosophy today. Nevertheless, certain topics stand out as worthy
of special mention. To begin with, it is only a slight exaggeration to
say that medieval philosophy invented the philosophy of religion. To be
sure, ancient pagan philosophers sometimes talked about the nature of
the gods. But a whole host of traditional problems in the philosophy of
religion first took on in the Middle Ages the forms in which we still
often discuss them today:
As for logic, the great historian of logic I. M. Bocheński
([1961], pp. 10–18) remarked that the later Middle Ages
was—along with the ancient period from roughly 350–200 BCE
and the recent period from Boole and Peano on—one of the three
great, original periods in the history of logic. Although we have
learned much about the history of logic since Bocheński wrote, and
although we can find individual notable figures in logic who fall
outside any of his three great periods, his observation is still by and
large correct. From the time of Abelard through at least the middle of
the fourteenth century, if not later, the peculiarly medieval
contributions to logic were developed and cultivated to a very high
degree. It was no longer a matter of interpreting Aristotle, or
commenting on the works of the “Old Logic” or the “New Logic”; wholly
new genres of logical writing sprang up, and entirely new logical and
semantic notions were developed. For logical developments in the Middle
Ages, see the articles
 insolubles,
 literary forms of medieval philosophy,
 medieval theories of categories, 
 medieval semiotics,
 medieval theories of analogy,
 medieval theories of demonstration,
 medieval theories of modality,
 medieval theories of Obligationes,
 medieval theories: properties of terms,
 medieval theories of singular terms,
 medieval theories of the syllogism,
 and
 sophismata.
 For
information on some contributors to medieval logic, see the articles
 Albert of Saxony,
 Anicius Manlius Severinus Boethius,
 John Buridan,
 John Wyclif,
 Johannes Sharpe,
 Paul of Venice,
 Peter Abelard,
 Peter of Spain,
 Richard Kilvington,
 Richard the Sophister,
 Roger Bacon,
 Thomas of Erfurt,
 Walter Burley,
 William Heytesbury,
and
 William of Ockham.
In metaphysics, the Middle Ages has a well deserved reputation for
philosophical excellence. The problem of universals, for example, was
one of the topics that were discussed at this time with a level of
precision and rigor it would be hard to find matched before or since.
But it was by no means the only such question. For some of the main
topics in metaphysics on which medieval philosophers sharpened their
wits, see the articles
 binarium famosissimum,
 existence,
 medieval mereology,
 the medieval problem of universals,
 medieval theories of causality,
 medieval theories of haecceity,
 and
 medieval theories of relations.
 For some important contributors to medieval
metaphysics, see the articles
 John Buridan,
 John Duns Scotus,
 John Wyclif,
 Saint Augustine,
 Saint Thomas Aquinas,
and
 William of Ockham.
In natural philosophy and philosophy of science, medieval philosophy
was of course very strongly—but not exclusively—influenced
by Aristotle. See, for example, the articles
 medieval theories of causality
 and
 Saint Thomas Aquinas.
Particularly from the fourteenth century on, the increasing use of
mathematical reasoning in natural philosophy would eventually pave the
way for the rise of early modern science later on. Important figures in
this development include
 William Heytesbury
and
 William of Ockham.
 Other important contributors to medieval natural philosophy
include Albert of Saxony,
 Dietrich of Freiberg,
  John Buridan,
 Nicholas of Autrecourt,
 Nicole Oresme,
 Robert Grosseteste, and
 William Crathorn.
Medieval epistemology was not, with some noteworthy exceptions,
particularly worried over the problem of skepticism, over
whether we have genuine knowledge (see the entry on
 medieval skepticism).
 The tendency was to take it
for granted that we do, and instead to ask about how this
comes about: what are the mechanisms of cognition, concept formation,
etc. Medieval epistemology, therefore, typically shades into what we
would nowadays call philosophical psychology or philosophy of mind;
after the recovery of Aristotle’s On the Soul, it was regarded
as a branch of the philosophy of nature. For some of the important
topics discussed in the area of medieval epistemology, see the
 entries 
 divine illumination,
 medieval theories of demonstration, and
 mental representation in medieval philosophy.
 For some important medieval
authors in this area, see the entries on
 John Buridan,
 John Duns Scotus,
 Nicholas of Autrecourt,
 Saint Augustine,
 Saint Thomas,
 Walter Chatton,
and
 William of Ockham.
For details on some important developments in medieval ethics, see
the entries on
 medieval theories of conscience,
 medieval theories of practical reason,
 and
 the natural law tradition in ethics.
 For some of the major contributors to medieval
ethics, see the articles
 John Duns Scotus,
 Peter Abelard,
 Peter of Spain
Saint Anselm,
 Saint Augustine,
 Saint Thomas Aquinas
and
 William of Ockham,
 elsewhere in this Encyclopedia. For some important
figures in medieval political theory, see the articles
 Dante Alighieri,
 John Wyclif,
 John Wyclif’s Political Philosophy and
 William of Ockham.
The above lists of topics and important figures should be regarded
as only representative; they are far from exhaustive.