Eckhart was born in 1260 in Hochheim (Thuringia). He entered the
Dominican Order quite early, and received most of his education in the
Studium Generale in Cologne that Albert the Great had founded
in 1248. In 1286 Eckhart went to Paris to study. From 1294 until 1298,
he was Prior of the Convent of Erfurt, at the same time carrying out
the office of Vicar of Thuringia. Eckhart was promoted to Master of
Theology at Paris in 1302 and taught as Professor there in the
academic year 1302/1303. He was elected Provincial of the newly
founded Province of Saxony in 1303, and held this office until
1311. In 1307 Eckhart also took over the administration of the
Province of Bohemia as Vicar General. When the Provincial Chapter of
the Province of Teutonia elected him Provincial in 1310, the election
was not accepted by the General Chapter in Naples (1311). Instead,
Eckhart was sent once more to Paris. After teaching there for a second
period, Eckhart went to Strasbourg in 1313, where from 1314 to 1322 he
was increasingly active as a preacher caring for Dominican convents
there. From 1323 on, Eckhart resided in Cologne, most likely at the
Studium Generale, and probably as Lecturer. During this time,
the campaigns against him began that led, in 1326, to the opening of
an inquisitional proceeding. In its course Eckhart submitted a reply
to the syllabus of errors attributed to him, protesting as well
against the proceeding itself, which was then continued at the Papal
Court in Avignon. It resulted in the papal bull In agro
dominico from Pope John XXII, issued on March 27, 1329,
condemning 17 articles from this syllabus as heretical and 11 more as
suspect of heresy. Eckhart, however, did not live to see his
condemnation; he died sometime before April 30, 1328—probably on
January 28, 1328, possibly in Avignon.
At the beginning of the academic year 1293/94 Eckhart held an
inaugural lecture (Collatio in libros Sententiarum) that has
been preserved. An academic sermon, the Sermo Paschalis a. 1294
Parisius habitus and the Tractatus super oratione
dominica date from the same time. Between 1294 and 1298 Eckhart
composed his Instructional Talks (Die rede der
underscheidunge), table-talks for his confratres in the
Erfurt monastery. From his first teaching period in Paris (1302/03)
come the Quaestiones (Quaestio Parisiensis I,
II and the rationes Equardi from one of the disputed
questions of Gonsalvus Hispanus), as well as the Sermo die beati
Augustini Parisius habitus, a feast-day sermon in honor of
Augustine (August 18, 1302 or February 28, 1303), and perhaps two
other Quaestiones. Between 1303 and 1310, during a General
Chapter, Eckhart held the Sermones on Ecclesiastics 24:
23–27a and 24: 27b–31. In 1305 he began composing the
Opus tripartitum, his major work, comprising three parts: the
Opus propositionum (Work of Theses), with over 1,000
theses in 14 treatises, the Opus quaestionum (Work of
Problems) and the Opus expositionum (Work of
Interpretations).  Much of the Opus tripartitum remained
incomplete. What we have are the Prologus generalis in opus
tripartitum, the Prologus in opus propositionum, the
Prologus in opus expositionum I and II, and
various commentaries (above all the Expositio sancti evangelii
secundum Iohannem).  Also preserved is an Opus sermonum
containing drafts of Latin sermons. From the Strasbourg and Cologne
period come the treatise Daz buoch der goetlîchen
troestunge and the sermon Von dem edeln menschen. (The
authenticity of the treatise Von abegescheidenheit has been
disputed in the past, but it has been recently accepted once more as a
work of Eckhart.) The most important German sermons also go back to
this last period. Among these is Predigt 52, which due to its
extremely innovative content was later translated from Middle High
German into Latin.
Of all those following in the tradition of Albert the Great who
developed theories of the intellect in the 13th and 14th centuries,
Dietrich of Freiberg went the furthest. In treating of the active
intellect (intellectus agens), Dietrich identified a
three-fold object, which, however, the intellect knows in a single
intuition (uno intuitu): its principle (deus), its
essence (essentia) and the totality of beings
(universitas entium). According to Dietrich, the intellect
knows its essence and all beings not only according to its essence,
but also “in its principle, according to the mode of this very
principle” (in suo principio secundum modum ipsius
principii; cf.  Dietrich of Freiberg, De intellectu et
intelligibili II 37–40, ed. Mojsisch, 1977,
pp. 175–77). This mode of knowing is the highest that we can
identify. Before Dietrich, no one had formulated this mode of knowing
in such a progressive manner by making such a radical claim.
Nevertheless, Dietrich did not further elaborate how to think
this mode of knowing in its individual moments, that is, the way the
intellect actually knows “in its principle, according to the
mode of this very principle”.
Meister Eckhart begins where Dietrich of Freiberg leaves off.  Nowhere
in his writings does Eckhart mention Dietrich by name, although they
were personally acquainted, and although Dietrich used his influence
to see that Eckhart received significant posts within the Dominican
Order. Yet Eckhart goes a step beyond Dietrich by expanding upon what
Dietrich had given only general expression to, unfolding how the
intellect actually moves in itself and therewith demonstrating what it
means for the intellect to know “according to the mode of this
very principle”. Briefly put, understanding how the intellect
returns to its principle, where it might know “according to the
mode of its principle”, requires that we first identify the way
in which this principle itself knows, so that we might then grasp how
the intellect comes to know there.
In the initial stage of his career, Meister Eckhart composed some not
very exciting table-talks for his confratres and, in his lost
Commentary on the Sentences (Goris/Pikavé, 2001), most
likely advocated doctrines based on the theology of Thomas
Aquinas. Once back in Paris, however, Eckhart inaugurated his teaching
with a bombshell. With a new thesis directed against Thomas Aquinas,
as well as against his own Thomistic thinking prior to 1302, Eckhart
contends that the absolute principle (or the absolute cause: God) is
pure intellect and not being. According to this view, being
(esse) is always caused and thus presupposes intellect,
itself without being, as the cause of being. In line with Neoplatonic
modes of thinking (cf. Liber de causis, cap. XI;
Fidora/Niederberger, 2001, 76: “Causatum ergo in causa est
per modum causae …”: “What is caused is in the
cause in the mode of the cause …”), Eckhart holds that
being is, in intellect, nothing other than intellect and, therefore,
not simply being, but instead being that has been elevated to
intellect. If someone should nonetheless object that in God knowing or
anything else might be described as ‘being’, the proper
response for Eckhart is that this ‘being’ still
presupposes the knowing of intellect (“Et si tu intelligere
velis vocare esse, placet mihi.  Dico nihilominus, quod, si in deo est
aliquid, quod velis vocare esse, sibi competit per
intelligere”: “And if you wish to call intelligizing
being, that is all right with me. Nonetheless, I say that if there is
something in God that you wish to call being, it suits him through
intelligizing”; cf. Echardus de Hochheim, Utrum in deo sit
idem esse et intelligere n. 24, ed. Mojsisch, 1999, 192,
103–105). As the absolute cause, intellect is thought of as
absolutely unlimited only if it is thought of as wholly without being.
As such, intellect becomes the principle for absolute as well as
contingent being. The alternative view—that knowing is simply
identical with being (a position advanced by Sturlese, 1993a and von
Perger, 1997 and again, with new argumentation, by Grotz,
2002)—disregards the more sweeping contention in Eckhart’s
thesis that knowing is presupposed in every case of being.
(Later, Nicholas of Cusa maintains accordingly that the maximum is
without being, yet can be contracted to being; cf. Nicholas of Cusa,
De docta ignorantia I, 6, ed. Hoffmann/Klibansky, 1932a,
p. 14, 1: “Praeterea, contrahamus maximum ad esse et
dicamus …”: “Besides, we might contract the
maximum to being and say …”) Scholars such as Klibansky,
however, as well as Imbach, 1976 have drawn attention to parallel
passages in the German sermons that make it clear that for Eckhart
absolute knowing is without being, indeed, that intellection is prior
to being.
Between the uncreated and the created the predominant relationship is
one of analogy, a relationship involving as well the
disjunction of the two terms. Insofar as Eckhart in 1305 again takes
up the theme of absolute being in its identity with God (esse est
deus), he likewise gives expression to relationships of
analogical causality, teaching that being as such, or absolute being
(esse absolute), is what becomes restricted to determinate
being (esse hoc et hoc), while determinate being is what
brings it about that a this or a that (hoc et hoc) actually
exists.  Eckhart says ever again that the created is of itself pure
nothing, indeed, even nothingness or nullity (nihileitas,
nulleitas). The created is only because absolute
being communicates itself to it—through determinate
being—whereby determinate being, of course, is not in any
position to communicate being as such, but only determinacy.
That all of this is so, of course, is something that can be
easily stated. Indeed, the metaphysics of being has always thrived on
describing such structures, whether this being be absolute or
determinate in nature.
Eckhart, however, breaks through that metaphysics of being with its
analogical base by thinking through the relation of causality
informing absolute being. We can assume at least hypothetically that a
cause causes not only something dependent on it, but also something
equal to it, namely that the cause causes in such a manner that it
causes itself. But if it causes itself, it causes
something which is itself also cause and at the same time cause of its
cause.  Such a mode of causality is called ‘univocal
causality’.  Our hypothesis of what could be thought in these
terms turns into a certainty when we explore the structures of
intellectual causality, for example, the relation between the act of
thinking and what is thought, or between an ethical principle and an
ethical principiate. Their relation is precisely what Eckhart takes
advantage of in developing his theory of univocal causality. In these
cases, it holds that the principle causes its principiate, and the
principiate causes its principle. Even more: The principiate is in its
principle nothing other than its principle. This means that the active
(principle) is at the same time active and passive, being affected in
the course of its activity (as principle). In turn, the passive
(principiate) is at the same time passive  and active, being
active in the course of its passivity (as principiate). Accordingly, a
central proposition of Eckhart reads as follows:
“[Principium et principiatum] … opponuntur
relative: in quantum opponuntur, distinguuntur, sed in quantum
relative, mutuo se ponunt …” (Echardus, In
Ioh. n. 197; LW III, 166, 10–12: “[The principle and the
principiate] … are opposed to one another relatively:
Insofar as they are opposed, they are distinguished, but insofar as
they are relative, they reciprocally posit themselves
…”).
The breakthrough that Eckhart attains through his theory of univocal
causality is exemplified by the relation between thinking and thought.
For Eckhart, thinking presupposes no origin because a presupposed
origin could only be thought by thinking and hence would be a thought
of thinking, that is, itself thinking. Thinking is, then, for itself a
presuppositionless origin, that is, it is its own principle:
principium (Echardus, In Ioh. n. 38; LW III, 32, 11:
“… ipsum principium semper est intellectus purus
…”: “The principle itself is always pure
intellect …”). Any thinking without act, however, is no
thinking at all. Consequently, its own originative activity accrues to
thinking, that is, insofar as it is a principle, the dynamics of its
principiating: principiare.  In this activity, however,
thinking directs itself towards a thought that it has originated, that
is, towards the product that is its principiate:
principiatum. But since this thought is a thought of
thinking, it is itself nothing other than thinking. The act of this
thinking that has been thought is, then, retrograde. This thought, as
thinking, is in turn principle, principiating and principiate, whereby
this last is the original thinking. In this way, thinking thinks
itself as thought and is therewith active thinking, while thought,
insofar as it thinks its thinking, is itself thinking, and its
thinking now thought. Consequently, both thinking and thought are at
the same time active and passive.
Another example of univocal causality as conceived by Eckhart is found
in the relation between justice and the just man. In the same vein as
that sketched out with regard to the dynamics of thinking, justice is
in the just man, and the just man is in justice. The just man is his
just action, and this just action is likewise justice.  Between the
just man and justice, there is difference on account of the opposition
between them, but because of their relationality they reciprocally
include each other. Just as thought is the thought of thinking and
therewith itself thinking, so, too, is what is just for Eckhart what
is just of justice and therewith justice itself. From this we can
draw, following Eckhart, a number of important conclusions.
A. For the just man, there is no why to his just action, no
purpose or goal of this action. For the action of the just man has
justice as its goal, and this goal is identical with the just man.
Therefore, the just man has no goal external to himself. Instead, as
justice, he is his own goal.
B. With the just man and with justice, there is no multiplicity.
Justice is one, and the just man is one; thus, justice and the just
man are one. Even if there are many just men: As
just men, the many just men are one (Echardus, In Sap. n. 44;
LW II, 366, 6–7: “… omnes iusti, in quantum iusti,
unum sunt …”), indeed, they are even justice itself.
C. Justice, which is the just man, knows neither where nor
when, that is, it knows neither space nor time, neither size
nor quality, neither inside nor outside, neither over nor under,
neither this side nor that side, neither above nor below, neither the
activity of effecting nor the passivity of being effected. Hence,
justice is indeterminate and does not accrue to anything else as an
accident. Justice is something whose purpose lies in itself.
D. Consequently, the just man is in justice, which means: The just man
is justice. This implies a reversal of the usual way of
looking at things. Normally, a quality (qualitas) is what is
found in an underlying subject (subiectum). With the
spiritual perfections (perfectiones spirituales), however,
the situation is different: The subjects are in the perfections, the
just man is in justice. But in the realm of the spirit, being-in is
nothing other than being-one. Hence, the just man, who is in justice,
is justice itself.  The just man does not possess justice,
but rather is justice. Similarly, he who is free is freedom
itself (Echardus, Predigt 28; DW II, 62, 3–5;
cf. Predigt 10; DW I, 165, 2: “… und ich diu
wîsheit selber bin, sô bin ich ein wîser
mensche”; what applies in the cases of freedom and justice
also applies in the case of wisdom). If he who is free merely
possessed freedom, then this freedom would be something external to
him, and he would never be freedom itself.
What is key is that by freedom Eckhart understands nothing
other than self-consciousness or the I. It is never
the case that the I wants something other, rather it wants only
itself; the I never knows something other, rather it knows only
itself; the I is never open for anything other, rather it is open for
itself alone.  Thus, the I is both cause of itself and conceives
itself alone in itself. The itself known and wanted by the I,
as well as defining its fundamental openness, is the other
I—that is, the moment of self-relationality constitutive
for the realm of the spirit.
E. In summary, Eckhart can say: “… in spiritualibus
conceptio est ipsa parturitio sive partus” (Echardus, In
Exod. n.  207; LW II, 174, 3–4): In the realm of the spirit,
conceiving is bearing or giving birth—and therefore (passive)
suffering is (active) production. It should be noted that the motif of
birth is one of Eckhart’s favorites, for example, when he holds
that the divine Father bears his Son in the soul, more precisely: in
the ground of the soul, and in this way he bears me as himself and
himself as me.  This motif, however, is not limited to theological
contexts. It also finds application as a philosophical motif. Here,
again, it is necessary to become accustomed to Eckhart’s
usage. Where others speak of “causing” or
“principiating”, Eckhart speaks of
“bearing”. This kind of language must be approached
carefully, however, and demands close scrutiny now more than
ever. Such a hermeneutical approach is currently favored especially by
Largier, Hasebrink and Köbele.
F. “Swer underscheit verstât von gerehticheit und von
gerehtem, der verstât allez, daz ich sage” (Echardus,
Predigt 6; DW I, 105, 2–3): “Whoever understands
the theory of justice and the just man understands everything that I
am saying.” With this statement, Eckhart commends to our
attention the paradigm of univocal co-relationality in the just man
and justice.  On one hand, this paradigm composes the precondition for
that analogical thinking that informs, among other things, the
relation of the uncreated and the created. While Wilde, 2000 asserts,
then, that univocal causality is subsumed in analogical causality,
Eckhart’s theory is exactly the opposite. On the other hand,
however, the paradigm of univocal causality refers to what, in line
with Eckhart, must still be made thematic because, as what is first,
it cannot be put into question: the one as unity.
The goal of the rational form of life—of living in and with the
spiritual perfections at the level of that transcendental being or
being (esse, ens) convertible with the termini
transcendentes (the one, the true, and the good)—is living
in and from the absolute one (in and from the divine nature as
presuppositionless unity). If the ground of the soul, as something
uncreated and uncreatable—attributes which Meister
Eckhart’s contemporary Eckhart von Gründig
explicitly ascribes to the ground or ‘little
spark’ of the soul that Meister Eckhart often invokes (cf.
Winkler, 1999), thus indicating that he in fact employed these
attributes—if human reason—not as human, but as
reason—is one with the divine nature or ground (Echardus,
Predigt 5b; DW I, 90, 8: “Hie ist gotes grunt
mîn grunt und mîn grunt gotes grunt”:
“Here, God’s ground is my ground and my ground God’s
ground”), then man is no longer simply on the way towards unity
(unio). Instead, unity is something that has always already
been achieved. This being-unified is alone what matters (Echardus,
Predigt 12; DW I, 197, 8–9; Predigt
39; DW II, 265, 6–266, 2), because man as reason
has left behind everything that stands in the way of his living in and
from unity, and because the ground of the soul is more interior in
this unity than it is in itself (Mojsisch 1983a, 140–141; 2001,
163–165). This is true equanimity—letting-go
(Gelâzenheit)—as the goal of human life.
Living in and from unity in the manner envisioned by Eckhart as the
end of self-discovery becomes possible through a change
(metabole) in intellectual disposition. The possible
intellect—which, as defined by Aristotle, can become all things
(cf. De anima III 5, 430a14–15)—is
able to know either as ordinary consciousness (in images,
species of things) or as self-consciousness through
self-knowledge (without images, free from images). The conversion in
disposition—Plato speaks of a peristrophe of the
soul (cf. Res publica VII, 521c5)—leads the possible
intellect to the uncreated and uncreatable ground of the soul, whose
movement, as a process of reason, reaches its goal in the absolute one
(unialiter unum, a combination suggested by Proclus; Eckhart
speaks of the luter pur clar Ein or indistinctum,
the undifferentiated). This goal, however, is itself nothing other
than the ground of the soul. The ground of the soul in the absolute
one is its own goal because self-consciousness is nothing other than
one and the one, because freedom is nothing other than one and the
one, because moral responsibility for oneself and others—Eckhart
speaks of justice—is nothing other than one and the
one.  Self-consciousness, freedom and justice are always and
everywhere only themselves, having nothing ‘outside’ of,
additional or foreign to them.
For Eckhart, this means that whoever is justice is always justice,
because the I that would stand out from justice would no longer be an
I. The I always already knows that it is justice, however, because in
knowing itself as just, it knows itself as justice; for the just man
is justice. The I knows that it is just, however, because otherwise it
does not know at all and is not even an I at all. The I is what it is
only as rationality, as a knowing which knows that it is and
knows what it is. This I is not only cause of itself
(causa sui; Eckhart, deepening the tradition of this concept,
says sache mîn selbes: “cause of myself”;
cf. Summerell, 2002). It is moreover the cause for God, insofar as God
stands in relation to his creatures. For only the uncreated and
uncreateable ground of the soul stands not in relation to creatures,
but instead only in relation to itself (cf. Echardus, Predigt
52). The I that knows itself, wills itself, and is its own abode,
and therewith the I that is, in univocal causality, cause of itself
and yet, in this unity, the one rationality, is, according to Eckhart,
what man ought to become and what man can become in taking on the true
poverty of spirit. This is so since man has always been this I, is now
this I, and always will be this I, even if he knows nothing of himself
as this I.
Consequently, the movement of reason, as Eckhart presents it, takes
its point of departure from absolute unity and, as a principle, takes
on being. This principle knows itself and wills itself, thinking
thought in this way as its principiate, the ground of the soul in its
uncreatedness and uncreatability. Since this thought is a thought of
thinking, however, and thus itself thinking, this thinking that has
been thought principiates its own principle in retrograde fashion. (As
Eckhart puts it, the Son is reborn in the Father.) This movement of
reason, as one of self-discovery and self-cultivation, ends there,
where it began, in presuppositionless unity, where it might begin
anew.  This is the fundamental process—taking place in and from
unity—inherent to the self-knowing and self-willing I. Insofar
as it knows itself and wills itself, this I is nothing other than what
man is when he has transcended himself as a creature fraught with
nothingness and entrusted himself to the movement of the ground of the
soul, acknowledging this movement as the sole form of life: that of
self-consciousness, freedom, and moral responsibility. 
Nicholas of Cusa, when asked what he had to say about Eckhart,
remarked that he had never read in Eckhart that the creature was
identical with the creator. At the same time, he praised
Eckhart’s talent (ingenium) as well as his ardor
(studium). Yet Nicholas also suggested that Eckhart’s
books should be removed from the public sphere, since they contained
much that was astute and useful (subtilita et utilia) for
those who understood them, but the people were not ready for what, in
Eckhart, contradicted the traditional doctrines of the learned
world.
 Still, the teacher said that he had never read that he [Eckhart]
thought that the creature was the creator, and praised his [Eckhart's]
talent and ardor. Yet he wished that his [Eckhart's] books would be
removed from public places; for the people are not ready for what he
[Eckhart] often intersperses, contrary to the custom of other learned
men, even though the intelligent find in them many astute and useful
things.
 
 What Nicholas gave voice to is not simply the divide between medieval
and modern thought, as well as that between orthodoxy and
unconventionality, that he himself most remarkably straddled. In fact,
it remains a challenge even today to properly understand the
Eckhartian thought that man is free only if he (not merely
possesses but instead) is freedom. This is so, in
part, because even scholarly language runs up against its limits in
Eckhart. For we still cannot give adequate expression to the real
meaning of the statement: “The free man is, if he is really
free, freedom itself, yet only insofar as he is free.” For this
very reason, however, it is all the more necessary to engage ourselves
in Eckhart’s thinking instead of banning his writings from the
public sphere. For if our thought counsels it, our language must
change, indeed, not only the language of scholars, but that of the
people as well.