The language here is highly contentious. There are exceptions, but in
a long history mental illnesses have been referred to as
“evil”, as “willful error”, as “grave
misfortune” or, at the very least, regarded as
unwelcome.[1]
And with some regularity, conditions like those listed in the current
diagnostic and classificatory manual of the American Psychiatric
Association (DSM-5 [APA 2013]) and or the International Statistical
Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems (ICD-11 [WHO
2018]) have been provided new classificatory titles and terminology,
such revisions often solely aimed at reducing negative and
stigmatizing associations.  Authors cited in what follows use
“mental disorder”, “psychiatric disability”,
“psychiatric disorder”, “mental illness”,
“madness”, “psychopathology”. Controversy
attaches to these terms, as it does to particular diagnostic labels
(such as “schizophrenia”), because some question whether
these mental differences are forms of illness or disorder at
all. Although it is not widely employed, the more neutral
“mental difference” better accommodates each side of this
controversy, and the choice of terminology employed in what follows is
not intended to promote a disorder or illness view.
Three changes of language require special attention. Frequently, the
term “illness” in “mental illness”
has been replaced by “disorder”, apparently
without a consistent rationale beyond avoiding explicitly medical
language. The rise of cognitive psychology has brought a parallel
trend where “the cognitive” and “cognition”
are sometimes introduced as equivalents or replacements for “the
mental”. This new language around “cognition”
combines the earlier faculty psychology divisions of affection and
cognition: as much as doxastic states, emotions are
 “cognitive”.[2]
 Then finally, increasing use of “mental and
behavioral”, sometimes shortened to
“behavioral” (as in “behavioral health”),
reflects substantive decisions also, such as the inclusion of
addictions and compulsions in the class of disorders, and a preference
for precisely measurable symptoms.
Because it is now more common in philosophical writing, the expression
“mental disorder”, replaces “mental illness”
in what follows. And unless otherwise indicated, “mental
disorder” is taken to refer not only to more
“mental” conditions like psychoses and affective
disorders, but also to “behavioral” conditions such as
addictions and character disorders. Frequently, the shift from
’mental’ to “cognitive” also indicates
allegiance to substantive theoretical tenets. Here, however,
“cognitive” and “cognition” are used only as
terms of art within particular theoretical analyses.
Both common sense folk psychology and medical psychiatry employ
concepts of mental disorder or illness. (“Depression”
refers to the same mood states and attitudes, for example, whether
used by a professionals or non-professionals.) This can foster
confusion, and inconsistencies arise at the boundaries where mental
disorders meet other kinds of disorder. Rather than traditionally
mental symptoms, for example, “hysterical”
(“psychosomatic”, “somatoform”, or
“conversion”) syndromes exhibit bodily paralyses, minor
skin conditions, and intestinal maladies (Shorter 2006; Micale 1995;
Scull 2009). Yet they remain mental disorders in common understanding,
and long found a place in standard psychiatric
 classifications.[3]
 Also anomalous, some conditions with apparently mental symptoms are
the causal product of what are, indisputably, diseases of and damage
suffered by the brain. (Delusions following cerebral hemorrhage are an
example.) They are judged to be neurological rather than psychiatric
complaints however, and excluded from the class of mental disorders
according to both everyday conceptions, and diagnostic taxonomies.
Similarly, although perception is widely judged a mental capacity,
some conditions affecting sight, such as blindness, are absent from
diagnostic classifications.
There are different views about the conceptual relationship between
the informal and more clinical language, and philosophers and others
have approached this problem in several ways depending on varying
foundational assumptions. Some insist that the confusions and
inconsistencies that occur result from the fact that the concept of
mental disorder employed in psychiatry’s conception and
classification of disorders is too closely allied to the parallel
concepts in folk psychology. Confusion and inconsistency at the
boundaries between mental, neurological, and organic disorders arise,
according to Dominic Murphy, from acceptance of inconsistent folk
psychological categorizing, ill-suited to the properly scientific
taxonomic task which, because it is tied to the hope for a theory of
the “hidden structure” of the taxonomic domain, seeks
causal explanation. Relinquishing intuitively grounded, inherently
normative folk psychological categories, and accepting the divisions
that ensue from scientific research through a combination of
psychiatry and cognitive neuroscience, is the first step towards
achieving a scientific psychiatric classification (Murphy 2007).
Without a principled and systematic way to identify the class of
mental disorders, Murphy’s concerns suggest, any disorder
taxonomy that is presently employed will likely prove inaccurate. The
old adage that once their organic causes are known, all mental
disorders are transformed into neurological conditions, bespeaks an
expectation that the out-moded, folk psychological category of mental
disorder is itself temporary and will eventually be rendered
otiose—an outcome anticipated without regret by adherents of
strong mind-body reductionism (see Guze 1992; Churchland 1989).
Adopting more conservative approaches, others have urged the
importance of maintaining the category of mental disorder (Brülde
& Radovic 2006). Everyday language and the traditional
classifications built around it have provided a common framework for
research and clinical practice; and with any further blurring of the
boundaries between mental disorders and the brain damage and disease
treated by neurologists, demarcations of professional competence would
be lost. Fear of over-diagnosis, of according too much power to
medical psychiatry and the psychopharmacology industry, and of
relinquishing to experts decisions about mental health and conceptions
of eudaimonia more appropriately resolved by non-scientists,
have all challenged the societal place occupied by medical psychiatry
(see
 §10).
It is not only for such social and political reasons, and
considerations of practicality and custom, that common sense concepts
have been supported. Also at stake here is the nature of the epistemic
role accorded to conceptual analysis. Whether cast in terms of
necessary and sufficient conditions, or more loosely, there is
disagreement over how much analyses of mental disorder must be guided
by everyday language and categories. Some analyses acknowledge more
than the most immediate observations derived from the empirical and
cognitive sciences, and may adhere to an account of mind and mental
processing employing mentalist terms and normative presuppositions
inapplicable within an exclusively physical framework (see
 §4,
 §5, and
 §8).
 In addition, some regard mental disorders as socially constructed
entities, the existence and classification of which necessarily rely
on societal features of the world (see
 §10).
A meta-taxonomy of these varying foundational assumptions includes
three intersecting issues: what mental disorders are; how much we can
presently know about them; and different approaches to their analysis.
Thus, objectivist (or naturalist) accounts, hold that mental disorders
are empirically discoverable items that can be provided value-free
description, while evaluativist (or normative) analyses deny the
possibility of such value-free description (these are discussed in
 §8.1).
 Prepared to relinquish our current concepts, revisionists are also
loosely distinguishable from conservatives favoring the retention of
(at least some) traditional categorizations. And finally, the nature
of mental disorder will be sought either through a posteriori
scientific research based in cognitive science, or through conceptual
analysis derived in part or whole from social and cultural norms.
In a once-common practice, mental or “functional”
disorders were diagnosed just when no somatic traits were evident.
Such language is now explicitly disavowed, eclipsed by a growing
confidence that all disorders involve bodily states (Sykes 2010; APA
2013: 309). Still, the “mental” in mental disorder is
variously construed. In this section we'll first consider different
views on "where" in disorder that mentality lies and, then, different
views on what it consists in.
On traditional, two-part models from pathology, dysfunctional organic
processes internal to the individual are manifested in, and causally
responsible for, more readily observable signs and symptoms;
collectively, these two parts make up the disease concept. Employed
for mental disease (illness, disorder), certain of those underlying
processes have been delimited as mental by appeal to the traditional
categories of faculty psychology (perception, affection, cognition,
memory, and so on). For example, hallucinations represent
dysfunctional perceptual capabilities, mania and depression disturbed
affect regulation, and delusions defective cognitive processing. A
disorder is thus determined to be mental as distinct from physical if
its internal causes involve psychological faculties (Wakefield 1997).
By contrast, although also governed by traditional facultative
divisions, other accounts ascribe disabled mentality not to underlying
features but to effects on the subject’s social and personal
functioning (Rashed & Bingham 2014; Wakefield 1992, 1997.). For
example, it is because her states of sadness and self-doubt result in
absenteeism, that the person with depression seeks medical help (see
 §4.2).
On two-stage accounts both internal and outwardly-observed features
form a part. (At least this is true of mental disorders that are
prototypical, according to George Graham [2010].) Internal and more readily
observable features are each included in the DSM definition of mental
disorder: 
a syndrome characterized by clinically significant disturbance in an
individual’s cognition, emotion regulation, or behavior, that
reflects a dysfunction in the psychological, biological or
developmental processes underlying mental functioning. (APA 2013: 20,
emphasis added)
The different positions on mental disorder just
sketched—emphasizing internal conditions, observable
manifestations, and both—are discussed in
 Section 4.
 Each position exhibits vulnerabilities. Accounts stressing inherent
features regularly rely on hypothetical entities or processes,
expecting that out of future discoveries will emerge knowledge of
causal mechanisms presently hidden from view. (This position has a
long history; for a recent version, see Murphy 2007.) Perhaps
explained by its status as a new science, this faith has been sorely
tested, thus far, by confused classifications, apparently ill grounded
research, and other liabilities, as well as incomplete models of
mental dysfunction (see
 §4
 and
 §6).
 If these impediments can be overcome, emphasis on internal causes may
be expected to yield powerful explanatory models, laying the ground
for the incalculably valuable targeted interventions and effective
prevention and treatment sought by all. (See entry on Philosophy of
Psychiatry). Placing emphasis on disabling or dysfunctional symptoms
has comparable vulnerabilities associated with relativism. One
setting’s dysfunctional mental symptom may be another’s
normal, admired, or useful trait; and mental disorder must be
distinguished conceptually from deviance, as well as from normal
responses to the losses and setbacks that are our common human
experience (these issues are discussed in
 §4,
 §8, and
 §10).
Views on the nature of the mental in mental disorder come from both
philosophical accounts and, implicitly, from cognitive psychology. In
some philosophical accounts including those stemming from
phenomenological traditions, the mental is distinguished by particular
features: it bears a special relationship to conscious awareness, and
to persons, for example, or may be taken to exhibit the distinctive
“aboutness” or intentionality exclusive to mental
attitudes (see
 §5).
 Some theorizing about meaning and language similarly emphasizes the
reasons-responsiveness of all human thought and action, by which
disorder can alone be explained and understood (Campbell 1999, 2001,
2013; Thornton 2007). 
Explanatory accounts of cognitive capacities in cognitive psychology
have taken several different forms over the years: information
processing models, which themselves were made up of computational
processes and representations; connectionist networks; and, more
recently, directly neural accounts. Moreover, philosophical
reconstructions of cognitive psychology and cognitive science must be
distinguished from the cognitive psychology practiced by
psychologists—although little discussion of "the mental" occurs
in either. Instead, focus is on the cognitive when, as was pointed out
earlier, the "cognitive" subsumes capacities, states, and processes
that used to be considered non-cognitive, such as sensations and
emotions. Widespread acceptance of these shifts in much theoretical
and research writing on mental disorder has gone some way toward
eclipsing more philosophical concepts of mind and the mental, even
though commonsense cognitive capacities, which are understood to
involve intentionality, remain the starting point of the research
program of cognitive science, and branches of cognitive psychology and
cognitive neuroscience address traditionally “mental”
processes such as reasoning and consciousness.
The focus of cognitive psychology usually lies with computation and
representation. Mental/cognitive states (representations) depict
features of the outside world (as well as other mental states and
abstract entities), and mental/cognitive processes operate on those
inner symbols, transforming and manipulating them (see Von Eckardt
1993; Friedenberg & Silverman 2011; Cratsley & Samuels 2013,
and the
 entry on cognitive science).
 Although demarcated by the faculties known as “mental”,
the realm of the cognitive is typically construed as properties or
processes with a causal role in determining behavior, or behavioral
capacities, that offer no resistance to naturalistic characterization
(Chalmers 1996). Candidates for a distinctive “mark of the
cognitive” are debated—but so is the need for one (for
discussion of this question, see Varga 2018).
Contrary to what has sometimes been feared, the broad grouping of
mental disorders does not require an embrace of unwanted metaphysical
dualism. Mental disorders are conditions or states attributed to
persons, but this need entail neither that they are entirely
non-physical in nature, nor that they must be explained in solely
neuro-scientific terms. Maintaining the separation between mental and
physical disorders is compatible with some form of weak physicalism,
for example, allowing that mental or psychological processing involved
in functions such as perception, reasoning and memory, depends on the
workings of the brain (see Schaffner 2013 and the
 entry on health).
How might mental disorders be distinguished from non-disordered mental
states and conditions? Depression and anxiety, the schizophrenias,
obsessions, compulsions and the like are core instances of mental
disorder, but psychiatric classification acknowledges many other
conditions as well. From such a large and apparently heterogeneous
collection, the broad category may best be judged a family resemblance
one. Indeed, through a different historical or cultural lens, the
assembled variations known today as mental disorders would likely
appear incoherently arbitrary and diverse. Yet, spurred by
essentialist expectations (and out of concern about the unwarranted
“medicalization” of normal states and behavior), the quest
for a unifying conception of mental illness or disorder has persisted
within philosophical research. Characteristic features have been
identified, including disunity, irrationality, the presence of
suffering and disability, and several forms of dysfunction. Formal
analytic definitions have also been proposed, and are illustrated in
 Section 4.4.
Works of ancient philosophy are focused more on the psyche’s
health (or eudaimonia) than its illness. Nonetheless, there
are hints that just as a unified soul is one that is healthy (as well
as rational and virtuous), a soul lacking unity will be disturbed, or
mad. Offering an account of the harmonious soul, whose rational and
non-rational elements achieve a unified whole, Aristotle leaves us a
picture of the warring and fractured state of an unhealthy soul, for
 example.[4]
 The emphasis on disunity is here tied to the vices and irrationality:
a fully unified soul is virtuous and rational, a dis-unified one
vicious and irrational in its unhealthy divisions. And, while they
adhere to a different account of the passions and a more
knowledge-based and Platonic analysis of vice, this link with the
vices and virtues is also characteristic of the subsequent Stoic
analyses (Irwin 2013). A conception of mental illness as psychic
disunity (as well as an association between health, rationality and
virtue) reoccurs in later philosophy (Spinoza, for example), and in
psychoanalytic traditions. Within present-day disorder descriptions,
some symptom clusters readily fit the classical emphasis on disunity
(addictions, and bipolarity, for example); others, including most
personality disorders, are less persuasively depicted in such terms
(see Worrell & Denham 2016).
As a characteristic attributed to mental disorder irrationality or
“unreason” has been linked to emphasis on order and logic
during the “Age of Reason”, which (together with the
emergence of empirical science), is seen to have laid the foundation
for our contemporary psychiatric categories and
 theories.[5]
 In the present day, cultural norms and intuitive folk psychology
assign the boundaries of mental disorder, and these intuitions
conflict about some particular conditions (addictions, and disorders
of “character” or personality, for example). Yet disturbed
or disabled doxastic states and capabilities remain core exemplars of
disorder, over which intuitive agreement is consistent. Characterized
by incomprehensibly disordered thought, failure to adjust beliefs in
response to new evidence, inconsistencies between thought and action,
and delusional convictions, psychosis and psychotic thought patterns
are regularly judged prototypical features of mental disorder. So the
rationalistic analysis of disorder may yet correspond—but to a
reduced version of the presently sprawling overall category.
Forms of doxastic irrationality are still the mainstay of much policy
and legal analysis about mental disorder. Assessments of criminal
responsibility, of fitness to stand trial, and of the capacity to
undertake binding contracts, for example, are cast in terms of the
defendant’s ability to know and understand (Reznek 1987;
Robinson 1996, 2013; Adshead 2008). Ostensibly, construing mental disorder as a want of
rationality has been weakened in the face of evidence from behavioral
economics showing that holding and acting on well-grounded and
reasons-responsive beliefs occurs rarely in the general population,
and common prejudices and superstitions seem to be indistinguishable
from clinical delusions with respect not only to their prevalence but
to the way they are adopted and maintained (Bortolotti 2009,
2013).
Confidence that irrationality defines mental disorder is similarly
eroded if, understood as effective social function and personal
flourishing, mental health lies in traits such as unwarranted
optimism, and the distorting tendency to emphasize, and remember,
success over failure experiences in “positive
illusions”(Taylor & Brown 1988; McKay & Dennett 2009;
Jefferson et al. 2017). Along these lines, some illusions, delusions,
and hallucinations have recently been acknowledged 
perfectly acceptable, sometimes praiseworthy ways of being hopeful,
committed to imagining and enacting a better world for oneself and
others…making moral and meaningful lives. (Flanagan &
Graham 2017: 309) 
But as this indicates, whether disorder is usefully characterized as a
want of reason depends, finally, on guiding, normative conceptions of
mental health or eudaimonia, and of the role of reason in
those conceptions—not on facts of the matter, or
consequentialist reasoning. 
Other depictions of disorder rely on one or both of the groups of
traits around suffering, distress and psychic pain,
on the one hand, and, on the other hand, disability,
incapacity and personal or behavioral dysfunction. These
are the features noted in a series of influential prefatory remarks in
the diagnostic and statistical manuals (the DSMs and ICDs). The
wording of the fifth edition of the DSM introduces a disjunction: 
Mental disorders are usually associated with significant distress
or disability in social, occupational, or other important
activities. (APA 2013: 20, emphasis added) 
A very similar passage from the ICD-10 is comparably qualified: 
“Disorder”…is used here to imply the existence of a
clinically recognizable set of symptoms or behavior associated in
most cases with distress and with interference with
personal functions. (WHO 1992: 5, emphasis added) 
Because distress, psychic pain, and suffering form a part of normal
human experience, and the presence of distress is also used to
separate disorder from social deviance, further qualifications follow
each of these statements (WHO 1992: 5)). In addition, as the
disjunction in the DSM formulation apparently recognizes, many
disorders fail to exhibit evidence of distress or suffering.
Psychodynamic or psychoanalytic presuppositions may posit underlying
distresses that are masked, or submerged, within the psyche; and the
elusive phenomenology of some conditions suggests the presence of
nameless existential anxieties hidden from awareness (Ratcliffe 2008,
2017). But such explanations aside, distress has been widely regarded
as a ubiquitous, if not unfailing, feature of disorder. In
symptom-focused accounts laying stress on the consequences of
the syndrome, distress becomes prominent as a form of disabling
dysfunction (Stein et. al. 2010). Instead of separate criteria (and
either singly or jointly sufficient for disorder, as in the respective
DSM and ICD definitions above), suffering and dysfunction are
conjoined on a “distress-impairment” analysis, where
disorder status is assigned with (and defined as) distress that is
“unmanageable or disabling” (Bolton 2013). Whether this
analysis applies to the whole class of mental disorders as presently
understood is doubtful: its plausibility increases with what has been
called “distress related conditions”, such as depression
and anxiety, that are “more constitutive of the illness”
(Bolton 2012: 10; see also
 §4).
To accommodate exceptions that seem neither distressing nor disabling
(such as manic states), mental disorder is sometimes characterized not
by distress and dysfunction but by raised risk of such outcomes (Gert
& Culver 2004). But risk of disorder is not disorder, and risk
language invites troubling issues around over-diagnosis and false
positives ((Schwartz 2008; Stein et al. 2010; Bolton 2013; Broome,
Fugar-Poli, & Wuyts 2013). 
Loosely understood, moreover, distresses such as these are an
inescapable part of the human condition and a normal response to
life’s vicissitudes. When and whether normal (and even
appropriate) suffering reflects pathology has long been the source of
philosophical—and societal—disagreement (Wilkinson 2000;
Horwitz & Wakefield 2007). In the discussions of “normal
sadness” that accompanied the revision of a fifth edition of the
DSM, the grief exclusion that had (temporarily) exempted from
diagnosis the suffering around mourning and grief, was challenged, its
proposed elimination charged with “medicalizing” or
“pathologizing” normal and appropriate human feelings
(Zachar 2014; Wakefield 2012). We might expect the separation of
normal from pathological distress and, more broadly, the
characterization of mental disorder in terms of distress, to be
indicated by distress emanating from the disorder itself, rather than
from other contingencies. But equally outcomes of the disorder itself
are the distresses resulting from the stigma and discrimination that
follow diagnosis and treatment, as well as a host of other, frequently
negative, consequences in jarring and alarming disruptions to personal
lives, selves, and relationships (Tekin 2011).
Pathological distress must thus be further specified, as the result of
causes inherent to the individual and/or her disorder. Research
identifying and explaining the physical elements of affect regulation
predicts that biological markers will eventually allow us to
distinguish distress that is a symptom of depression, for example,
from that which is a more normal response (Horwitz & Wakefield
2007). (In serving to shrink the margins of disorder, such biomarkers
may be welcomed by those decrying over-diagnosis, even if an
evaluative interpretation as to whether, and when, such biomarkers
occur in healthy and unhealthy form is still required.)
Rather than illness attributions being made on the basis of any
antecedent facts about the body, Mohammed Rashed and Rachel Bingham
argue that the subjective experience of distress and the extent of
impairment of the person’s day-to-day functioning is an
intrinsic property of depression: conceptually such
attributions are made on the basis of “consequences of the
syndrome as they manifest for the subject” (Rashed & Bingham
2014: 245). Similarly stressing intrinsic properties, others have
emphasized that psychological symptoms may constitute a
mental disorder, even as it is caused by biological or social factors.
Thus, in the case of depression without evidence of known biomarkers,
our intuitions suggest disorder would be attributed on the basis of
psychological symptoms alone. Were known biomarkers present
without evidence of any psychological symptoms, on the other hand, no
attribution would be made. These intuitions may shift with time, it is
recognized, so the assertion is limited to how most people and most
psychiatrists now understand, define, diagnose, and treat,
depression (Sinnott-Armstrong & Summers forthcoming). But today at
least, disorder would be attributed on the basis of the symptoms of
depression with or without known biomarkers.
Analyses characterizing felt distress as a property constitutive of
some given psychiatric condition (such as depression), are also
compatible with recent models focused on the causally interconnected
statistical networks making up symptom clusters. These clusters are
depicted as reinforced through feedback loops that serve to rope
together assorted symptoms independent of any underlying, antecedent,
common, cause. In the case of depression, a range of symptoms arise
from diverse sources and, through their looping interactions, form,
worsen, and maintain the disorder as a relatively stable entity and
conceptual whole (Kendler, Zachar, & Craver 2011; Borsboom &
Cramer 2013).
Symptom-focused accounts sometimes combine suffering with disability,
as was noted. But standing alone, something the affected person is
prevented from doing, or unable to do as well as others, captured in
the ideas of disability, impairment, incapacity and personal or
behavioral dysfunction, offers an alternative characterization that
can acknowledge disorders without apparent personal suffering (notably
mania, some personality disorders, and some addictions).
Dysfunction and disability have been allied, or treated as rough
equivalents, but disability is also placed in opposition to
dysfunction. Instead of construed as internal to the person,
disabilities are often represented as conditional
impairments, dependent on context (including physical and social
arrangements). They impose limitations on the person’s ability
to perform everyday activities and participate as more typically-abled
people do and, on this view, call for appropriate accommodation
analogous to ramps for those using wheelchairs (Oliver 1996; Polvora
2011). The analogies linking psychiatric with other disabilities may
not be complete, however, nor can accommodations be achieved as easily
as installing ramps (see Amundson & Tresky 2007; Rashed
2019).
Dysfunction forms a central element of the most widely discussed
analytic definition of mental disorder, introduced in
 Section 3.
 The notion of dysfunction applies in two distinct ways in
Wakefield’s harmful dysfunction analysis, one way avowedly
objective, and the other not (see
 §4.4).
 In the first, dysfunction occurs in some part or parts of a bodily or
neural system. That dysfunction in turn causes dysfunction in some
part or parts of the individual’s social and personal system
(grounding the normative judgment of harmfulness). Only the first kind
of dysfunction is claimed to permit non-evaluative description.
The characteristic dysfunction of mental disorder is here part of a
standard, idiopathic model, as we saw, with these disabling
traits understood as the symptomatic, causal manifestations of an
underlying, pathological process. The appropriateness of that model
for psychiatric conditions has received persistent critique during the
twentieth century (see
 §10.1).
 Recent challenges include the alternative network models (introduced
in
 §4.2),
 where symptomatic dysfunction emanates not from some disabled inner
mechanism, but instead emerges piecemeal from interacting experiences
that cumulatively build clusters of disabling symptoms out of feedback
loops (Kendler, Zachar, & Craver 2011; Borsboom & Cramer
2013). In support of this alternative model is accumulating evidence
from the social sciences that a range of factors combine to bring
about disorder: individualistic risk factors, but also aspects of the
broader context in which the individual finds herself (Bolton 2010;
Kirmayer, Lemelson, & Cummings 2015).
Eschewing a more formal analysis, some definitions (including the
“distress-impairment” analyses introduced earlier), rely
on prototypical cases (see Graham 2010, for example).
Others are more ambitious, proposing analytic definitions in terms of
necessary and sufficient conditions. Some are intended to cover other
medical conditions as well as mental disorders. (For those stressing
the inseparability and interdependence of mental and bodily disorder,
no important distinction is acknowledged between mental and physical
disorders [Pârvan 2015].) (i)–(iv) below are a sample of
these efforts.
The symptoms of mental disorder are primarily, if not exclusively,
states about which their subject can claim a sort of authority. (Since
in describing these states subjects can intentionally or
unintentionally mislead, such loosely phenomenological [or
“experience-near”] reports may nonetheless present
epistemic limitations as data (Kontos 2016).) Psychology can provide
reliable behavioral assessments of disorder, and indicate its presence
through laboratory performance tests. But no mental disorder is thus
far independently verifiable (though blood tests or scans, for
example). So first person reports play a special part in understanding
such disorder for the clinician, and those establishing philosophical
analyses are similarly beholden (Flanagan 2011; Varga 2015). Carl
Jaspers’ 1913 General Psychopathology, which combines
close, clinical description with the method and presuppositions of
existential and phenomenological thinkers such as Husserl and
Heidegger, has been widely discussed (Jaspers 1913 [1963]).
(Jaspers’ pairing of clinical and philosophical knowledge makes
him one of the undisputed originators of the research field known as
the philosophy of psychiatry and psychopathology.) Confusingly, not
every loosely “phenomenological” clinical approach focused
on the patient’s experience and report adheres to all of the
tenets of the philosophical discipline of phenomenology derived from
these traditions, however (see Parnas & Sass 2008).
The phenomenological strand of philosophical analysis influenced by
thinkers like Husserl and Heidegger remains focused on immediate,
first person report (for example, self-experience in psychosis (Parnas
& Sass 2008), disordered temporal experience (Fuchs 2005, 2013),
delusional states (Parnas & Sass 2008; Gallagher 2005, 2011,
2013), and affective disturbances (Ratcliffe 2008; Ratcliffe &
Stephan 2014; Jacobs et. al. 2014)). In these traditions neither
psychology nor psychopathology are empirical sciences in the usual
sense because they involve distinctive forms of explanation. Arising
within nineteenth century social science, the hermeneutical approach
involving meanings calls for Verstehen (understanding), a
distinctive, interpretive way of apprehending human action. (See
Jaspers 1913 [1963]; Phillips 2013,Wiggins & Schwartz 2011;
Spitzer & Uehlein 1992.) These differences of approach bring
differing orientations towards fundamentals, and writing following
German and French traditions has been placed in contrast to the
“Anglo-empiricist” approach judged more influenced by
empirical science, and showing greater emphasis on objectivity and
measurement (Mullen 2011).
These differences bring contrasting theories about psychology as
science. Whether, bypassing diagnostic categories and medical disease
models entirely, symptoms and the subjective life of the patient
should be the main or even sole locus of attention, is one
(Stanghellini 2004); another is whether the experiences associated
with psychosis, particularly, must be categorically divorced from more
typical psychological processes (Sass 2001; Parnas & Sass 2008).
Emphasizing the unique challenges imposed by interpretation in
psychiatry, Somogy Varga has argued for a hermeneutics distinctive to
psychiatry that is grounded in ideas about the self-interpreting
aspect of human beings, “mental disorder” thus standing in
an asymmetrical relation that is supervenes on our self identities
(Varga 2015). 
There is disagreement over the correct application of phenomenological
method (Mishara 2007; Sass, Parnas, & Zahavi 2011). But
psychopathology likely offers a challenge so great as to call for a
range of approaches (Ratcliffe 2011; Wiggins and Schwartz 2011;
Gallagher 2013). Attempts have also been made to combine
phenomenological with empirical approaches: Matthew Ratcliffe’s
work on affective states employs social research methods, for example
(Ratcliffe 2008; Ratcliffe & Stephan 2014). And efforts to tie in
phenomenological theorizing with findings in neuroscience have yielded
the hybrid methodology of phenomenological clinical neuroscience
advocating an initial study of subjective experience to only
then be probed for its underlying neurobiology (Mishara 2007:
34).
The merging of empirical and phenomenological methodologies is also
readily supported by the tenets of some accounts of embodied and
enactive cognition. Conceptions of the embodied, embedded, and
sense-making enactive mind bring emphasis on the way, shaped by
perceptual experience, consciousness and the first person perspective
form the basis of all mental processing (Varela, Thompson, & Rosch
1991; Durt, Fuchs, & Tewes 2017; Di Paolo & De Jaegher 2017).
Applied to mental disorder, this departure from classical cognitivist
assumptions and analogies suggests that in at least some, and perhaps
all cases, disorder grows out of disturbances in embodied interaction
with the environment, and not from dysfunctions occurring in
high-level cognitive mechanisms (Drayson 2009; Stanghellini 2004;
Maiese
 2016).[6]
While
 Section 3
 focused on what might separate mental from non-mental disorders, and
 Section 4
 was concerned with how to separate disordered from non-disordered
states, Section 6 addresses another aspect of classification:
controversies over how different types of putative mental disorders
should be distinguished from one another. These controversies, like so
many about psychiatry, span the disciplines of medicine, science
(including neuroscience and psychology) and philosophy.
The diagnostic and statistical classificatory manuals and
international disease classifications (DSMs and ICDs) share broad
features in providing a categorical scheme of separate mental
disorders: each disorder is idiopathic in arising at least in part
from morbid factors within the person, and each is identified on the
basis not of causal explanation but “descriptively”, using
polythetic (disjunctive) criteria to be employed with clinical
observation of individual patients (including their self-report).
Aside from serving the institutions providing services, their
uniformity is aimed to enhance inter-diagnostician reliability; and
research based on these reliable classifications, it has been hoped,
should eventually allow validation of the categories (APA 1980).
(Failure of this hope to achieve its promised yield in research
findings partly motivated the revised research domain criteria (RDoC),
described later in this section.) 
Philosophical discussions of psychiatric classification can be
arranged according to their allegiance to the DSMs and ICDs, and their
accompanying presuppositions. Following early work by Carl Hempel
(1961) that depicted psychiatry’s claim to scientific status as
depending on the value neutrality of its classifications, much
discussion of classification has been entirely critical, conceding
little usefulness to the approach, skeptical of the promise of
validity, doubtful of its methodology and claims to scientific
authority, un-persuaded by the categorical system employed, as well as
its individualistic and idiopathic emphasis, and dubious over its
claim to being, or being able to be, value-free. Philosophical
analysis has often been focused on particular symptom descriptions,
disregarding or disavowing the diagnostic categories of which they are
presumed to be clinical manifestations, in some cases introducing and
employing revised categories such as “distress related
conditions” (Bolton 2012), “body image
disorders”(Morris 2013), and “real hallucinations”
(Ratcliffe 2017). Others have accepted the entities so classified
(Sass, Zahavi, Frith and colleagues, for example).
Criticisms of DSM and ICD classifications have addressed their
research purposes and usefulness, categorical approaches and supposed
value-neutrality. (The claim to value neutrality is discussed in
 Section 8.
 These classifications recognize the presence of many overarching
values, including the methodological ones implicit in their goals of
achieving validity and reliability. But further, unsupportable values
(such as homophobia and misogyny) have been identified as well.)
Even by those within psychiatry, it has been widely concluded that as
tools for research, the prevailing classifications are flawed,
producing findings tending to be inconsistent, non-replicable,
non-specific, or ambiguous, with the categories involved exhibiting
problems of construct and predictive validity, as well as imprecise
phenotypic definitions, widespread heterogeneity, and extensive
comorbidity (Cuthbert & Insel 2013; Poland 2014). Reviewing these
flaws in the classification scheme and the research dependent on it,
Jeffrey Poland and Barbara Von Eckardt conclude that it provides a
very poor map of the domain of mental illness, leading to a crisis in
mental health research practice (Poland & Von Eckardt 2013).
Research-related concerns such as these have led to upheavals within
psychiatry, issuing in new, dimensional criteria by which the research
domain is to be approached (Revised Domain Criteria, or RDoC).
Separate units of analysis (genes, cells, circuits, self reports,
etc.) are each employed in specific research domains (such as positive
and negative valence systems, cognitive systems, systems for social
processes, and arousal/regulatory systems), and the intersections of
units of analysis with research domains produce segments of a spectrum
linking normal and atypical features. Although whether the following
goals are entirely compatible has been questioned, the aim here is to
promote both more accurate research and more effective treatments
(Cuthbert & Insel 2013; Perring 2016). And while answering some of
the concerns about the earlier classificatory model, RDoC has in its
turn been criticized for, among other features, its conception of
validity; its assumptions about the uniformity of normal
distributions; its continuing acceptance of clinical and medical
presuppositions assigning disorder to the individual rather than the
broader social context; and its finding little place for personal
agency, and assuming a traditional, individualistic and autonomous
model of self challenged by today’s philosophical analyses. (See
essays in Poland & Tekin 2017.)
In partial defense against objections to DSM-type classifications,
Elizabeth Lalumera employs the contrast between conceptions
(procedures of identifications) and concepts (reference fixing
representations). Mental disorders may still correspond to
theoretically informed concepts, thus far incompletely
understood, and presently known only through descriptive
conceptions enabling identification practices in diagnosis
and care (Lalumera 2016).
DSM-type classification adheres to a classical nineteenth century
disease model, whereby each disease is a discretely bounded entity,
made up of a symptom cluster emanating from underlying organic states
or processes within the individual patient. The applicability of each
aspect of this model to mental disorder has been challenged. Some
would replace its idea of validity (involving a relation between
classificatory name and underlying disease) with the statistical
concept of predictive or prognostic validity, which proceeds without
reference to underlying causes. Rather than discretely bounded, many
disorders appear to be continuous with normal states. In an
interpretive and definitional choice, over which the data remains
ambiguous, mental disorders arguably represent no more than tails of
normal distributions of particular traits in the general population
(Machery 2017). But the uniformity of these normal distributions has
also been questioned (Poland & Tekin 2017).
Some diagnostic conditions (post-traumatic stress disorder, most
unarguably) apparently arise from elements of their subject’s
surrounding social, economic, and cultural context. Even those with
more claim to idiopathic genetic, neurological, or biological causes
or predisposing factors are recognized to exhibit a course more
strongly influenced by environmental than (hypothesized) inherent
factors, thus putting pressure on the “common cause”
hypothesis, whereby a syndrome is explained by a single inherent
feature (Borsboom & Cramer 2013). Solely internal, organic states
and processes, and genes, cannot alone explain all, and probably any,
diagnostic disorders.
Expanding with each new addition, the collection of disorders
enumerated and described in these classifications has prompted alarm
over the boundaries of mental disorder, the erosion of normal,
mentally healthy states and variations, and the inappropriate role
played by medical psychiatry and, finally, science, in dictating norms
of healthy psychic functioning. Added to narratives critical of
modernist science and psychiatry, other philosophical criticisms of
such “medicalization”, emphasize the increasing influence
of neuroscience in transforming cultural expectations and diminishing
individual agency, and the power over psychological norms exhibited by
the psychopharmacological industry (Phillips 2009, 2013; Rose &
Abi-Rached 2013; Moncrieff 2008; Sadler 2005 , 2013, Whitaker & Cosgrove 2015;
Valenstein 2002).
In contrast to these commonly-voiced apprehensions about
over-medicalization, there remains the persistent charge of
under-diagnosis and under-treatment of those with
diagnosable mental disorder, often attributed to stigma, and to the
socioeconomic status of under-served communities. Epidemiological
findings about the incidence of disorder, as distinct from its
diagnosis, are notoriously insufficient (due to self-stigma and fear
of discrimination, for example, but also to distorting placebo
effects, and to research methods misleadingly susceptible to false
positives (Jopling 2009; Horwitz & Wakefield 2007; Poland &
Von Eckardt 2013)). The actual epidemiological data remains opaque and
equivocal, leaving these contrary speculations unresolved and likely
unresolvable. 
The DSM and ICD diagnostic classifications have been remarkably
influential worldwide: today, they appear almost immovably permanent.
But viewed within their broader moral, political, and social context,
which includes psychiatry’s apparently uneven provision of
effective treatment, the appropriate stance to adopt towards them, as
Christian Perring has pointed out, remains critical and skeptical
(Perring 2016: 87).
Philosophers of science have explored whether mental illnesses might
be classified as natural kinds, the claim made about particular
diagnostic categories or symptom clusters (depression, schizophrenic
disorder, and autism, for example), as well as about separate symptoms
(Cooper 2007; Samuels 2009). Bolstered by recognition that even the
category of biological species would not meet an essentialist
criterion for classification as natural kinds, a “homeostatic
property cluster” account of natural kinds has been proposed
(Ellis 2001; Cooper 2007; Murphy 2007; Samuels 2009). (See entry on
Species.) The expectation here is merely that a natural kind must be
able to ground explanations and inductive inferences, and enable
effective human intervention. Linked by shared causal properties such
as genes, on this view, their homeostatic aspect ensures that property
clusters making up separate disorders (or symptoms) will remain stable
enough to behave the same way in response to the same conditions, due
to a similarity-generating mechanism explaining their co-occurrence.
(That comparable stability and consequent predictive properties could
arise not from shared causal properties such as genes, but as the
result of feedback loops binding symptoms together in stable clusters
has also been proposed. See essays in Kincaid and Sullivan 2014.)
Granted, psychological categories seem to be more like biological
species than like gold, magnesium or atomic particles, for instance,
in possessing fuzzy boundaries and seeming to rest on continua, rather
than forming discrete categorical entities. But the differences have
often been seen as profound, as three examples will demonstrate. (i)
Some have taken psychological categories to represent a different
order of being, as we saw in
 Section 5,
 with its own distinctive forms of causal explanations (Jaspers 1913
[1963]; Bolton 2008; Wiggins & Schwartz 2011; Kusters 2016). (ii)
Others point out that psychological categories can alter, and
eventually even be altered by, the persons they classify, forming
“interactive” kinds through such looping effects. Indeed,
mental disorders have been denied the status of natural kinds on
precisely the grounds that instability in their properties results
when they have been classified and labeled (Hacking 1995). And in a
final example (iii), some have tried to show that the relation between
mental illnesses and biological kinds differs according to the role
played by values in establishing the taxa of mental illness (Wakefield
1992; this claim is discussed in
 §8).
 None of these differences has gone un-criticized. A thoroughgoing
mind to brain reductionism would reject (i). About (ii), it has been
pointed out that the classification of biological species is also
subject to the instability wrought by looping effects. And similarly,
it has been argued in response to (iii) both that values also enter
into the classification of biological species, and that once we reach
the categories of interest in this analysis, non-evaluative traits
form the observable taxa of such species (Cooper 2007).
By adopting a thoroughgoing biological reductionism it will be
possible (although not necessary), to accept as dispositive the
parallel between psychiatric categories and other categories
recognized as natural kinds on non-essentialist definitions. But,
although the diverse ends to which disease taxonomies can be put argue
against finding a single answer about the kind status of mental
disorders, focus on the purposes served by disorder language and
categories has proven fruitful, here. (i) Mental illnesses have been
assigned to a category of “practical kinds”, where
membership in this class depends on some external criterion that is
pragmatically relevant in the clinical context, such as a certain
degree of functional impairment, and remains unrelated to the
underlying structure of the kind (Zachar 2014). Along with practical
kinds, moreover, mental disorders may be further classified according
to their status as dimensional, discrete, and fuzzy kinds, and there
is little reason to suppose mental disorders are all of one kind
(Haslam 2002, 2014). (ii) Whether or not they exhibit the stability
required of classifications into true natural kinds, mental illnesses
do possess the properties relevant, and sufficiently stable, to guide
clinical treatment, as Şerife Tekin illustrates using the lack of
illness awareness (“insight”) common in patients with some
diagnoses. A settled self-conception that involves being mistakenly
seen as ill can be effectively treated using trust-building strategies
that avoid medical language forcing the subject to explicitly
acknowledge illness (Reimer 2010; Tekin 2016).
Values have unfailingly played a part in the way mental disorders are
classified, conceptualized, experienced as personal diagnosis, and
treated. Philosophical accounts fall into evaluativist and objectivist
camps, however, according to their allegiance to the possibility of a
value-free science of psychiatry (these are considered in
 §8.1).
 Values also affect societal and personal attitudes towards disorder
and diagnosis, in ways that are more immediate, considerably more
urgent, and morally consequential (see
 §8.2).
 Some of these issues are dealt with in bioethical research directed
specifically to psychiatry
 (§8.3).
Present day conceptions, classifications, and attributions of mental
disorder contain many values, some explicit, others implicit, some
moral, others non-moral (Sadler 2005, 2013)>. Unacceptable bias has
been repeatedly identified, exemplified in categories such as
homosexuality (with its homophobia), pre-menstrual syndrome
(unwarrantedly assigning disorder status to normal function),
masochistic personality disorder (pathologizing misogynist gender
roles), and oppositional defiant conduct disorders (exhibiting racial
bias) (Sadler 2005, 2013; Potter 2014; Poland 2014).
There is no question that values have played a role in discourse on
mental disorder. The question remaining is whether moral values are
inescapably attached to the conceptualization and classification of
mental disorders at the level of theorizing, forming an inherent part
of their definition. Such “evaluativism”
(“normativism”, or “constructivism”) is placed
in contrast to “objectivism” (“naturalism”),
which seeks a value-free, naturalist account of mental disorder.
Debates over these questions have dominated philosophical research in
psychiatry and psychopathology for decades, many played out around
attempts to define mental disorder in ways that are value-free (see
 §4).
 (Objectivist or naturalist conceptions have implications well beyond
these academic debates, it should be added. For example, a related
societal issue with practical consequences concerns the expectations
around a value-free medicine in those assigning, and subject to,
diagnoses, regardless of the facts of the matter.)
Etymology indicates that “illness” and
“disorder” contain values (such as the preference for
health over ill-health). The contrast between evaluativism and
objectivism reveals nothing distinctive about mental disorder in this
respect. But the theory of values based medicine (VBM) emphasizes
that, because they are shared, values in the rest of medicine are not
usually contentious. When VBM is adopted as a treatment approach,
these contested values can be acknowledged, and the different
perspectives supported, and subjected to negotiation (Fulford 2004,
2014).
As was shown earlier
 (§4.4),
 philosophical definitions aiming to avoid all values have been
proposed, relying on appeal to allegedly value-neutral statistical
norms, and adaptive function, respectively. The vulnerability in
Boorse’s (1997) statistical definition, where normal function is
determined according to the person’s reference class, identified
by such criteria as age, and sex, lies both with assigning the
appropriate reference class, a process that inevitably re-introduces
values, and at the point on a continuous distribution curve where
deviance from the mean is granted the status of dysfunctional, an
assessment also involving normative judgments (Bolton 2008).
Recognizing that a trait may be dysfunctional in evolutionary terms
without being disvalued, and disvalued without being evidence of
dysfunction, Wakefield’s two-part definition explicitly
accommodates the evaluative element marking the category. This attempt
to provide a naturalistic and value free evolution-based account of
“function” and “dysfunction” has been subject
to a range of damaging objections, including the claim that biological
dysfunction is not, as promised, value neutral, carrying as it does a
preference for evolutionary fitness. Discerning what would be the
maximal response in terms of perpetuating the species represents
another of these objections, since no agreed-upon conclusion about
this can be drawn in a value-neutral, or perhaps any, way. (See Murphy
& Stich 2000.)
Evaluativism and objectivism are customarily depicted as incompatible
contraries, although the different domains where claims about disorder
occur (including ordinary usage; conceptually clean versions of
“health” and “disease”; the operationalization
of dysfunction, and the justification for that operationalization),
indicate need for a more nuanced analysis of the role of values in
health and disease (Kingma 2014). The broad contrast between
evaluativism and objectivism has also been resisted for other reasons.
Judgments about mental disorder need not be entirely arbitrary and
subjective as long as those values are taken to be real features of
the world along the lines of McDowell’s secondary property value
realism, for example. In this relaxed naturalism, objectivism merely
means requiring no special subject for the disciplining, conception,
and framing of judgments, and providing a contrast between correct and
incorrect, or truth and falsity, for the relevant judgments (Thornton
2007).
The present discussion concerns evaluations that are primarily
negative, although as we saw earlier, positive evaluations arise in
traditions valorizing madness, and many in the neuro-diversity
movement insist that autism spectrum and other mental disorders are
human variations analogous to differences of gender, which ought to be
granted respectful accommodation, not clinical treatment.(See Chapman 2019, Hoffman 2019.) Negative
social attitudes towards observable disorder have led to stigma,
self-stigma, and discrimination (Hinshaw 2007). The madman and
madwoman have been the subject of fear, misunderstanding,
disparagement and condemnation, their failings exaggerated and
humanity denied (Gilman 1985). With modernity, care and protection
apparently replaced earlier, moralistic and neglectful arrangements.
(The reforms’ real effects and costs remain an unsettled matter
of historical
 debate.[7]
 ) At the same time formal exceptions and protections, such as the
insanity defense, recognized mental disorder as an exculpating excuse
for wrongdoing and negligence. Despite such attitudinal change,
however, these issues around responsibility remain contentious and
unresolved (C. Edwards 2009).
The effect of diagnoses on those so distinguished has been
demonstrated to be extensive, often personally transformative, and
rarely consistently benign. The extent of these effects has drawn
research attention to first-person report, and to the eloquent madness
memoirs increasingly available for study. It has led to theorizing
within formal philosophical writing, and also within the rhetoric of
social movements and identity-focused political interest groups (see
 §10).
 The Recovery movement, for example, stresses the way the self and
identity are diminished by diagnosis, eroding and occluding other,
more positive, attributes making up the whole person. (See Jacobson
& Greenley 2001; Pouncey & Lukens 2010; Davidson 2013.)
Critiques of diagnosis place emphasis on its dehumanizing and
“objectifying” effects that, multiplied by stigmatizing
societal attitudes about psychiatric labels, engender self-stigma
(Sadler 2005; Hoffman & Hansen 2017; 
Weiss, Ramakrishna, & Somma 2006; Hinshaw 2009; Thornicroft
2006; Kendler & Zachar 2015).
Not only the social and personal effects of diagnosis in individual
lives and within mental health care, but also the societal face of
psychiatric care, are achieving belated recognition. Recent data on
the effects of the biogenetic explanations regularly accompanying
diagnosis of mental disorder advocates for greater attention to these
attitudes: research findings cannot be read as evidence of embodied
defectiveness, with patients reduced to broken mechanisms; instead,
patients must be brought to be aware that “their agency and
optimism are not dissolved if their problems have a biological
dimension” (Haslam & Kvaale 2015: 402–403).
The social attitudes and values adopted towards mental disorders,
added to features associated with such disorders themselves, have
given rise to a bioethics differing in emphasis from that which
addresses ethical issues in most of general medicine. Widespread
stigma about such disorder raises extra privacy and confidentiality
issues, for example. Because of the powerful and disruptive effects of
the experience of disorder, conceptions of disorder, and of its
treatment, are often linked to the self and identity of the subject in
distinctive ways (Tekin 2011, forthcoming). The perceptual, affective,
and reasoning disabilities that at least temporarily mark severe
disorder are seen to jeopardize the widely-valued traits of rational
autonomy, responsibility, and coherent and unified personhood, leading
to challenges over autonomy and decisional capacity (R.B. Edwards
1997; Radoilska 2012; Sadler, Fulford, & van Staden 2015). And
most significant, treatment raises fundamental ethical issues because
it regularly employs coercive methods.
These coercive practices are judged of serious moral concern in recent
policy documents. For example, coercive treatment apparently violates
rights proclaimed by the United Nations Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities (2006). Important philosophical issues here
include whether there are person-centered and more paternalist
principles that would respectively obviate, and justify, coercive
treatment; how to define coercion; what constitutes valid consent; and
links between coercion and stigmatizing consequences (Kallert,
Mezzich, & Monahan 2011; Cratsley 2019; Pouncey & Mertz
2019). Recent theorizing addresses “mental disorder
exceptionalism” (different treatment for mental and physical
conditions), proposing capacity tests that would apply to everyone
with reduced capacity, regardless of cause (Szmukler & Dawson
2011; Szmukler 2016).
Looking toward the future, the related, and broader field of neuroethics explores
developments and prospects in neuroscience possessing increased
urgency, or distinctive relevance, for psychopathology. (See Bluhm,
Jacobson, & Maibom 2012; Roskies 2007; Glannon 2015; Caruso &
Flanagan 2018.) For example, encroachment on “mental
privacy” can be expected to disproportionately affect those with
stigmatized disorders and symptoms; and a future can be envisioned in
which the semantic authority of first person symptom descriptions is
undermined by diagnoses independently verified through imaging or
other technologies; also, traditionally gendered traits such as
empathy likely perpetuate bias within neuro-scientific methods and
findings (Maibom 2012). More generally, this new knowledge seems
likely to foster a trend from the treatment of disorder to its
prediction based on observed risk factors, which in turn spawns
initiatives such as the identification and treatment of early onset,
“prodromal” conditions in younger subjects (children and
youth), likely affecting identity development and self-management
(Broome, Fusar-Poli, & Wuyts 2013; Whitaker & Cosgrove 2015).
(See entries on Philosophy of Neuroscience, and Neuroethics.)
Responsibility concepts, together with those around personhood,
autonomy, diminished capacity, treatment responses, and individual
rights, make up an inescapable aspect of the broad field of
psychiatric ethics that includes part of the more general neuroethics. Two areas of recent
research will serve to illustrate, the first concerning responsibility
and blame. Attitudes of blame are customarily treated as an
appropriate sequel to assigning responsibility (Watson 2004). By
emphasizing the tie between responsibility and (morally-neutral)
agency, Hanna Pickard uncouples responsibility from blame. At least
for the apparently willful behavior of those diagnosed with disorders
affecting agency, she argues, the proper stance for the care-giver is
grounded in an empathic attitude that assigns responsibility without
blaming, because it is one most conducive to improvement and recovery
(Pickard 2011).
Closely related to these philosophical concerns about responsibility
are issues involving the personality disorders, which, due to their
long-recognized relationship to more normal character weaknesses, and
their evidently dimensional nature, sit uneasily within psychiatric
classifications (Sinnott-Armstrong 2008; Radden 2011; Pickard 2011).
Among one DSM grouping (cluster B personality disorders, including
borderline, narcissistic and antisocial), additional distinguishing
features have been observed: their symptoms are described using
moralistic language. Rather than medical entities, susceptible to
medical treatments, they are better approached using persuasion, and
methods reminiscent of the “moral treatment” of earlier
times, Louis Charland argues (Charland 2004).
Philosophical challenges to customary moral, ethical, and medical
presuppositions introduced in this section have been influenced by,
and are difficult to separate from, critiques of medical psychiatry
during the second half of the twentieth century that have taken place
not only within academe, but also beyond it. These are discussed in
 Section 10.
The category of psychosis, employed for extreme states of disorder
affecting perceptual capabilities (in hallucinations) and reasoning
(in delusions), are introduced here, followed by a sample of
particular disorders among the many that have received philosophical
attention: addiction, anorexia, psychopathy (anti-social personality
disorder), and depression. Philosophical analyses of other diagnostic
categories include defiant disorder (Potter 2014), borderline
personality (Potter 2009); obsessive compulsive disorder (Glas 2013;
Szalai 2016); dissociative identity disorder (Braude 1991; Radden
1996; Worrell & Denham 2016; Maiese 2016); anxiety (Horwitz &
Wakefield 2012), and neurodevelopmental conditions such as autism
spectrum disorder (Baron-Cohen, Lombardo, & Tager-Flusberg
2013).
The severity of hallucinations and delusions, with almost unfailing
consequences for their subject in clinical, legal, social,
and personal settings, serves to distinguish them from many of the
general controversies about disorder noted thus far. The incidence of
and pathology associated with hallucinations has been questioned, as
has their origins, and phenomenology (Leudar & Thomas 2000;
Ratcliffe 2017; Henriksen, Raballo, & Parnas 2015). And delusions
have attracted the particular attention of philosophers for
their incomprehensibility, which challenges standard epistemology and
theories about meaning, language, belief, and intention (Coltheart
& Davies 2000; Bortolotti 2009). They have also been the impetus
for important collaborative work between several sciences: in addition
to being psychiatric disorders delusions occur as symptoms of
neurological diseases of and injury to the brain, and as such have
been subject to considerable empirical study. Philosophical research
on delusions primarily addresses issues about their intelligibility;
about their status in relation to more normal doxastic states; and
about explanatory models.
The intelligibility of delusions remains contested. Delusions are
expressed using unexceptional syntax, and some involve content that,
while inaccurate or implausible, is entirely comprehensible. These,
Jaspers insisted, are secondary delusions; primary delusions, in
contrast, are distinguished by their meaninglessness: attributing
meaning to them is a misapplication of the hermeneutic approach
(Jaspers 1913 [1963]; Gorski 2012). Influenced by Wittgenstein, others
have adopted the position that all delusions are meaningless
utterances (Berrios 1991). Findings in brain science have been
employed to confirm the latter view. Delusions are hypothesized to
reflect thought and narrative fragments trapped in the off-line,
default cognitive mode, due to brain activity that prevents processes
of critical evaluation (Gerrans 2014). In contrast, and following
Freud, others have stressed that delusions are always comprehensible,
but able to be understood only within a context that includes the
person’s whole life, ideas and values (Bentall 2004; Wickham
& Bentall 2016, Mullen & Gillett 2014)
Delusions are belief-like, but disagreements arise over whether they
are beliefs, imaginings, some formes frustes of one of these
two, or a distinct hybrid form. The doxastic position (delusions are
beliefs) must somehow accommodate that compared to typical beliefs,
delusions are not responsive to countervailing evidence, and are only
weakly behavior guiding. (See entry for Delusions.) Associated more
with imagining than with believing, these same features have led to
the assertion that delusions are imaginings mistakenly identified as
beliefs (Currie & Ravenscroft 2002; Broome & Bortolotti 2009).
Apparently part belief and part imagining, they have also been
proposed as a new hybrid form on the basis of these contradictory
elements: “bimagining” (Egan 2009).
Increasingly, explanations of delusions are multi-factorial.
Influential early models that grew out of research on single-themed
delusions resulting from brain damage, such as Capgras, hypothesized
two deficiencies: an initiating aberrant experience or perception due
to brain dysfunction, combined with some failure of the system of
“belief fixation” by which initial beliefs are critically
reviewed in light of other information (Davies et al. 2001; Davies
& Davies 2009; Young 2011). The second factor in such “two
factor” theories is faulty inference, and is on some accounts
distinguished by degree alone from common forms of reasoning error such as
attribution bias (Bentall 2004). On an alternative, “prediction
error” model, perceptual aberrations conflict with prior
(Bayesian) expectations when accompanied by reasoning bias, giving
rise to delusions (Stone & Young 2007; Mishara & Corlett
2009). The “polythematic” and complex delusions more often
seen in the psychiatry clinic, that are partially driven by social and
environmental effects, present significant challenges for cognitive
science, since they involve the higher cognitive systems that
apparently resist modular analysis and decomposition.
Polarized societal attitudes towards responsibility for addictive
behavior and towards its disorder status, are mirrored in
philosophical analyses and theoretical positions (West 2006; Poland
& Graham 2011; Flanagan 2017). Accounts that construe addiction as
a disorder reducing responsibility invoke the idea of irresistible
compulsion and periodic failures of self-control (Vohs &
Heatherton 2000). Objections to this “willpower” view
include its being unable to distinguish those who won’t
from those who cannot abstain from using, deficiency from
deviance (Foddy & Savulescu 2010; Levy 2013). Added to these
difficulties, the phenomenology of addiction is not uniform (Kennett
2013).
Others see addiction as motivated on a standard structure of beliefs
and desires, with addictive behavior simply reflecting the
person’s highest priority (Foddy & Savulescu 2010). Efforts
to combine these contrary positions propose an interaction between
systems that regulate desires and systems that control which of those
desires are acted upon (Holton & Berridge 2013). Similarly,
addicts have been characterized as engaging in a
misevaluation that, serving to explain their resistance to
contrary evidence, is further reinforced by unthinking and impulsive
behavior (Summers 2015; Lewis 2015). Reduced reasons-responsiveness
and diminished responsibility have also been analyzed in terms of a
deficiency of “extended agency”—the ability to
extend one’s will over time to shape one’s future (Levy
2006). On another account, addiction can also be understood as disease
or deficit in terms of an inability to realize vital goals, with
addicts’ reduced health at least partially caused by mental
disposition (Nordenfelt 1995).
Among eating disorders, the apparently voluntary self-starvation known
as anorexia nervosa has been a subject of intense speculation
and theorizing. Because of its strong gender link, this behavior has
been interpreted as an attempt to exert power by a group (adolescent
girls and young women) marked by powerlessness, in a form of extreme,
perfectionistic self control, creating an alienated,
unheimlich body (Svenaeus 2013). The role of individual
agency in these activities, particularly, has been linked to self
identity and identity formation (Tan, Hope, & Stewart 2003; Tan,
Stewart, Fitzpatrick, & Hope 2010; Gillett 2009; Morris 2013). The
disorder apparently occurs more frequently in settings of Western or
Westernized, influence and affluence. Implicated as triggers have been
aesthetics around women’s appearance, as well as more general
Western moral priorities around self-control, and ethereal, non-bodily
qualities associated with weightless lightness (Bordo 1993; Giordano
2005).
Like other self-harming practices, self starvation has not received
medical diagnosis in many historical and cross-cultural contexts,
where explanations instead appeal to the subject’s religious,
ideological, or political motivations. So the motivation of the
anorexic individual deserves attention, especially her beliefs,
attitudes and feelings (Giordano 2005; Svenaeus 2013; Morris 2013).
Efforts to isolate underlying perceptual dysfunction once supposed to
explain the anorexic’s attitudes have been unsuccessful (Morris
2013). A more complex hypothesis, involving interaction between
defective “body schemas” (non-linguistic, preconscious,
bodily representations) that are distorted by, and also generate, the
anorexic’s attitudes, await the attention of neuroscience. (See
Morris 2013; Gadsby 2017.)
In their apparent failure to recognize the difference between moral
and merely conventional transgressions, it has been questioned whether
so-called psychopaths (those diagnosed with antisocial personality
disorder) are appropriately held responsible for their attitudes and
actions (Sinnott-Armstrong 2008; Adshead 2013); whether, in seeming to
hold normal moral beliefs without being motivated by them, they
provide a counterexample to motivational internalism; and whether
their observed amygdala dysfunction serves to excuse (Levy 2007).
Patients with damage to the ventromedial frontal lobe exhibit symptoms
similar to those of the psychopath (Roskies 2003): how similar, is
questioned, as is what these patients with “acquired
sociopathy” show about whether natural psychopaths should be
exempt from responsibility (Kennett & Fine 2008; Sinnott-Armstrong
2008). The deficits apparently exhibited by psychopaths (in empathy,
rationality, and volition, for example) have also been explored for
the light they throw on the ingredients of the “moral point of
view” (Schramme 2014). Treatment approaches critically rest on
how these traits are understood (Maibom 2014). For further discussion
of psychopathy, see entry on Philosophy of Psychiatry.
Since the humoral theories of earlier eras, mood disorders have been
strongly associated with bodily
 states.[8]
 Chief among the several hypotheses about depression challenged by
philosophers are appeals to hormonal changes and biology (particularly
as they would explain depression’s persistent gender link), and
accounts derived from evolutionary psychology (Varga 2012, 2016; Bluhm
2011). Related work also emphasizes that explanations of depression
must appeal to broader societal structures, rather than individual
vulnerabilities (Bluhm 2011; Bluhm, Jacobson, & Maibom 2012)). The
uncertain line between disorders of mood and normal states of distress
was discussed earlier
 (§4.2).
 It has prompted contrasting hypotheses about “true”
depression, as we saw, including inferences to brain dysfunction
(Horwitz & Wakefield 2007), and criteria that appeal to a
disabling degree of suffering (Bolton 2013).
First person symptom descriptions from memoirs, in-depth case studies,
and analysis of large data sets, have illuminated the disorder in
several ways: its classification and conceptualization (Hoffman &
Hansen 2017); the relation of affective states to the self (Ratcliffe
& Stephan 2014; Browne 2018); the disorder status of its
mood-based phenomenology (Radden 2013); the relation of depression to
autonomy, and to narrative theories of emotion in treatment contexts
(Radoilska 2012; Biegler 2011); temporal experience (Fuchs 2001, 2013;
Ratcliffe 2008), and many more.
“Anti-psychiatry” has come to stand for ideas from
mid-twentieth century thinkers such as Thomas Szasz, R.D. Laing, and
Michel Foucault. Many of these involved social and political critiques
and calls to action, with real-world consequences that have been
linked to deinstitutionalization, human rights movements, and a shift
towards more autonomy-focused mental health care. In English language
theorizing Szasz and Laing rejected the appropriateness of analogizing
particular “problems in living” (Szasz) with medical
disorders, insisting that misapplication of the medical model to
mental health was emblematic of the overreach of the medical
establishment. The practices and discourses within society and its
institutions making up the era’s episteme are depicted
historically by Foucault, the focus on the exercise of psychiatric
power that, arising with modern science, is increasingly exerted
through mechanisms of protection, surveillance, and control. With
modernity, on this account, power is no longer brute force, instead
taking a more diffused and subtle form that imperceptibly disciplines
and controls not only bodies, but selves (Foucault 1965, Bracken &
Thomas 2010, 2013; Rose 2010; Iliopoulos 2012). Foucault’s
sweeping ideas remain central to the “post psychiatry” and
“critical psychiatry” that have emerged during the
beginning of the twenty-first century.
Interwoven with these ideas from the start have been relentless
critiques from feminist theory. These include acknowledgment of the
women’s actual, unwarranted, institutionalization, as well as
emphasis on harms of disempowerment and silencing (Kristeva 1987
[1989]), and of epistemic injustices (Dotson 2011; Sanati &
Kyratsous 2015; entry on Feminist Social Epistemology). In a legacy
affecting mental disorder even today, binary conceptualizations have
assigned women and the feminine to illogicality, emotionality,
subjectivity, the bodily, and madness (in contrast to men’s more
valued traits) (G. Lloyd 1984; Potter 2009). Earlier feminist thinkers
focused on the medicalization of women’s normal traits, as well
as research neglect and distortion of gender-linked disorders;
separate and unequal treatments; the mental health vulnerabilities
associated with traditional women’s roles and identities; and
diagnosis and treatment understood as tools of patriarchal social
control (Russell 1995; Ussher 2011). 
Feminism has consistently rejected traditional causal explanations of
women’s disorder derived from allegedly natural biological
predispositions, pointing instead to the effects of women’s
oppressive socialization and to the consequences of devaluing
women’s characteristics and abilities (Bluhm 2011). Similarly,
it has emphasized the embodiment, and relationality, of the self
(Bluhm, Jacobson, & Maibom 2012). And more recent work, much of it
influenced by social theory and phenomenological approaches, focuses
on the intersection of gender with marginality, invisibility,
non-normativity and oppression in lived experience (Nissim-Sabat 2013;
Zeiler & Folkmarson Käll 2014).
Objections to the modernist presuppositions of psychiatry also take
issue with the model by which disorder reflects flawed brain
mechanisms or processes, serving to enhance the status of psychiatry
and disempower those diagnosed with disorder (Bracken & Thomas
2005, Iliopoulos 2012). The new brain sciences will magnify this
disempowerment, it is argued, with the agency and authority previously
attributed to persons replaced by a bio-scientific “management
of the mind” (Phillips 2009, 2013; Rose and Abi-Rached 2013). A
more recent descendant of mid-twentieth century writing is the
collection of concerns known as critical psychiatry: critiques of the
influence of the pharmacological industry (Phillips 1996, 2013; Moncrieff 2008;
Whitaker & Cosgrove 2015; Valenstein 2002; Karp 2017); a discourse
around mental disorder that, influenced by hermeneutics, aims to be
more sensitive to the meaning of symptoms (Bracken & Thomas 2010);
and the promotion of a more equal and collaborative relationship
between carers and those they treat (Double 2006; Cohen & Timimi
2008). 
Associated with these ideas, some research appeals to the unique
expertise of “service users” or “survivors” in
analyses of mental disorder (Faulkner & Leyzell 2000; Gergel
2012; Cooper 2017). And
these innovations have been analyzed appealing to critical theory,
narrative research methods, the impediments to representational
authority, and the co-production of knowledge (Voronka 2016; Russo
& Sweeney 2016).
Claims arising from political movements made up of recipients of
psychiatric care include the call for a seat at the
policy-makers’ table; representational authority based on first
person experience of psychiatric symptoms; the complaints of unjust
treatment by the “survivors” of diagnosis and care;
requests for equality of mental with other disabilities, and or mental
with other medical conditions; recognition of neuro-atypicality from
proponents of a neurodiversity model of disorder (Ortega 2009); and
from “mad pride”, the claim that madness is an attribution
from which to draw strength and cultural identity. Largely neglected
until now within psychiatry or philosophical writing, the claims of
mad pride have recently been critically evaluated and related to the
social theory of philosophers like Honneth and Taylor (Rashed
2019).
Where might we expect philosophical work on mental disorder to go from
here? Certainly, one issue must be what role or roles remain for
commonsense psychology. An aspect of this is the tug of war over who
decides mental health—society, or science? Ought we be guided by
the values around utility sought by modern science? Or should
richer eudaimonic visions be pursued? Even granted the
authority to override science in determining ideals of mental health,
society—and philosophy— still contend with 
issues such as how generously to attribute normalcy, and what might
limit thinking in terms of neuro-diversity rather than deficiency, in
light of the implications such alternatives hold for traditional
liberal values around responsibility and the self. We can anticipate
that with the ways to verify, understand, and ameliorate mental
disorder it promises, neuroscience will not resolve, but instead
augment and extend questions such as these, perhaps in directions
barely dreamed of.