The English words ‘representation’ and ‘to
represent’ derive via Old French from the Latin words
‘repraesentatio’ and ‘repraesentare,’ but
these are by no means commonly used words in classical Latin. In late
ancient thought it is foremost Quintilian and Tertullian that uses
the terms in a philosophically interesting way. It was not until the
twelfth century Latin translation of Avicenna’s De anima that
these terms became frequently used in connection with cognition and
the mind or the intellective soul (see Lagerlund 2007b).
The Latin translators of Avicenna rendered several related terms in
Arabic all related to cognition and the internal senses with the Latin
‘repraesentatio’. In doing so they, intentionally or not,
formed the concept of representations in the soul. Representation in
the Latin translation of Avicenna is associated with all five
faculties. Forms received through the common sense and stored in the
phantasia are called representations. The imaginative or cogitative
faculty combines and divides representations collected in the phantasia
to make new representations, which might not have any real object
corresponding to them. The senses apprehend the sensible forms of the
objects perceived and the estimative faculty apprehends the
‘intentio’ or ‘ma’na’ of the perceived
object. Representations in the imagination are also the basis for
intellectual activity, according to this view of cognition:
Avicenna here describes the process of abstraction, or how the
representation in the imagination of particular things becomes
universal in the intellect. The universal forms are abstracted from
representations in the imagination and flow from the active intellect
into the passive. Note, however, that the terminology of
representation is never used in relation to the intellect. It is
always the internal senses that represent in Avicenna and not the
intellect or the external senses (see Lagerlund 2007b, for a table of
the whole range of terms translated by ‘representation’ in
Avicenna’s works.)
One of the reasons ‘representation’ is only used for the
internal senses is that representations are thought of as images. The
notion of linguistic representations or representations as signs is
not present in Avicenna’s work or any other work of the time. It seems
instead to derive from logic. Early logic works like Garlandus
Compotista’s Dialectica (17) and
Abelard’s Dialectica (II, 188) discussed a distinction
between a word’s signification by imposition and representation. A
denominative term such as ‘white’ signifies by imposition
a substance that is white, but it signifies by representation the
whiteness inhering in the substance. The white thing stands in for or
is an instantiation of whiteness; white is re-presented in the
object. Garlandus mentions the example of a traveler
(‘viator’) who can be said to represent a road
(‘via’). The term ‘traveler’ signifies by
imposition the human being who is a traveler, but also represents the
road the traveler travels on. It is exactly this usage of
representation applied to mental signs that becomes important with
Ockham and Buridan.
The most influential theory of thought in the thirteenth century goes
back to Aristotle and has its foremost medieval defender in Thomas
Aquinas. It rests on viewing mental representations or intelligible
species, as Aquinas calls them, as sameness of form. The explanation
for why thoughts are about something, exhibit intentionality, or
represent is that the form of the object thought about is in the mind
of the thinker. According to a popular metaphor, thinking something, on this view, is being the object thought
about in the sense that the intellect becomes the object or takes on its form.
Following Aristotle in De anima III.4, Aquinas argues, that
the mind or the intellective part of the soul has no nature or rather
it is nothing before it thinks of something. The active intellect
abstracts the intelligible species from the sensitive species in the
internal senses and places it in the potential intellect. Aquinas is
here very close to the view we saw Avicenna defend above. The species
actualizes the potential intellect as a form actualizes a potency. The
intelligible species in the potential intellect constitutes the
thought. The intellect is immaterial, according to Aquinas, and since
he also famously thinks that matter is the principle of individuation,
the intelligible species in the potential intellect is not individual,
but universal. This is why Aquinas holds that a thought is always
universal. 
There are many problems associated with this view of mental
representation. A famous problem is: why are the daffodils outside my
soul not about my thought of the daffodils? The forms inside and
outside my mind are the same, suggesting that mental representation is
symmetrical. Aquinas has a famous answer to this problem, which is
that the daffodils in the garden are not about my thought because of
the mode of the form’s presence in them. The forms in the daffodils
are really or naturally present whereas in my mind the universal form is
spiritually or intentionally present.
The distinction between forms being really/naturally or spiritually/intentionally present is
central to Aquinas’s theory of cognition. A form may be present
somewhere without literally making whatever substance it informs into
something else. Colors in the air, for example, do not make the air
really colored: we see colors in the objects around us but not in the
intervening air, although they must be there spiritually if sensation
is to be a causal process. This means, of course, that the air must
somehow contain the color, which entails that intentionality is not a
mark of the mental for Aquinas. The air is not in itself a mind (for
discussion, see Pasnau 1997, Chap. 2).
One of the first to criticize the species theory of
cognition, in the late thirteenth century, was Peter Olivi. He argued,
contrary to Aristotle and Aquinas, that the mind is active in its
cognition of the world; it attends to the object, and it is this move
on his part that puts the species theory of cognition in a completely
different light. In fact, there seems little point in postulating a
species through which the object is cognized. He argues:
In this passage, it seems clear that for Olivi the species is a thing
in itself and that there really are three things involved in the
cognition of an object: the object, the species, and the cognizer. The
species is on his view a representation, namely a thing that stands in
for the object in the mind. The main problem he sees with the theory
is hence epistemological. How can we be sure we are cognizing the
object and not the species (see Toivanen 2009, Chap. 4). Olivi hence
argues that this third representing thing is not needed and that the
mind can attend to the object directly. Ockham is later on in the
early fourteenth century to repeat a similar argument against the
species theory.
Both Olivi and Ockham seem to take it for granted that species are
representations and hence a thing added to the object and the
cognizer. There were, however, two versions of the species theory of
cognition in the thirteenth century. The most influential one was
foremost associated with Roger Bacon. According to him, species are
representations, that is, real extended images like objects
representing the thing cognized to the cognizer. The other version of
the theory was defended by Aquinas. According to him, species were not
representations but the forms themselves of the objects cognized under
a different mode of being. The species were not real but spiritual and
as such there are no physical change of for example the eye in a
visual perception; only a spiritual one.
Olivi’s objection mentioned above does not apply to Aquinas’ theory
since species are not real representations on that view. Olivi himself
seems aware of this, however, and says that if the species has
spiritual being, then they cannot: “truly and naturally flow from
a natural, corporeal form, [and] not really and truly inform a natural
body, e.g. the air or the eye.” (Sententiarum II, q. 73,
87.) On Aquinas’ theory the species cannot affect the sense organ and
cause a cognition, he seems to think. The species cannot hence fulfill
the role they are supposed to play in a theory of cognition or a
theory of vision.
Olivi does not straight our reject all species, however, since he
thinks memory utilizes species. These species are representations and
they are constructed by us. He explains it in the following
passage:
This is the most common usage of species after Olivi, that is, that
species are representative (see Adriaenssen 2017).
 For various reasons, the late thirteenth century saw an increased
interest in epistemology. One reason for this was the development of
new theories of mental representations and intentionality. Some of
these developments were due to problematic features of, on the one
hand, Aquinas’s view of mental representation and on the other,
of Henry of Ghent’s interpretation of Augustine’s view of
divine cognition. Aquinas seems to have held that the intelligible
species is supposed to play a dual role both as a universal common to
all of us thinking it and as my individual thought. It is hard to see
how such a view can be maintained without the introduction of some
kind of distinction. Henry on the other hand reinterprets
Augustine’s doctrine of divine ideas and introduces a
distinction between the ideas and the divine nature. The ideas are
possibilia or the natures of possible things to be created (de Rijk
2005:81–84).
 Both of these views contribute to the introduction of a
distinction between the vehicle and the content of a
representation. The distinction developed by Henry in relation to the
divine nature was almost immediately taken up into the debates about
human cognition. It was applied to Aquinas’s theory of mental
representation, taking it a step further by introducing a distinction
between the thing representing and the thing represented. 
 John Duns Scotus was instrumental in adapting this view to human
cognition. Scotus’s implemented Henry’s distinction and
treated the thing that does the representing as a mental act or
concept, which ontologically speaking is an accident of the mind, and
the thing represented as the form of the object thought about. Scotus
claimed that the accident or mental act is subjectively in the soul,
whereas the object being represented is present objectively, or has
objective being in the mind. He also said that the object exists as
represented to express the content side of the mental representation
(Ord. I, d. 3, pars 3, q. 1, n. 382) Scouts can through this
distinction also maintain that all spiritual change supervenes on a
real change (see Cross 2014). 
 Scotus thus had a clear way of expressing what Brentano later
called intentionality, that is, the way the object of thought exists
in the mind. It has objective existence in the mind on his view, which
later came to be regarded as the mark of the mental (see Normore 1986;
Pasnau 2003; King 2007; Cross 2014). Although the advantages of this
approach over Aquinas’s are clear, problems remains concerning
the ontological status of these mental contents. The medieval debate
here is famous and features a wide variety of opinions (for a survey,
see Tachau 1988). Scotus himself says that thought objects have a
diminished kind of being, which is supposed to be a state between real
being and no being at all. Although first accepting a similar view,
Ockham would later subject this view to much criticism.
 The theory of mental language in the fourteenth century was
foremost developed by William Ockham. It rests on a theory of mental
representation that combined the notions of cause and signification. A
concept or a mental term on this view represents because it is caused
efficiently by a thing in the world. It signifies that thing also
because of the causal relation between them. On Ockham’s view, a
mental representation or concept is caused by an intuitive
cognition. He explains:
According to Ockham’s metaphysics there are only individuals in the
world so that when an individual causes a concept to exist in the
mind, it causes an individual concept and hence a singular conception
of itself. Nothing else can cause that concept (except perhaps
God). The singular concept functions as the word of the object that
caused it in our language of thought. It is an atomic constituent that
can then be combined to form more complex concepts or sentences in the
language.
Ockham’s notion of concept acquisition and mental representation is
developed as part of a very sophisticated theory of thought involving
not only a theory of signification, but also a whole range of
logico-semantic properties such as connotation and supposition. It
explains how concepts, which in turn are the direct objects of belief
and knowledge, are assembled into mental sentences describing the
world (for the details, see Panaccio 2004).
Ockham and John Buridan’s accounts of thought are on the one hand very
similar, but on the other hand there are fundamental differences
between them. This is particularly true about their view of mental
representation. A case in point is their views of singular
thought. They both start out from the same idea, that is, that
thinking something singular is having a singular concept in mind, but
they disagree fundamentally on what a singular concept looks like and
foremost on how it manages to latch onto the world. On Ockham’s
account a concept is singular because its cause was proper, as he
calls it, and proper causes are necessarily tied to one object. But on
Buridan’s account, a singular concept is singular because of its
complexity. (Meaning pure semantic complexity, according to
Klima 2001: xxxviii–xlii and 2009: 40–56) It has a descriptive content
that enables it to narrow down its signification to only one
thing. (For the significance of this difference from Ockham, see Klima
2009: 69–89)
Buridan thinks that we always cognize or conceive of something first
as singular, but this also means that we first conceive of it as this
or that, that is, we conceive of it as something. For him, this means
that our concepts are from the very beginning loaded with some content
and a fully singular concept picks out whatever it is of or represent
in all circumstances. Such a concept is determinate and not vague,
since it applies to only one thing, but it is also not what we first
acquire, Buridan thinks. The first singular concepts acquired are
so-called vague singular concepts. A vague concept is singular because
it is about only one thing, but it is not determined what thing that
is; examples of such concepts are ‘this human,’
‘this cup,’ hence the name ‘vague
singulars’. It is from these we arrive at determinate singular
concepts by adding content and at universal concepts by abstracting
away from singularizing circumstances.
To explain how this process works, he uses an example that, after him,
became a standard example used to explain singular cognition. In the
example, Socrates approaches from afar. At first, I cannot tell
exactly what I see approaching; something (a substance) is coming
closer and closer to me. After a while, I see that it is an animal of
some sort, but I cannot tell exactly what kind of animal it is. As it
comes closer, I realize that it is a human being, and, finally, when
he is close enough, I recognize Socrates (see Normore 2007).
 Although this example seems to have had a long tradition (Black
2011), nowhere else did it play as important a role as it does for
Buridan and some of his followers. Cognition, it shows, is always in
the first instance about ‘that thing,’ ‘that
animal,’ ‘that human being,’ and finally about
‘Socrates.’ Hence, it is always about a singular thing in
the first instance. The example can be found in John Buridan, Nicholas
Oresme, Marsilius of Inghen, Peter of Ailly, Gabriel Biel, as well as
Thomas Hobbes, and all these authors used it in virtually the same
way. The example can thus be said to reform the theory of thought
developed by Ockham (see Lagerlund 2006 and Lagerlund 2014).