Close your eyes and visualize an apple. Many readers will have a
quasi-perceptual experience that may be a bit similar to actually
seeing an apple. For those who do, this experience is an example of
mental imagery – in fact, it is the kind of example philosophers
use to introduce the concept.
It is not clear whether introducing the term ‘mental
imagery’ by example is particularly helpful, for at least two
reasons. First, there are well-demonstrated interpersonal variations
in mental imagery (see Section 1.2), so much so that some people
report no experience whatsoever when closing their eyes and
visualizing an apple. Second, it is unclear how such an example like
visualizing an apple could be generalized in a way that would give us
a coherent concept. It does not seem like mental imagery is an
ordinary language term – it was introduced at the end of the
19th century (see Section 1.1 below) as a technical term in
psychology and no languages other than English has a term that would
mean mental imagery (as distinct from ‘imagination’ or
‘mental picture’). But if ‘mental imagery’ is
indeed a technical term, then it is supposed to be used in a way that
maximizes theoretical usefulness. In this case, theoretical usefulness
means that we should use ‘mental imagery’ in a way that
would help us to explain how the mind works.
This encyclopedia entry will not attempt to give an ordinary language
analysis of the term ‘mental imagery’, partly because it
is far from clear that ‘mental imagery’ is part of the
ordinary language. Instead, the focus will be on the theoretically
useful concept of mental imagery as it is used for explaining various
mental phenomena in psychology, neuroscience and philosophy.
The concept of mental imagery was first consistently used in the then
very new discipline of empirical psychology at the end of the
19th century. At that time, psychologists like Francis
Galton, Wilhelm Wundt or Edward Titchener (Galton 1880, Wundt 1912,
Titchener 1909) thought of mental imagery as a mental phenomenon
characterized by its phenomenology – a quasi-perceptual episode
with a certain specific phenomenal feel. This stance lead to serious
suspicion, and often the outright rejection, of this concept in the
following decades when behaviorism dominated the psychological
discourse (Kulpe 1895, Ryle 1949, Dennett 1969). It was not until the
1970s that mental imagery was again considered to be a respectable
concept to study in the empirical sciences of the mind.
Just as perception can be characterized in a variety of ways, the same
goes for mental imagery. One way of characterizing perception is in
terms of its phenomenology: perception would be a mental process that
is characterized by a certain specific phenomenology. The problem is
that phenomenology is not publicly observable and, as a result, it is
not a good starting point for scientific study. The same
considerations apply for mental imagery. But we can also characterize
perception functionally or neuroanatomically and these ways of
thinking about perception would be publicly observable and, as a
result, would be a good starting point for the scientific study of
perception. And this is exactly how perceptual psychology and the
neuroscience of perception proceeds. Again, the same considerations
apply for mental imagery.
As a result, in recent decades psychologists and neuroscientists,
rather than relying on introspection and phenomenology, characterized
mental imagery in functional and neuroscientific terms. Here is a
typical characterization from a review article that summarizes the
state of the art concerning mental imagery in psychology, psychiatry
and neuroscience, published in the flagship journal Trends in
Cognitive Sciences: “We use the term ‘mental
imagery’ to refer to representations […] of sensory
information without a direct external stimulus” (Pearson et al.
2015, p. 590, see also Dijkstra et al. 2019). In short, according to
the psychological definition, mental imagery is perceptual
representation not triggered directly by sensory input (or
representation-involving perceptual processing not triggered directly
by sensory input – these two phrases will be used interchangeably in
what follows).
The concept of directness may need some further clarification (and the
same goes for the concept of “appropriate immediate sensory
input” (Kosslyn et al., 1995, p. 1335, see also Shepard and
Metzler 1971) that has also been used to specify what mental imagery
lacks). The perceptual processing (in the early cortices) is triggered
directly by sensory input if it is triggered without the
mediation of some other (perceptual or extra-perceptual) processes. If
the perceptual processing is triggered by something non-perceptual (as
in the case of closing our eyes and visualizing), it is not triggered
either directly or indirectly (see Section 1.3). If the perceptual
processing in the visual sense modality is triggered by sensory input
in the auditory sense modality (as in the case of an involuntary
visual imagery of your face when I hear your voice with my eyes
closed), the visual processing is triggered indirectly – with
the mediation of auditory processing (see Section 2.2). A direct
trigger here would be visual input, but there is no visual input in
this case. And if the visual processing at the center of the visual
field is triggered by input in the periphery of the visual field (say,
because the center of the visual field is occluded by an empty white
piece of paper), then the visual processing at the center of the
visual field is, again, triggered indirectly, that is, in a way
mediated by the visual processes in the periphery (see Section 2.1). A
direct trigger would be sensory input at the center of the visual
field, but there is no such sensory input in this case. According to
the psychological definition of mental imagery, all three of these
different examples of perceptual processing count as mental imagery as
the perceptual processing is not triggered directly by the sensory
input.
Contemporary philosophical thinking about mental imagery comes close
to this way of defining mental imagery (see Nanay forthcoming for a
summary). Gregory Currie, for example says that “episodes of
mental imagery are occasions on which the visual system is driven
off-line, disconnected from its normal sensory inputs” (Currie
1995, p. 26, see also Kind 2001, Richardson 1969, Currie and
Ravenscroft 2002, but see also Section 1.2 below and see Fazekas et
al. 2021, for more on the concept of offline perception).
This way of thinking about mental imagery allows us to examine mental
imagery empirically and in a publicly observable manner. To put it
very simply, if someone’s eyes are closed, so she receives no
visual input and her early sensory cortices are nonetheless
representing an equilateral triangle at the middle of the visual field
(something that can be established fairly easily given the retinotopy
of vision by means of fMRI), this is an instance of mental
imagery.
This psychological conception of mental imagery is neutral about some
seemingly important features of mental imagery. If mental imagery is
perceptual representation not triggered directly by sensory input,
then mental imagery may or may not be voluntarily triggered (see more
on this distinction in Section 1.3 below). Further, it may or may not
be conscious – even if you experience nothing, as long as there
is a triangle in your primary visual cortex, but no triangle on your
retina, you have mental imagery (see more on unconscious mental
imagery in Section 1.2 below).
The psychological definition characterizes mental imagery is defined
negatively: it is perceptual representation not triggered
directly by sensory input. This leaves open the question what it is
triggered by. Often it is triggered by higher level cognitive
processes – this is the case when you count to three and
visualize an apple. But it can also be triggered laterally by
different sense modalities (see Section 2.2 below). And it can also be
triggered by sensory input but in an indirect manner (see Section 2.1
below).
Mental imagery is often used interchangeably with the term
‘mental image’. This is misleading in more than one way.
First of all, mental imagery is not necessarily visual. Just as
perception can be visual, auditory, olfactory, tactile, gustatory,
etc, the same goes for mental imagery (see, e.g., Young 2020).
Auditory mental imagery, for example, plays a crucial role in
listening to music (see Section 5.2 below). But it is not an
‘image’ in any meaningful sense of the term.
Second, and even more importantly, not everyone conjures up vivid and
distinct images when they have mental imagery (see Kind 2017 for a
summary of the vividness of imagery). There are people who, when they
close their eyes and visualize an apple see no ‘images’ in
their mind’s eye. They are referred to as aphantasics, a label
that just means that they report no conscious mental imagery (Zeman et
al. 2010). Aphantasia can have many causes, some having to do with
voluntary control, some with the phenomenology of early cortical
representations. But at least some aphantasics seem to have mental
imagery that they are not aware of: they have unconscious mental
imagery (Koenig-Robert and Pearson 2021, Nanay 2021c, see also
Phillips 2014, Church 2008, Emmanouil and Ro 2014, Brogaard and Gatzia
2017 on unconscious mental imagery).
The very idea of unconscious mental imagery may raise some
philosophical eyebrows and some philosophers indeed build
consciousness into their definition of mental imagery (Richardson
1969, pp. 2–3, Kung 2010, p. 622). But if mental imagery is
perceptual representation that is not directly triggered, then the bar
for unconscious mental imagery should not be higher than the bar for
perception per se, that is, for perceptual representation that is
directly triggered. And we have plenty of evidence that perception is
often unconscious: subjects with blindsight are not conscious of what
they are staring at, but what they see systematically influences their
behavior. And the same goes for healthy subjects when they look at
very briefly presented or masked stimuli (see, e.g., Kentridge et al.
1999, Kouider & Dehaene 2007 as two representative examples of the
vast literature on unconscious perception). If perception can be
unconscious, then so can mental imagery.
Aphantasia comes on a spectrum. Researchers put together the so-called
‘vividness of visual imagery questionnaire’, which
indicates how vivid one’s (visual) mental imagery is.
Aphantasics score very low on this scale. People with very vivid
mental imagery (often referred to as hyperphantasics) score very high.
But most people are somewhere in between. These interpersonal
variability in the vividness of mental imagery should make us even
more wary of using introspective criteria for characterizing mental
imagery as this would give different results in different people on
different parts of the aphantasia-hyperphantasia spectrum.
Mental imagery is not imagination (Langland-Hassan 2015, 2020,
Arcangeli 2020). Imagination is (typically) a voluntary act. Mental
imagery is not. Mental imagery can be, and is very often, involuntary.
When we have flashbacks to an unpleasant scene, this is mental
imagery, but not imagination by any sense of the term (see also
Gregory 2010, 2014, Wiltsher 2016 on the differences between
imagination and mental imagery). It is involuntary mental imagery. The
same goes for earworms: annoying tunes that go through our head in
spite of the fact that we really don’t want them to. Again, this
is not auditory imagination, but it is auditory mental imagery.
In spite of these differences, given that the term ‘mental
imagery’ was not systematically used until the end of the
19th century, throughout the history of philosophy people
used the term ‘imagination’ to refer to what we now would
describe as mental imagery. Thomas Hobbes, for example, talked about
“retaining an image of the seen thing”, which comes very
close to at least a subcategory of the current use of mental imagery
in psychology and neuroscience, but he referred to this mental
phenomenon as imagination (Hobbes 1651, Chapter 2). More generally,
both the British empiricists and the German idealists used the term
‘imagination’ at least sometimes in the sense that would
be captured by the concept of mental imagery nowadays (see Yolton 1996
for a summary). If we want to understand the evolution of
philosophical thinking about mental imagery, we would need to go
through all the historical texts about imagination and separate out
references to voluntary acts (imagination proper) from references to
mental imagery. This is not something that can be done in this
encyclopedia entry.
The relation between mental imagery and imagination is important for
another reason: we have seen that we can have mental imagery without
imagination (see the flashback and the earworm examples). But how
about the other way round? Can we have imagination without mental
imagery? In other words, does imagination necessarily involve the
exercise of mental imagery (Kind 2001, Van Leeuwen 2016,
Langland-Hassan 2020)? This debate has been further complicated by the
standard distinction between sensory and propositional imagination
(roughly, imagining seeing x versus imagining that x is F), and the
role imagery plays in these two forms of imagination – roughly,
the difference between them is that the former, but not the latter is
necessarily accompanied by (or constituted by) mental imagery. Without
taking sides or venturing into the literature on the distinction
between sensory and propositional imagination, it needs to be pointed
out that many of the arguments on either side appeal to introspection
(Byrne 2007, Chalmers 2002). If we allow for unconscious mental
imagery, then these arguments would not lead to any kind of conclusive
resolution. The only way in which we can assess whether imagination
necessarily involves mental imagery is by empirical means.
Mental imagery is a form of representation. But what does it represent
and how does it do so? If mental imagery is a perceptual or at least
quasi-perceptual representation, it seems that it represents the way
perceptual states represent. Perceptual states attribute properties to
the perceived scene. Mental imagery attributes properties to the
imagined scene (or imagined properties to the actual scene). Just what
such ‘imagined’ attributed properties could be and how to
think of the ‘imagined scene’ are highly controversial
questions (see, e. g., Kulvicki 2014, Langland-Hassan 2015). What
seems to be less controversial is that both forms of property
attributions are underwritten by early cortical processes, and both
are sensitive to the allocation of attention (Shea 2018, Dijkstra et
al. 2019).
This similarity between perception and mental imagery in terms of
content plays an important role in thinking about the phenomenology of
these states. One old question concerning the relation between
(conscious) perception and (conscious) mental imagery is about the
phenomenal similarity between the two (Hume 1739, 1.1.1). Mental
imagery can feel similar to perception, so much so that under
experimental conditions, it is easy to confuse the two (Perky 1910,
see also Hopkins 2012 for a contrasting view). Assuming that the
phenomenal character of a state depends in some ways on its content
(an assumption that doesn’t need to be as strong as that of
intentionalism), we can explain this with reference to the similarity
of the content of perception and the content of mental imagery.
Not just the similarities, but the differences between mental imagery
and perception also need to be explained. And the difference between
perceptual content and the content of mental imagery also plays an
important role in the debate about a phenomenologically salient and
historically influential difference between the vividness of
perception and the vividness of mental imagery. The historically
influential view, championed most memorably by the British
empiricists, is that mental imagery is paler and less vivid than
perception. Even if we set aside hyperphantasics, who report very
similar vividness for mental imagery and perception, this distinction
does not seem to hold across the board. The properties that constitute
the content of mental imagery can be very determinate indeed –
and most of the properties that constitute perceptual content are not
particularly determinate (see Dennett 1996 for a classic argument).
Nonetheless, determinacy plays a role in yet another major difference
between perceptual content and the content of mental imagery.
When you look at a landscape and shift your attention from the tree on
the left to the mountain range on the right, this implies a change in
the determinacy of the perceptually attributed properties: the
properties attributed to the tree will be less determinate than before
and the properties attributed to the mountain range will be more
determinate than before (Yeshurun and Carrasco 1998). Let’s
focus on the change in determinacy in the latter case: the extra
determinacy of the perceptually attributed properties comes from the
sensory input: perceptual attention increases determinacy by means of
extracting more information from the sensory input. In the case of
mental imagery, in contrast, there is no sensory input to exploit, so
when you close your eyes and imagine the same landscape with the tree
on the left and the mountain range on the right and you shift your
attention from the former to the latter, then the increased
determinacy of the properties attributed to the mountain range
can’t come from the sensory input. It must come from a top-down
source – your beliefs or expectations or memories about mountain
ranges (Nanay 2015).
The format of a representation is different from its content. Two
representations can have the same content but different formats. The
usual starting point of talking about representational format is the
difference between the way pictures and sentences represent. Pictures
represent imagistically or iconically and sentences represent
non-imagistically or propositionally. They may represent the same
thing: say, a red apple on a green table. But they represent this red
apple on a green table differently (for example, to just mention one
often-emphasized difference, very few parts of the sentence
“there is a red apple on a green table” represent part of
what the sentence itself represents, whereas many parts of the picture
of the red apple on a green table represent part of what the whole
picture represents) – the format of the representation is
different.
So the question is: does mental imagery represent the way pictures do
or the way sentences do? This was the central question of the
so-called ‘Imagery Debate’ of the 1980s (in the imagistic
corner: Kosslyn 1980, in the propositional corner: Pylyshyn 1981, see
Tye 1991 for a good summary). It was this debate that made
philosophers take the concept of mental imagery seriously again, after
a long period of behaviorist-inspired skepticism about anything
imagery-related.
The Imagery Debate is historically significant for yet another reason:
it helped us to appreciate how interpersonal variations in mental
imagery can have a major impact on one’s
philosophical/theoretical positions. An important and fairly large
study conducted at a time when the Imagery Debate was on its way out
shows this very clearly. It mapped how philosophers’ and
psychologists’ intuitions about the format of mental imagery
vary as a result of the vividness of their mental imagery. The results
showed that the vividness of imagery has significant impact on
theoretical commitments in this debate (Reisberg 2003). Researchers
with less vivid mental imagery were more likely to take the
propositional side and those with more vivid mental imagery tended to
come down on the iconic side.
As the dependence on the vividness of one’s mental imagery
shows, it is far from clear that the Imagery Debate is a substantive
debate, and many psychologists and neuroscientists (including some of
the original participants of this debate) explicitly declared this
debate dead (see esp. Pearson and Kosslyn 2015). There are many ways
of characterizing the distinction between imagistic and propositional
formats, some more controversial than others. Appeal to holism or the
‘picture principle’ have been more on the controversial
side (Kulvicki 2014). Describing iconic format as
“representation of magnitudes, by magnitudes” (Peacocke
2019, p. 52) is on the less controversial side. And at least according
to these criteria it seems clear that mental imagery has iconic
format.
Perceptual representations represent magnitudes by means of
magnitudes. In the case of vision, for example, they represent
magnitudes like illumination, contours, color and they do so by means
of magnitudes in the early sensory cortices. The early visual cortices
are retinotopic (Grill-Spector and Malach 2004 for a summary and
Talavage et al. 2004 on equivalent claims regarding the non-visual
sense modalities). If you are looking at a triangle, there is a
roughly triangle-pattern activation of direction-sensitive neurons in
your primary visual cortex. This is iconic format par excellence. And
if you visualize a triangle, there is also a roughly triangle-pattern
activation of direction-sensitive neurons in your primary visual
cortex (Kosslyn et al. 2006). Again, iconic format par excellence, at
least according to the ‘representation of magnitudes, by
magnitudes’ criteria.
The role of mental imagery in perception has been an important theme
in the history of philosophy. We have seen the debate about the
phenomenal similarities and differences between mental imagery and
perception in Section 1.4. But there is an even more important
question about the relation between mental imagery and perception,
namely, about whether and in what sense perception depends on mental
imagery. This has been a dominant theme in the history of philosophy
and Immanuel Kant was probably the most explicit proponent of a fairly
strong constitutive dependence claim. Kant famously claimed that
imagination is “a necessary ingredient of perception
itself” (Critique of Pure Reason, A120, fn. A) and this
claim has become quite influential not just in philosophy (Strawson
1974, p. 54, Sellars 1978), but in the history of ideas in general.
Eugène Delacroix, for example, wrote in his diary on September
1, 1859 that “Even when we look at nature, our imagination
constructs the picture” (see also Briscoe 2018 and Van Leeuwen
2011 for examples of perception/mental imagery hybrid).
As we have seen in Section 1.3, in Kant’s time, imagination and
mental imagery were not systematically kept apart and a charitable
interpretation of Kant’s claim would be that what is a necessary
ingredient of perception itself is not voluntary imagination (as we
don’t voluntarily imagine each time we perceive), but rather
mental imagery (see Strawson 1974 and Gregory 2017 for discussion of
just how charitable such interpretation would be). So the charitable
interpretation of the Kantian Thesis is that mental imagery is a
necessary ingredient of perception itself.
This is a constitutive claim: perception doesn’t merely depend
on mental imagery causally, it depends on mental imagery
constitutively. This, like all constitutive claims, is a fairly strong
one, and a much more modest, also historically influential,
pre-Kantian, view dominant among, for example, the British
empiricists, would be that perception does not depend on mental
imagery at all, of if it does, it depends on it merely causally. While
there has never been an explicit debate between these two positions,
recent empirical research helps us to assess the respective merits of
these two ways of thinking about the relation between perception and
mental imagery.
Amodal completion in the visual sense modality is the representation
of occluded parts of perceived objects. When we see a cat behind a
picket fence, we complete those parts of the cat amodally that are
hidden behind the planks. But amodal completion is not just a visual
phenomenon: in the auditory sense modality, we amodally complete, for
example, beeped out parts of a soundtrack and in the tactile sense
modality, we amodally complete the entire shape of the wine glass we
hold although we only touch it with the tip of our fingers (see also
Young and Nanay forthcoming on olfactory amodal completion). Amodal
completion is the representation of those parts of perceived objects
that we get no sensory stimulation from (Michotte et al. 1964, Nanay
2018b).
Amodal completion is perceptual representation, as a vast amount of
neuroscientific studies show that it happens very early in the sensory
cortices, in the visual case it happens in the primary visual cortex
(Lee and Nguyen 2001, Ban et al. 2013, Pan et al. 2012, see also
Briscoe 2011). And it is not directly triggered by sensory input as
the amodally completed shape is not directly triggered by the retinal
input – the retinal input that would correspond to the amodally
completed contour is empty – no contour on the retina there. In
the case of the cat behind the picket fence, the shape of the occluded
tail is represented in the primary visual cortex, but there is no
corresponding shape on the retina that could have directly triggered
this shape representation: the only thing on the part of the retina
that would correspond to the shape of the tail is just the monochrome
white of the picket fence. Amodal completion is, in this sense,
perceptual representation that is not directly triggered by sensory
input (a view widely shared among empirical researchers, see van Lier
and Ekroll 2020 for a summary).
Is amodal completion a form of mental imagery then? Not everyone
thinks so. One could argue that amodal completion is not a perceptual
phenomenon at all, but rather a cognitive one: we see the unoccluded
parts and then form beliefs about the occluded ones (see Briscoe 2011
for one version of this claim). There are two sorts of reasons to
worry about this proposal. First, there are phenomenological worries:
it just doesn’t feel as if we merely had beliefs about occluded
parts of perceived objects (see, e.g., Noe 2004). Second, there are
empirical problems. In particular, this way of thinking about amodal
completion does not (and, arguably, could not) explain why the
occluded contours show up in early cortical regions of perceptual
processing and do so very quickly after stimulus presentation (Sekuler
and Palmer 1992, Rauschenberger and Yantis 2001).
And amodal completion is partly constitutive of perception per se. The
vast majority of our perceptual states involve amodal completion. Take
the visual sense modality: when you look around, you see objects
further away from you partly occluded by objects closer to you. So
your perceptual system amodally completes these occluded bits of the
objects further away from you. But amodal completion is also involved
in the representation of the unoccluded objects – you
don’t get direct sensory input from the back side of these
objects, nonetheless you represent them perceptually – which
means you amodally complete the back side of all three-dimensional
objects (Bakin et al. 2000, Ekroll et al. 2016). In short, amodal
completion is partly constitutive of perception per se. And if amodal
completion is indeed a form of mental imagery, then we have reason to
think that mental imagery is partly constitutive of perception, just
as the charitable interpretation of Kant suggests.
We have seen that the negative definition of mental imagery as
perceptual representation that is not directly triggered by sensory
input allows for lateral triggering of this perceptual representation.
This amounts to perceptual representation in one sense modality, say
vision, triggered by sensory input in another sense modality, say,
audition. As this is not a direct trigger (your eyes could be closed,
so nothing triggers your visual representation directly), this is a
form of mental imagery. And it is what is known as multimodal mental
imagery (Spence and Deroy 2013, Lacey and Lawson 2013, Nanay
2018a).
One everyday example of multimodal mental imagery is watching the tv
muted: your auditory representation is not triggered directly by
auditory input (as there is no auditory input), but by visual input
(the image on tv). If the person speaking on tv is someone famous whom
you have often heard before, you may even have the phenomenal
experience of ‘hearing’ this person’s voice
‘in your mind’s ear’. But even if you don’t
have this phenomenal experience, your early cortical auditory
processes work differently depending on what famous person you see on
your muted tv (Pekkola et al. 2005, Hertrich et al. 2011).
Given that most of the things around us are multisensory objects and
events, which just means we can get information about them by means of
more than one sense modality and given that most of them we do not
actually get information about by means of all the possible sense
modalities, this means that the norm is that we have multimodal mental
imagery of most objects and events around us (even if they are
unconscious, we have plenty of evidence that these are instances of
unconscious mental imagery, rather than no representation at all, see,
e.g., Vetter et al. 2014). This is another important example of why
and how perception may depend constitutively on mental imagery, in
this case, multimodal mental imagery.
Visually impaired people often report having visual mental imagery.
And we know that with the exception of cortical blindness, the visual
cortices of blind people remain more or less intact. Hence,
(non-cortically) blind people can and do have visual mental imagery
that is triggered by sensory input in another sense modality, for
example, audition or tactile perception (Arditi et al. 1988). In
short, blind people can and do have multimodal mental imagery.
The multimodal mental imagery of the visually impaired plays an
important role in various ways in which they can navigate their
environment. Cane use and brail reading rely on the subject’s
visual mental imagery triggered by tactile input as does echolocation,
a more and more widespread means by which blind people can learn to
gather information about the spatial layout of their environment (by
making clicking sounds and use the echo of these sounds as the source
of spatial information). It is now known that echolocation relies on
processing in the early visual cortices: it is visual mental imagery
that is triggered auditorily (Thaler et al. 2011). Finally, sensory
substitution devices also create visual mental imagery. These devices
consist of a video camera mounted on the head of the blind subject
that provides a continuous stream of tactile or auditory input
(transferred from the visual input the camera registers – for
example gentle needle pokes on the subject’s skin in a pattern
that corresponds, in real time, with the image the camera records).
This tactile input then leads to processing in the early visual
cortices of these blind subject (which then gives rise to an
experience that the subjects characterize as visual). In short, what
is referred to as sensory substitution assisted perception is in fact
another example of multimodal mental imagery (Renier et al. 2005, see
Nanay 2017a for a summary).
Another ‘unusual’ form of mental imagery in general and
multimodal mental imagery in particular is in synesthesia. Synesthetes
report strong visual experiences of a specific color in response to
auditory or tactile (or a wide variety of other non-color)
experiences. It has been widely debated just what kind of experience
synesthetic experience is. Is it a form of perceptual experience
(Matthen 2017, Cohen 2017)? Or is it some kind of higher level,
cognitive/linguistic experience (Simner 2007)? The problem is that
synesthesia doesn’t really seem to fit squarely in any of these
categories.
The connection between synesthesia and mental imagery has long been
acknowledged: Synesthetes across the board have more vivid mental
imagery than non-synesthetes (Barnett and Newell 2008, Price 2009,
Amsel et al. 2017) And this difference is modality specific – so
lexical gustatory synesthesia subjects have more vivid gustatory
mental imagery (but not necessarily more vivid mental imagery in the,
say, auditory sense modality (Spiller et al. 2015). Further,
synesthesia is very rare among aphantasia subjects (who report no or
hardly any mental imagery) and relatively frequent among
hyperphantasia subjects (who report very vivid mental imagery) (Zeman
et al. 2020). While there is significant variability between the
experiences synesthetes report (see Dixon et al. 2004) and some, but
not all of these experiences are reported to be very similar to mental
imagery, all instances of synesthesia will count as mental imagery
understood as perceptual representation formed in response to early
cortical processing that is not triggered directly by sensory input
(Nanay 2021a). This gives a unified account of synesthesia and can
also explain non-standard (but rigorously demonstrated) cases of
synesthetic experiences triggered not by sensory input but by
imagining sensory input (Spiller and Jansari 2008).
Perhaps the most useful application of multimodal mental imagery
involves pain management. More specifically, one of the most efficient
ways of alleviating (chronic) pain is by means of the use of mental
imagery in other sense modalities (Fardo et al. 2015, MacIver et al.
2008 and Volz et al. 2015). This presents something of a conundrum:
why does mental imagery in, say, the visual sense modality help us
with pain?
Pain perception, in textbook cases, starts with the stimulation of
pain receptors, known as nociceptors, and this input is then processed
in the primary and secondary somatosensory cortices. But sometimes
pain processing in the primary and secondary somatosensory cortices is
not directly triggered by nociceptors. This would be the equivalent of
mental imagery in the context of pain perception – something we
could call pain imagery.
The question is then about the relation between pain perception and
pain imagery: between processing in the primary and secondary
somatosensory cortices that is directly triggered by nociceptors and
processing that is not. And the claim that would be structurally
similar to the Kantian claim we considered in Section 2.1 and Section
2.2 is that just as visual mental imagery is a crucial ingredient of
vision and multimodal mental imagery is a crucial ingredient of
perception, pain mental imagery (representation formed as a result of
perceptual processing in the primary and secondary somatosensory
cortices that is not triggered directly by nociception) is a crucial
ingredient of pain perception (in fact, it may even be partly
constitutive of it, see Nanay 2017b).
In some instances of pain perception, mental imagery plays an even
more central role: for example, phantom limb pain (pain some subjects
feel in amputated limbs) consists of cortical pain processing (in
S1/S2) that is not triggered by nociceptors (Ramachandran et al. 1995)
for the simple reasons that the relevant nociceptors are missing (they
have been cut off with the rest of the limb). Further, the thermal
grill illusion (where applying warmth to the index and the ring finger
and cold to the middle finger triggers strong pain sensation in the
middle finger) is also an instance of sensory pain processing that is
not triggered by nociception (Defrin et al. 2002). In both cases, as
the nociception is missing, there is no pain perception, but only pain
imagery.
There may be reasons to generalize the importance of pain mental
imagery in pain perception. One important feature of pain perception
is that it is extremely dependent on expectations (when you expect
painful sensation, a non-painful stimulus can lead to pain sensation,
see Sawamoto et al. 2000; Keltner et al. 2006; Ploghaus et al. 1999).
If we consider at least some forms of expectations to be
(future-oriented) temporal mental imagery (see Section 5.2 for more on
expectations and mental imagery), then these results are easily
explained.
Mental imagery is a perceptual phenomenon, but it has important uses
in post-perceptual processing and in cognition more generally. Mental
imagery is involved in a wide variety of cognitive phenomena and it is
deeply intertwined with emotions, memory and even language (see also
the rich literature on the role of imagery in inner speech, e.g.,
Langland-Hassan and Vicente 2018).
The concept of mental imagery has played an important role in the
philosophy of memory for at least two reasons. First, imagery training
improves memory (in fact, findings along these lines sparked the
revival of research into mental imagery in the 1960s, see Yates 1966,
Luria 1960). Second, and more importantly, a fundamental distinction
in the philosophy of memory is drawn between episodic and semantic
memory (Tulving 1972). To put it very simply, episodic memory is
remembering an experience and semantic memory is remembering a fact.
And one way of cashing out this difference is in terms of mental
imagery: mental imagery is a necessary feature of episodic memory, but
not of semantic memory.
The connection between episodic memory and mental imagery has been
supported by a wide variety of empirical findings (see Laeng et al.
2014 for a summary). The loss of the capacity to form mental imagery
results in the loss (or loss of scope) of episodic memory (Byrne et
al. 2007, see also Berryhill et al. 2007’s overview). An even
more important set of findings is that relevant sensory cortical areas
are reactivated when we recall an experience (Wheeler et al. 2000, see
also Gelbard-Sagiv et al. 2008).
These results show that episodic memory involves the exercise of
mental imagery, but it is an open debate whether there is more to
episodic memory than mental imagery. Some have argued that episodic
memory has some extra ingredients besides mental imagery, for example,
some sort of causal chain to the past observed event (e.g., Bernecker
2010). In contrast, some other philosophers of memory claim that
episodic memory is really nothing but mental imagery (Michaelian 2016,
De Brigard 2014, Hopkins 2018). The claim is that there is no real
difference between future-directed mental time travel (that is,
imagining the future) and past-directed mental time travel (episodic
memory). Whether we go with the stronger or the weaker claim about the
importance of mental imagery in memory, understanding memory seems to
presuppose understanding mental imagery.
Try to imagine, as vividly as you can, being attacked by a rabid dog,
foaming at the mouth, snapping at your feet right there under your
desk. The resulting mental imagery is an important form of mental
imagery and also an important form of emotional state. More generally,
imagery dramatically affects emotions – it seems for instance
difficult to make sense of what goes on in the mind of a fearful or
angry person without appealing to imagery. On the other hand, the
impact of emotions on imagery is equally significant – the
imagery that occupies our minds is very often under the control of our
dominant emotion, which sometimes alters its fabric and our capacity
to control it. In other words, there is a two-way interaction between
emotions and mental imagery (see Holmes and Matthews 2010 for a
summary).
Recent findings support this picture of the close connection between
mental imagery and emotions. For example, imagining an emotionally
charged event or person at an emotionally neutral place confers
emotional charge to the place (see Benoit et al. 2019). It has been
known for a while that seeing a negatively valenced event (say, a
fight between two friends of yours) at a neutral place (say, the
corridor in front of your office) makes this formerly neutral place
inherit the negative valence of the event. So, in the future, when you
see the corridor of your office, it triggers slight (or not so slight)
negative emotions. The crucial finding is that the same process also
takes place even if you merely imagine a negatively valenced event at
a neutral place. In short, negatively valenced mental imagery confers
valence on various components of the imagined scene, which then remain
emotionally valenced.
The degree to which imagery and affective states are intertwined is
further emphasized by the mood congruency effect (Blaney 1986, Matt et
al. 1992, Gaddy and Ingram 2014). The most famous example of mood
congruency effect is mood congruent memory (Loeffler et al. 2013)
– we are more likely to recall scary memories when we are
scared, for example. But mood congruency also works in the case of
mental imagery: your general mood makes it more likely that you form
mental imagery that is congruent with your mood. And it makes it less
likely that you form mental imagery that is not congruent with your
mood. We also encode emotionally salient stimuli in a more detailed
manner, which makes it possible to form more vivid mental imagery
(Yonelinas & Ritchey 2015, Hamann 2001, LaBar & Cabeza 2006,
Phelps 2004).
Throughout the history of philosophy imagistic mental representations
have been routinely contrasted with abstract, linguistic
representations (see Yolton 1996 for a summary). So the assumption
here is that there is a sharp contrast between two different kinds of
mental representations: imagistic ones, like mental imagery and
abstract, linguistic ones. And when we talk about the importance of
mental imagery in human cognition, the reach of mental imagery is
limited as there is an extra layer of mental representations,
abstract, linguistic ones, which have nothing to do with mental
imagery. This, in fact, may be one of the reasons why the obsessive
emphasis on language at the middle of the 20th century
sidelined the philosophical study of mental imagery. Either way, the
overall picture then is that there is imagistic cognition and there is
linguistic cognition and the two have nothing to do with each other.
There have been important debates about where to draw the line between
these two domains of the mind: almost all imagistic cognition (a
broadly Humean picture) vs almost all linguistic cognition (a broadly
Wittgensteinian picture).
Empirical findings work against a common presupposition in this
debate. We now know that language processing is not completely
detachable from imagistic cognition. One important set of findings
come from the ‘dual coding theory’ (Paivio 1971, 1986),
according to which linguistic representations themselves are partly
constituted (or at least necessarily accompanied) by mental imagery
and this explains why concrete words (that are accompanied by more
determinate mental imagery) are easier to recall than abstract words
(that are accompanied by less determinate and in some cases very
indeterminate mental imagery).
While Paivio’s dual coding theory posited the importance of
mental imagery in linguistic processing to explain the behavioral
differences between the recall of concrete and abstract words, we also
know a lot about the ways in which linguistic labels change (and speed
up) perceptual processes as well as a fair amount about the time scale
of this influence. The crucial piece of finding both from EEG and from
eye tracking studies is that linguistic labels influence shape
recognition in less than 100 milliseconds (Boutonnet and Lupyan 2015,
de Groot et al. 2016, Noorman et al. 2018). This means that linguistic
and imagistic representations interact at an extremely early stage of
perceptual processing – by any account in early cortical
processing (see Thorpe et al. 1996 and Lamme and Roelfsema 2000 for
the temporal unfolding of visual processing in unimodal cases). All
this indicates that imagistic and linguistic cognition are far from
being independent from one another – they are deeply intertwined
even at the earliest levels of perceptual processing.
Perception sometimes justifies our beliefs. If you see that it is
raining outside, this may justify your belief that it is raining
outside. And much of what we know is based on perception. But how
about mental imagery? Can mental imagery justify our beliefs? There
are two related, but independent questions here. The first one is
about whether mental imagery could ever be a source of knowledge or
even new information. And the second one is about reliability: if
perception is colored by mental imagery, should this give us a more
complex picture of perceptual justification?
The first of these questions is about whether mental imagery itself
(that is not in conjunction with perception) can lead to knowledge or
even to new information. Jean-Paul Sartre, for example, famously
claimed that “nothing can be learned from an image that is not
already known.” (Sartre 1948, 12) Since on his view “it is
impossible to find in the image anything more than what was put into
it,” we can conclude that “the image teaches
nothing.” (Sartre 1948, 146–7). Sartre was not always
making a clear distinction between imagination and mental imagery, so
it is not clear whether it is imagination or mental imagery that
teaches nothing. Contemporary philosophers tend to raise this issue
about imagination (Langland-Hassan 2016, 2020, see also Kind and Kung
2016), but the question from our point of view is whether it is true
of mental imagery. And here some examples seem to suggest that even if
imagination teaches nothing, mental imagery can and does. When you
want to wrap a chocolate box in wrapping paper, you look at it and
form (often involuntarily, not by counting to three and voluntarily
imagining) visual imagery of the wrapping paper needed and you may
find your estimation of the size of the paper unexpected or
surprising. Maybe it’s larger than you had assumed. Or smaller.
Your estimation of the size of the paper needed can be very different
before and after forming the mental imagery of the paper covering the
chocolate box (and this can, of course, be still different from the
size of the paper actually needed, see Gauker forthcoming for more
examples of this kind). If we can generalize from this example (see
Levin 2006 for discussion), then mental imagery can lead to new
information even if imagination cannot.
The second question is about the reliability of perceptual
justification. If (see Section 2 above), perception per se is a hybrid
between sensory stimulation-driven perception and mental imagery, what
does this mean for the concept of perceptual justification? Even if
sensory stimulation-driven perception can justify beliefs, if mental
imagery does not, then the hybrid state of the two, that is,
perception per se, may not be as epistemically innocent as it has been
thought (MacPherson 2012). Mental imagery is defined precisely by the
lack of direct causal link with the sensory input. In any kind of
broadly externalist account of justification, this raises worries
about the epistemic work that mental imagery can do (as the
reliability of mental imagery is supposed to depend on the directness
of the causal link between mental imagery and what the mental imagery
is about). This does not mean that mental imagery does no epistemic
work as the lack of a direct causal link would be compatible with the
mental imagery nonetheless carrying information about the external
world reliably – and, arguably, this is exactly what happens in
the case of amodal completion (Helton and Nanay 2019). But if we take
the importance of mental imagery in perception seriously, we need to
examine the reliability of these non-direct causal links of mental
imagery.
Mental imagery plays an important role in action. It is involved not
only in action execution, but also in desires. Further, it can explain
many of the biases in our behavior as well.
We need to keep the concept of mental imagery apart from motor
imagery. Motor imagery plays a crucial role in action planning and
action execution, but motor imagery is not mental imagery. But how
exactly this distinction is to be drawn is subject to debate.
Motor imagery has been traditionally understood as the feeling of
imagining doing something. It is sometimes taken to be necessarily
conscious, not just by philosophers (Currie & Ravenscroft 1997),
sometimes even by psychologists (Jeannerod 1997; see also Brozzo 2017:
esp. 243–244 for an overview). And as imagining tends to be a
voluntary act, motor imagery is also often taken to be voluntary. So
the paradigmatic example here is closing your eyes and imagining
reaching for an apple.
There are debates, however, about what this traditional,
phenomenological way of zeroing in on motor imagery as the feeling of
imagining doing something entails. As it is acknowledged by all
involved in this debate, not all imaginative episodes of doing
something would count as motor imagery: you somehow need to imagine
doing something from a first person, and not a third person
perspective. Marc Jeannerod, one of the most important psychologists
working on both motor imagery and mental imagery made a distinction
(following the practice in sport psychology) between internal (first
person) and external (third person) imagery, and only the former would
count as motor imagery (the latter would be sensory imagery of me
doing something, see Jeannerod 1994, p. 189).
Given that motor imagery, just like mental imagery, can be conscious
or unconscious (see, for example, Osuagwu & Vuckovic 2014) and it
can also be voluntary or involuntary, there has been a tendency to
move away from phenomenological characterization. A more inclusive way
of understanding motor imagery is supported by the methodological
advice by Jeannerod, who writes: “Motor imagery would be related
to motor physiology in the same way visual imagery is related to
visual physiology” (Jeannerod 1994, p. 189). And here a better
understanding of mental imagery can help us with defining motor
imagery.
Mental imagery is the representation that results from perceptual
processing that is not triggered directly by sensory input. So we get
mental imagery when the first stop of perceptual processing happens
without direct sensory input. Motor imagery is to the output what
mental imagery is to the input. So we get motor imagery when the last
stop in action processing happens without directly triggering motor
output. In other words, motor imagery is the representation that
results from processing in the motor system (in the motor and premotor
cortices) that does not trigger motor output directly.
Another open question about the relation between motor imagery and
mental imagery is about whether the former necessarily involves the
latter. When we think of conscious examples of motor imagery, it seems
that imagining touching the camera of my laptop involves some form of
sensory mental imagery (maybe visual imagery of my finger touching the
camera, or, maybe, more minimally, proprioceptive mental imagery of my
finger being at a different location from where it is now). And
empirical studies also show that motor imagery necessarily entails
representing the sensory consequences of the imagined action (Kilteni
et al. 2018).
Not only motor imagery, but mental imagery also plays an important
role in action execution (see Van Leeuwen 2011). Some of our actions
(in fact, most of them) are perceptually guided actions: our
perceptual states trigger and guide our action. When we pick up a
coffee cup to drink from it, this is a perceptually guided action: our
perceptual state represents the spatial location of the cup, which
then guides your reaching movement (and does so in real time, if the
perceptual state changes, your reaching movement changes immediately
without you noticing any of these changes, see e.g., Paulignan et al.
1991).
If, after looking at the coffee cup, you close your eyes and pick up
the cup with your eyes closed, your action is not perceptually guided
as you do not perceive the coffee cup anymore. It is, in this case,
guided by your visual mental imagery. You looked at the cup, you close
your eyes, form mental imagery of the cup’s whereabouts (as well
as its other properties that are necessary for performing this action,
like its weight and size) and your reaching action is guided by this
‘pragmatic mental imagery’ (Nanay 2013).
In the first case, the pragmatic mental imagery was formed on the
basis of your perceptual state: you looked at the cup and then you
closed your eyes, but it is this visual information that the mental
imagery is based on. But pragmatic mental imagery is more than just
some kind of echo of sensory input. Suppose that you are in your
bedroom and it is pitch dark. You want to switch on the light, but you
can’t see the switch. You are nonetheless in a position to
switch it on given your memory of the room’s layout and the
location of the light switch in it. In this case, your pragmatic
mental imagery is formed on the basis of your memory. But pragmatic
mental imagery can be triggered by completely non-perceptual means as
well, for example, if I blindfold you and then explain to you in great
details where exactly the coffee cup is in front of you, how far
exactly to the left and how far exactly ahead, and so on. Your
pragmatic mental imagery can still guide your action, but it does so
without any (visual) input. In our everyday life many of our actions,
especially our routine actions, like flossing, are in fact guided by
pragmatic mental imagery.
Desires are among the prime examples of propositional attitudes. So
one would be tempted to think that desires have nothing to do with
mental imagery: they are propositional and not imagistic
representations. Nonetheless, one of the leading psychological
theories of desire, the elaborated intrusion theory, takes mental
imagery to be constitutive of desires (Kavanagh et al. 2005, May et
al. 2014).
According to the elaborated intrusion theory, forming a desire is a
two-step process. First, a mental state intrudes our mind, which
represents the desirable state of affairs. This often happens
unconsciously, and it is often not clear what triggers this intruding
mental state. The second step is that this representation is
elaborated with the help of mental imagery. Without this second,
elaborating step, which necessarily involves mental imagery, we would
not have a desire.
But one does not need to endorse the elaborated intrusion theory of
desire to see the close link between desires and mental imagery.
Strong occurrent desire is invariably accompanied by vivid mental
imagery (Kavanagh et al. 2009). Further, stronger desires (for
example, to smoke) are accompanied by more vivid mental imagery (of
smoking-related scenes) (Tiffany and Drobes 1990, see also Tiffany and
Hakenewerth 1991). Similarly, desire for consuming alcohol can be
induced by imagining entering one’s favorite bar, ordering,
holding and tasting a cold, refreshing glass of one’s favorite
beer. In fact, this guided imaginative episode triggers a stronger
desire than actually seeing a glass of beer (Litt and Cooney 1999).
More generally, the vividness of mental imagery is correlated with the
strength of one’s desire for this thing across a range of
desirable substances and activities (May et al. 2008, Harvey et al.
2005, Statham et al. 2011).
Further, mental imagery of neutral scenes, for example, a rose garden,
reduces desire for a cigarette in people who are trying to give up
smoking (May et al, 2010). Olfactory mental imagery of unrelated odors
has the same effect (Versland and Rosenberg 2007). Desire for eating
chocolate can also be reduced by mental imagery of neutral scenes
(Kemps and Tiggermann 2007, Harvey et al. 2005) and also by engaging
involuntary mental imagery (by, for example, modelling clay out of
sight (Kemps et al. 2004)). Some of these results show that mental
imagery influences desires. Others show that mental imagery is a
downstream consequence of desires. In short, if we manipulate mental
imagery, the desire changes and if we manipulate desires, the mental
imagery changes.
While the elaborated intrusion theory of desire is explicit about the
role of mental imagery in desires, other influential empirically
plausible accounts of desire (like the reward-based learning account
(Schroeder 2004) or the attentional account (Scanlon 1998)) are also
consistent with the importance of mental imagery in desires.
Some of our behavior is biased: it goes against our reported beliefs.
And often we are not fully aware of these biases. Some of these biases
are about racial or gender groups. A big question not just in
philosophy and psychology, but in the daily running of our society is
where these biases come from and what we can do about them. There is
some evidence that at least some of these biases have a lot to do with
mental imagery.
First of all, a number of empirical studies show that the vividness of
mental imagery biases our behavior. If you are deciding between two
positive scenarios, the one that brings up the more vivid mental
imagery tends to win out. And if you are deciding between two negative
scenarios, the one that brings up the less vivid mental imagery tends
to win out (Austin and Vancouver 1996, Trope and Liberman 2003, see
also the rich literature on construal level theory and also on the
effects of the vividness of mental imagery on future discounting, see
Parthasarathi et al. 2017, Mok et al. 2020). Here is an example: If a
smoker is deciding between smoking a cigarette and not smoking one,
the smoking option brings up very vivid and detailed (and emotionally
charged) mental imagery. Meanwhile, the non-smoking option
doesn’t bring up any mental imagery at all, or if it does it is
not at all detailed and not at all vivid (of just sitting there, not
smoking). This is why smoking tends to win out, and also why it is
often difficult to stop procrastinating activities like playing video
games or checking our social media feed: continuing what we have been
doing is represented much more vividly than stopping.
Mental imagery can also explain some famous examples of racial bias
(Nanay 2021b, see also Sullivan-Bissett 2019, who describes implicit
racial bias as unconscious imagination, not imagery). Subjects are
more likely to misperceive a phone as a gun if a black person holds it
than if a white person does so (Payne 2001). The perceptual state that
represents a black person holding a phone gives rise to the mental
imagery that represents a black person holding a gun. This mental
imagery does not have to be conscious – and when white people
rate black people as more dangerous, it is possible that the mental
imagery that grounds these judgments is not conscious. The same is
true of the biased behavior of standing further away from some people
than others in the elevator. The importance of mental imagery in
implicit bias is also supported by the fact that one of the most
efficient ways of counteracting implicit bias is based on modifying
the subject’s mental imagery and the efficiency of these
procedures correlates with the vividness of the subjects’ mental
imagery (see Lai et al 2013, Blair et al. 2001, Blair 2002, see also
Peck et al. 2013 for further relevant findings).
The importance of mental imagery can be traced beyond the confines of
philosophy of mind. More specifically, mental imagery plays an
important role in our engagement with and appreciation of artworks,
which makes mental imagery a crucial concept in aesthetics (see also
Lopes 2003). While mental imagery may also play a crucial role in
artistic creation, as many artists and composers like to emphasize,
the focus here will be on the importance of mental imagery in engaging
with artworks.
A somewhat obvious way in which mental imagery plays a role in our
engagement with visual arts follows from the simple fact that most
pictorial art does not normally encompass the entire visual field. So
those parts of the depicted scene that fall outside the frame, could
be, and very often are, represented by means of mental imagery. One
famous example would be Edgar Degas, who likes to place the
protagonists of his paintings in a way that only parts of them are
inside the frame. The rest we need to complete by means of mental
imagery. In some extreme cases (e.g., Dancers climbing the stairs,
1886–1890, Musee D’Orsay), we only see someone’s arm
or the top of their head and we need to complete those parts of her
body that are outside the frame by means of mental imagery. Another
example is Buster Keaton, who also uses the viewer’s mental
imagery of the off-screen space in his films, but normally for comical
effects. One example is the first shot of his short film Cops
(1922), where we see the protagonist in close up behind bars and
looking depressed. The second shot reveals that he is behind an iron
gate talking to a girl who does not love him back (see Burch 1973, pp.
17–31 for more examples of this kind).
But mental imagery is also often used within the picture frame. In the
1950 American film Harvey, the character played by Jimmy
Stewart is an alcoholic and he hallucinates a six foot three and a
half inch tall rabbit (or pooka). We don’t see anyone, but the
Jimmy Stewart character clearly does. And, crucially, all the scenes
with the imaginary rabbit are framed as if there really were a rabbit
in them. So when we see the Jimmy Stewart character in an armchair
having a conversation with Harvey, this shot is framed in a way as if
there really were a six foot tall creature next to him. This framing
is aesthetically relevant and its choice clearly relies on the
viewer’s mental imagery. In this example, we have a fairly good
idea what we’re supposed to form a mental imagery of – the
Jimmy Stewart character gives a fairly accurate description of
Harvey’s alleged appearance. But there are examples where we are
in a much less fortunate epistemic situation. One classic example is
Bunuel’s Belle de Jour, where the Chinese businessman
shows a little box to the Cathrine Denevue character, who is clearly
fascinated by what is inside. She sees it, he sees it, but we, the
viewers don’t. There is a humming voice coming from the box, but
we never see what is inside. We have a very indeterminate
(crossmodally triggered) visual mental imagery of what could possibly
be in the box – whatever is in the box is left intentionally
indeterminate. The French film director, Robert Bresson often uses
mental imagery this way, so much so that he even takes this use of
mental imagery to be the mark of a ‘good’ director (or, as
he would put it, of a cinematographer, not merely of a director):
“Don’t show all sides of the object. A margin of
indefiniteness” (Bresson 1975/1977, p. 52).
Multimodal mental imagery became a hallmark of 1960s European
modernist art films. In some of his films, Jean-Luc Godard used sound
primarily as a prompt for triggering visual mental imagery (see
Levinson 2014’s sensitive analysis of the use of sound in
Masculin/Feminin (1966) from this point of view). And both
Bresson and Michelangelo Antonioni used sound this way for much of
their career, and they were also very explicit about this way of using
sound in their theoretical writings and interviews. As Bresson said,
“The eye solicited alone makes the ear impatient, the ear
solicited alone makes the eye impatient. Use these impatiences”
(Bresson 1975/1977, p. 28) and “A locomotive’s whistle
imprints on us a whole railroad station” (Bresson 1975/1977, p.
39). And here is Antonioni giving a textbook definition of multimodal
mental imagery: “When we hear something, we form images in our
head automatically in order to visualize what we hear”
(Antonioni 1982, p. 6). Both Bresson and Antonioni use multimodal
mental imagery that is indeterminate and that is also very much
emotionally laden. As a counterbalance to this high-brow overkill, it
needs to be emphasized that multimodal mental imagery can also be used
in a very different manner and still be aesthetically relevant. As
Ridley Scott repeatedly emphasizes in his interviews about his
Alien trilogy, the Alien is shown relatively rarely because
having mental imagery of it is much scarier than seeing it. This
general credo has been used in suspense for a long time (from
Hitchcock films to Jaws). Finally, the recurring joke on
Friends about the ugly naked guy who lives across the street
(but whom we never see) clearly utilizes multimodal mental
imagery.
Mental imagery also plays a crucial role in our appreciation of music,
primarily as a result of the importance of musical expectations, which
are a form of auditory mental imagery. Expectations play a crucial
role in our engagement with music (and art in general). When we are
listening to a song, even when we hear it for the first time, we have
some expectations of how it will continue. And when it is a tune we
are familiar with, this expectation can be quite strong (and easy to
study experimentally). When we hear Ta-Ta-Ta at the beginning of the
first movement of Beethoven’s Fifth Symphony in C
minor, Op. 67 (1808), we will strongly anticipate the closing Taaam of
the Ta-Ta-Ta-Taaaam. Much of our expectations are fairly
indeterminate: when we are listening to a musical piece we have never
heard before, we will still have some expectations of how a tune will
continue, but we don’t know what exactly will happen. We can
rule out that the violin glissando will continue with the sounds of a
beeping alarm clock (unless it’s a really avant-garde
piece…), but we can’t predict with great certainty how
exactly it will continue. Our expectations are malleable and dynamic:
they change as we listen to the piece.
Expectations are mental states that are about how the musical piece
will unfold. So they are future-directed mental states. But this
leaves open just what kind of mental states they are – how they
are structured, how they represent this upcoming future event and so
on (see Judge and Nanay 2021 for an overview of the options and the
history of this question). At least some forms of expectations in fact
count as mental imagery. And musical expectations (of the kind
involved in examples like the Ta-Ta-Ta-Taaaam) count as auditory
temporal mental imagery: they are auditory representations that result
from perceptual processes that are not directly triggered by the
auditory input. The listener forms mental imagery of the fourth note
(‘Taaam’) on the basis of the experience of the first
three (‘Ta-Ta-Ta’) (there is a lot of empirical evidence
that this is in fact what happens – see Yokosawa et al. 2013,
Kraemer et al. 2005, Zatorre and Halpern 2005, Herholz et al. 2012,
Leaver et al. 2009). This mental imagery may or may not be conscious.
But if the actual ‘Taaaam’ diverges from the way our
mental imagery represents it (if it is delayed, or altered in pitch or
timbre for example), we notice this divergence and experience as
salient as a result of the mismatch between the experience and
the mental imagery that preceded it.
The Ta-Ta-Ta-Taaam example is a bit simplified, so here is a real-life
and very evocative case study, an installation by the British artist,
Katie Peterson. The installation is an empty room with a grand piano
in it, which plays automatically. It plays a truncated version of
Beethoven’s Moonlight Sonata. The title of the installation is
‘Earth-Moon-Earth (Moonlight Sonata Reflected From The
Surface of The Moon’ (2007). Earth-Moon-Earth is a form of
transmission (between two locations on Earth), where Morse codes are
beamed up the moon and they are reflected back to earth. While this is
an efficient way of communicating between two far-away (Earth-based)
locations, some information is inevitably lost (mainly because some of
the light does not get reflected back but it is absorbed in the
Moon’s craters). In ‘Earth-Moon-Earth (Moonlight
Sonata Reflected From The Surface of The Moon’ (2007) the
piano plays the notes that did get through the Earth-Moon-Earth
transmission system, which is most of the notes, but some notes are
skipped. Listening to the music the piano plays in this installation,
if you know the piece, your auditory mental imagery is constantly
active, filling in the gaps where the notes are skipped.
Reading a novel tends to lead to mental imagery in a variety of sense
modalities. This triggering of mental imagery is typically
involuntary: you do not need to count to three and voluntarily conjure
up the mental imagery of the protagonist’s face, instead, you
have involuntary mental imagery episodes somewhat reminiscent of
flashbacks. While this kind of mental imagery is often visual (when
you have imagery of the protagonist’s face or the layout of the
room where they are), it can also be auditory (of the
protagonist’s tone of voice, for example), olfactory or even
gustatory (see Starr 2013 for a wide-ranging analysis with an emphasis
on multimodal mental imagery and Stokes 2019 for the role such mental
imagery plays in reading fictional works). Further, the more vivid the
reader’s mental imagery is, the more likely it is that
information from the novel is imported into the reader’s beliefs
about the real world (Green and Brock 2000).
At the end of the first book of In Search of Lost Time,
Marcel Proust gives a brief but very sophisticated account of how
words trigger mental imagery, which is also indicative of the way
Proust himself manipulates the reader’s mental imagery (Proust
1913/1928). He makes a distinction between names and words and argues
that names trigger a more specific or more determinate mental imagery
than words. In both cases, the name or word leads to mental imagery,
but then, in turn, mental imagery influences or colors the name or
word when we encounter it next time. So throughout the unfolding of
the novel, names/words and the mental imagery they occasion evolve in
parallel, influencing each other.
Other writers also actively manipulate the reader’s mental
imagery. George Orwell points out the importance of mental imagery in
understanding metaphors when he says in Poetics and the English
Language that “The sole aim of metaphor is to call up a
visual image”. We might add to this that this imagery is often
not visual, it can be auditory, olfactory, etc. And here is a final
example from the third part of Roberto Bolano’s novel
2666 (‘The Part about Fate’). This part of the
book introduces a New York-based journalist, Oscar Fate. After about
80 pages of description of Fate’s life in New York City, it is
revealed that he is in fact African-American. This comes after very
explicit nudges to form mental imagery of him as Caucasian,
confronting the readers with their implicit racial bias (see also
Section 4.4 above).
While discussions of mental imagery crop up in most fields of
aesthetics and art history (including by some of the most influential
art historians, like George Kubler, see Kubler 1987), the role of
mental imagery is probably the most salient if we turn to conceptual
art. Many conceptual artworks actively try to engage our mental
imagery in an unexpected manner. Here are two illustrative (and
famous) examples, but the point can be generalized.
Marcel Duchamp’s L.H.O.O.Q. Rasée (1965) is a
picture that is perceptually indistinguishable from a faithful
reproduction of Leonardo’s Mona Lisa. But Duchamp
earlier made another picture (L.H.O.O.Q.) where he drew a
moustache and beard on the picture of Mona Lisa.
Duchamp’s L.H.O.O.Q. Rasée (as
‘rasée’ means ‘shaven’) is a reference
to this earlier picture and we, presumably, see it differently from
the way we see Leonardo’s original: the missing moustache and
beard is part of our experience, whereas it is not when we look at
Leonardo’s original. And it is difficult to see how we can
describe our experience of L.H.O.O.Q. Rasée without
some reference to the mental imagery of the missing beard and
moustache. What is interesting in this example is that the mental
imagery of the beard and moustache is influenced in a top-down manner
not just by our prior knowledge (about how the world is) but also by
our prior art historical knowledge.
The second example is Robert Rauschenberg’s Erased de
Kooning drawing (1953), which is just what it says it is: all we
see is an empty paper (with hardly visible traces of the erased
drawing on it). Again, it is difficult to look at this artwork without
trying to discern what drawing might have been there before
Rauschenberg erased it. And this involves trying to conjure up mental
imagery of the original drawing. Again, these were two classic
examples. But there are more. All of Ai Wei Wei’s works, for
example, rely heavily on our mental imagery.
Not all works of conceptual art evokes mental imagery this way. One
exception would be Robert Barry’s All the things I
know, which is nothing but the following sentence written on the
gallery wall with simple block letters: “All the things I know
but of which I am not at the moment thinking – 1:36 PM; June 15,
1969”. It would be difficult to argue that this work has much
interest in enticing the viewer’s mental imagery. But it is not
easy to find an example of a conceptual artwork where mental imagery
plays no role. So in the vast majority of conceptual artworks, mental
imagery is a necessary feature of appreciating the artwork.