The range of issues, puzzles and questions that fall within
metaethics’ purview are consistently abstract. They reflect the
fact that metaethics involves an attempt to step back from particular
substantive debates within morality to ask about the views,
assumptions, and commitments that are shared by those who engage in
the debate. By and large, the metaethical issues that emerge as a
result of this process of stepping back can be addressed without
taking a particular stand on substantive moral issues that started the
process. In fact, metaethics has seemed to many to offer a crucial
neutral background against which competing moral views need to be seen
if they are to be assessed properly. Some metaethicists early in the
twentieth century went so far as to hold that their own work made no
substantive moral assumptions at all and had no practical
 implications.[2]
 Whether any view that is recognizably still a
view about the nature and status of ethics could manage this is
dubious. But there is no doubt that, whatever
metaethics's substantive assumptions and practical implications
might be, it involves reflecting on the presuppositions and commitments
of those engaging in moral thought, talk, and practice and so
abstracting away from particular moral
judgments.
Such reflection quickly reveals the extent to which various aspects of
morality might reasonably be seen as both intellectually and
practically problematic. On the intellectual side, many have worried
that there is no good way to vindicate the assumptions and commitments
of morality. A careful and clear-eyed study of morality will reveal,
some argue, that morality is a myth; others argue that the various
principles that are presented as authoritative standards for all are
actually merely expressions of emotion or projections of the
idiosyncratic attitudes of those advocating the principles; still
others argue that in some other way morality is not what it pretends
to be and not what it needs to be if it is to be legitimate. On the
practical side, many have pressed the difficulty of getting people to
judge themselves and others impartially; others have worried that,
while we have an interest in convincing others to conform to morality,
we ourselves rarely have any reason, really, to conform; still others
have thought that the sort of freedom morality assumes is not
available to humans as they actually are. 
Of course these worries and arguments regularly find counterparts on
the other side, with people maintaining that, properly understood,
morality is no myth, that its pretensions can be vindicated, that we
have all the reason we need to embrace morality and meet its demands,
and that people, at least some people under some circumstances, have
whatever sort of freedom it is that morality might require. 
None of the arguments, on either side, can go quickly or easily.  They
all depend, first, on identifying and defending the presuppositions
and commitments one takes to be at issue and then, second, on showing
that they either cannot, or can, be defended.  What is at stake is, at
least, an understanding of what is an important part of most
peoples’ lives, but there is potentially a lot more at stake to
the extent the presuppositions and commitments people take for granted
turn out to be suspect. For then, not only will our
understanding of that part of our lives be compromised, our
sense that it is important may well disappear as well.  
Despite the abstract and deeply controversial nature of metaethics,
its central concerns arise naturally — perhaps even inevitably
— as one reflects critically on one's own moral convictions. So
it is no surprise that, in Plato's Republic,
Polemarchus’ claim that being a just person enhances one's life
developed quickly into a decidedly metaethical discussion of the
origin and nature of justice. Early in Book I, for instance,
Thrasymachus defends the idea that justice is whatever is in the
interest of the stronger, arguing that morality is a human creation
designed by the rich and powerful to control and exploit others. A
myth for the weak-minded, arranged for the advantage of a few, justice
imposes burdens most have reason to set aside. So Thrasymachus argues.
Glaucon follows up, in Book II, with an alternative, and less cynical,
proposal. While he too sees morality as a human creation, he sees it
as a salutary solution to the serious problems we would otherwise
face. He argues that people naturally find themselves unable
successfully to ensure that their own wills will rule while,
simultaneously, being subject regularly to the will of others.  The
principles of justice are, he thinks, reasonably introduced and
enforced by all as a good way to ensure peace and stability in
society. Socrates, in contrast, rejects the idea that justice is a
human invention and argues instead that justice provides independent
and eternal standards against which human practices, conventions, and
institutions can be judged. These different views will likely have
implications for what value justice might have. At the same time,
though, accepting one or the other view of the nature of justice is
compatible with a range of substantive views about what, specifically,
justice consists in and about its value.  
According to many, Socrates's position fits well with
morality's pretensions. It fits well also with the thought
that whatever standards humans might put in place are, one and all,
liable to moral criticism. Of course, Socrates's position
brings along a suite of puzzles concerning the nature of these
transcendent standards. What is their origin and from where do
they derive their authority?  
Many have thought the right answers to these questions are found in an
appeal to God. On their view, moral principles are the expression of
God's will — they are His commands to us — and they get
their authority from their source. In important ways, though, this
merely shifts the puzzles back a step.  Whatever problems one might
have making sense of eternal transcendent standards re-emerge when
trying to make sense of an eternal transcendent being who might issue
commands. And, as Plato emphasized in Euthyphro, one is also
left with the difficulty of explaining why God's commands are
authoritative.  
One plausible answer might be that God's perfect knowledge of right
and wrong, or God's own moral perfection, explains why his commands
serve legitimately as standards for us. But that answer assumes that
standards of morality exist independently of God's will (either as
objects of his knowledge or as standards in light of which He counts
as morally perfect), in which case speaking of morality as consisting
of God's commands will not explain the origin or nature of these
independently existing standards. 
Alternatively, one might eschew an appeal to God's knowledge or
goodness and claim that there is no independent standard for God's
will and nature. But that leaves in place the puzzle concerning the
authority of moral principles. If we reject the idea that God's
commands reflect His knowledge of right and wrong, and reject as well
the idea that God is all good, it seems reasonable to wonder why his
commands have any special
 authority.[3] 
One might here point to God's power to punish or to His role in our
creation. But neither consideration seems to establish legitimate
authority on its own. In general, at least, the mere fact that one has
the power to enforce one's commands does not establish those commands
as legitimate, nor does it ensure that one has a right to punish those
who fail to conform to one's commands. Similarly, in general, the mere
fact that one created something does not establish that one properly
has absolute control over what one has created.  Of course, room
remains to argue that there is something special about God's power, or
about His role as creator, that makes his commands distinctively
legitimate. What is needed is an account of what is special. And, in
this context, it needs to be an account that explains how God's
commands, as opposed to the commands that others might issue, have an
authority. Moreover, if appealing to God is to solve the metaethical
puzzle posed by Euthyphro, the account offered must not itself rely
on, or presuppose, the sort of transcendent standards we have been
attempting to explain.
One appealing feature of Glaucon's account of morality as a mutually
advantageous convention is that it renders morality's origin and
nature non-mysterious. Moral facts, on this sort of view, emerge as no
more puzzling than facts about what is legal or polite. In each case,
the standing of some behavior (as moral, or legal, or polite) depends
on its conforming to, or conflicting with, various standards that have
been put in place. Glaucon's account also makes clear why it is that
people might care deeply about morality's demands (even as they are,
in their own cases, tempted to violate them when they believe they can
with impunity), since the relevant conventions are mutually
advantageous. 
Yet conventionalist views such as Glaucon's have real difficulties
fitting with the common idea that the fundamental principles of
morality are universal. Conventions, after all, are contingent
creations that differ from place to place and come in to, and go out
of, existence. Moreover, conventions seem liable to arbitrariness in
ways that threaten to undermine their claim to authority unless they
are recognized (at least implicitly) as satisfying some
convention-independent standard. That some convention demands
something seems to provide reason to conform to the demand only when
the convention is, itself, just or reasonable, or in some other way
good. And this suggests that, to whatever extent specific moral rules
and principles are products of convention, their claim to authority
relies on some standards that are not products of convention. 
Needless to say, these considerations are not decisive, and those who
see morality as a kind of convention have a variety of plausible ways
to address the worries mentioned above. As a result, the view remains
attractive. Still, many — even many who think an appeal to
convention is essential to making sense of morality — think that
the proper account of morality cannot be a matter of conventions
“all the way 
down.”[4]
  But that does not mean that they think that the standards that serve
to justify the demands of (some) conventions are mysterious. Some, for
instance, argue that what makes a convention good, and so serves to
justify its demands, is its contribution to overall happiness, while
others see the measure of conventions in their ability to advance the
interests of each considered singly, and still others maintain that
the value of conventions is found in their capacity to secure the
approval of those who consider them impartially. On all such accounts,
value is convention-independent, but it is nonetheless metaphysically
non-mysterious. Each of these accounts portrays value as, at bottom, a
familiar, completely natural, feature of the world.  Moreover, while
(on these accounts) particular claims concerning value will prove hard
to establish and controversial, there is no special puzzle about what
we would be trying to discover or what would count as relevant
evidence. 
All of these views, conventionalist and not, identify various moral
properties with non-problematic natural features of the world. As a
result, they are commonly characterized as versions of naturalism and
are contrasted with non-naturalist views that see morality as
presupposing, or being committed to, properties over and above those
that would be countenanced by natural science. Non-naturalism comes
with two distinctive burdens: (i) accounting for how the realm of
moral properties fits in with familiar natural properties and (ii)
explaining how it is that we are able to learn anything about these
moral properties. Naturalism, in contrast, avoids these metaphysical
and epistemological burdens.
Despite its advantages, naturalism has difficulty capturing well what
people take to be the true nature of morality. In saying something is
good or right or virtuous we seem to be saying something more than, or
at least different from, what we would be saying in describing it as
having certain natural features.  Correspondingly, no amount of
empirical investigation seems by itself, without some moral
assumption(s) in play, sufficient to settle a moral question. 
David Hume seemed to have these points in mind when he observed that
an ‘ought’ cannot be derived from an
 ‘is.’[5]
 There is substantial debate about just what Hume meant, and similarly
substantial debate as well about whether he was right. But at least
part of Hume's concern seems to have been that no set of claims about
plain matters of fact (‘is’ claims) entail any evaluative
claims (‘ought’ claims). That is, he seems to have
thought, that one can infer the latter from the former only if, in
addition to premises concerning plain matters of fact, one has on hand
as well at least one evaluative premise. If, for instance, one infers
from the fact that someone is feeling pain that something bad is
happening, one is at least presupposing that pain is bad. And that
presupposition, in turn, is not entailed by any claims concerned
solely with plain matters of fact. If Hume is right, every valid
argument for an evaluative conclusion either includes or presupposes
some evaluative premise. And, as a result, there is no value neutral
argument for an evaluative conclusion.
Coming at the same issues from a different direction, G. E. Moore
argued (at the beginning of the twentieth century) that no naturalist
account of morality could do justice to what we are actually thinking
and claiming when we make moral
 judgments.[6] 
 Moore had in mind a variety
of naturalist views that, at the time, had come to be seen as, on
balance, the most attractive accounts of the nature of morality. 
While these views differed among themselves as to what goodness,
rightness, virtue and justice might consist in, they shared a
commitment to seeing morality as a wholly natural phenomenon and they
all saw moral judgment as a matter of thinking that actions,
institutions, or characters had some particular natural property or
other. According to these views, moral properties were to be
identified with some natural property or other (e.g. with what is
pleasant, or what satisfies someone's desire, or what conforms to
social rules that are in force).
Considering specifically views that identified goodness either with
pleasure or with being the object of a desire one desires to have,
Moore maintained that such views confused the property goodness with
some other property that good things might happen to have. In support
of his claim, Moore offered a simple test. Take whichever account you
will — say, one according to which to be good is to be pleasant
— and then consider whether a person who understands the terms
involved might nonetheless intelligibly ask whether something she
acknowledges to be pleasant is good. It seems she could. And it seems
too that in asking the question she would not then be revealing any
kind of conceptual confusion or incompetence. The question is, as
Moore put it, a genuinely open one. But then we must grant that to
think something is pleasant is not identical to thinking it
good. Otherwise, wondering whether something that is, admittedly,
pleasant, is good would be as senseless as wondering whether a given
pleasant thing was pleasant. If, though, to think something good is
different than thinking it pleasant, such thoughts (Moore assumed)
must involve attributing distinct properties. 
Moore was quick to point out that granting that the question is open,
in the sense his argument supposes, is compatible with discovering
that, as a matter of fact, everything that is pleasant is also
good. Moore's point is that the question is not settled — not
closed — on conceptual grounds (whereas it would be if thinking
something good were just a matter of thinking it pleasant).  Because
analogous questions remain open for all the candidate naturalist
proposals, Moore argued that no such proposal could legitimately be
defended as a conceptual truth and that they all failed to capture
accurately what we are thinking in thinking of something that it is
good.
Moore's argument had a tremendous impact, striking most people at the
time as decisive. As a result, non-naturalism got a new lease on life
with a number of people working in metaethics trying to articulate,
systematize, and defend accounts of morality that resisted the
temptation to identify moral properties with natural
 properties.[7] 
 Much of the
attention was given, by those who have come to be called intuitionists,
to defending the idea that moral knowledge, while not based on our
senses and on the empirical data we might collect, was nonetheless on
as secure a footing as, say, our knowledge of mathematics or of the
fundamental concepts (of, say, causation and necessity) that play
crucial roles in science. Much of the work in metaethics pursued
a strategy of finding companions in guilt, of showing that the status
of moral properties as non-natural and the attendant implications for
what we must suppose about the nature of moral evidence, if we are to
take ourselves as having any, did not leave morality any worse off than
other respected fields of knowledge.
Yet Moore's casual slide from claims about what we are thinking to the
nature of the properties we are attributing in thinking as we do,
offered an important point of resistance. As Moore saw things, to make
a moral claim is to express a distinctive belief (that might be true
or false) about how things are. Specifically, it is to express the
belief that some course of action, or institution, or character trait
had the property of being right, or good, or virtuous. The challenge
(Moore assumed) is to figure out what property it is that we are
taking a thing to have, in thinking of it as right, or good, or
virtuous. And the place to look, he thought, is at the content of our
beliefs.
According to many, while Moore's Open Question argument does show that
moral thinking is distinctive and should not be treated as part and
parcel of thinking about non-moral matters, Moore was wrong in holding
that the important difference should be traced to the nature of the
properties we are taking things to have. According to some of these
critics, Moore's mistake is in thinking we are attributing properties
at all, when we think of something as right, or good, or virtuous;
according to others, his mistake was in thinking that how we think of
a property reveals the true nature of the
 property.[8]
The first line of criticism emerged soon after Moore first offered his
Open Question Argument, with philosophers suggesting that in thinking
morally we may well not be attributing properties at
 all.[9] 
 Agreeing that it was a mistake to see moral claims as attributing
natural properties to things, non-cognitivists argue that Moore's
mistake was in thinking that moral claims attribute any sort of
property to things, and so he was also wrong in thinking that moral
claims have propositional content and express genuine beliefs. The
Open Question is always open, they argue, not because we are, in
making a moral judgment, attributing some non-natural property to
things, but because we are not attributing any property at all. We are
not saying anything that might be true or false, nor are we expressing
a belief. We are doing something altogether different: taking a stand,
or expressing an emotion, or prescribing something. On these views,
moral judgments express some attitude other than belief and lack the
sort of cognitive content that would allow them to be true or
false.
From the start non-cognitivists have had an eye on both (i) the
non-cognitive attitudes that are expressed in making a moral
claim and (ii) what people are doing in making such claims.
When focusing on the first, they emphasize that moral terms get their
meaning not by their link to beliefs that represent the world as being
a certain way, but by their connection to non-cognitive attitudes
— e.g., reactions to the way the world is, or desires for how
the world might be. Here their attention, in giving an account of the
“meaning” of moral terms is on those terms'
conventionally-established connection to certain attitudes. (Of course
people can use such a term without actually having the corresponding
attitudes, but understanding the term is a matter of seeing that it is
a linguistically appropriate way to express the attitude.) When
focusing on the second, non-cognitivists emphasize moral language's
role as tool for influencing the others.  Here their attention is on
in claiming that something is, say, wrong, people are consistently not
just expressing their opposition to it but telling others not to do
it, or working to persuade them not to, or in some other way working
to direct action. The two ideas go together naturally, since if the
first is right, then it would help explain why people can and do use
moral language in the way the second suggests. But the ideas are
separable. And many think that the expressivist idea advanced by the
first goes to the heart of the matter, while thinking that
concentrating on the directive or prescriptive use of moral
language can at best be secondary.  
      
Whatever the details, the non-cognitivists share the idea that
one can admit that something is pleasant, or the object of a desire,
or such that it conforms to some rule in force, and nonetheless not
take a stand regarding it, or not have any particular emotion
concerning it, or not have any interest in prescribing anything
relating to it. The Open Question is open, they hold, precisely
because the attitudes expressed by a moral judgment all involve
something other than merely believing of something that it has certain
features (whether natural or not). At the same time, the
non-cognitivists’ proposals fit well with granting Hume's claim
concerning the gap between ‘is’ and ‘ought’:
whatever facts one grants, whatever ‘is’ claims one
endorses, there is no logical inconsistency involved in failing to
take a relevant stand, or to express a emotion towards it, or to
prescribe something related to it. Between the beliefs we might have
and the other attitudes we might form, no entailment relations hold at
all.  
Non-cognitivists, of course, need to explain why it seems so plausible
to see moral judgment as an expression of belief and as a matter of
attributing properties to actions, institutions and characters.  And
they need to explain why moral thought seems appropriately subject to
the rules of logic, whereas the various attitudes that play central
roles in the non-cognitivist accounts all seem to fall outside of that
realm. Taking the challenge head-on, recent versions of expressivism,
flying the banner of “quasi-realism,” have taken as a
central project explaining, on non-cognitivist foundations, how and
why moral language has all the trappings of being cognitivist and
realist.  These views start with a picture of the world as having
neither moral properties nor people believing in moral properties
(though they have other beliefs), and then explain how a practice of
thinking and talking about moral properties, moral beliefs, moral
truth, and moral facts, might naturally and properly emerge.
The central idea is that we can see our thought and talk as
fundamentally a matter of our expressing our affective attitudes or
commitments which gives rise to legitimate thought and talk about
corresponding properties, beliefs, truths and facts. Two moves
underwrite this idea. One is to hold that talk of properties, beliefs,
truths and facts comes cheap: Once one holds sincerely that
“Lying is wrong,” no additional commitments come with
adding “Lying has the property of being wrong” or “I
believe that lying is wrong” or “It is true that lying is
wrong” or that “It is a fact that lying is wrong.”
These are all, in effect, just different ways of saying the same
thing.  And if, in the first place, sincerely saying “Lying is
wrong” is a matter of expressing an attitude or a commitment
then so too are these alternative ways of saying the same thing.  The
second move that underwrites quasi-realism is that the question of
whether the cognitivist and realist sounding discourse is legitimate
is, itself, an evaluative question judged in light of one's attitudes
and commitments.  There is, on this view, no independent standard of,
say, “matching the world” that one can deploy without, in
choosing that standard, expressing one's attitudes and
 commitments.[10] 
Various versions of non-cognitivism, and in particular versions of
quasi-realist expressivism, remain among the most attractive ways of
resisting the non-naturalist implications of Moore's Open Question
Argument.[11]
But they are not the only option.  Many argue that, while Moore's
argument shows that thinking something is good is different
than thinking it is pleasant (or the object of a desire, or
such as to conform to some norm that is in force), it does not show
that being good is different from being pleasant (or
the object of a desire, or such as to conform to some norm that is in
force). After all, they point out, thinking that some liquid is
H2O is different from thinking it is water
and one might intelligibly wonder whether what one grants to be water
really is H2O. Yet that does not show that being
water is anything other than being H20. Far
from it. A difference between the thoughts does not establish a
difference in the properties. Thus, for all the Open Question Argument
shows, it might turn out that a naturalist account of the nature of
moral properties is correct. The naturalist account cannot be defended
simply as a conceptual truth but it also cannot be rejected, as Moore
thought it could be, as obviously confusing one property (the natural
property) for another one (the moral property). This sort of
cognitivism has no trouble explaining why it seems so plausible to see
moral judgment as an expression of belief and as a matter of
attributing properties to actions, institutions and characters. Moral
judgments are in fact, on this sort of account, the expression of
belief and they do involve attributing properties to actions,
institutions and characters (though the account holds that the true
nature of the property being attributed is something that might come
as a surprise to some). Similarly, this sort of cognitivism can
explain why moral thought seems appropriately subject to the rules of
logic: it seems appropriately subject to these rules because it
is. Problems emerge, however, when it comes to explaining the
apparently distinctive nature of moral thinking. If thinking that
something is good or right is a matter of attributing to the thing
some natural property or other, then what explains the apparently
distinctive nature of moral thought?  
Cognitivists and non-cognitivists face a common challenge: to account
for the nature of moral thought and talk that simultaneously does
justice to its distinctive nature without failing to appreciate the
significant ways in which it is continuous with non-moral thought and
talk. Cognitivism has a relatively easy time accommodating the
continuity between moral and non-moral thought and talk, but,
especially when combined with naturalism, it faces a real challenge in
marking the distinctive nature of moral thought and talk;
non-cognitivism has no trouble making room for the distinctive nature
of moral thought and talk, but it has trouble accommodating the
continuity. 
What has always been attractive about Moorean non-naturalism is its
capacity to combine the continuity and the difference into a coherent
picture. There is room, at least, to account for moral thought's
continuity with other thought by emphasizing that it is all a matter
of attributing properties (albeit different properties) to things; and
there is room too for locating the distinctive nature of moral thought
in the putatively authoritative standing of the properties
attributed. Of course leaving room for an account is not the same as
actually providing one, and Moore himself does not actually offer much
at all by way of an explanation of the normative authority (as we
might call it) of moral properties. In any case, what has always been
troubling about Moore's view is that the coherent picture that emerges
seems to presuppose (i) the existence of metaphysically dubious
properties that fall outside the causal nexus and, so, are such that
(ii) it would be a complete mystery how we could every reliably learn
anything about them, if they were to exist.  Moore, and the
intuitionists who followed him, work in various ways to address these
concerns. Error theorists, in contrast, hold that the coherent picture
painted by Moore is, at least roughly, the right account of what moral
thought and talk involves, but they go on to argue that the
metaphysically and epistemically troubling implications of that
picture properly undermine its credibility.  They argue that we have
compelling reasons to reject the presuppositions of moral
 thought.[12] 
The error theorists’ position regarding morality is the
counterpart, with respect to moral thought, of the atheist's position
with respect to views concerning God's will and ways. In both cases,
the suggestion is that the thoughts at issue involve a mistake or a
failed presupposition, and that, because of this, they cannot be
true. The error theorist's position, it is worth noting, requires
establishing two claims that have each met a lot of resistance: that
moral thought really has the presuppositions the error theorist
supposes and that those presuppositions are as untenable as the error
theorist maintains. At the same time, though, anyone who hopes to
vindicate moral thought has the burden of showing that its actual
presuppositions and implications are, after all, defensible.
Anyone mounting such a defense needs to offer some account of how it
is we might successfully justify one set of moral judgments as over
against others. When we turn to morality, what counts as good grounds
for holding one view rather than other?  What sort of evidence might
be available? If Hume and Moore are right, no evidence that appeals
solely to non-evaluative considerations will be sufficient (unless we
presuppose some principle of inference that connects non-moral
premises to moral conclusions). But if we need to rely on evaluative
premises or principles in order to infer substantive moral conclusions
from non-moral premises (e.g. non-moral premises regarding the impact
of a course of action on pleasure or on the satisfaction of human
interests), the question immediately arises, “How might we
justify these evaluative premises or principles?” 
One answer often offered is that, at a suitably abstract level, there
are premises or principles that everyone in fact accepts.  Perhaps
'Murder is wrong', or 'pain is bad', or 'everyone should be treated
equally', would qualify. But of course such claims hardly do much work
since questions immediately arise about which killings constitute
murder and about how different pains should be compared and about
which way of treating people counts as treating them equally in the
relevant way. No moral claim that is plausibly offered as actually
accepted by all, or nearly all, people can possibly be substantive
enough to help settle on one view rather than another as better
justified. 
One might, in light of this, offer a more substantive principle, not
as one that people actually all accept, but as one that they are all,
in fact, committed to (though they may not realize it). This strategy
offers the prospect of identifying a principle rich enough in content
to serve as the justifying ground for other moral judgments. Yet it
requires showing how the principle(s) identified work to justify the
more specific judgments they are meant to support.  Moreover, one who
takes this approach needs also to justify the claim that people are
actually committed to the principle in the first place. And this
raises the suspicion that claiming there are certain principles to
which everyone is committed simply relocates the original challenge,
without actually meeting it. 
In any case, even if there are suitably substantive principles to
which people are committed, and this can be shown, and even if there
is a way to establish as well that the principles in question would
(if right) actually justify more specific moral judgments, one might
understandably worry about the status of the resulting structure. Why
not think of it as a castle in the sky, a structure with no
appropriate foundation?  After all, the fact that we happen to accept,
or are committed to accepting, some principle, seems a long way from
showing that the principle is true or right. 
Our moral judgments (about particular cases as well as about general
principles) seem to float disconcertingly free from our normal sources
of evidence concerning the nature of the world. We cannot see, touch,
taste, or smell value or rightness or virtue, even as we can see,
touch, taste, or smell some of the things that have value or that are
right or that manifest virtue. So how do we learn about value and
rightness and virtue themselves?  What grounds do we have for thinking
our various moral judgments link up appropriately with what they are
judgments of?
Of course moral judgments are not the only judgments that face such a
challenge. Many mathematical, modal, and religious judgments face a
similar challenge. They all apparently concern matters that are not
directly available to the senses and that are, in various ways,
mysterious. That establishes some companions in guilt, but also
provides the hope that reasonable accounts of how we might learn (or
not) about numbers, possibility and necessity, and God, might provide
insight into the evidence (if any) we are able to secure concerning
morality. 
It is worth emphasizing that positive theories of moral epistemology
are inevitably bound up with accounts of the nature of moral judgment
and their metaphysical presuppositions and commitments. On some
accounts, there is nothing to know and so no need for an
epistemological theory at all. On others, a proper understanding of
moral judgments will reveal that justifying them is of a piece with
justifying other judgments for which we have, or hope to have, a
plausible epistemology, so the epistemology of morality will be
continuous with epistemological theories of other domains. On still
other accounts, moral judgments are such that only a sui
generis epistemology would make sense of our capacity to acquire
moral knowledge. No matter which of these options one takes,
epistemological skepticism looms as a real possibility. And in the
first case, where there is by implication nothing to know, it does not
merely loom, it arrives inevitably.  Even if one succeeds in
developing a positive theory of moral epistemology in light of which
moral knowledge might be possible, the substantive challenge of
showing that knowledge has actually been secured remains
formidable.
At the same time, much of morality seems clearly a matter of knowing
how — how to respond to the need of others, how to
respond to threats, how to carry oneself in various situations —
and not primarily (if at all) a matter of knowing that
something is the case. No doubt, focusing on knowing how, rather than
knowing that, does not address skepticism concerning the claims we
might make as to which know how is morally significant. But paying
attention to the degree to which people count as moral (or immoral)
not because of what they say or believe, but because of how they act,
is important to appreciating both the nature of morality and what all
a plausible account of moral knowledge must encompass.
Among morality's distinctive features, all agree, is its apparently
intimate connection to action. In making moral judgments, for
instance, we seem to be making a claim that, if true, establishes that
someone or other has a reason to act or be a certain way. This marks
an important difference between moral claims and claims concerning,
say, color. The claim that something is red is, even if true, only
contingently connected to whether anyone has any reason at all to act
or be a certain way.  Whereas if a certain thing is morally good it
seems that everyone necessarily has at least some reason (perhaps
overrideable or defeasible, but still some reason) to promote, pursue,
protect, or respect it — at least if they recognize that it is
good.  Moreover, many have thought, to judge sincerely that something
is good (whether or not one is right) is to have some motivation
(again, perhaps overrideable or defeasible, but still some motivation)
to promote, pursue, protect, or respect it. 
Thus there seem to be necessary connections between moral properties
and reasons and also between moral judgments and motivations. Some
have thought as well that there is a necessary connection between
moral judgments and reasons, such that if one judges that something is
good or right then (whether one is right or not) one had a reason to
act or be a certain way. Others have thought that there is a
connection, again, a necessary connection, between there being a
reason for someone to act or be a certain way and that person being,
or at least being able to be, motivated in a
 certain
 way.[13] 
This last suggestion, that (say) one can have reason to do only what
one might be motivated to do, has implications as well for what might
count as good, if something is good only if one has a reason to act in
a certain way with respect to
 it.[14]
Each of these supposed necessary connections is controversial and yet
each has plausibly been taken to be at the heart of what is
distinctive about morality. At the same time, different proposed
connections fit more or less well with different accounts of morality
and at least some of the supposed connections are flat out
incompatible with some of the accounts. Thus those versions of
non-cognitivism that see making a moral judgment as a matter of
expressing some motivating attitude have an easier time explaining the
internal connection (if there is one) between sincerely making a moral
judgment and having an appropriate motive, while certain naturalist
cognitivist proposals, for instance those that identify goodness with
having the capacity to garner approval from someone who is fully
informed, must hold that a person might sincerely judge that something
would secure that approval and yet be utterly unmotivated by that
 fact.[15]
Working through the ways in which a proper appreciation of the
relations between morality, reasons, and motivation constrain and
inform an account of morality has been a central issue in
metaethics. In fact, Glaucon's original proposal concerning the nature
of morality (according to which morality is a conventional solution to
problems we would otherwise have to face) was introduced as a way of
pressing a worry about morality: Morality pretends to provide reason
to all, virtue is supposed to be its own reward, and a person is told
she should do the right thing because it is right and not because she
hopes for some reward, yet, in the face of the demands morality
sometimes makes, these claims concerning its nature and value all seem
dubious. Specifically, if morality is (as Glaucon's proposal would
have it) constituted solely by a set of conventional rules we put in
place to secure the benefits we receive from the restraint of others,
it looks as if the only reason (and the only motive) we would each
have for conforming to the rules would be found in the consequences we
hope such compliance would secure.  In cases where we could get the
benefits without the restraint (as when our failure to restrain
ourselves would be undetected) we would have neither reason nor motive
not to violate the rules. Thus, if Glaucon is right about the nature
of morality, then morality (properly understood) would only provide
reason to some, under some circumstances, not reason to all,
always. Moreover, virtue would not be its own reward. And morality
would not be such that it would make sense for a person to do the
right thing (as defined by the rules in place) for its own sake, since
the sole value of the relevant rules is found in the benefits that
come from others complying with those rules.
Glaucon's ultimate aim was to get from Socrates an account of morality
that — unlike his own — would serve to vindicate
morality's pretensions. He assumed that if no such account was
forthcoming morality's claim on our allegiance would have been
undermined even as we might continue to have our own reasons for
perpetuating the myth and for working to see that others comply with
its rules. Much of the Republic is then given over to
Socrates’ attempt to develop first an account of the nature of
morality (specifically, of justice) and then, second, to arguing that
being moral is valuable regardless of the consequences. Socrates'
concern, in showing that being moral is valuable, is to show
specifically that it is valuable to the person who is moral, that the
virtuous person, and not just others, benefits from her
virtue. Indeed, he tries to show that being moral is so valuable to
the person who is moral, that whatever the consequences of injustice
might be, however great the rewards, they could never be valuable
enough to outweigh the loss of one's virtue. 
Socrates’ own account of the metaphysical and epistemological
underpinnings of his view (his appeal to eternal, non-physical
Platonic Forms and to our intellectual access to those Forms) commits
him unmistakably to non-naturalism and to something like
intuitionism. Yet his account of the nature of justice and the
specific features of justice that he takes to establish its value, all
appeal to considerations that are as available to a naturalist as to a
non-naturalist. 
In any case, the question underlying Glaucon's concern — Why
should I be moral? — has consistently been at the center of
attempts to explain the connection between morality and what we have
reason to
 do.[16] 
 Some have argued that the question is
misplaced, at least if it assumes there must be some non-moral reason
to be moral. Others have held that the question is easily answered
on the grounds that the fact that some action is morally required, for
instance, entails that one has reason to do it. And still others
have maintained that the question presses the single most important
challenge to morality's legitimacy, since morality's claim
on our allegiance depends on our having reason to comply with its
demands, yet explaining why we might have those reasons is
extraordinarily difficult. 
Whatever view one ends up adopting concerning the connections that
hold (or do not hold) among moral properties, moral judgments, reasons
for action, and effective motivations, no account is plausible as a
vindication of morality unless it makes sense of how and why moral
considerations might properly figure in practical deliberation that
results in decision and action. Doing this successfully is, in
principle, compatible with thinking moral properties do not always
provide reasons, compatible too with holding that moral judgments some
times fail to motivate, and, finally, compatible as well with the idea
that one might have a reason to perform some action that one has no
motivation to perform. Of course, these various views are each
themselves quite controversial and involve rejecting what others have
thought to be necessary truths.  
Making sense of how moral considerations might figure in practical
deliberation is especially important when it comes to explaining when
and why people are responsible for what they do or fail to do.  Some
of that explanatory job is a matter of moral theory, not metaethics,
and involves figuring out what counts as good excuses, legitimate
justifications, and appropriate burdens. A theory of moral
responsibility inevitably relies on substantive moral theory.
Yet there are important metaethical issues bound up in giving an
account of moral responsibility. They emerge most sharply as one
considers the nature and significance of free will. Does
responsibility presuppose free will?  If so, when does someone count
as having a free will?  It cannot merely be a matter of her will being
uncaused. After all, a person whose will was utterly random,
responsive neither to her nor to the reasons she had for doing things,
would be a person no freer (in the relevant sense) than a person whose
will was fully and directly controlled by someone else as a puppeteer
might control a puppet. What would it take for her will to count as
appropriately responsive, either to her or to her reasons?  Is this
appropriate responsiveness a matter of being undetermined or of being
determined by the right things or in the right way?  In any case, if
one has the sort of free will that moral responsibility requires
(whatever that turns out to be) how are we to understand the
connection between the will, and what influences it, on the one hand,
and the various psychological and physical causes that apparently
determine the behavior that is identified as the action one performs
willingly, on the other? How do agents with a free will fit within a
natural world?
Not surprisingly, the range of answers that have been offered to these
questions covers an exceedingly broad spectrum. Some hold that moral
responsibility requires a certain kind of freedom and then argue that
we lack that sort of freedom or, alternatively, that we at least
sometimes have it. Others, though, maintain that freedom is irrelevant
and that holding people morally responsible makes sense only if we see
their wills as determined. And others identify a truly free will not
with a will that is undetermined, but with one that is determined by
reason. And still others argue that the right understanding of moral
responsibility will show that metaphysical questions concerning the
nature of the will are irrelevant.  
The history of moral theory is a history of attempts to identify,
articulate, and defend general moral principles that serve to explain
when and why various types of action, institutions, or characters
count as right or wrong, just or unjust, virtuous or vicious. The
assumption has consistently been that there is a general and
principled account of morality to be given. And this assumption has
survived the fact that few people think any particular set of
principles that we have actually succeeded in articulating, is fully
adequate.  What explains the assumption?  Why not hold, as
particularists do, that there may well be no set of general principles
that adequately mark moral distinctions?  Or, why not think, as
skeptics do, that our repeated failures actually to identify fully
adequate principles shows that morality is a chimera? 
Wrestling with these questions returns one immediately and directly to
wondering about the nature of morality and the role it is supposed to
play in human life. What is it about morality's nature, or its role,
that would make sense of the idea that general principles are
essential to it?  Why not suppose that one case of cruelty might be
wrong, and another not wrong, without there being any ground that
would justify treating them as different?  Why is it so natural to
suppose that there must be some other difference — say a
difference in their consequences, or a difference in what has led up
to the act of cruelty — that underwrites and justifies the
thought that one is wrong, but not the other?  Why not grant that one
of the two just happened to be wrong and the other happened not to be?
Could not moral properties just happen to have been distributed
randomly so that, in the end, there is no justification for one action
having a certain moral standing while another, otherwise the same, has
a different standing?  These suggested possibilities are, I believe,
not real possibilities at all. They would each entail that moral
demands are fundamentally arbitrary in a way that is incompatible with
morality's claim to authority. But what is it about morality that
precludes it being fundamentally arbitrary?  A good answer, I suspect,
will lead one away from the idea that moral properties are merely
there in the world to be found, wholly independent of our concerns and
practices. But a good answer is needed.  And a good answer is not
provided simply by supplying, if one could, a consistent and coherent
set of principles that successfully systematized particular moral
judgments about acts, institutions, and characters.  The challenge
here is not simply to show that moral judgments can be seen to fit a
pattern; the challenge is to show that the pattern they fit —
the principle(s) to which they conform — work to explain and
justify their importance.
   