When we resort to metaphor, we contrive to talk about two things at
once; two different and disparate subject matters are mingled to rich
and unpredictable effect.  One of these subject matters is already
under discussion or at least already up for consideration when a
speaker resorts to metaphor in the first place. This is the
metaphor’s primary subject or
tenor: the young girl Juliet in the case of Romeo’s metaphor;
history, Ireland’s history or the world’s, in the case of Stephen’s;
works, prose writings in general, in the case of Benjamin’s. The
second subject matter is newly introduced with an eye to temporarily
enriching our resources for thinking and talking about the first. This
is the metaphor’s secondary subject or vehicle: the
sun; nightmares from which one tries to awake; death masks, i.e.,
death masks in general. The primary subject of a metaphor may be a
particular thing, or it may be a whole kind of thing, and likewise for
the secondary subject—with the result that the metaphor itself
may take the verbal form of an identity statement (X is Y) as
with Romeo; a predication or membership statement (X is a G)
as with Stephen Daedalus; or a statement of inclusion (Fs are
Gs) as with Benjamin.
If we ask how primary and secondary subjects are brought into relation
by being spoken of together in a metaphor, it seems natural to say
that metaphor is a form of likening, comparing, or
analogizing. The maker of a metaphor (or the metaphor itself)
likens the primary subject to the secondary subject: Romeo (or
Romeo’s speech) likens Juliet to the sun, Stephen likens history
to nightmares, Benjamin likens works in prose to death masks. But it is
unclear what we mean when we say this, to the point where some are
reluctant to appeal to likeness or similarity in explaining what
metaphor is or how it works. Much of the power and interest of many a
good metaphor derives from how massively and conspicuously different
its two subject matters are, to the point where metaphor is sometimes
defined by those with no pretensions to originality as “a
comparison of two unlike things.” The interpretation of
a metaphor often turns not on properties the secondary subject actually
has or even on ones it is believed to have but instead on ones we
habitually pretend it to have: think of what happens when we call
someone a gorilla.
Metaphor is but one of many techniques, named and unnamed, for
likening one thing to another by means of words. We may employ an
explicit comparison of one thing to another, built around like,
as, or some other explicit comparative construction, in
what’s known as simile:
We may interweave parallel observations about two different subject
matters by means of so and too and thus. We
may liken a whole bunch of things to one another by making
conspicuously parallel statements about each, inviting our listener to
register the parallelism and ponder its significance. Or we may simply
juxtapose mention of a first thing with mention of a second in a
suitably conspicuous and suggestive manner:
Part of what is distinctive about metaphorical likening in
particular is that in resorting to it, we speak of one thing or kind
(the primary subject) as and in terms of a second
thing or kind (the secondary subject). Our deployment of language
takes place as if primary subject and secondary subject
(Juliet and the sun) were one and the same; or as if the
primary subject (history) were an instance of the secondary subject
(nightmares); or as if the primary subject (works) were
included within the secondary subject (death masks). In this sense,
the primary subject is spoken of as the secondary
subject. Words, idioms, and other ways of talking customarily deployed
in connection with the secondary subject (the sun, death masks) are
appropriated and redeployed for use in thinking and talking about the
primary subject (Juliet, prose works). In this sense, the primary
subject is spoken of and thought about in terms of the
secondary subject. It is easy to feel that in Romeo’s metaphor,
familiar fragments of sun-talk come to be about Juliet without ceasing
to be about the sun. If so, the double aboutness exhibited by
metaphorical language is something philosophers must strive to
understand.
A sentence metaphor typically likens many things or kinds to many
other things or kinds at a single verbal stroke. Benjamin’s terse
little aphorism manages to liken works to death masks, conceptions to
living human beings, the changes a conception undergoes before being
incorporated into a finished work to life, the stabilization and
stultification it allegedly undergoes after such incorporation to
death—and so on. In the context provided by the rest of his
speech, Romeo’s exclamation manages to liken Juliet to the sun, her
room and balcony to the east, Romeo himself to creatures dependent on
the sun for warmth and light and nurturance, Romeo’s old love Rosaline
to that lesser light the moon, the sight of Juliet to the light of the
sun, Juliet’s appearance at her window as the sun’s rising in the
east—and so on. Only some of a metaphor’s primary subjects and
some of its secondary subjects are explicitly referred to by any
verbal expression contained therein. Listeners must work the others
out for themselves. In this respect, every metaphor leaves something
implicit.
Nevertheless, some metaphors are explicit in the sense that
they liken one or more named things or kinds to one or more other
named things or kinds by means of locutions regularly found in overt
literal statements of identity, membership, or inclusion:
while other metaphors are implicit in that they eschew such
simple alignments, mingling primary subject language and secondary
subject language almost at random, yet in such a way as to leave
listeners able to work out which is which and what’s being likened to
what else:
Within the confines of a given metaphor, we distinguish pretty readily
between words and phrases that are to be taken metaphorically and
others that are to be taken only literally. To take an expression
metaphorically is one way to take it figuratively, and to take an
expression figuratively is to reinterpret it, to construe it
in a manner that departs from but remains informed by some relevant
prior literal construal of it. Various other kinds of figurative
reinterpretation are exhibited in various other recognized figures of
speech: metonymy (This policy covers you from the cradle to
the grave), irony (You’re a fine friend),
hyperbole (loud enough to wake the dead), and so on.
The portion of a
metaphor that undergoes figurative reinterpretation is its
focus and the rest is its frame. The focus of a
metaphor may be a single word drawn from almost any part of speech. It
may be a multi-word phrase like the sun or death
mask. It may consist of scattered parts of an extended sentence,
the remainder of which is to be taken only literally:
Or it may be an extended phrase, rich in internal syntactic
structure:
Philosophers need to elucidate (a) the nature of the difference
between taking language literally and taking it metaphorically, the
nature, if you will, of the reinterpretation language undergoes when
we take it metaphorically, and (b) the nature of the division of
expressive labor between a metaphor’s focus and its frame.
Literary theorists regularly acknowledge the existence of
extended metaphors, unitary metaphorical likenings that sprawl
over multiple successive sentences. There are also contracted
metaphors, metaphors that run their course within the narrow confines
of a single clause or phrase or word. They reveal themselves most
readily when distinct metaphors are mixed to powerful,
controlled, anything but hilarious effect:
Not all sentence metaphors take the form of declarative sentences by
any means: there are metaphorical questions, metaphorical commands,
metaphorical optatives, etc. Despite these complications, modern metaphor theory tends to treat the
freestanding declarative metaphorical sentence as the
fundamental unit of metaphorical action.
This is a distinctively modern development. Ancient philosophers and
rhetoricians viewed metaphor as a temporary self-explanatory change in
the usage of a general or singular term, typically a noun or
noun phrase. When we resort to metaphor, a term that routinely stands
for one thing or kind is made to stand for another, suitably related
thing or kind instead, and this change in what the term stands for
occurs on the fly, without warning and without special
explanation. The effect is to transfer the term in question
from its accustomed place in our verbal classificatory scheme to
some other unaccustomed place for special temporary expressive
purposes. For Aristotle, writing in the middle of the fourth century
BCE, the figurative redeployment of term counts as a metaphor
regardless of precisely how the term’s usual referent and its special
temporary referent are related (Poetics 21 1457b ff. See
also Rhetoric 3.2 1404b-1505b, 3.4 1406b–1407a,
3.10–11 1410b–1413b). By the time Quintilian and Cicero
come along, metaphor is one of many distinct recognized figures of
speech, and a self-explanatory terminological transfer counts as
metaphorical only if it is based on a real or
supposed analogy or likeness between the regular
referent and the special temporary one. This matters less than one
might expect, since although Aristotle recognized four different kinds
of metaphor, he regarded the analogy-based kind as far and away the
most interesting and devoted the bulk of his discussion to it.
Sometimes we resort to metaphor because there’s no established term
for the thing we want to talk about and no need to contrive a new term
that will refer to it once and for all. More often and more
interestingly, we resort to metaphor for the sake of the pleasure our
audience will take in puzzling it out, the persona it allows us to
adopt in addressing our audience, and the quasi-sensory vividness it
brings to the audience’s apprehension of whatever we say with its
help. (See Cicero, De Oratore, 55 BCE,
3.159–60)
Aristotle portrays the understanding of a simple metaphor as a
stimulating exercise in analogical equation solving. Suppose
Empedocles employs the term ‘old age’ under circumstances
where it looks for all the world as if what is really being discussed
is the course of a single day. Old age itself lacks any
immediate bearing on efforts to understand the course of a single day,
so we conjecture that on this special occasion, the term “old
age” stands for something with the kind of immediate bearing on
efforts to understand the course of a single day that old
age itself has on efforts to understand some other
subject matter readily called to mind by invoking old
age—namely, the course of a single human life. Just as
old age constitutes the final stage of the course of a single life,
what constitutes the final stage of the course of a single day
is evening. Old age is to a life as evening is to a
day. We thus infer that on this special occasion, “old
age” is being employed to refer to evening, and we interpret the
sentence in which it figures accordingly (Poetics 10
1457b).
In working this out, we activate and begin to explore a complex and
potentially fruitful analogy between the way a person’s physical and
intellectual powers wax and wane over the course of a single human
life and the way the sun’s powers wax and wane over the course of a
single day, between the way individual human lives repeat each other
with variations in the course of an extended human lineage and the way
individual days do so over the course of a year, and so on. The effort
to recover a simple metaphorical meaning (evening) for the term
“old age” calls forth a beneficial, pleasurable, complex
intellectual effort from us. The sentence we thereby come to
understand may say something simple and unambitious that could easily
be said without resorting to metaphor, but the effort to recover this
meaning has a cognitive value transcending that of the meaning itself.
Something happens to the terms on which we access our own thoughts
about days and how they run: evening is set before our eyes in the
suggestive and instructive guise of an elderly human being. For
discussion see Ricoeur (1997, 9–43), Moran (1996), Halliwell
(2003, 189–191). On ancient rhetoric and poetics more generally,
 see the entries
 Aristotle’s Rhetoric
 and
 Plato on Rhetoric and Poetry
in this encyclopedia.
As modern poetics developed out of ancient rhetoric, the temptation to
regard metaphors as meaning or communicating or at
the very least suggesting something inherently complex,
open-ended, and resistant to compact literal statement became stronger
and stronger.
Sometimes the effort to render a given original in a given medium
requires approximation and elaboration of various sorts, so that any
rendering of the given original in the given medium will be correct
only up to a point and incorrect thereafter (such is approximation)
and more complex or longwinded than the thing rendered (such is
elaboration). When this is the case we often call our renderings
paraphrases of their originals. Sometimes originals and
paraphrases are both verbal, and the aim of the paraphrase is to
explain or exposit the original: think of a lawyer’s paraphrase
of an obscure statute or a preacher’s paraphrase of a cryptic
Bible passage. Sometimes neither original nor paraphrase is verbal and
the aim is to adapt the original in some sense or other: think
of a polyphonic paraphrase by Palestrina of a snatch of medieval
plainsong or the paraphrase of an acanthus leaf in the design of a
Corinthian capital.
The effort to translate a literary work from one language to
another, to render the original work in a language not its own,
involves a complex mixture of exposition and adaptation. Translational
rendering is especially likely to resort to approximation and
elaboration—paraphrase—when confronted by metaphors and
other figures of speech. Yet it is often said that poetry is
what’s lost in translation, to the point where Coleridge proposed
“untranslatableness in words of the same language without injury
to the meaning” as “the infallible test of a blameless
style” (Biographia Literaria, chap. 22). If metaphor is
a form of poetry, it might seem to follow that paraphrase in words
of the same language is impossible or uncalled for where metaphor
is concerned. The American New Critic Cleanth Brooks argued as much in
a famous essay called “The Heresy of Paraphrase”
(1947).
Nevertheless, there is a familiar way of registering how one takes or
understands a given metaphor, naturally called paraphrase,
such that dispensing with it entirely would condemn
articulate consumers of metaphor to an unproductive silence. It is
hard not to sympathize with Stanley Cavell when he writes in
“Aesthetic Problems of Modern Philosophy” (1969):
He adds:
Perhaps we can agree that explications of the sort Cavell has in mind
exist and have some legitimate role to play in the understanding and
appreciation of metaphor—and agree to call such
explications paraphrases—while agreeing to disagree
about how they relate to the language they purport to explain.
The mid twentieth century saw a striking renewal of interest in
metaphor theory, marked by interdisciplinary collaboration of a close
and ongoing kind. Poets and novelists, linguists and literary critics,
analytic philosophers and continental philosophers all got in on the
act and followed each other’s work with remarkable care and
closeness. Accounts of metaphor developed in this period fall into
four basic types.
Semantic Twist Accounts hold that metaphor results from the
interaction or interanimation of words and word meanings as they are
brought together and act on each other in the settings provided by
particular utterances made on particular concrete occasions.
When we take an uttered sentence as a metaphor, we assign it a new
and distinctively metaphorical meaning. The assignment of
fresh meaning to the sentence as a whole results from a more local
assignment of fresh meaning to one or more of the sentence’s
constituent words or phrases, the ones we take metaphorically, the
focal words or phrases. The meanings assigned the remainder of
the sentence, the framing words or phrases, remain unchanged.
(Here it’s taken for granted that whatever meanings may be, they
obey a compositionality principle, according to which the
meaning of a complex expression is a function of the meanings of its
elementary components and the manner in which those components are
woven together by the complex expression’s syntax.)
The frame isn’t a passive bystander to changes in the
interpretation of the focus: it induces and controls these changes.
When we attempt to take each and every part of the sentence in the most
literal and straightforward way possible, there proves to be something
deviant, incongruous, or otherwise out of order—something
semantically or pragmatically inappropriate, something incoherent at
worst and strained at best—about how we must then take the
sentence as a whole. If unstrained, coherent, contextually appropriate
sense is to be made of the sentence as a whole, something’s gotta
give. What in fact does give is our straightforward
literal understanding of the focal expressions. The meanings of these
expressions undergo a metaphorical twist, a twist produced by
the more unyieldingly literal meanings of the expressions that serve as
the metaphor’s frame.
Metaphor results from a kind of tension between the literal meanings
accruing to the focus and the literal meanings accruing to the frame, a
tension which disappears when we alter the meanings accruing to the
focus just enough to make it disappear. Paraphrase is an
effort to re-express the new metaphorically determined sentence meaning
in more literal or at least, less ambitiously metaphorical terms. Influential early semantic twist accounts were provided by I.A.
Richards (1936), Max Black (1954), and Monroe Beardsley (1962).
An especially lucid and careful version is offered by
the literary scholar Harold Skulsky (1986, 1992). Skulsky maintains
that when a speaker speaks figuratively, he switches from ordinary
vernacular English to an improvised dialect, a metaphorese,
that is richer than the vernacular in the speech act potentials it
accords certain particular sentence forms, the meanings it accords
certain particular words or phrases, or both—a dialect the
listener must master on the spot and on the fly, treating the
speaker’s tiny specimen of correct usage as her main concrete
guide to how it differs from the familiar vernacular. We have willful
and challenging linguistic innovation on the part of a speaker,
followed by a resourceful struggle to keep up on the part of a
listener, “a distinctive kind of cooperative activity halfway
between a game and a rite” that requires and thereby elicits a
special cognitive rapport between speaker and listener (1992, 24).
Figuration occurs only when:
Many schemes and tropes are such that the innovations they license at
a given point depend on what’s mutually understood to be the case for
present communicative purposes, what’s implicitly taken as true or at
least truistic, at the point where the innovation occurs. Any
such assumption is what Skulsky calls a talk postulate.
Something may be a talk postulate because it’s so widely and firmly
believed as to be obvious (and obviously obvious), or because we’re
assuming it for the time being for purposes of argument, or simply
because it’s something we routinely pretend to believe in particular
conversational settings. The crucial points are three:
The conventional vernacular use of a declarative form like
“You laughed” is to assert and thereby inform you that you
just now did just that—laugh. But asserting this to you or
informing you of it is out of the question if you’ve just burst
out laughing at a funeral; under the circumstances, your laughter
can’t conceivably come as news to you. A scheme, call it
the scheme of rebuke, enables me to use this sentence form in
a conventionally unconventional manner to blame you for your
laughter or scold you for your laughter when (and because)
informing you of it is manifestly out of the question.
A trope, by contrast, is a recipe for turning out new word
or phrase meanings when none of the vernacular ones will do. Hyperbole
and metonymy may be understood as tropes in this sense, and so can
metaphor:
Here being G is an implication of being F in a
particular conversational setting just in case it readily follows from
talk postulates conspicuously active there that whatever is F
is also G. In the Macbeth case, whatever is a man is such that
he keeps track of injuries and is ready to avenge himself on those who
injure him whenever he can. The recipe for metaphor, then, might read
something like this:
Pragmatic Twist Accounts maintain that when we resort to
metaphor, we use words and phrases with their standard literal meanings
to say one thing, put one thing into words, yet we are taken
to mean, taken to assert or acknowledge or otherwise indicate,
something entirely different. Our sentence as used by us means one
thing, we in using it mean or are properly construed as meaning
something entirely different. Metaphor is a genre of deliberate and
overt suggestion, one by means of which speakers commit themselves
to, implicitly vouch for the truth of, the things they
suggest. Paraphrase is an effort to get at what is metaphorically
suggested by putting it (or some part of it, or some approximation to
it) directly into words, thereby explicitly saying (more or less fully
and more or less accurately) what was implicitly vouched for by
the original metaphorical utterance.
The thought that metaphor concerns what speakers mean as
opposed to what their words mean is old and widespread. Often
it comes with the further thought that metaphor reveals by
concealing—revealing things in the end by concealing them at the
outset.
The first concerted attempt to build a philosophical account of
metaphor around these familiar ideas was Grice’s account of
conversational implicature in the second of his 1967 William James
Lectures, which appeared with various supplementations and
afterthoughts as Grice (1989).
The following exposition lightly modernizes Grice’s own at
certain points. For fuller discussions of Grice’s work as a whole
see the entries concerning 
 Paul Grice, 
 implicature, 
 and
 pragmatics. 
Detailed elaborations of Grice’s account of metaphor were
offered by Searle (1979a) and Martinich (1984).
A conversation is a loosely collaborative exchange of
information having one or more mutually understood aims. Participants
presume they share certain pertinent information already, but each is
presumed to need further information the others might be in a position
to provide. In conversations we can and regularly do hold the other
participants responsible for the truth of both more and less—in
some ways more, in other ways less—than they explicitly put into
words. For once a conversation is under way, each of us is entitled to
interpret the words of the others in light of the supposition that
they are cooperative, rational, and unconfused about the current state
of conversational play, even if there is good reason to doubt or
disbelieve this supposition, e.g. even if they exhibit troubling
signs of recklessness or deceitfulness. This is an application to
speech of a much more general principle: in improvised voluntary
collaborations of any sort, the responsibilities a given party
shoulders are those he willingly lets himself seem ready to shoulder,
no more and no less.
So my words may imply something I don’t: if something my words
imply is manifestly so firmly accepted already as to need no
certification from me, or so firmly rejected or patently unknowable by
me as to be unable to benefit from any certification I might attempt,
it forms no part of what I commit myself to in speaking my words. On
the other hand, I may imply something my words don’t: I can
and do vouch for the truth of a thing that isn’t implied by the
words I speak when my audience can square my utterance of those words
with the supposition that I am cooperative, rational, and unconfused
about the state of conversational play only by assuming that I am in a
position to vouch for that thing’s truth (in that I believe it
and have good grounds for believing it) and am prepared to actually do
so. Such, nearly enough, was how Grice defined the special kind of
speaker meaning he dubbed conversational implicature.
This tells us what implicature is but not how it happens. For that
we need four more ideas. (1) Declarative sentences are standing
equipment for calling attention to the propositions they express: the
proposition an uttered sentence calls to mind most immediately,
reliably, and deliberately is the one it semantically expresses. (2)
Once a conversation is under way I can vouch for the truth of any
proposition whatsoever by calling attention to it with a sufficient
show of deliberateness, if I am plausibly in a position to
vouch for its truth and if no other plausible motive for
calling attention to it can be expected to come to mind. (3) Suppose I
call attention to a thing of any sort with a sufficient show
of deliberateness. If the thing strikes my audience as a fully
appropriate object of attention in its own right, their attention will
dwell on it and go no further; they’ll treat my drawing their
attention to it as an end in itself, as it were. But if the thing
doesn’t strike them as an appropriate resting place for
their attention, they’ll view my drawing their attention to it as
a means to some further attentional end, an effort to refer attention
onward to some further, ultimately more worthy object. (4) What a
cooperative, rational, unconfused speaker is out to vouch for as
true in speaking as she does includes both what she is out to
get across, the part expected to address her listener’s
presumed informational needs, and a rudimentary rationale for
speaking as she does, serving to reconcile the words she produces
with the supposition that she is cooperative, rational, and unconfused.
For without a reputation for being cooperative, rational, and
unconfused, a speaker simply won’t be able to collaborate
effectively with her audience. Of course, parts of what she is out to
vouch for may do double duty, meeting the listener’s
informational needs while at the same time helping to preserve or
cultivate her own reputation.
So: if she is cooperative, rational, and unconfused, a speaker does
her best to endow her contribution—the content she is
out to vouch for, the part of that content she is out to get across,
and the verbal form she employs for these purposes—with certain
features that are manifestly desirable from her listener’s point of
view. She does her best to comply with certain
familiar conversational maxims:
(The maxims concern characteristics that are matters of degree, so
the best way to read them is a matter of some controversy. On the
interpretation adopted here, I obey Relation if and only if what I am
out to get across is both (a) adequately relevant and (b) about as
relevant as I can readily make it without sacrificing anything of
comparable importance. Similarly for the other maxims. On this
interpretation, Gricean maxims don’t call on us to maximize
anything.)
Listeners know that cooperative, rational, unconfused speakers do
their best to comply with the maxims. So speakers can arrange
for a difference between what they express and what they are properly
taken to vouch for by speaking so as to put their reputation for
cooperativeness, rationality, and unconfusedness in a kind of
controlled short-term jeopardy from which their listeners can readily
rescue them.
Suppose speaker S expresses proposition P in words
W. And suppose circumstances are such that if we
were to understand S as out to vouch for the truth
of P and
P alone, no more and no less, in uttering W, we would
thereby portray S as avoidably violating maxim M or
at least, avoidably inviting the suspicion that she is avoidably
violating it, with the consequence that either her contribution is
gratuitously unresponsive to her audience’s informational needs
or she is gratuitously neglecting to maintain her reputation as
cooperative, rational, and unconfused. In either case, she
wouldn’t be behaving as a cooperative, rational, unconfused
speaker must. To clear her her of this charge, to square our
interpretation of her words with the governing supposition that
she is behaving as a cooperative, rational, unconfused
speaker must, we need to find something more or
something else she might be out to vouch for.
Four basic scenarios are possible here.
(1) Sometimes P and P alone is what S is
out to get across, despite the fact that getting P and
P alone across by means of W manifestly violates
some particular maxim. In that case S may be designedly
calling attention to, hence trying to vouch for the truth of, some
plausible account of why her informational and expressive resources
leave her in a position where some such violation couldn’t be
helped—confront her with a clash of maxims.
(2) Sometimes getting P and P alone across by means
of W would manifestly violate some maxim or other if
S were in a position to vouch for any of various manifestly more
desirable propositions by expressing one of them via any of various
manifestly available sequences of words. In that case S may
be designedly calling attention to, hence trying to vouch for the
truth of, some plausible account of why she couldn’t do this—why
her respect for the maxims actually puts each of these more
desirable-looking contributions off limits.
(3) Sometimes the expression of P by means of W
would manifestly violate some particular maxim if P and P
alone were what S was out to get across, but the natural
inference is that what she was out to get across was P and then
some: the expression of P by means of W readily
calls to mind some unique more inclusive story Q about the
world of which P forms an essential part, such that S
might plausibly be in a position to vouch for Q’s truth and
such that doing so by means of W, if it could be
managed, might plausibly comply with all the maxims. In that case
S may be designedly calling attention to, hence trying to vouch
for the truth of, the whole of Q.
(4) Last but not least, sometimes the expression of P by
means of W would manifestly violate some particular maxim if
P formed any essential part of what S was
out to get across, and the natural inference is that what she was out
to get across is something entirely different: the expression
of P by means of W readily calls to mind some unique
alternative message Q about the world of which P
forms no part whatsoever, such that S might plausibly be in a
position to vouch for Q’s truth and such that doing so by
means of W, if it could be managed, might plausibly
comply with all the maxims. (Such is the residual force of the idea
that verbal expressions of P are equipment for
asserting P that S will still be viewed as vouching
for the truth of P as well unless doing so is manifestly out
of the question in the circumstances at hand, as it often will
be. What she won’t be vouching for is P’s
value or interest in the light of her
listener’s presumed informational needs.)
When such a Q readily comes to mind, S may be
designedly calling attention to, hence trying to vouch for the truth
of, Q. In such a case, S is enabled to fulfill a
conversational maxim (by meaning something other than what she
actually expresses) precisely by speaking in such a way that she would
flout the maxim, blatantly violate it, if she were to mean what she
says. Grice speaks in such cases of exploiting the maxim in
question. To exploit a maxim is to fulfill it “at the level
of” what one means by manifestly and avoidably violating
it—flouting it—“at the level of” what one
expresses.
There are two main ways to play out this scenario.
On the first, Q admits of intelligible and compact expression
but is something the speaker is understandably reluctant to assert
outright. The notorious letter of recommendation example is of this
kind.
On the second, Q is so extensive or so resistant to
intelligible compact expression for other reasons that the benefits to
speaker and listener alike of a terse and simple utterance outweigh
the inferential costs to the listener involved in extracting a large
message from a small package. This is often the case with allusions,
for instance. Where outright explicit assertion can’t be managed or
can be managed only with excessive effort on both sides, suggestion
has to suffice and will violate no general conversational norms.
Grice proposes that metaphor exemplifies this second playing out of
the flouting scenario. Suppose I say to you, “you’re the cream
in my coffee.” No human being literally is or literally could be
a dollop of viscous potable dairy product I could literally stir into
a piping hot breakfast beverage. This is a commonplace your acceptance
of which isn’t about to be shaken by any words from me. So for you to
take me as out to get that across, alone or in combination
with other things, would be for you to take me to be “blatantly
and inexplicably” violating Quantity (and/or Relation); you’d be
portraying me as being utterly, obviously, and to all appearances
pointlessly untruthful, uninformative, and irrelevant. But in
circumstances such as these, the proposition that you’re the cream in
my coffee reliably calls to mind a certain particular other
proposition, “attributing to [you] some feature or features in
respect of which [you] resemble (more or less fancifully) the
mentioned substance.” Perhaps it’s the proposition that you’re
such a comforting luxury (for me) that you’ve become a necessity (for
me) for most intents and purposes—a proposition whose explicit
expression is regrettably clumsy and longwinded and ungenerous. (In
fact the 1924 DeSylva, Brown, and Henderson lyric Grice is quoting
from continues as follows: “You’re the cream in my coffee, /
You’re the salt in my stew, / You will always be / My necessity, / I’d
be lost without you…”) The only obvious reason I could
have for calling your attention to this proposition in these
circumstances is in order to get it across and hence, vouch for its
truth. So I do vouch for its truth.
By speaking of “more or less fanciful resemblance,”
Grice reinstated the ancient idea that metaphor is a special figure
based in some special way upon likeness or analogy. Subsequent
advocates of an implicature approach to metaphor were sometimes
skeptical about this feature of the account. Searle, for instance,
found it hard to see any real resemblance between literally cold things
and metaphorically cold people. After starting a long list of possible
relations between what a metaphorical speaker says about an object and
what she should be taken to mean, he despairs of completing
it:
This registers an important general fact about pragmatic
explanations in the Gricean style. Conversational implicatures can come
off only if something in particular reliably comes to mind once there
is an appearance of a maxim violation to explain or explain away. Often
enough, something in particular does reliably come to mind,
but Gricean conversational principles in and of themselves do nothing
to explain what comes to mind or why it does
so.
One and the same metaphor can often be plausibly paraphrased in
substantively different ways. Yet Grice’s account appears to
depend on there being some unique alternative message that
reliably comes to mind when the speaker’s words are pondered. It
has struck some commentators that metaphorical interpretation involves
a kind of indeterminacy Gricean implicature theory can’t
readily accommodate. See Davis (1998), 70–74 and the response by Saul
(2001) for the main arguments on both sides.
There is also the phenomenon of twice-apt metaphor (Hills,
1997, 2008). Consider Romeo’s death speech:
Who’s the true apothecary? The impoverished pharmacist who
sold Romeo the poison, or death itself? Both, surely. From time to time
we are induced to construe one and the same utterance both
literally and metaphorically. In such cases an utterance is
already apt, already in complete accord with
pertinent conversational norms, when regarded as an effort to mean what
one says, no more and no less. Yet a metaphoric reconstrual of the
utterance comes to mind anyway, without the spur of any
threatened impropriety in the initial literal construal on which it is
based, and listeners view the speaker as vouching for the truth of both
construals at once.
Determinacy worries help motivate one influential and sweeping
reworking of Gricean pragmatics, the relevance theory of
Sperber and Wilson (1995, also Wilson and Sperber 2002). In an early
and somewhat simplified formulation (Sperber and Wilson 1985),
relevance theory takes metaphor to be an especially dramatic form of
loose talk and takes talk in general to be at least somewhat loose most
of the time. What is meant typically departs from what is said, to the
point where all a speaker ever commits herself to in
expressing a proposition is a noteworthy interpretive
resemblance between this proposition and the one whose truth she
is out to vouch for. (Two propositions bear an interpretive resemblance
to one another in a given setting to the extent that they have similar
consequences, given whatever is mutually taken for granted in that
setting.) And speakers can anticipate what competent listeners will
take them to mean only up to a point. What they can most firmly
anticipate being taken to mean is strongly implied by their
utterance, what they may or may not be taken to mean, depending on
facts about the listeners they aren’t in a position to know, is
only weakly implied. The result is that what’s meant by
an utterance, what the speaker vouches for in speaking as she does,
isn’t sharply delimited but trails off, in much the way that good
paraphrases typically trail off.
When a listener L provisionally decides that
utterance U is worth processing, he goes into the deductive
inference business in the following highly specific manner:
In the former case, where L does eventually feel adequately
compensated for his processing of U, he stops processing
U at this break-even point and takes U to properly
convey the consequence set C. In the latter
case, L doesn’t treat U as properly conveying
anything at all.
In general C will be in some ways
stronger, in other ways weaker, than U itself. In some ways
stronger, since auxiliary hypotheses have got in on the act. In other
ways weaker, since various parts of U’s own content that
have been judged to be old news, obviously false, or simply not worth
attending to have fallen by the wayside.
Suppose this is how listeners always process utterances.
Then to the considerable extent that speakers can anticipate the course
of such processing (what will get added to the premise set, what
consequences will get drawn, what will get discarded along the way,
where the break-even point will be reached), speakers can anticipate
what listeners will make of their words. Yet they can’t
anticipate the course or extent of listeners’ processing in
complete detail, with the result that their responsibility for what a
listener makes of their words, the degree to which they can be said to
have vouched in advance for the results of the listener’s
processing, trails off as this processing continues. Sperber and Wilson
contend that this processing model accounts for standard Gricean
implicatures, metaphors included, without requiring the
listener to reconstruct the speaker’s precise rationale for
speaking as she did and without a rich and contentious set of
conversational norms.
But why should we believe that this is how listeners always
process inferences?
First, it is a general principle of human cognition (and one whose
truth we all implicitly recognize) that our attention always goes to
whatever stimulus in our environment (if any) looks to be most worth
processing then and there, whatever looks then and there to be
“optimally relevant” (if anything does). A stimulus counts
as just plain relevant if it’s worth processing at all, and how
relevant or worth processing a stimulus actually is depends jointly on
two things about it:
The processing of any stimulus takes the form of extracting more and
more remote consequences from the conjunction of it with less
and less antecedently salient, less and less antecedently
taken-for-granted, auxiliary assumptions. Such is the Cognitive
Principle of Relevance.
Second, in claiming the attention of a listener at all, a speaker
implicitly assures him that the stimulus she’s offering him is
relevant and indeed optimally relevant—the most relevant
stimulus within reach. (In view of the Cognitive Principle, he
wouldn’t process her utterance unless he took it to be the most
relevant stimulus within reach, so to induce him to process it, she
must get him to take it to be the most relevant stimulus within reach.)
Such is the Communicative Principle of Relevance.
From these principles, Sperber and Wilson deduce two key
corollaries:
If we grant both (I) and (II), then we have at once a story about
why listeners process utterances as relevance theory claims and a story
about why speakers implicitly vouch for the results of such processing,
insofar as these results are foreseeable. In claiming the attention of
L for my utterance U, I’m implicitly vouching
for the truth of whatever I can expect L to come up with if he
processes U the way he’d process any promising stimulus
and continues to do so until it yields a result that adequately repays
his investment of effort to date. But this is all I implicitly vouch
for in speaking as I do. After that, the listener is on his own.
The trickiest part of this is the argument for (II). Suppose some
significant part of the consequence set C
that L can be expected to extract from U is either
(undetectably) false or (undetectably) undeserving of
L’s attention. This would detract in a very substantial way
from the relevance of U: falsity of the part detracts very
substantially from overall truth, and lack of pertinence in the part
detracts very substantially from overall pertinence. So
substantially, in fact, that S will almost always have
available to her some other utterance U* the
processing of which would have yielded L more in the way of
overall pertinent truth than U does—even if we make
allowances for motives S may have to conceal part of what she
knows from
L. If this is the case, then U will scarcely be
optimally relevant, the most relevant stimulus within reach,
since U* is more relevant and it’s
definitely within reach as well.
It’s possible to suspect that this argument equivocates in its
final stages. Until then, “U is optimally
relevant” appears to mean:
This is what S implicitly claims in inviting L to
attend to her utterance. Yet in those final stages, “U
is optimally relevant” needs to mean instead:
Ancient Greek poetry was rich in extended explicit
comparisons—similes—of the sort we now call epic
or Homeric. At Iliad 20.164–73, Aeneas is
bearing down on Achilles when the roles of attacker and attacked are
abruptly reversed; this is a literal rendering from (Stott, 2006):
Ancient rhetoricians would maintain that Homer’s simile and a
metaphor employing the epithet “the lion” so as to
manifestly refer to the man Achilles are alike in that they make or
present one and the same comparison, each in its own way: both bits of
language compare Achilles to a lion. Aristotle goes
on to contend that “similes are metaphors needing an explanatory
word” (Poetics 1407a)—as if the difference
between the “The lion [Achilles] rushed” (metaphor) and
“He [Achilles] rushed as a lion” (simile) came down to the
presence in the latter of a stage direction indicating that Achilles
went on the attack in the guise of a lion. A simile is thus a
lengthened metaphor. Quintilian turns things round, speaking of
metaphors as shortened similes:
Like his fellow ancients, Quintilian conceived metaphor as an affair
of terms rather than as an affair of sentences. A metaphorical
employment of the term “lion” to refer to the man Achilles
doesn’t say that Achilles is like a lion, since it
doesn’t say anything at all. Namings aren’t
sayings; they merely pave the way for sayings. What Quintilian meant,
then, is that a simile states the real or alleged similarity
(of Achilles to lions) which the corresponding metaphorical
substitution leaves to a listener’s imagination.
Once we come to view the sentence as the fundamental unit of
metaphorical action, Quintilian’s remark suggests something to us
that it couldn’t suggest to Quintilian himself: what a simple
sentence metaphor (Juliet is the sun, History is a
nightmare) really says is that Juliet is like the
sun, history like a nightmare—where the extent and
nature of the alleged likeness are things listeners must infer from the
concrete conversational setting in which the metaphor is employed. It
suggests that a sentence metaphor is an elliptical simile, a figurative
comparison whose key comparative construction is understood to be
present but remains unpronounced. Some such comparativist account of
metaphor has been proposed from time to time by modern critics
(Nowottny, 1962) and by modern linguists (Ortony, 1979).
An especially detailed version was developed by
Robert Fogelin (1998) from suggestions by Amos Tversky (1977).
For Fogelin, to speak figuratively is to speak so as to
stand corrected, to speak so as to manifestly invite and reliably
elicit some particular spontaneous correction from one’s
audience. This is easiest to see and easiest to understand when it
comes to figurative predications, e.g. instances of irony or
understatement. In such cases correcting the speaker consists
in correcting what she said by understanding her to have said
one thing while meaning another. Listeners take the speaker’s
actual words and edit them in the privacy of their own heads, thereby
bringing her utterance into accord with the context in which she spoke
them as called for by Gricean conversational principles. When a speaker
indulges in understatement, correction of what she says involves
strengthening it; when she indulges in irony, our correction involves
reversing it (in some sense or other, the nature of the reversal
varying from case to case), and so forth. Often the value and interest
of a thought is enhanced by the listener’s coming up with it for
himself and deciding for himself that it is appropriate to the
circumstances in which he finds himself. Figurative predication is one
way to impose these tasks on a listener; that’s one of our main
reasons for resorting to it.
Whether it is to be taken literally or figuratively, an
unqualified simple comparison
is to be understood as saying that (an) A has enough of the
features of (a) B that are salient in the present context. Or
if you prefer, (an) A is similar enough to (a) B in
respects that concern aspects of (a) B that
are salient in the present context. What counts as enough in
the way of shared salient B-features or enough in the
way of similarity to B in salient B-respects depends
in turn on the contextually salient interests or concerns that are
understood to motivate the making of the comparison in the first place.
So whether they are to be taken literally or figuratively, unqualified
simple comparisons have highly context-sensitive truth conditions.
Fogelin follows Tversky in supposing that when we compare (an)
A to (a) B, it is the currently salient features or
aspects of the second thing or kind of thing that call the
tune. This represents a break with how likeness or resemblance or
similarity has usually been construed in the philosophical
literature—viz., as a symmetric relation, with the
result that (an) A is like (a) B just in case, or
just to the extent that, (a) B is like (an) A. On
the understanding of likeness talk being offered here, this won’t be
true at least in general. And Fogelin seems right about this:
Comparisons have conversationally adjustable contents, resulting
from the attribution of conversationally adjustable contents to
comparative constructions such as is like. To assign a
comparative statement a particular truth-value, one must bring to bear
a conversationally adjustable canon of similarity, telling us
how much like (a) B and in what respects a thing A
needs to be in order for A to count as unqualifiedly like (a)
B for present conversational purposes. For instance, in
ordinary contexts governed by a routine default canon of
similarity,
comes out true, since “like bulldozers, road graders are also
used to push around large quantities of dirt, the chief difference
being that road graders have their blades beneath the chassis rather
than in front of them.” (88)
We’re now in a position to draw a distinction between literal
comparisons and figurative comparisons, similes, that accords with the
idea that to speak figuratively is to speak so as to stand corrected.
Figurative comparisons invite a different kind of correction than
figurative predications do.
To take a comparison literally is to assess it in the light
of a canon of similarity already in play when the comparison is
uttered, a generally prevailing or already prevailing
canon of similarity. This is how we always take a comparison on first
encountering it. And when the content we thereby assign it is fully in
accord with Gricean conversational principles, this is the only way we
ever do take it, the way we presume we were intended to take it all
along. Such is how we take (1), for example.
But sometimes taking a comparison literally yields a content that is
manifestly false, manifestly uninformative, or otherwise at odds with
conversational principles. Such is the case with
“Margaret Thatcher cannot, for example, move huge quantities
of dirt in an efficient manner” (87). Nor is she routinely
prepared to get dirty in any literal sense. Listeners can be counted on
to know as much and notice as much. So confronted with (2), they cast
about for a possible adjustment to the previously prevailing canon of
similarity that brings the content of (2) into line with conversational
principles and is manifestly smaller, manifestly more natural,
manifestly easier to make, than any other adjustment that would do the
trick. This adjustment relaxes the standards of how like a
bulldozer a thing needs to be in order to be just plain like a
bulldozer, like a bulldozer without qualification. And
it bestows fresh salience on relatively abstract features of
bulldozers, features a powerful person might credibly share: an ability
to take on large tasks, an ability to wear down large obstacles a
little at a time, a certain gracelessness in moment-to-moment
operation, etc.
When they think they’ve hit on such a possible adjustment,
listeners promptly implement it: they reinterpret the comparison in
accord with the adjusted canon of similarity and take the resulting
adjusted content to be what the speaker intended to get across all
along. (The whole process takes place without conscious inference;
indeed, this is part of what makes the adjustment a natural one in
Fogelin’s eyes.) To take a comparison figuratively is simply to
execute this kind of adjustment in how we interpret it. A
simile, a figurative comparative statement, is simply a
comparison that manifestly requires and therefore routinely receives
this kind of adjusted truth-conditional interpretation. When a simile
is figuratively true, it will ordinarily be literally false—it
will compare things such that the first is unlike the second
by generally prevailing or previously prevailing standards, yet the
first is like the second by new standards the simile
itself helps to impose; this is the sense in which a simile is an
exhibition of unity in variety, a likening of dissimilar things.
This account of how similes differ from more routine literal
comparisons predicts that similes exhibit the same kind of
reversibility failure as their literal counterparts and do so for
fundamentally the same reason. And this prediction seems to be correct.
Witness this observation from the novelist William H. Gass:
As with comparisons generally, our interest in a simile usually
isn’t an interest in the bare fact of likeness; it’s an
interest in the specific features of (an) A in virtue of which
it’s figuratively like (a) B. So: ordinarily a listener
is expected to infer for himself or notice for himself what it is about
(an) A that’s supposed to make it count as like (a)
B by these newly prevailing, adjusted standards:
To do this is to paraphrase the simile in question. In the
case of (2), we might come up with something along the lines of
On being told by Gertrude Stein that his portrait of her
didn’t look much like her, Picasso is said to have responded,
“Don’t worry, it will.” If we call such portraits,
portraits that vindicate themselves in the fullness of time by imposing
their own novel standards of vindication, Picasso likenesses,
we might say that on Fogelin’s account of things, similes are
Picasso likenings.
If we can understand
as somehow short for (2), we’ll see how (3) is in order as a
paraphrase of (4) as well. We’ll have a ready explanation of the
fact that there is all the difference in the world between saying in a
spirit of metaphor that money is blood (a stuff which
invigorates by circulating and facilitating vital exchanges) and saying
in a spirit of metaphor that blood is money (in that
parting with it, letting it be shed, is a powerful but drastic way of
obtaining precious things). As for the fact that metaphors often invite
more subtle and ambitious readings than the corresponding similes would
in their place, ellipsis itself has powerful effects on how words are
best interpreted in context. Imagine trying to find precise,
conversationally natural, non-elliptical equivalents for such cleverly
crafted ellipses as these:
Brute Force Accounts maintain that in metaphor, no words go
missing and neither words nor speakers are induced to mean anything out
of the ordinary. Instead, an utterance that would otherwise be idle or
pointless produces something Richard Moran calls a “framing
effect”(Moran, 1989): listeners are induced to view or consider
or experience the primary subject (or subjects) in a fresh and special
light, a light afforded by juxtaposing it (or them) with the secondary subject
(or subjects). What makes a remark metaphorical is the fact that it
induces this framing effect—together, perhaps, with the
specific syntactic strategy it employs for getting the job done.
Paraphrase (so-called) is best viewed as an effort to provide a salient
and representative sample of the real or apparent truths about the
primary subject(s) the framing effect induces us to notice, think
about, or dwell upon. It mustn’t be viewed as a restatement of
some metaphorically expressed or metaphorically conveyed message, since
there is no such message, restatable or otherwise. As Donald Davidson
put it in the most influential statement of such an account,
“What Metaphors Mean”:
Davidson cheerfully admits that there are things we can naturally
and usefully refer to as metaphorical meaning and metaphorical truth.
But they aren’t the seeds of metaphorical understanding; they are
among its fruits. We mislocate metaphorical meanings if we regard them
as accruing to particular words or phrases, the words and phrases we
take metaphorically. And we mislocate metaphorical truth if we think of
it as accruing to particular sentences, the ones we take to be
metaphors.
When it comes to metaphorical meaning: metaphors are subject to
interpretation in much the same way or sense as dreams are. We may
interpret a dream with an eye to ascribing it a determinate cognitive
value or interest, thereby coming to terms with it. Whether an
interpretation of a dream and the value or interest it ascribes to the
dream in question can be made to stick depends as much on the nature of
the interpreter and her concerns as on the nature of the dream and its
origins. A successful dream interpretation is the successful outcome of
a hermeneutic negotiation between an interpreter and a dream, or
between an interpreter and a dreamer, where what counts as a successful
outcome depends on what both parties bring to the transaction:
“Metaphor is the dreamwork of language, and, like all dreamwork,
its interpretation reflects as much on the interpreter as on the
originator.” (31)
When it comes to metaphorical truth: there can be truth (call it
metaphorical truth) in a sentence that is itself, considered simply as
a sentence, simply false, just as there can be truth (call it mythic
truth) in a story that is itself, considered simply as a story, simply
false. Understood along these lines, metaphorical truth would be
something like the revelatory power conferred upon a metaphorical
sentence (or on the impulse to use such a sentence) by a successful
metaphorical interpretation of the sentence, a successful ascription to
it of metaphorical meaning.
Davidson’s own version of a brute-force account has two main
positive inspiring ideas.
The first is the analogy between metaphors and jokes, an analogy he
may have encountered originally in work of Ted Cohen (cf. Cohen
1978). Metaphors and jokes are alike in being small-scale works of
verbal art. It takes wit to make jokes and a sense of humor to get
them; it takes genius of a certain sort to make metaphors and taste of
a certain sort to get them. All four capacities just mentioned are
creative capacities, modes of inventiveness—inventive
construction in the case of wit and genius, inventive construal in the
case of humor and taste. The acquisition of these capacities
isn’t simply a matter of assimilating rules, nor is their
exercise simply a matter of applying rules. But capacities that are in
this sense creative or inventive are already at work in literal
construal, even if they don’t have such fancy names.
We get closer to the heart of Davidson’s analogy if we contend
that metaphors (taken as metaphors) have meanings only in the same way
or sense that jokes (taken as jokes) do: both metaphors and jokes have
points, points which will be got by some and missed by others.
The point of a joke or metaphor is based on and made possible by
appropriate assignments of literal meanings to the words and phrases
that go to make up an utterance—based on and made possible by
an appropriate literal construal of the utterance. Yet one may
manage the called-for literal construal of a joke or metaphor yet
nevertheless miss (fail to get) its point.
The point of a joke or metaphor is at once something more
than a second meaning or import, assigned in the course of a second act
of construal, and something less than this. It is something
more, in that producing a joke or metaphor in the first place requires
some kind and degree of artistic success: to produce a joke or metaphor
at all is to bring something off. Getting (the point of) either kind of
verbal contraption involves appreciating what the speaker has brought
off in producing it. And no amount of intellectual
understanding of the speaker’s ends, the speaker’s
means, or the manner in which and extent to which the speaker’s
means achieved the speaker’s ends suffices for appreciation.
Appreciation involves a capacity and readiness to experience and value
the finished contraption in ways called for by what its maker has
brought off.
The second inspiring idea is an account of the framing effect
itself, on which it consists for the most part in a state of mind in
which we are encouraged and enabled to make comparisons, encouraged and
enabled to notice similarities and dissimilarities, analogies and
disanalogies, between primary and secondary subjects. Metaphor is
concerned with likenesses or analogies although it
doesn’t state them.
Sometimes a brief but powerful poetic utterance consists solely of
the juxtaposed mentionings of two different things or sights or
situations, managed so as to suggest that one of the two is there to
shed light on the other. In Buson’s haiku:
the light source, the chill, comes first. More commonly, as in Pound’s
“In a Station of the Metro,” it comes second.  Critics
often regard such poetic miniatures as limiting cases—in a
nonprejudicial sense, degenerate cases—of metaphor or
simile. Northrop Frye (1957, 123) speaks of “metaphor by
juxtaposition”; he’d have us regard Pound’s semicolon as the
ghost of a departed metaphor-forging form of the verb to
be:
John Hollander (1985, 278) speaks of “evaded simile”;
he’d have us regard the semicolon as the ghost of a departed
comparative construction:
Davidson’s idea is the reverse of Frye’s and
Hollander’s: he’d have us regard both the is of
metaphor and the is like of simile as lengthenings of
Pound’s semicolon. What it is about A that lights up or
is brought into prominence when A is considered in the light
of B is what A shares or at least might be regarded
as sharing with B, specific concrete real or putative
likenesses between A and B. For Davidson himself, the
framing effect is a cognitive affair; it consists in having one’s
attention drawn to such real or putative likenesses. Not all advocates
of a brute force account would agree with him about this. (See for
instance Rorty 1989, 17–18.)
Davidson confronts semantic twist accounts like Skulsky’s with
the following thought experiment:
You are entertaining a visitor from Saturn by trying to teach him
the word “floor.” You go through the familiar dodges,
leading him from floor to floor, pointing and stamping and repeating
the word.…
Should we call this process learning something about the world or
learning something about language? An odd question, since what is
learned is that a bit of language refers to a bit of the world. Still,
it is easy to distinguish between the business of learning the meaning
of a word and using the word once the meaning is learned. Comparing
these two activities, it is natural to say that the first
concerns learning something about language, while the second
concerns learning something about the world…
Your friend from Saturn now transports you through space to his home
sphere, and looking back remotely on earth you say to him, nodding at
the earth, “floor.” Perhaps he will think this is still
part of the lesson and assume that the word “floor” applies
properly to the earth, at least as seen from Saturn. But what if you
thought he already knew the meaning of “floor” and you were
remembering how Dante, from a similar place in the heavens, saw the
inhabited earth as “the small round floor that makes us
passionate”? [Paradiso 22.151, trans. Laurence Binyon]
Your purpose was metaphor, not drill in the use of the language. What
difference would it make to your friend which way he took it? With the
theory of metaphor under consideration, very little difference.
(36–7)
Semantic twist theory locates metaphor’s specialness in a
special kind of on-the-fly language learning. So it is committed to
viewing metaphorical understanding as a process in which how we are
already disposed to experience, think about, and otherwise respond to
the primary and secondary subjects informs how we freshly
experience, think about, and respond to words such as
“floor.” A process in which what needs attending to,
what needs active re-experiencing, is language, not the world.
Metaphorical understanding, metaphorical language learning, would be
on all fours with respect to the prior and more drawn out business of
learning the literal meaning of “floor.” But metaphorical
understanding isn’t like this at all. On the contrary, it is a
process in which how we already experience, think about, and otherwise
respond to words such as “floor” informs how we
freshly experience, think about, and respond to the primary and
secondary subjects. A process in which what needs attending to,
what needs active re-experiencing, is the world, not language. Brute
force theory gets this exactly right; semantic twist theory gets it
exactly wrong.
Roger M. White (1996) agrees with Davidson about the
comparison-based nature of the framing effect but rejects his
juxtaposition-based account of how metaphors deploy their syntactic raw
material. On White’s alternative brute force account, metaphor
involves a pair of recoverable parent sentences that have been
intertwined or interwoven to yield the sentence actually uttered;
metaphor’s characteristic effect on the listener requires the
tacit reconstruction by him of those parent sentences, followed by an
active comparison of the differing situations those differing sentences
would serve to describe. Metaphor still works by inducing a framing
effect rather than by formulating or communicating any particular
propositional content. But it is a whole situation, not a discrete
object or kind of object, that metaphor enables us to view in a new
light; the new light is shed by the invocation of a second situation of
comparable complexity; and the invocation is managed by an interweaving
of sentences rather than by a juxtaposition of terms. Such an account
might be called conflationism. It’s especially appealing
as an account of implicit metaphors such as Ahab’s, and
White employs it to offer close readings of ambitious literary
metaphors from Shakespeare, Dostoyevsky, and others.
More recently, Lepore and Stone (2010, 2015) have drawn on David
Lewis’s work on convention, signaling, and conversational
scorekeeping to offer a Davidson-inspired account of how speakers and
audiences collaborate in bringing off the special verbal accomplishment
that is a metaphor.
It won’t be possible to analyze metaphor in terms of special
speaker meanings (in the manner of Grice) or special word meanings (in
the manner of Skulsky) unless the words of a metaphor are put to
special nonstandard communicative use. Yet not all coordination with an
audience by means of conventionally signaled intentions counts as
communication with that audience. Say that a speaker S
coordinates with his audience in the joint achievement of goal
G by means or utterance U when circumstances are such
that:
(a) S can motivate his listeners to collaborate with him in
achieving G simply by getting them to think he intends that he
and they collaborate in achieving it;
(b) Motivating his listeners in this manner pretty much exhausts the
contribution S himself needs to make to their joint
achievement of G;
(c) S can get his listeners to think he so intends simply
by producing something that will function under the circumstances as a
conventional signal that he so intends, where conventional signal
systems are defined and explained along lines laid down in Lewis
(1969);
(d) Understandings already in place between S and his
listeners enable his production of U to function as just such
a conventional signal of just such an intention on his part; and
(e) S in fact produces U.
Joke-telling and metaphor-making certainly involve coordination with
an audience so defined: coordination in a shared relishing of the
ridiculousness of some situation or attitude; coordination in a joint
exploration of the ramifications of some pregnant comparison; or what
have you. But if we follow Lewis (1979), such coordination amounts to
communication if and only if either
(1) G simply consists in the addition of particular
propositions to some public, jointly maintained conversational score or
record; or at least,
(2) all it would take to achieve G under the circumstances is
some such addition to some such conversational score or
record.
And the goals built into joke-telling and metaphor-making
don’t meet this condition. No collaborative adjustment in what is
taken for granted for present conversational purposes suffices by
itself to make it the case that we relish the ridiculousness of a
situation together, explore the ramifications of a comparison together,
or what have you. So metaphors and jokes are instances of
non-communicative verbal coordination: however much communication
bringing off a metaphor or joke may often require, bringing off a
metaphor or a joke is not in itself a communicative accomplishment.
(The point has an interesting consequence for theories of
 speech acts.
 Sometimes speakers collaborate with
audiences on the production of a perlocutionary effect without
collaborating with them on the production of any enabling illocutionary
effect. Such brute perlocutionary acts include the bringing off of
metaphors and jokes. When we tell a joke or propound a metaphor, we do
something by speaking as we do without doing anything
in speaking as we do.)
For detailed critical commentary on
Davidson, see Reimer (1996, 2001, 2004).
In the 1980s a distinctive style of theorizing about
language, thought, and meaning took shape in the work of Charles
Fillmore, Eleanor Rosch, George Lakoff, Ronald Langacker and their
followers that came to be known as cognitive linguistics (Lee
2001, Croft and Cruse 2004).
Cognitive linguists break with advocates of Chomskian generative
grammar, denying that the terms on which words intelligibly combine are
set by brute hard-wired principles of universal grammar embodied in a
special purpose language module. Instead, the terms on which words
meaningfully combine are a direct reflection of the terms on which
certain strategies for conceiving concrete situations, strategies the
words serve to signal and evoke, can be successfully coordinated with
one another. They break with advocates of a Fodorian language of
thought, denying that conceiving or thinking is a matter of
manipulating sentence-like discursive mental representations in accord
with syntactically stated, truth preserving inferential rules. Instead,
conceiving is a matter of manipulating unconscious mental imagery so as
to let concretely pictured physical objects and situations stand in for
the more abstract objects and situations we’re endeavoring to
understand.
Verbal and nonverbal signs don’t possess fixed meanings or
applicability conditions independent of particular occasions of use.
Signs prompt audiences to construct contextually appropriate meanings
for them afresh and on the fly, each time would-be communicators resort
to them. Communication depends on the would-be communicator’s
ability to anticipate and purposefully manipulate the spontaneous,
largely unconscious constructions of meaning her signals will elicit
from her intended audience.
Concepts are first and foremost techniques for coping with their
subject matters; only secondarily are they means of referring to
particular constituents of those subject matters for the purpose of
framing discursively structured true and false thoughts about them. And
talk of discursively structured thoughts needs to be taken
with a grain of salt. Tempting as it is to regard the meaning of a
concept as a matter of the mind-independent thing or kind or relation
to which it refers, tempting as it is to regard the content of a true
or false thought as a matter of the mind-independent proposition the
thought expresses, tempting as it is to regard the thoughts we think as
arranging already meaningful concepts in much the way the sentences we
speak arrange already meaningful words, such thinking underestimates
the degree to which how we think is implicated in what we
are able to think and what we are able to think about.
Talk of referents and propositional contents and logical forms belongs
to a formalistic picture of what thinking is like, a picture
which is at best an intermittently convenient fiction.
Our most basic concepts, our most basic coping strategies, are those
we employ incessantly in the course of purposeful voluntary bodily
movement executed in response to sense-perceptible features of things
in our immediate spatial vicinity. These basic concepts sketch out a
world of discrete objects and discrete parcels of various physical
stuffs (substances), laid out in space and changing over time as the
objects and substances in question come into existence, move about from
place to place, and eventually go out of existence. They present this
sensorimotor world to us from a particular determinate spatiotemporal
perspective, and characterize it for us more or less as follows.
There’s an inherent difference between horizontal and vertical
directions; with only one vertical direction but many different
horizontal ones. There’s an inherent difference between higher
and lower places, hence also an inherent difference between upward and
downward motion. Some objects are undifferentiated point particles;
others are extended, with distinguishable fronts and backs and sides; a
few have distinguishable tops and bottoms as well. (An object’s
front is the part of it that normally faces forward as it moves and the
part one normally needs to manipulate if one has serious business to
transact with the object; a thing’s top is the part that is
normally highest up, etc.) Some motions, the forced ones, result from
external influences on a moving object or substance, pushes or pulls
exerted on it by other objects or substances in its immediate physical
surroundings. Others, the spontaneous motions, occur at the initiative
of the moving thing itself; these are physical actions on the part of
physical agents. Some objects are hollow and can accommodate other
objects or substances within themselves, in an interior place that
moves around with them whenever they move around; these are the
containers. One place or object may be connected to another place or
object by a traversible path consisting of intervening locations. Such
a path may be short, straight, and direct; or it may be long, crooked,
and indirect. Objects and substances stand in relations of fitting,
sticking, gripping, supporting and the like, and each of these
relations has immediate consequences for how (and how independently)
the objects or substances in question can move. Etc.
The concepts that figure in the foregoing remarks outline a kind of
folk geometry, folk kinematics, and folk dynamics. The relations with
which these concepts are concerned aren’t the only immediate
objects of human experience: we are aware of some of our own emotions
with equal immediacy. But they are the most “clearly
delineated” objects of experience and those with which human
thinking is most inevitably and incessantly concerned.
We exhibit these relations to ourselves and make inferences about
them by means of simple diagrammatic mental images, images the
unconscious employment of which routinely mediates the planning and
execution of our voluntary bodily movements: these are sensorimotor
image schemas. We use these schemas to monitor and manage our
ongoing activities in the here and now, and to envisage possible future
circumstances and possible future activities when we speculate or plan.
We may also employ them in imagistic demonstrations of important
general principles governing the geometric, kinematic, and dynamic
relations they serve to depict, truths such as:
(1) If object x is in container c and c
itself is in a second container d, then x is in
d.
(2) If object x starts out at a and travels
continuously in a single direction along a direct path leading from
a to b, then x gets closer and
closer to b at later and later times until it eventually
arrives at b (if it ever does).
Such demonstrations are possible because once properly set up and
properly deployed, an image-schematic depiction is often found to
possess reality-describing content in excess of what its constructor
deliberately imposed in the first place. When this occurs, the
depiction is treated by its constructor as carrying information (or
misinformation) concerning what situations of the kind she set out to
picture typically are or necessarily must be like.
Some of this excess information may be presented explicitly and
statically, so that she can simply read it off the face of the
depiction she has constructed. This is how we might demonstrate (1) to
ourselves. Such is structural inference. The rest of it
is presented only implicitly and dynamically, so that she can retrieve
it only by setting her depiction in motion and letting its changing
states tell her how situations of the kind she set out to picture
typically would or necessarily must evolve over time. This is how we
might demonstrate (2) to ourselves. Such is enactment, also
called simulation, elaboration, or running a mental
space. (For “structural inference” and
“enactment” see Lakoff and Johnson (2003), 257. For
“simulation,” “elaboration,” and “running
a space,” see Fauconnier and Turner (2002), 42–48.)
Lakoff and his collaborators hold that metaphor is at bottom a
conceptual matter, a matter of thinking of one thing as and in terms of
another. What Lakoff calls a conceptual metaphor or
cross-domain map (e.g. love is a journey) is a standing
pervasive culture-wide disposition to conceive one fixed sort of thing
(e.g. love affairs), as and in terms of another fixed sort of thing
(e.g. journeys). Such a cognitive disposition sets up a standing
correspondence between particular standard love-affair concepts on the
one hand and particular standard journey concepts on the other, with
the effect that each time the relevant conceptual metaphor is invoked
(in connection, perhaps, with a new pair of lovers),
The lovers correspond to travelers.

The love relationship corresponds to the vehicle.

The lovers’ common goals correspond to their common destinations
on the journey.

Difficulties in the relationship correspond to impediments to travel.
(Lakoff 1993, 207)
And so on. By exploiting these correspondences, we can and do
redeploy familiar, easy patterns of thinking about one familiar sort of
thing lending itself to direct sensorimotor representation (journeys)
in novel and strenuous bouts of thinking about a second, more elusive
sort of thing (love affairs):
The metaphor involves understanding one domain of experience, love,
in terms of a very different domain of experience, journeys…
(206)
Metaphor allows us to understand a relatively abstract or inherently
unstructured subject matter in terms of a more concrete, or at least
more highly structured subject matter. (244–245)
Over time this single cognitive disposition may manifest itself in
many different verbal expressions:
What makes these verbal expressions metaphorical, according
to Lakoff, is the fact that they are direct, conventionally
straightforward puttings-into-words of inherently metaphorical
thoughts, thoughts constructed in the first place under the
supervision of the single conceptual metaphor love is a journey.
Activate a conceptual metaphor; use it to think a metaphorical thought;
put that thought into words in the usual routine manner, provided for
by the usual routine meanings of the words in question; and the result
thereby counts as a verbal metaphor. Lakoff effectively
defines verbal metaphor as the conventionally straightforward
putting-into-words of an inherently metaphorical conceiving, an
inherently metaphorical thought. Such is the application to verbal
metaphor of the general cognitive linguistic principle that syntactic
form is the direct expression of underlying meaning relations.
A mental space is an arrangement of discrete concepts or images deployed so as to represent some familiar recurrent sort of situation. Imaginative manipulation of such a space allows us to anticipate the structure at a time and behavior over time of situations of the sort it is designed to represent. Mental spaces represent ways things can be conceived to be in something of the way possible worlds represent ways they could be. Gilles Fauconnier (1994) proposed them as a basis for interpretations of counterfactuals and propositional attitude constructions he viewed as superior to the standard truth conditional interpretations based on quantification over possible worlds.
 

Suppose two such spaces, representing distinct sorts of situations, can be viewed as contrasting enrichments of a single generic space representing a more general sort of situation they instantiate in differing and contrasting ways. Concepts or images in the first space correspond to concepts or images in the second if they flesh out the same concept or image in the generic space. One can then construct a fourth blended space deriving some of its representational features from the first input space, some from the second, and still others from general principles of conceptual integration, in hopes that the result may accurately represent—accurately anticipate the structure at a time and behavior over time—of some independently interesting sort of situation. Fauconnier and Turner (2002) offered a general framework for studying blended spaces and the conceptual integration networks that produce them. They envisioned diverse applications of the framework to the study of informal reasoning and the interpretation of ordinary language. One such application was the interpretation of analogical metaphors of the form “X is the Y of Z”—e.g. “Vanity is the quicksand of reason”—a matter Turner explores at length in his (1998).
A metaphor’s paraphrasable content isn’t
definitively settled by the pertinent literal meanings of its
constituent words and phrases. The sun can nourish and illuminate, but
it can also parch and dessicate and burn. What I convey about a person
by metaphorically likening her to the sun depends on which forms of
solar power come to mind when I do so, and that in turn depends in an
intricate manner on the concrete conversational setting in which I do
so. Metaphors exhibit a profound and conspicuous
context-sensitivity, and much of the work done on metaphor
over the past few years has been informed by more general debates about
the proper treatment of context-sensitivity in systematic philosophy of
language.
For the literalist, the primary verbal expressers of
propositions, the fundamental verbal bearers of truth-values, are
suitably disambiguated sentence types. Hence the primary
bearers of referents, extensions, and truth-conditional
contents, the fundamental units of account in compositional
semantics, are suitably disambiguated word and phrase types.
It is easy to see what this comes to in the case of artificial
languages suitable to pure mathematics and kindred abstract subject
matters. It is harder to see what it comes to in the case of natural
languages, where a single sentence type may be used to assert many
different propositions with every outward show of candor and directness
in as many different concrete conversational settings. The literalist
hopes to take the context-sensitivity of indexicals like I and
here and now as a model for understanding semantic
context-sensitivity more generally.
Here an independently plausible conception of conversational
exchange comes to her aid. The utterances of speakers and the
interpretive activity of listeners is profoundly and pervasively shaped
by the current values of a small number of basic situating
parameters. These parameters have fairly determinate values at
each stage in a well-run conversation; a wide variety of conversational
proprieties and improprieties turn on their current values at any given
stage; the values change from utterance to utterance in response to
publicly discernible events in a manner governed by simple principles
of conversational dynamics, so that careful and well-situated
participants have a fighting chance of keeping track of their changing
values. Participants need that fighting chance, since fluent
unconstrained conversational exchange resulting in full understanding
by each of what all the others are saying requires the participants to
possess more or less accurate, more or less thoroughgoing mutual
knowledge of the values of the parameters at each and every point in
the exchange.
The single most obvious and pervasively important situating
parameter is what is (pragmatically)
presupposed, the set of propositions whose truth is mutually
assumed for current conversational purposes. Yet it is easy to make a
case for regarding who is speaking, who is being addressed, the
time of speaking, relations of relative salience, etc, as
additional situating parameters. In fact, the parameters to which the
contents of various special “context-sensitive”
words and phrases are most obviously sensitive appear to be among the
situating parameters mutual knowledge of which is essential to
unconstrained conversational coordination more generally. So
perhaps we should think of sentence types as expressing propositions,
and of word and phrase types as expressing propositional constituents
or contents, relative to one or another assignment of values to the
various situating parameters that govern ongoing conversational
exchange, which will then proceed more or less as follows:
(a) The content accruing to a sentence (type) when it is uttered,
the content it has relative to the currently active values of the
pertinent situating parameters, serves to determine what can be said or
otherwise directly communicated by uttering it.
(b) What is said or otherwise directly communicated by an utterance,
together with various other publicly accessible changes in
conversational circumstances, serve to determine how situating
parameters change in preparation for the next utterance somebody might
make.
(c) When the values situating parameters take on in preparation for
the next utterance are fully appropriate as they stand to the
interpretation of the next utterance when it comes, the content taken
on by this utterance when it comes is the content the uttered sentence
possesses relative to those preset parameter values.
(d) When the values the parameters take on in preparation for the
next utterance are inappropriate as they stand to the next
utterance when it comes, but there is a unique simple, feasible,
publicly guessable change in those values that would render the
utterance appropriate and appropriately interpretable, that change
occurs forthwith, and the content taken on by the next utterance when
it comes is the one the uttered sentence possesses relative to the
freshly minted set of parameter values resulting from this last-minute
adjustment. The literature calls this process
accommodation.
For purposes of semantic and pragmatic theorizing, we can represent
the contexts to which the contents of context-sensitive
expressions are sensitive and in relation to which they vary by
sets of possible values for the situating parameters. And we
can represent the meaning of a given suitably disambiguated word or
phrase type by a rule for arriving at an appropriate propositional
constituent or truth-conditional contribution or content,
given a context thus understood. David Kaplan called
such a rule taking us from contexts to contents a character.
The technical resources employed by literalism were put in place
gradually over the years by Richard Montague (1974), David Kaplan
(1989), David Lewis (1979), and Robert Stalnaker (1999), but whether
any of them would fully endorse it is open to question. Prominent
literalists include Kent Bach (2005), Jason Stanley (2007), and the
self-styled semantic minimalists: Emma Borg (2004) and Herman Cappelen
and Ernie Lepore (2005).
The contextualist, by contrast, insists that what it would
take for an utterance to be true or instead false, what it would take
for an uttered sentence type to be true or instead false
as uttered, is a matter of what it would take for us to be
speaking truly or instead falsely in producing the utterance. When I
employ my words with every outward show of candor and directness, there
simply isn’t room for a principled and explanatory distinction
between what I say and what I mean, the proposition I express and the
proposition I communicate. As a general rule, the proposition I express
in speaking as I do is what you’d be affirming if you responded
with Yes, that’s so; what you’d be denying if you
responded with No, that’s not so; what you’d be
questioning if you responded with Is that so? Where there
is a disparity between what is said and what is successfully
meant in either direction, the disparity needs to be pretheoretically
discernible at least in broad outline, or Gricean conversational
inferences won’t get off the ground in the first place.
Grant me this much, the contextualist continues, and you’ll
need to conclude that there’s no assignable limit to the number
of contents a term with a given literal meaning can assume, no
assignable limit to the features of an occasion of use that can become
pertinent to determining which of these contents the term actually will
assume on some particular occasion of use, given its literal meaning.
Contexts resist summary representation in terms of sets of situating
parameter values, and the passage from literal meaning to appropriate
content, given a context, can’t be encapsulated in any tidy
parametric rule; it is hermeneutic rather than algorithmic in nature.
As Charles Travis puts it:
The contextualist concludes that there is nothing compact and
surveyable, relative to which natural language sentence types
can be said to express determinate propositions. Indeed, sentence
types as such don’t express propositions or possess
truth conditions at all. What truth and falsity and propositional
content accrue to first and foremost are speakings to particular
communicative effect on the part of particular speakers. “Only in
the context of a speech act does a sentence express a determinate
content”(Recanati, 2004). Prominent contextualists include Travis
(2008), John Searle (1979a), François Recanati (2004), Herbert
Clark (1992), Stephen Levinson (2000), and latter-day relevance
theorists: Robyn Carston (2002), Anne Bezuidenhout (2002), and Sperber
and Wilson themselves in work from the mid-90s on.
Confronted with puzzles like Travis’s about what it takes to
be literally “at home,” the literalist needs to
maintain that the proposition I succeed in communicating by uttering a
sentence often differs from the one my sentence expresses relative to
prevailing values for relevant situating parameters, even when I speak
with every surface sign of candor and directness. She concludes from
this that there are disparities between what we strictly speaking
say, the propositions we verbally express, and what we
successfully mean that are subtler than those exhibited in
classical Gricean implicatures. She hopes the discriminatory and
explanatory strategies Grice brought to bear on relatively gross
disparities between the said and the meant can eventually be brought to
bear on these subtler ones as well.
The contextualist is free to think of at least some figurative uses
as turning on a contrast between the literal content accruing
to an expression directly and from below (in virtue of its meaning and
relevant features of its occasion of use) and a distinct, derived,
figurative content the expression passes on up the tree of
grammar as its contribution to the content of any larger syntactic
wholes in which it may be embedded. In other words, he is free to
regard at least some figures of speech as involving pragmatically
inspired processes of content reassignment.
For the literalist, however, all possible contents for a given
expression issue from some appropriate underlying literal meaning for
it in fundamentally the same way and with fundamentally the same
directness: we simply apply one and the same content-determining
rule, one and the same character, to different
contexts. Literalism therefore has no place for figurative
contents (so understood) in its accounts of figurative
language use.
Recent contextualist accounts of metaphor have tended to be
exercises in “truth conditional pragmatics”: metaphor
involves some combination of enrichment and loosening in the
applicability conditions of pertinent general terms, where the
resulting content shift is just drastic enough to bring what the
speaker is thereby taken to be saying and what she is thereby
taken to mean or implicate into accord with pertinent conversational
norms. The conceptual raw materials for the shifted content derive in
part from what is taken for granted at a given point in a given
conversation, in part from commonplaces belonging to
“encyclopedia entries” permanently associated with
particular terms for all competent users of those terms. In relevance
theoretic accounts—Carston (2002), Bezuidenhout (2001), Sperber
and Wilson (2008)—the adjustment is part of the same
reflectively accessible process of conversational inference we use to
work out classical Gricean implicatures. In Recanati’s competing
account (2004), it is managed by “associative” processes to
which the listener lacks routine reflective access. Sperber and Wilson
maintain that metaphor is just an especially dramatic instance of
processes of content modulation at work throughout the interpretation of
language, involving no distinctive principles of its own.
Recent literalist accounts of metaphor have come in two styles.
On the one hand, there are efforts to portray the context
sensitivity of metaphor in terms of Kaplanian characters: rules that
render the semantic content of a suitable specific metaphorical
constituent a suitable function of the current value of some specific
situating parameter of special relevance to metaphor in particular.
When employed within the scope of modal and counterfactual
constructions, a metaphorical focal expression brings the properties it
actually picks out here and now to the characterization of
circumstances in which it would have picked out other properties, had
it been employed in them. This encourages Josef Stern (2000) to posit a
term-taking, term-making operator, “metaphorically
speaking” or “mthat,” ordinarily left unpronounced,
whose behavior is modeled on that of Kaplan’s rigidifying
operator “dthat.” Stern supposes that at any given point in
any given conversation, there is a set of things mutually taken for
granted for various figure-interpreting purposes; he calls them
I-presuppositions. (Think back to Skulsky’s
talk-postulates.) Like ordinary presuppositions, I-presuppositions
change from utterance to utterance under the impact of accommodation
pressures, and they equip terms with “implications” in
something like Skulsky’s sense: a property P is
“implied by” or m-associated with a general term
Φ in context c just in case it is I-presupposed in that
context that things to which Φ applies have property P.
The full Kaplanian account of “mthat” runs more or less as
follows:
This makes the content of “mthat [Φ]” a function of
a special purpose situating parameter, the set of active
I-presuppositions, even in cases where Φ itself has
the same content in every context.
On the other hand, there are efforts to rehabilitate the classical
Gricean implicature account of metaphor by challenging the specific
diagnostics for ‘what is said’ insisted upon by
contemporary contextualists. Neo-Gricean literalists undertake to
argue that what is meant can differ from what is said even
when speakers speak with every outward show of candor and directness,
and that this is precisely what happens when speakers resort to
metaphor. The arguments they employ against their contextualist
opponents bear a striking resemblance to those Kripke employed against
Donnellan’s
content-based treatment of the distinction between referential
and attributive uses of definite descriptions. See Donnellan
(1966), Kripke (1977), and the entry on 
 descriptions.
An especially detailed effort along these lines comes from Elisabeth
Camp (2006); only one of her arguments can be reviewed here. Some time
back the linguist Larry Horn drew attention to “the phenomenon
of
metalinguistic negation—a 
device for objecting to a previous utterance on any grounds whatever,
including the conventional or conversational implicata it potentially
induces, its morphology, its style or register, or its phonetic
realization” (Horn, 1988, 381). Consider “It
wasn’t warm, it was
sweltering,” where of course, if it was
sweltering, it follows that it was warm as well. In many circumstances,
a form of words the contextualist regards as reserved for denying what
is said can in fact be pressed into service to deny one or another
associated, unexpressed proposition. Camp contends that this renders
direct denial diagnostics for what is said systematically unreliable.
If she’s right about this, direct affirmation diagnostics and
direct questioning diagnostics will be in trouble for the same sort of
reason.
The American aesthetician Kendall Walton has pioneered an
approach to imaginative play in children and its analogues in adult
human culture built around the notion of a game of
make-believe. Such a game is governed by complex, tacit, mutually
understood rules or norms, principles of generation, that
render what’s fictional in the game, what players of it
are supposed to imagine in playing it, a fixed function of the actual
states and behaviors of various things and people they perceive,
manipulate, and otherwise interact with as they play it. Walton calls
such generators of fictional content props.
Iconic and verbal representations of various familiar traditional
kinds—dolls, hobby horses, statues, paintings,
novels—are inanimate props, artifacts whose
whole raison d’être is to help generate fictional
content in make-believe games of various familiar recurrent
kinds. What such representations represent is a matter of how they
stand ready to function as props, how they stand ready to shape
fictional content by helping to generate it when games of these
familiar recurrent kinds actually get played. Actors, on the other
hand, are animate props, props of a peculiarly active and
self-conscious kind. They help to author and direct (in their capacity
as autonomous agents) the fictional content they help to generate (in
their capacity as props) and go on to consume (in their capacity as
obedient imaginers). Actors behave so as to deliberately shape what
comes out fictional in the games they play with one another and with
salient inanimate bits of the world around them, thereby deliberately
orchestrating their own imaginings and those of their fellow
players.
The most conspicuous games of make-believe, those involving
premeditated acting, prefabricated representations, or both, are games
whose players vividly and eagerly imagine what they are supposed to
imagine under the rules because doing so is intrinsically satisfying in
some way. Props in such games are means to imaginative ends, deriving
their instrumental value or interest from the intrinsic value or
interest of the fictional content they help generate. Such games
are content oriented. Examples include playing cops and
robbers, putting on Hamlet, reading a novel for the sake of
its story. Walton (1990) analyzed various important modes of
representation in and outside the arts—depiction, narration,
dramatic enactment, etc.—in terms of the special sorts of prop
and special sorts of principle of generation characteristic of such
anthropologically conspicuous, intrinsically satisfying, content
oriented games.
But not all games of make-believe are like this. Sometimes the games
we play and the fictions we generate in the course of playing them owe
much of their value and interest to the manner in which they enable us
to perceive, conceive, and manipulate their own props. Sometimes our
thought and speech about objects that already really exist and are
already of vital interest to us can be helpfully structured or
restructured by pressing these objects into service as props in a
suitable game of make-believe, turning them for the time being into
improvised representations of something almost entirely different.
Pretend for a moment that Italy is a boot, turn Italy for the time
being into an improvised representation of a boot, and you have a
readymade scheme for locating particular Italian cities in relation to
each other, deriving from familiar established ways of thinking and
talking about boots and their component parts. Games of this second
sort are prop oriented (Walton 1993). Since little turns on
how vividly we imagine the things such games call on us to imagine, we
may be only dimly aware of playing them even as we do so. Yet we are
are remarkably skilled at playing such games with one another on a
pickup basis, never formulating, let alone stipulating, the principles
of generation that govern our imaginative collaborations for as long as
they last.
Hearing “Juliet is the sun” in its concrete
conversational setting, we come to suspect that Romeo is imagining his
new love to just plain be exactly that, the sun. We come to suspect
that Romeo is enabled to imagine this and in his personal
opinion called on to image it by the rules of a game of
make-believe he spontaneously finds himself playing, a game we attempt
to join him in playing as we struggle to make appropriate sense of his
words. Romeo imagines Juliet to be the sun because he feels called on
to do so, and he feels called on to do so because of the rules he takes
himself to be playing by (on the one hand) and what he seriously
believes about Juliet herself (on the other).
Perhaps Romeo’s game is such that in going through the motions of
asserting that Juliet is the sun, he renders it fictional that he does
assert this and does so sincerely and truthfully. (Many games of
make-believe do work this way, after all.) If so, his utterance is an
act of verbal participation in the game on which it comments,
a fiction-generating move in the game under the rules: going
through the motions of asserting that Juliet is the sun will
fictionally count as sincerely and truthfully asserting this very
thing. Or perhaps not: perhaps Romeo isn’t pretending to say or assert
anything at all in speaking as he does. Perhaps he isn’t speaking in
his capacity as make-believe actor at all; perhaps he speaks merely in
his other capacities as make-believe author and director and
audience. In either case, his words serve to signal an understanding
on his part that it is fictional in the game he’s playing that Juliet
is the sun: an understanding on his part that under the rules of the
game that he and any suitably attuned listeners are playing together,
he and they are to imagine Juliet to be the sun—imagine her to
just plain be exactly that.
As we have already seen, this understanding on Romeo’s part is in turn
a joint product and joint expression of his working understanding of
the rules he’s playing by (on the one hand) and his working
understanding of what Juliet herself is actually like (on the
other). So: what would Romeo’s signal do for a listener who is already
suitably attuned with him, a listener already reliably disposed to
play by the same rules he plays by? It would ascribe to Juliet the
properties that in Romeo’s opinion render it fictional that
she is the sun, the properties that in Romeo’s opinion make the
role of the sun fall to her, under those rules. And these are the
very properties that turn up in a successful paraphrase of Romeo’s
utterance when it gets taken as a metaphor. We listeners undertake to
discover what properties these are by responding to Romeo’s utterance
as a make-believe signal, doing our best to enter into the spirit of a
game already in progress, and reflecting on the rules we find
ourselves playing by if and when we succeed in doing so.
At any rate, this is how things go in the basic case. Sometimes the
rules by which the maker of a metaphor is playing are so familiar and
stereotyped that we can recover them without any prior effort to join
in and play along, in which case we may not bother to do so. For that
matter, sometimes the initiator of the game may merely go through the
motions of playing it himself, failing to imagine the things he is
nominally called on to imagine by make-believe signals he himself
emits, in which case he merely alludes to a game that even he doesn’t
bother to play.
All of which suggests the broad outlines of a novel account of how we
go about interpreting many metaphors: