The word ‘metaphysics’ is notoriously hard to define.
Twentieth-century coinages like ‘meta-language’ and
‘metaphilosophy’ encourage the impression that metaphysics
is a study that somehow “goes beyond” physics, a study
devoted to matters that transcend the mundane concerns of Newton and
Einstein and Heisenberg. This impression is mistaken. The word
‘metaphysics’ is derived from a collective title of the
fourteen books by Aristotle that we currently think of as making up
Aristotle's Metaphysics. Aristotle himself did not know
the word. (He had four names for the branch of philosophy that is the
subject-matter of Metaphysics: ‘first philosophy’,
‘first science’, ‘wisdom’, and
‘theology’.) At least one hundred years after Aristotle's
death, an editor of his works (in all probability, Andronicus of
Rhodes) titled those fourteen books “Ta meta ta
phusika”—“the after the physicals” or
“the ones after the physical ones”—the
“physical ones” being the books contained in what we now
call Aristotle's Physics. The title was probably meant to warn
students of Aristotle's philosophy that they should attempt
Metaphysics only after they had mastered “the physical
ones”, the books about nature or the natural world—that is
to say, about change, for change is the defining feature of the
natural world.
This is the probable meaning of the title because Metaphysics is
about things that do not change. In one place, Aristotle identifies
the subject-matter of first philosophy as “being as such”,
and, in another as “first causes”. It is a nice—and
vexed—question what the connection between these two definitions
is. Perhaps this is the answer: The unchanging first causes have
nothing but being in common with the mutable things they
cause. Like us and the objects of our experience—they are,
and there the resemblance ceases. (For a detailed and informative
recent guide to Aristotle's Metaphysics, see Politis
2004.)
Should we assume that ‘metaphysics’ is a name for that
“science” which is the subject-matter of
Aristotle's Metaphysics? If we assume this, we should be
committed to something in the neighborhood of the following theses:
 Any of these three theses might have been regarded as a defensible
statement of the subject-matter of what was called
‘metaphysics’ until the seventeenth century. But then,
rather suddenly, many topics and problems that Aristotle and the
Medievals would have classified as belonging to physics (the relation
of mind and body, for example, or the freedom of the will, or personal
identity across time) began to be reassigned to metaphysics. One might
almost say that in the seventeenth century metaphysics began to be a
catch-all category, a repository of philosophical problems that could
not be otherwise classified as epistemology, logic, ethics or other
branches of philosophy. (It was at about that time that the word
‘ontology’ was invented—to be a name for the science
of being as such, an office that the word ‘metaphysics’
could no longer fill.)  The academic rationalists of the
post-Leibnizian school were aware that the word
‘metaphysics’ had come to be used in a more inclusive
sense than it had once been. Christian Wolff attempted to justify this
more inclusive sense of the word by this device: while the
subject-matter of metaphysics is being, being can be investigated
either in general or in relation to objects in particular
categories. He distinguished between ‘general
metaphysics’ (or ontology), the study of being as such, and the
various branches of ‘special metaphysics’, which study the
being of objects of various special sorts, such as souls and material
bodies. (He does not assign first causes to general
metaphysics, however: the study of first causes belongs to natural
theology, a branch of special metaphysics.) It is doubtful whether
this maneuver is anything more than a verbal ploy. In what sense, for
example, is the practitioner of rational psychology (the branch of
special metaphysics devoted to the soul) engaged in a study of being?
Do souls have a different sort of being from that of other
objects?—so that in studying the soul one learns not only about
its nature (that is, its properties: rationality, immateriality,
immortality, its capacity or lack thereof to affect the body
…), but also about its “mode of being”, and hence
learns something about being? It is certainly not true that all, or
even very many, rational psychologists said anything, qua
rational psychologists, that could plausibly be construed as a
contribution to our understanding of being.
Perhaps the wider application of the word ‘metaphysics’
was due to the fact that the word ‘physics’ was coming to
be a name for a new, quantitative science, the science that bears that
name today, and was becoming increasingly inapplicable to the
investigation of many traditional philosophical problems about
changing things (and of some newly discovered problems about changing
things).
Whatever the reason for the change may have been, it would be
flying in the face of current usage (and indeed of the usage of the
last three or four hundred years) to stipulate that the subject-matter
of metaphysics was to be the subject-matter of
Aristotle's Metaphysics. It would, moreover, fly in the face
of the fact that there are and have been paradigmatic metaphysicians
who deny that there are first causes—this denial is certainly a
metaphysical thesis in the current sense—others who insist that
everything changes (Heraclitus and any more recent philosopher who is
both a materialist and a nominalist), and others still (Parmenides and
Zeno) who deny that there is a special class of objects that do not
change. In trying to characterize metaphysics as a field, the best
starting point is to consider the myriad topics traditionally assigned
to it.
If metaphysics now considers a wider range of problems than those
studied in Aristotle's Metaphysics, those original problems
continue to belong to its subject-matter. For instance, the topic of
“being as such” (and “existence as such”, if existence is
something other than being) is one of the matters that belong to
metaphysics on any conception of metaphysics. The following theses are
all paradigmatically metaphysical:
 It seems reasonable, moreover, to say that investigations
into non-being belong to the topic “being as such” and
thus belong to metaphysics. (This did not seem reasonable to Meinong,
who wished to confine the subject-matter of metaphysics to “the
actual” and who therefore did not regard his Theory of Objects
as a metaphysical theory. According to the conception of metaphysics
adopted in this article, however, his thesis [paraphrased]
“Predication is independent of being” is paradigmatically
metaphysical.)
The topics “the first causes of things” and
“unchanging things”—have continued to interest
metaphysicians, though they are not now seen as having any important
connection with the topic “being as such”. The first three
of Aquinas's Five Ways are metaphysical arguments on any conception of
metaphysics. Additionally the thesis that there are no first causes
and the thesis that there are no things that do not change count as
metaphysical theses, for in the current conception of metaphysics, the
denial of a metaphysical thesis is a metaphysical thesis. No
post-Medieval philosopher would say anything like this:
 I study the first causes of things, and am
therefore a metaphysician. My colleague Dr McZed denies that there are
any first causes and is therefore not a metaphysician; she is rather,
an anti-metaphysician. In her view, metaphysics is a science with a
non-existent subject-matter, like astrology.
This feature of the contemporary conception of metaphysics is
nicely illustrated by a statement of Sartre's:
I do not think myself any less a metaphysician in denying the
existence of God than Leibniz was in affirming it. (1949:
139)
 An anti-metaphysician in the contemporary sense
is not a philosopher who denies that there are objects of the sorts
that an earlier philosopher might have said formed the subject-matter
of metaphysics (first causes, things that do not change, universals,
substances, …), but rather a philosopher who denies the
legitimacy of the question whether there are objects of those
sorts. 
The three original topics—the nature of being; the first
causes of things; things that do not change—remained topics of
investigation by metaphysicians after Aristotle. Another topic,
discussed in the following subsection, occupies an intermediate
position between Aristotle and his successors. 
We human beings sort things into various classes. And we often
suppose that the classes into which we sort things enjoy a kind of
internal unity. In this respect they differ from sets in
the strict sense of the word. (And no doubt in others. It would seem,
for example, that we think of the classes we sort things
into—biological species, say—as comprising different
members at different times.) The classes into which we sort things are
in most cases “natural” classes, classes whose membership
is in some important sense uniform—“kinds”. We shall not attempt
an account or definition of ‘natural class’ here. Examples
must suffice. There are certainly sets whose members do not make up
natural classes: a set that contains all dogs but one, and a set that
contains all dogs and exactly one cat do not correspond to natural
classes in anyone's view.  And it is tempting to suppose that there is
a sense of “natural” in which dogs make up a natural
class, to suppose that in dividing the world into dogs and non-dogs,
we “cut nature at the joints”. It is, however, a
respectable philosophical thesis that the idea of a natural class
cannot survive philosophical scrutiny. If that respectable thesis is
true, the topic “the categories of being” is a
pseudo-topic. Let us simply assume that the respectable thesis is
false and that things fall into various natural
classes—hereinafter, simply classes.
Some of the classes into which we sort things are more
comprehensive than others: all dogs are animals, but not all animals
are dogs; all animals are living organisms, but not all living
organisms are animals …. Now the very expression “sort
things into classes” suggests that there is a most comprehensive
class: the class of things, the class of things that can be sorted
into classes.  But is this so?—and if it is so, are there
classes that are “just less comprehensive” than this
universal class? If there are, can we identify them?—and are
there a vast (perhaps even an infinite) number of them, or some
largish, messy number like forty-nine, or some small, neat number like
seven or four? Let us call any such less
comprehensive classes the ‘categories of being’ or the
‘ontological categories’. (The former term, if not the latter,
presupposes a particular position on one question about the nature of
being: that everything is, that the universal class is the class of
beings, the class of things that are. It thus presupposes that Meinong
was wrong to say that “there are things of which it is true that
there are no such things”.)
The topic “the categories of being” is intermediate
between the topic “the nature of being” and the topics
that fall under the post-Medieval conception of metaphysics for a
reason that can be illustrated by considering the problem of
universals.  Universals, if they indeed exist, are, in the first
instance, properties or qualities or attributes (i.e.,
“ductility” or “whiteness”) that are
supposedly universally “present in” the members of classes
of things and relations (i.e., “being to the north of”)
that are supposedly universally present in the members of classes of
sequences of things. “In the first instance”: it may be
that things other than qualities and relations are universals,
although qualities and relations are the items most commonly put
forward as examples of universals. It may be that the novel War
and Peace is a universal, a thing that is in some mode present in
each of the many tangible copies of the novel. It may be that the word
“horse” is a universal, a thing that is present in each of
the many audible utterances of the word. And it may be that natural
classes or kinds are themselves universals—it may be that there
is such a thing as “the horse” or the species Equus
caballus, distinct from its defining attribute “being a
horse” or “equinity”, and in some sense
“present in” each horse. (Perhaps some difference between
the attribute “being a horse” and the attribute
“being either a horse or a kitten” explains why the former
is the defining attribute of a kind and the latter is not.  Perhaps
the former attribute exists and the latter does not; perhaps the
former has the second-order attribute “naturalness” and
the latter does not; perhaps the former is more easily apprehended by
the intellect than the latter.)
The thesis that universals exist—or at any rate
“subsist” or “have being”—is variously
called ‘realism’ or ‘Platonic realism’ or
‘platonism’. All three terms are objectionable. Aristotle
believed in the reality of universals, but it would be at best an
oxymoron to call him a platonist or a Platonic realist. And
‘realism’ tout court has served as a name for a variety of
philosophical theses. The thesis that universals do not exist—do
not so much as subsist; have no being of any sort—is generally
called ‘nominalism’. This term, too is objectionable. At
one time, those who denied the existence of universals were fond of
saying things like:
 There is no such thing as “being a horse”:
there is only the name [nomen, gen. nominis]
“horse”, a mere flatus vocis [puff of
sound].
Present-day nominalists, however,
are aware, if earlier nominalists were not, that if the phrase
‘the name “horse” ’ designated an
object, the object it designated would itself be a universal or
something very like one. It would not be a mere puff of sound but
would rather be what was common to the many puffs of sound that were
its tokens.
The old debate between the nominalists and the realists continues
to the present day. Most realists suppose that universals constitute
one of the categories of being. This supposition could certainly be
disputed without absurdity. Perhaps there is a natural
class of things to which all universals belong but which contains
other things as well (and is not the class of all things). Perhaps,
for example, numbers and propositions are not universals, and perhaps
numbers and propositions and universals are all members of a class of
“abstract objects”, a class that some things do not belong
to. Or perhaps there is such a thing as “the whiteness of the
Taj Mahal” and perhaps this object and the universal
“whiteness”—but not the Taj Mahal itself—both
belong to the class of “properties”. Let us call such a
class—a proper subclass of an ontological category, a natural
class that is neither the class of all things nor one of the
ontological categories—an ‘ontological sub-category’. It may
indeed be that universals make up a sub-category of being and are
members of the category of being “abstract object”. But
few if any philosophers would suppose that universals were members of
forty-nine sub-categories—much less of a vast number or an
infinity of sub-categories. Most philosophers who believe in the
reality of universals would want to say that universals, if they do
not constitute an ontological category, at least constitute one of the
“higher” sub-categories. If dogs form a natural class,
this class is—by the terms of our definition—an
ontological sub-category. And this class will no doubt be a subclass
of many sub-categories: the genus canis, the class (in the
biological sense) mammalia, …, and so through a chain
of sub-categories that eventually reaches some very general
sub-category like “substance” or “material
object”. Thus, although dogs may compose an ontological
sub-category, this sub-category—unlike the category
“universal”—is one of the “lower”
ones. These reflections suggest that the topic “the categories
of being” should be understood to comprehend both the categories
of being sensu stricto and their immediate
sub-categories.
Does the topic “the categories of being” belong to
metaphysics in the “old” sense? A case can be made for
saying that it does, based on the fact that Plato's theory of forms
(universals, attributes) is a recurrent theme in
Aristotle's Metaphysics. In Metaphysics, two of
Plato's central theses about the forms come in for vigorous criticism:
(i) that things that would, if they existed, be “inactive”
(the forms) could be the primary beings, the “most real”
things, and (ii) that the attributes of things exist
“separately” from the things whose attributes they are. We
shall be concerned only with (ii). In the terminology of the Schools,
that criticism can be put this way: Plato wrongly believed that
universals existed ante res (prior to objects); the correct
view is that universals exist in rebus (in objects). It is
because this aspect of the problem of universals—whether
universals exist ante res or in rebus—is
discussed at length in Metaphysics, that a strong case can be
made for saying that the problem of universals falls under the old
conception of metaphysics. (And the question whether universals, given
that they exist at all, exist ante res or in rebus
is as controversial in the twenty-first century as it was in the
thirteenth century and the fourth century B.C.E.) If we do decide that
the problem of universals belongs to metaphysics on the old
conception, then, since we have liberalized the old
conception by applying to it the contemporary rule that
the denial of a metaphysical position is to be regarded as a
metaphysical position, we shall have to say that the question whether
universals exist at all is a metaphysical question under the old
conception—and that nominalism is therefore a metaphysical
thesis.
There is, however, also a case to made against classifying the
problem of universals as a problem of metaphysics in the (liberalized)
old sense. For there is more to the problem of universals than the
question whether universals exist and the question whether, if they do
exist, their existence is ante res or in rebus. For
example, the problem of universals also includes questions about the
relation between universals (if such there be) and the things that are
not universals, the things usually called particulars. Aristotle did
not consider these questions in the Metaphysics. One might
therefore plausibly contend that only one part of the problem of
universals (the part that pertains to the existence and nature of
universals) belongs to metaphysics in the old sense. At one time, a
philosopher might have said,
 The universal “doghood” is a thing
that does not change. Therefore, questions about its nature belong to
metaphysics, the science of things that do not change. But dogs are
things that change. Therefore, questions concerning the relation of
dogs to doghood do not belong to metaphysics.
But no contemporary philosopher would divide the topics that
way—not even if he or she believed that doghood existed and was
a thing that did not change. A contemporary philosopher—if that
philosopher concedes that there is any problem that can properly be
called “the problem of universals”—will see the
problem of universals as a problem properly so called, as a problem
having the kind of internal unity that leads philosophers to speak of
a philosophical problem. And the same point applies to
the topic “the categories of being”: every philosopher who
is willing to say that “What are the categories of being?”
is a meaningful question will assign every aspect of that question to
metaphysics
Let us consider some aspects of the problem of universals that
concern changing things. (That is, that concern particulars—for
even if there are particulars that do not change, most of the
particulars that figure in discussions of the problem of universals as
examples are things that change.) Consider two white
particulars—the Taj Mahal, say, and the Washington Monument. And
suppose that both these particulars are white in virtue of (i.e.,
their being white consists in) their bearing some one, identifiable
relation to the universal “whiteness”. Suppose further
that we are able to single out this relation by some sort of act of
intellectual attention or abstraction, and that (having done so) we
have given it the name “falling under”. All white things
and only white things fall under whiteness, and falling under
whiteness is what it is to be white. (We pass over many questions that
would have to be addressed if we were discussing the problem of
universals for its own sake. For example, both blueness
and redness are spectral color-properties, and whiteness is not. Does
this fact imply that “being a spectral color-property” is,
as one might say, a second-order universal? If so, does blueness
“fall under” this universal in the same sense as the sense
in which a copy of Philosophical Studies falls under
blueness?)
Now what can we say about this relation, this “falling
under”? What is it about the two objects whiteness and the Taj
Mahal that is responsible for the fact that the latter falls under the
former? Is the Taj perhaps a “bundle” of universalia
ante res, and does it fall under whiteness in virtue of the fact
that whiteness is one of the universals that is a constituent of the
bundle that it is? Or might it be that a particular like the Taj,
although it indeed has universals as constituents, is something more
than its universal constituents? Might it be that the Taj has a
constituent that is not a universal, a “substrate”, a
particular that is in some sense property-less and that holds the
universal constituents of the Taj together—that
“bundles” them? (If we take that position, then we may
want to say, with Armstrong (1989: 94–96), that the Taj is a
‘thick particular’ and its substrate a ‘thin
particular’: a thick particular being a thin particular taken
together with the properties it bundles.) Or might the Taj have
constituents that are neither universals nor substrates? Might we have
been too hasty when we defined ‘particulars’ as things
that are not universals? Could there perhaps be two kinds of
non-universals, concrete non-universals or concrete individuals (those
would be the particulars, thick or thin), and abstract non-universals
or abstract individuals (‘accidents’ or
‘tropes’ or ‘property instances’), things that
are properties or qualities (and relations as well), things like
“the (individual) whiteness of the Taj Mahal”? Is the Taj
perhaps a bundle not of universals but of accidents? Or is it composed
of a substrate and a bundle of accidents? And we cannot neglect the
possibility that Aristotle was right and that universals exist
only in rebus. If that is so, we must ask what the relation
is between the matter that composes a particular and the universals
that inhere in it—that inhere simultaneously in
“this” matter and in “that” matter.
The series of questions that was set out in the preceding paragraph
was introduced by observing that the problem of universals includes
both questions about the existence and nature of universals and
questions about how universals are related to the particulars that
fall under them. Many of the theories that were alluded to in that
series of questions could be described as theories of the
“ontological structure” of non-universals. We can contrast
ontological structure with mereological structure. A philosophical
question concerns the mereological structure of an object if it is a
question about the relation between that object and those of its
constituents that belong to the same ontological category as the
object. For example, the philosopher who asks whether the Taj Mahal
has a certain block of marble among its constituents essentially or
only accidentally is asking a question about the mereological
structure of the Taj, since the block and the building belong to the
same ontological category. But the philosopher who asks whether the
Taj has “whiteness” as a constituent and the philosopher
who supposes that the Taj does have this property-constituent and
asks, “What is the nature of this relation ‘constituent
of’ that ‘whiteness’ bears to the Taj?” are
asking questions about its ontological structure.
Many philosophers have supposed that particulars fall under
universals by somehow incorporating them into their ontological
structure. And other philosophers have supposed that the ontological
structure of a particular incorporates individual properties or
accidents—and that an accident is an accident of a certain
particular just in virtue of being a constituent of that
particular.
Advocates of the existence of ante res universals, and
particularly those who deny that these universals are constituents of
particulars, tend to suppose that universals
abound—that there is not only such a universal as
whiteness but such a universal as “being both white and round
and either shiny or not made of silver”. Advocates of other
theories of universals are almost always less liberal in the
range of universals whose existence they will allow. The
advocate of in rebus universals is unlikely to grant the
existence of “being both white and round and either shiny or not
made of silver”, even in the case in which there is an object
that is both white and round and either shiny or not made of silver
(such as a non-shiny white plastic ball).
The two topics “the categories of being” and “the
ontological structure of objects” are intimately related to each
other and to the problem of universals. It is not possible to propose
a solution to the problem of universals that does not have
implications for the topic “the categories of
being”. (Even nominalism implies that at least one popular
candidate for the office “ontological category” is
non-existent or empty.) It is certainly possible to maintain that
there are ontological categories that are not directly related to the
problem of universals (“proposition”, “state of
affairs”, “event”, “mere
possibile”), but any philosopher who maintains this
will nevertheless maintain that if there are universals they make up
at least one of the higher ontological sub-categories. And it seems
that it is possible to speak of ontological structure only if one
supposes that there are objects of different ontological
categories. So whatever metaphysics comprehends, it must comprehend
every aspect of the problem of universals and every aspect of the
topics “the categories of being” and “the
ontological structure of objects”. For a recent investigation of
the problems that have been discussed in this section, see Lowe
(2006).
We turn now to a topic that strictly speaking belongs to “the
categories of being”, but which is important enough to be
treated separately.
Some things (if they exist at all) are present only
“in” other things: a smile, a haircut (product, not
process), a hole …. Such things may be opposed to things that
exist “in their own right”. Metaphysicians call the things
that exist in their own right ‘substances’. Aristotle
called them ‘protai ousiai’ or “primary
beings”. They make up the most important of his ontological
categories. Several features define protai ousiai: they are
subjects of predication that cannot themselves be predicated of things
(they are not universals); things exist “in” them, but
they do not exist “in” things (they are not accidents like
Socrates' wisdom or his ironic smile); they have determinate
identities (essences). This last feature could be put this way in
contemporary terms: if the prote ousia x exists at a
certain time and the prote ousia y exists at some
other time, it makes sense to ask whether x and y are
the same, are numerically identical (and the question must have a
determinate answer); and the question whether a given prote
ousia would exist in some set of counterfactual circumstances
must likewise have an answer (at least if the circumstances are
sufficiently determinate—if, for example, they constitute a
possible world.  More on this in the next section). It is difficult to suppose that smiles
or holes have this sort of determinate identity. To ask whether the
smile Socrates smiled today is the smile he smiled yesterday (or is
the smile he would have smiled if Crito had asked one of his
charmingly naïve questions) can only be a question about descriptive
identity.
 Aristotle uses ‘(prote) ousia’ not
only as a count-noun but as a mass term. (He generally writes
‘ousia’ without qualification when he believes
that the context will make it clear that he means ‘prote
ousia’.) For example, he not only asks questions like
“Is Socrates a (prote) ousia?” and
“What is a (prote) ousia”?, but
questions like “What is the (prote) ousia of
Socrates?” and “What is
(prote) ousia?” (Which question he is asking
sometimes has to be inferred from the context, since there is no
indefinite article in Greek.) In the count-noun sense of the term,
Aristotle identifies at least some (protai) ousiai
with ta hupokeimena or “underlying
things”. Socrates, for example, is a hupokeimenon in
that he “lies under” the in rebus universals
under which he falls and the accidents that inhere in
him. ‘To hupokeimenon’ has an approximate Latin
equivalent in ‘substantia’, “that which
stands under”. (Apparently, “to stand under” and
“to lie under” are equally good metaphorical descriptions
of the relations a thing bears to its qualities and accidents.) Owing
both to the close association of (protai) ousiai
and hupokeimena in Aristotle's philosophy and to the absence
of a suitable Latin equivalent of ‘ousia’
‘substantia’ became the customary Latin
translation of the count-noun
‘(prote) ousia’.
 The question whether there in fact are substances continues to be
one of the central questions of metaphysics. Several closely related
questions are: How, precisely, should the concept of substance be
understood?; Which of the items (if any of them) among those we
encounter in everyday life are substances?; If there are substances at
all, how many of them are there?—is there only one as Spinoza
contended, or are there many as most of the rationalists supposed?;
What kinds of substances are there?—are there immaterial
substances, eternal substances, necessarily existent substances?
It must be emphasized that there is no universally accepted and
precise definition of ‘substance’. Depending on how one
understood the word (or the concept) one might say either that Hume
denied that there were any substances or that he held that the only
substances (or the only substances of which we have any knowledge)
were impressions and ideas. It would seem, however, that most
philosophers who are willing to use the word ‘substance’
at all would deny that any of the following (if they exist) are
substances:
The nature of being, the problem of universals, and the nature of
substance have been recognized as topics that belong to
“metaphysics” by almost everyone who has used the word. We now
turn to topics that belong to metaphysics only in the post-Medieval
sense.
Philosophers have long recognized that there is an important
distinction within the class of true propositions: the distinction
between those propositions that might have been false and those that
could not have been false (those that must be true). Compare, for
example, the proposition that Paris is the capital of France and the
proposition that there is a prime between every number greater than 1
and its double. Both are true, but the former could have been false
and the latter could not have been false. Likewise, there is a
distinction to be made within the class of false propositions: between
those that could have been true and those that could not have been
true (those that had to be false).
Some Medieval philosophers supposed that the fact that true
propositions are of the two sorts “necessarily true” and
“contingently true” (and the corresponding fact about
false propositions) showed that there were two “modes” in
which a proposition could be true (or false): the mode of contingency
and the mode of necessity—hence the term ‘modality’.
Present-day philosophers retain the Medieval term
‘modality’ but now it means no more than “pertaining
to possibility and necessity”. The types of modality of interest
to metaphysicians fall into two camps: modality de re and
modality de dicto. 
Modality de dicto is the modality of propositions
(‘dictum’ means proposition, or
close enough). If modality were coextensive with modality de
dicto, it would be at least a defensible position that the topic
of modality belongs to logic rather than to metaphysics. (Indeed, the
study of modal logics goes back to Aristotle's Prior
Analytics.)
But many philosophers also think there is a second kind of
modality, modality de re—the modality of things. (The
modality of substances, certainly, and perhaps of things in other
ontological categories.) The status of modality de re is
undeniably a metaphysical topic, and we assign it to the
“new” metaphysics because, although one can ask modal
questions about things that do not change—God, for example, or
universals—a large proportion of the work that has been done in
this area concerns the modal features of changing things.
There are two types of modality de re. The first concerns
the existence of things—of human beings, for example. If Sally,
an ordinary human being, says, “I might not have existed”,
almost everyone will take her to have stated an obvious truth. And if
what she has said is indeed true, then she exists contingently. That
is to say, she is a contingent being: a being who might not have
existed.  A necessary being, in contrast, is a being of which it is
false that it might not have existed. Whether any objects are
necessary beings is an important question of modal metaphysics. Some
philosophers have gone so far to maintain that all objects are necessary
beings, since necessary existence is a truth of logic in what seems to
them to be the best quantified modal logic. (See Barcan 1946 for the
first modern connection between necessary existence and quantified
modal logic. Barcan did not draw any metaphysical conclusions from her
logical results, but later authors, especially Williamson 2013
have.) 
The second kind of modality de re concerns the properties
of things.  Like the existence of things, the possession of properties
by things is subject to modal qualification. If Sally, who speaks
English, says, “I might have spoken only French”, almost
everyone will take that statement to be no less obviously true than
her statement that she might not have existed. And if what she has
said is indeed true, then “speaking English” is a property
that she has only contingently or (the more usual word) only
accidentally.  Additionally there may be properties which some objects
have essentially. A thing has a property essentially if it could not
exist without having that property. Examples of essential properties
tend to be controversial, largely because the most
plausible examples of a certain object's possessing a property
essentially are only as plausible as the thesis that that object
possesses those properties at all. For example, if Sally is a physical
object, as physicalists suppose, then it is very plausible for them to
suppose further that she is essentially a physical object—but it
is controversial whether they are right to suppose that she is a
physical object. And, of course, the same thing can be
said, mutatis mutandis, concerning dualists and the property
of being a non-physical object. It would seem, however, that Sally is
either essentially a physical object or essentially a non-physical
object. And many find it plausible to suppose that (whether she is
physical or non-physical) she has the property “not being a
poached egg” essentially.
The most able and influential enemy of modality (both de
dicto and de re) was W. V. Quine, who vigorously
defended both the following theses. First, that modality de
dicto can be understood only in terms of the concept of
analyticity (a problematical concept in his view).  Secondly, that
modality de re cannot be understood in terms of analyticity
and therefore cannot be understood at all. Quine argued for this
latter claim by proposing what he took to be decisive counterexamples
to theories that take essentiality to be meaningful. If
modality de re makes any sense, Quine contended (1960:
199–200), cyclists must be regarded as essentially
bipedal—for “Cyclists are bipedal” would be regarded
as an analytic sentence by those who believe in analyticity. But
mathematicians are only accidentally bipedal (“Mathematicians
are bipedal” is not analytic by anyone's lights). What then,
Quine proceeded to ask, of someone who is both a mathematician and a
cyclist?—that person seems both essentially and only
accidentally bi-pedal. Since this is incoherent, Quine thought that
modality de re is incoherent.
Most philosophers are now convinced, however, that Quine's
“mathematical cyclist” argument has been adequately
answered by Saul Kripke (1972), Alvin Plantinga (1974) and various
other defenders of modality de re. Kripke and Plantinga's
defenses of modality are paradigmatically metaphysical (except insofar
as they directly address Quine's linguistic argument). Both make
extensive use of the concept of a possible world in defending the
intelligibility of modality (both de re and de
dicto). Leibniz was the first philosopher to use ‘possible
world’ as a philosophical term of art, but Kripke's and
Plantinga's use of the phrase is different from his. For Leibniz, a
possible world was a possible creation: God's act of creation consists
in his choosing one possible world among many to be the one world that
he creates—the “actual” world. For Kripke and
Plantinga, however, a possible world is a possible “whole of
reality”. For Leibniz, God and his actions “stand
outside” all possible worlds. For Kripke and Plantinga, no
being, not even God, could stand outside the whole system of possible
worlds. A Kripke-Plantinga (KP) world is an abstract object of some
sort. Let us suppose that a KP world is a possible state of affairs
(this is Plantinga's idea; Kripke says nothing so definite). Consider
any given state of affairs; let us say, Paris being the capital of
France.  This state of affairs obtains, since Paris is
the capital of France. By contrast, the state of affairs Tours
being the capital of France does not obtain. The latter state of
affairs does, however, exist, for there is such a state of
affairs. (Obtaining thus stands to states of affairs as truth stands
to propositions: although the proposition that Tours is the capital of
France is not true, there nevertheless is such a proposition.) The
state of affairs x is said to include the state of
affairs y if it is impossible for x to obtain
and y not to obtain. If it is impossible for both x
and y to obtain, then each precludes the other. A possible
world is simply a possible state of affairs that, for every state of
affairs x, either includes or precludes x; the actual
world is the one such state of affairs that obtains.
Using the KP theory we can answer Quine's challenge as follows. In
every possible world, every cyclist in that world is bipedal in that
world. (Assuming with Quine that necessarily cyclists are
bipedal. Apparently he had not foreseen adaptive bicycles.)
Nevertheless for any particular cyclist, there is some possible world
where he (the same person) is not bipedal. Once we draw this
distinction, we can see that Quine's argument is invalid. More
generally, on the KP theory, theses about de re essential
properties need not be analytic; they are meaningful
because they express claims about an object's properties in various
possible worlds. 
We can also use the notion of possible worlds to define many other
modal concepts. For example, a necessarily true proposition is a
proposition that would be true no matter what possible world was
actual. Socrates is a contingent being if there is some possible world
such that he would not exist if that world were actual, and he has the
property “being human” essentially if every possible world
that includes his existence also includes his being human. Kripke and
Plantinga have greatly increased the clarity of modal discourse (and
particularly of modal discourse de re), but at the expense of
introducing a modal ontology, an ontology of possible worlds.
Theirs is not the only modal ontology on offer. The main
alternative to the KP theory has been the ‘modal realism’
championed by David Lewis (1986). Lewis's modal ontology appeals to
objects called possible worlds, but these “worlds” are
concrete objects. What we call the actual world is one of these
concrete objects, the spatiotemporally connected universe we
inhabit. What we call “non-actual” worlds are other
concrete universes that are spatiotemporally isolated from ours (and
from each other). There is, Lewis contends, a vast array of non-actual
worlds, an array that contains at least those worlds that are
generated by an ingenious principle of recombination, a principle that
can be stated without the use of modal language (1986: 87). For Lewis,
moreover, “actual” is an indexical term: when I speak of
the actual world, I refer to the world of which I am an
inhabitant—and so for any speaker who is “in” (who
is a part of) any world.
In the matter of modality de dicto, Lewis's theory
proceeds in a manner that is at least parallel to the KP theory: there
could be flying pigs if there are flying pigs in some possible world
(if some world has flying pigs as parts). But the case is otherwise
with modality de re. Since every ordinary object is in only
one of the concrete worlds, Lewis must either say that each such
object has all its properties essentially or else adopt a treatment of
modality de re that is not parallel to the KP treatment. He
chooses the latter alternative. Although Socrates is in only the
actual world, Lewis holds, he has ‘counterparts’ in some
other worlds, objects that play the role in those worlds that he plays
in this world. If all Socrates' counterparts are human, then we may
say that he is essentially human. If one of Hubert Humphrey's
counterparts won (the counterpart of) the 1968 presidential election,
it is correct to say of Humphrey that he could have won that
election.
In addition to the obvious stark ontological contrast between the
two theories, they differ in two important ways in their implications
for the philosophy of modality. First, if Lewis is right, then modal
concepts can be defined in terms of paradigmatically non-modal
concepts, since ‘world’ and all of Lewis's other technical
terms can be defined using only ‘is spatiotemporally related
to’, ‘is a part of’ and the vocabulary of set
theory. For Kripke and Plantinga, however, modal concepts are sui
generis, indefinable or having only definitions that appeal to
other modal concepts. Secondly, Lewis's theory implies a kind of
anti-realism concerning modality de re. This is because there
is no one relation that is the counterpart relation—there are
rather various ways or respects in which one could say that objects in
two worlds “play the same role” in their respective
worlds. Socrates, therefore, may well have non-human counterparts
under one counterpart relation and no non-human
counterparts under another. And the choice of a counterpart relation
is a pragmatic or interest-relative choice. But on the KP theory, it
is an entirely objective question whether Socrates fails to be human
in some world in which he exists: the answer must be Yes or No and is
independent of human choices and interests.
Whatever one may think of these theories when one considers them
in their own right (as theories of modality, as theories
with various perhaps objectionable ontological commitments), one must
concede that they are paradigmatically metaphysical theories. They
bear witness to the resurgence of metaphysics in
analytical philosophy in the last third of the twentieth century.
Long before the theory of relativity represented space and
time as aspects of or abstractions from a single entity, spacetime,
philosophers saw space and time as intimately related. (A glance
through any dictionary of quotations suggests that the philosophical
pairing of space and time reflects a natural, pre-philosophical
tendency: “Had we but world enough, and time …”;
“Dwellers all in time and space”.) Kant, for example,
treated space and time in his Transcendental Aesthetic as
things that should be explained by a single, unified theory. And his
theory of space and time, revolutionary though it may have been in
other respects, was in this respect typical of philosophical accounts
of space and time. Whatever the source of the conviction that space
and time are two members of a “species” (and the only two
members of that species), they certainly raise similar philosophical
questions. It can be asked whether space extends infinitely in every
direction, and it can be asked whether time extends infinitely in
either of the two temporal “directions”. Just as one can
ask whether, if space is finite, it has an “end” (whether
it is bounded or unbounded), one may ask of time whether, if it is
finite, it had a beginning or will have an end or whether it might
have neither, but rather be “circular” (be finite but
unbounded). As one can ask whether there could be two extended objects
that were not spatially related to each other, one can ask whether
there could be two events that were not temporally related to each
other. One can ask whether space is (a) a real thing—a
substance—a thing that exists independently of its
inhabitants, or (b) a mere system of
relations among those inhabitants. And one can ask the same
question about time.
 But there are also questions about time that have no spatial
analogues—or at least no obvious and uncontroversial
analogues. There are, for example, questions about the grounds of
various asymmetries between the past and the future—why is our
knowledge of the past better than our knowledge of the future?; why do
we regard an unpleasant event that is about to happen differently from
the way we regard an unpleasant event that has recently happened?; why
does causation seem to have a privileged temporal direction? There do
not seem to be objective asymmetries like this in space.
There is also the question of temporal passage—the question
whether the apparent “movement” of time (or the apparent
movement of ourselves and the objects of our experience through or in
time) is a real feature of the world or some sort of illusion. In one
way of thinking about time, there is a privileged temporal direction
marking the difference between the past, present, and
future. A-theorists hold that time is fundamentally structured in
terms of a past/present/future distinction. Times change from past to
present to future, giving rise to passage. (The name
‘A-theorist’ descends from J.M.E. McTaggart's (1908) name
for the sequence past/present/future which he called the
‘A-series’.) Within the A-theory, we might further ask
whether the past and future have the “same sort of
reality” as the present. Presentist A-theorists, like Prior
1998, deny that the past or future have any concrete reality.
Presentists typically think of the past and future as, at best, akin
to abstract possible worlds—they are the way the world was or will
be, just as possible worlds are ways the actual world could be. Other
A-theorists, like Sullivan (2012), hold that the present is
metaphysically privileged but deny that there is any ontological
difference between the past, present, and future. More generally,
A-theorists often incorporate strategies from modal metaphysics into
their theories about the relation of the past and the future to the
present. 
According to B-theories of time, the only fundamental distinction we
should draw is that some events and times are earlier or later
relative to others. (These relations are called
‘B-relations’, a term also derived from McTaggart). According
to the B-theorists, there is no objective passage of time, or at least
not in the sense of time passing from future to present and from
present to past.  B-theorists typically maintain that all past and
future times are real in the same sense in which the present time is
real—the present is in no sense metaphysically privileged. 
It is also true, and less often remarked on, that space raises
philosophical questions that have no temporal analogues—or at
least no obvious and uncontroversial analogues. Why, for example, does
space have three dimensions and not four or seven? On the face of it,
time is essentially one-dimensional and space is not essentially
three-dimensional. It also seems that the metaphysical problems about
space that have no temporal analogues depend on the fact that space,
unlike time, has more than one dimension. For example, consider the
problem of incongruent counterparts: those who think space is a mere
system of relations struggled to explain our intuition that we could
distinguish a world containing only a left hand from a world
containing only a right hand. So it seems there is an intuitive
orientation to objects in space itself. It is less clear whether the
problems about time that have no spatial analogues are connected with
the one-dimensionality of time.
Finally, one can raise questions about whether space and time are
real at all—and, if they are real, to what extent (so to speak)
they are real. Might it be that space and time are not constituents of
reality as God perceives reality but nevertheless “well-founded
phenomena” (as Leibniz held)? Was Kant right when he denied
spatial and temporal features to “things as they are in
themselves”?—and right to contend that space and time are
“forms of our intuition”? Or was McTaggart's position the
right one: that space and time are wholly unreal?
If these problems about space and time belong to metaphysics only
in the post-Medieval sense, they are nevertheless closely related to
questions about first causes and universals. First causes are
generally thought by those who believe in them to be eternal and
non-local. God, for example—both the impersonal God of Aristotle
and the personal God of Medieval Christian, Jewish, and Muslim
philosophy—is generally said to be eternal, and the personal God
is said to be omnipresent. To say that God is eternal is to say either
that he is everlasting or that he is somehow outside time. And this
raises the metaphysical question of whether it is possible for there to
be a being—not a universal or an abstract object of some other
sort, but an active substance—that is everlasting or
non-temporal. An omnipresent being is a being that does not occupy any
region of space (not even the whole of it, as the luminiferous ether
of nineteenth-century physics would if it existed), and whose causal
influence is nevertheless equally present in every region of space
(unlike universals, to which the concept of causality does not
apply). The doctrine of divine omnipresence raises the metaphysical
question whether it is possible for there to be a being with this
feature. Ante res universals are said by some of their
proponents (precisely those who deny that universals are constituents
of particulars) to have no relations to space and time but
“vicarious” ones: the ante res universal
“whiteness” may be said to be present where each white
particular is, but only in a way analogous to the way in which the
number two is present where each pair of spatial things is.  But it is
doubtful whether this is a position that is possible for a
metaphysician who says that a white thing is a bundle composed of
whiteness and various other universals. Those who believe in the
existence of in rebus universals are fond of saying, or have
been in recent years, that these universals (‘immanent
universals’ is a currently popular name for them) are
“multiply located”—“wholly present” at
each place at which the things that fall under them are present. And
by this they certainly do not mean that whiteness is present in many
different regions of space only vicariously, only as a number might be
said to be present wherever there are things in that number, only in
virtue of bearing the non-spatial relation “being had by”
to a multitude of particulars each of which is present in a single
region of space. All theories of universals, therefore, raise
questions about how things in various ontological categories are
related to space. And all these questions have temporal analogues.
Related to questions about the nature of space and time are
questions about the nature of objects that take up space or persist
through time, and these questions form yet another central theme in
post-medieval metaphysics. Are some or all objects composed of proper
parts? Must an object have proper parts in order to “fill
up” a region of space—or are there extended simples? Can
more that one object be located in exactly the same region? Do objects
persist through change by having temporal parts?
Much work on persistence and constitution has focused on efforts to
address a closely knit family of puzzles—the puzzles of
coincidence. One such puzzle is the “problem of the statue and
the lump”. Consider a gold statue. Many metaphysicians contend
that there is at least one material object that is spatially
co-extensive with the statue, a lump of gold. This is
easily shown, they say, by an appeal to Leibniz's Law (the principle
of the non-identity of discernibles). There is a statue here and there
is a lump of gold here, and—if the causal story of the statue's
coming to be is of the usual sort—the lump of gold existed
before the statue. And even if God has created the statue (and
perforce the lump) ex nihilo and will at some point
annihilate the statue (and thereby annihilate the lump), they further
argue, the statue and the lump, although they exist at exactly the
same times, have different modal properties: the lump has the property
“can survive radical deformation” and the statue does
not. Or so these metaphysicians conclude. But it has seemed to other
metaphysicians that this conclusion is absurd, for it is absurd to
suppose (these others say) that there could be spatially coincident
physical objects that share all their momentary
non-modal properties. Hence, the problem: What, if anything, is the
flaw in the argument for the non-identity of the statue and the
lump? 
A second puzzle in this family is the “problem of Tib and
Tibbles”. Tibbles is a cat. Call his tail “Tail”.
Call all of him but his tail “Tib”. Suppose Tail is cut
off—or, better, annihilated. Tibbles still exists, for a cat can
survive the loss of its tail. And it would seem that Tib will exist
after the “loss” of Tail, because Tib lost no part. But
what will be the relation between Tib and Tibbles? Can it be identity?
No, that is ruled out by the non-identity of discernibles, for Tibbles
will have become smaller and Tib will remain the same size. But then,
once again, we seem to have a case of spatially coincident material
objects that share their momentary non-modal properties.
Both these constitution problems turn on questions about the
identities of spatially coincident objects—and, indeed, of
objects that share all their (proper) parts. (A third famous problem
of material constitution—the problem of the Ship of
Theseus—raises questions of a different sort.) Some
metaphysicians contend that the relation between the lump and the
statue, on the one hand, and the relation between Tib and Tibbles, on
the other, cannot be fully understood in terms of the concepts of
parthood and (non-) identity, but require a further concept, a
non-mereological concept, the concept of “constitution”:
the pre-existent lump at a certain point in time comes to constitute
the statue (or a certain quantity of gold or certain gold atoms that
first constituted only the lump come to constitute them both);
pre-existent Tib at a certain point in time comes to constitute
Tibbles (or certain cat-flesh or certain molecules …).  (Baker
2000 is a defense of this thesis.) Others contend that all the
relations between the objects that figure in both problems can be
fully analyzed in terms of parthood and identity. For a more thorough
overview of the solutions to these puzzles and different theories of
constitution in play, see Rea (ed.) 1997 and Thomson 1998.
 Questions about causation form yet a fourth important category of
issues in the “new” metaphysics. Of course, discussion of
causes go back to Ancient Philosophy, featuring prominently in
Aristotle's Metaphysics and Physics. But Aristotle understood
‘cause’ in a much broader sense than we do today. In Aristotle's
sense, a ‘cause’ or ‘aiton’ is an explanatory condition of an
object—an answer to a “why” question about the
object. Aristotle classifies four such explanatory conditions—an
object's form, matter, efficient cause, and teleology. An object's
efficient cause is the cause which explains change or motion in an
object. With the rise of modern physics in the seventeenth century,
interest in efficient causal relations became acute, and it remains so
today. And when contemporary philosophers discuss problems of
causation, they typically mean this sense.
 One major issue in the metaphysics of causation concerns
specifying the relata of causal relations.  Consider a
mundane claim: an iceberg caused the Titanic to sink.  Does the causal
relation hold between two events: the event of the ship hitting the
iceberg and the event of the ship sinking? Or does it hold between two
sets of states of affairs? Or does it hold between two substances, the
iceberg and the ship? Must causal relations be triadic or otherwise
poly-adic? For example, one might think that we are always required to
qualify a causal claim: the iceberg, rather than the captain's
negligence, was causally responsible for the ship’s foundering. And can
absences feature in causal relations? For example, does it make sense
to claim that a lack of lifeboats was the cause of a third-class
passenger's death?
 We might further ask whether causal relations are objective and
irreducible features of reality. Hume famously doubted this,
theorizing that our observations of causation were nothing more
than observations of constant conjunction. For example, perhaps we
think icebergs cause ships to sink only because we always observe
ship-sinking events occurring after iceberg-hitting events and not
because there is a real causal relation that holds between icebergs
and foundering ships.
Contemporary metaphysicians have been attracted to other kinds of
reductive treatments of causation. Some—like Stalnaker and
Lewis—have argued that causal relations should be understood in
terms of counterfactual dependencies (Stalnaker 1968 and Lewis
1973). For example, an iceberg's striking the ship caused its sinking
at time t if and only if in the nearest possible worlds where
the iceberg did not strike the ship at time t, the ship did not
sink. Others have argued that causal relations should be understood in
terms of instantiations of laws of nature. (Davidson (1967) and
Armstrong (1997) each defend this view albeit in different ways.) All
of these theories expand on an idea from Hume's Treatise in
attempting to reduce causation to different or more fundamental
categories. (For a more complete survey of recent theories of
causation, see Paul and Hall 2013.)
 Debates about causation and laws of nature further give rise to a
related set of pressing philosophical questions—questions of
freedom. In the seventeenth century, celestial mechanics gave
philosophers a certain picture of a way the world might be: it might
be a world whose future states were entirely determined by the past
and the laws of nature (of which Newton's laws of motion and law of
universal gravitation served as paradigms).  In the nineteenth century
the thesis that the world was indeed this way came to be called
‘determinism’. The problem of free will can be stated as a
dilemma. If determinism is true, there is only one physically possible
future. But then how can anyone ever have acted otherwise? For, as
Carl Ginet has said (1990: 103), our freedom can only be the freedom
to add to the actual past; and if determinism holds, then there is
only one way that the given—the actual—past can be
“added to”. But if determinism does not hold, if there are
alternative physically possible futures, then which one comes to pass
must be a mere matter of chance. And if it is a mere matter of chance
whether I lie or tell the truth, how can it be “up to me”
whether I lie or tell the truth? Unless there is something wrong with
one of these two arguments, the argument for the incompatibility of
free will and determinism or the argument for the incompatibility of
free will and the falsity of determinism, free will is impossible. The
problem of free will may be identified with the problem of discovering
whether free will is possible—and, if free will is possible, the
problem of giving an account of free will that displays an error in
one of (or both) these arguments.
 Van Inwagen (1998) defends the position that, although
the modern problem of free will has its origin in philosophical
reflections on the consequences of supposing the physical universe to
be governed by deterministic laws, the problem cannot be evaded by
embracing a metaphysic (like dualism or idealism) that supposes that
agents are immaterial or non-physical. This leads into our next and
final sample of topics from the “new” metaphysics.
 If it is natural both to pair and to oppose time and space, it is
also natural to pair and to oppose the mental and the physical. The
modern identity theory holds that all mental events or states are a
special sort of physical event or state. The theory is parsimonious
(among its other virtues) but we nevertheless exhibit a natural
tendency to distinguish the mental and the physical. Perhaps the
reason for this is epistemological: whether our thoughts and
sensations are physical or not, the kind of awareness we have of them
is of a radically different sort from the kind of awareness we have of
the flight of a bird or of a flowing stream, and it seems to be
natural to infer that the objects of the one sort of awareness are
radically different from the objects of the other. That the inference
is logically invalid is (as is so often the case) no barrier to its
being made. Whatever the reason may be, philosophers have generally
(but not universally) supposed that the world of concrete particulars
can be divided into two very different realms, the mental and the
material. (As the twentieth century passed and physical theory
rendered “matter” an increasingly problematical concept,
it became increasingly common to say “the mental and the
physical”.) If one takes this view of things, one faces
philosophical problems that modern philosophy has assigned to
metaphysics.
 Prominent among these is the problem of accounting for mental
causation. If thoughts and sensations belong to an immaterial or
non-physical portion of reality—if, for example, they are
changes in immaterial or non-physical substances—how can they
have effects in the physical world?  How, for example, can a decision
or act of will cause a movement of a human body? How, for that matter,
can changes in the physical world have effects in the non-physical
part of reality? If one's feeling pain is a non-physical event, how
can a physical injury to one's body cause one to feel pain? Both
questions have troubled “two realm” philosophers—or
‘dualists’, to give them their more usual name. But the former has
troubled them more, since modern physics is founded on principles that
assert the conservation of various physical quantities. If a
non-physical event causes a change in the physical
world—dualists are repeatedly asked—does that not imply
that physical quantities like energy or momentum fail to be conserved
in any physically closed causal system in which that change occurs?
And does that not imply that every voluntary movement of a human body
involves a violation of the laws of physics—that is to say, a
miracle?
 A wide range of metaphysical theories have been generated by the
attempts of dualists to answer these questions. Some have been less
than successful for reasons that are not of much intrinsic
philosophical interest. C. D.  Broad, for example, proposed (1925:
103–113) that the mind affects the body by momentarily changing
the electrical resistance of certain synapses in the brain, (thus
diverting various current pulses, which literally follow the
path of least resistance into paths other than those they
would have taken). And this, he supposed, would not imply a violation
of the principle of the conservation of energy. But it seems
impossible to suppose that an agent could change the electrical
resistance of a physical system without expending energy in the
process, for to do this would necessitate changing the physical
structure of the system, and that implies changing the positions of
bits of matter on which forces are acting (think of turning the knob
on a rheostat or variable resistor: one must expend energy to do
this). If this example has any philosophical interest it is this: it
illustrates the fact that it is impossible to imagine a way for a
non-physical thing to affect the behavior of a (classical) physical
system without violating a conservation principle.
 The various dualistic theories of the mind treat the
interaction problem in different ways. The theory called
‘dualistic interactionism’ does not, of itself, have
anything to say about the problem—although its various
proponents (Broad, for example) have proposed solutions to
it. ‘Occasionalism’ simply concedes that the “local”
counterfactual dependence of the behavior of a physical system on a
non-physical event requires a miracle. The theory of pre-established
harmony, which substitutes “global” for local
counterfactual dependence of voluntary physical movements on the
mental states of agents, avoids problems with conservation
principles—but secures this advantage at a great price. (Like
occasionalism, it presupposes theism, and, unlike occasionalism, it
entails either that free will does not exist or that free will is
compatible with determinism.) ‘Epiphenomenalism’ simply denies that the
mental can affect the physical, and contents itself with an
explanation of why the mental appears to affect the physical.
 In addition to these dualistic theories, there are monistic
theories, theories that dissolve the interaction problem by denying
the existence of either the physical or the non-physical: idealism and
physicalism.  (Present-day philosophers for the most part prefer the
term ‘physicalism’ to the older term
‘materialism’ for reasons noted above.) Most current work
in the philosophy of mind presupposes physicalism, and it is generally
agreed that a physicalistic theory that does not simply deny the
reality of the mental (that is not an “eliminativist”
theory), raises metaphysical questions. Such a theory must, of course,
find a place for the mental in a wholly physical world, and such a
place exists only if mental events and states are certain special
physical events and states. There are at least three important
metaphysical questions raised by these theories. First, granted that
all particular mental events or states are identical with particular
physical events or states, can it also be that some or all mental
universals (‘event-types’ and ‘state-types’
are the usual terms) are identical with physical universals? Secondly,
does physicalism imply that mental events and states cannot really be
causes (does physicalism imply a kind of epiphenomenalism)? Thirdly,
can a physical thing have non-physical properties—might it be
that mental properties like “thinking of Vienna” or
“perceiving redly” are non-physical properties of physical
organisms? This last question, of course, raises a more basic
metaphysical question, ‘What is a non-physical property?’
And all forms of the identity theory raise fundamental metaphysical
questions, ontological questions, questions like, ‘What is an
event?’ and ‘What is a state?’.
 As is obvious from the discussion
in Section 3, the scope of metaphysics has
expanded beyond the tidy boundaries Aristotle drew. So how should we
answer our original question? Is contemporary metaphysics just a
compendium of philosophical problems that cannot be assigned to
epistemology or logic or ethics or aesthetics or to any of the parts
of philosophy that have relatively clear definitions? Or is there a
common theme that unites work on these disparate problems and
distinguishes contemporary metaphysics from other areas of
inquiry? 
 These issues concerning the nature of metaphysics are further
connected with issues about the epistemic status of various
metaphysical theories. Aristotle and most of the Medievals took it for
granted that, at least in its most fundamental aspects, the ordinary
person's picture of the world is “correct as far as it
goes”. But many post-Medieval metaphysicians have refused to
take this for granted. Some of them, in fact, have been willing to
defend the thesis that the world is very different from, perhaps
radically different from, the way people thought it was before they
began to reason philosophically. For example, in response to the
puzzles of coincidence considered in Section
3.3, some metaphysicians have maintained that there are no objects
with proper parts. This entails that composite objects—tables,
chairs, cats, and so on—do not exist, a somewhat startling
view. And as we saw in Section 3.1, other
metaphysicians have been happy to postulate the reality of concrete
merely possible worlds if this posit makes for a simpler and more
explanatorily powerful theory of modality. Perhaps this contemporary
openness to “revisionary” metaphysics is simply a recovery
of or a reversion to a pre-Aristotelian conception of a
“permissible metaphysical conclusion”, a conception that
is illustrated by Zeno's arguments against the reality of motion and
Plato's Allegory of the Cave. But no matter how we classify it, the
surprising nature of many contemporary metaphysical claims puts
additional pressure on practioners to explain just what they are up
to. They raise questions of the methodology of metaphysics.
 One attractive strategy for answering these questions emphasizes
the continuity of metaphysics with science.  On this conception,
metaphysics is primarily or exclusively concerned with developing
generalizations from our best-confirmed scientific theories. For
example, in the mid-twentieth century, Quine (1948) proposed that that
the “old/intermediate” metaphysical debate over the status
of abstract objects should be settled in this way. He observed that if
our best scientific theories are recast in the “canonical
notation of (first-order) quantification” (in sufficient depth
that all the inferences that users of these theories will want to make
are valid in first-order logic), then many of these theories, if not
all of them, will have as a logical consequence the existential
generalization on a predicate \(F\) such that \(F\) is satisfied only by
abstract objects. It would seem, therefore, that our best scientific
theories “carry ontological commitment” to objects whose
existence is denied by nominalism.  (These objects may not be
universals in the classical sense. They may, for example, be sets.)
Take for example the simple theory, ‘There are homogeneous
objects, and the mass of a homogeneous object in grams is the product
of its density in grams per cubic centimeter and its volume in cubic
centimeters’. A typical recasting of this theory
in the canonical notation of quantification is:
(‘\(Hx\)’: ‘\(x\) is homogeneous’;
‘\(Mx\)’: ‘the mass of \(x\) in grams’;
‘\(Dx\)’: ‘the density of \(x\) in grams per cubic
centimeter’; ‘\(Vx\)’: ‘the volume of \(x\) in
cubic centimeters’.) A first-order logical consequence of this
“theory” is
That is: there exists at least one thing that is a product (at
least one thing that, for some \(x\) and some \(y\) is the product of \(x\)
and \(y\)). And a product must be a number, for the
operation “product of” applies only to numbers. Our little
theory, at least if it is recast in the way shown above,
is therefore, in a very obvious sense, “committed” to the
existence of numbers. It would seem, therefore, that a nominalist
cannot consistently affirm that theory. (In this example, the role
played by ‘the predicate F’ in the abstract
statement of Quine's “observation” is played by the
predicate ‘…=…×…’.)
Quine's work on nominalism inspired a much broader program for
approaching ontological questions. According to
“neo-Quineans”, questions about the existence of abstract
objects, mental events, objects with proper parts, temporal parts, and
even other concrete possible worlds are united to the extent that they
are questions about the ontological machinery required to account for
the truth of our best-confirmed theories. Still, many questions of the
new and old metaphysics are not questions of ontology. For example,
many participants in the debate over causation are not particularly
worried about whether causes and effects exist. Rather, they want to
know “in virtue of what” something is a cause or
effect. Few involved in the debate over the mental and physical are
interested in the question whether there are mental properties (in
some sense or other).  Rather, they are interested in whether mental
properties are “basic” or sui generis—or
whether they are grounded, partially or fully, in physical
properties.
 Is there a unified methodology for metaphysics more broadly
understood? Some think the task of the metaphysician is to identify
and argue for explanatory relations of various kinds. According to
Fine (2001), metaphysicians are in the business of providing theories
of which facts or propositions ground other facts or propositions, and
which facts or propositions hold “in reality”. For
example, a philosopher might hold that tables and other composite
objects exist, but think that facts about tables are completely
grounded in facts about the arrangements of point particles or facts
about the state of a wave function. This metaphysician would hold that
there are no facts about tables “in reality”; rather, there are
facts about arrangements of particles.  Schaffer 2010 proposes a
similar view, but holds that metaphysical grounding relations hold not
between facts but between entities.  According to Schaffer, the
fundamental entity/entities should be understood as the
entity/entities that grounds/ground all others.  On Schaffer's
conception we can meaningfully ask whether a table is grounded in its
parts or vice versa. We can even theorize (as Schaffer does) that the
world as a whole is the ultimate ground for everything. 
Another noteworthy approach (Sider 2012) holds that the task of the
metaphysician is to “explain the world” in terms of its
fundamental structure. For Sider, what unites (good) metaphysics as a
discipline is that its theories are all framed in terms that pick out
the fundamental structure of the world. For example, according to
Sider we may understand ‘causal nihilism’ as the view that
causal relations do not feature in the fundamental structure of the
world, and so the best language for describing the world will eschew
causal predicates.
 It should be emphasized that these ways of delimiting metaphysics
do not presuppose that all of the topics we've considered as examples
of metaphysics are substantive or important to the subject. Consider
the debate about modality. Quine (1953) and Sider (2012) both argue
from their respective theories about the nature of metaphysics that
aspects of the debate over the correct metaphysical theory of
modality are misguided. Others are skeptical of the debates about
composition or persistence through time. So theories about the nature
of metaphysics might give us new resources for criticizing particular
first-order debates that have historically been considered
metaphysical, and it is common practice for metaphysicians to regard
some debates as substantive while adopting a deflationist attitude
about others.
 It may also be that there is no internal unity to metaphysics.
More strongly, perhaps there is no such thing as metaphysics—or
at least nothing that deserves to be called a science or a study or a
discipline.  Perhaps, as some philosophers have proposed, no
metaphysical statement or theory is either true or false. Or perhaps,
as others have proposed, metaphysical theories have truth-values, but
it is impossible to find out what they are. At least since the time of
Hume, there have been philosophers who have proposed that metaphysics
is “impossible”—either because its questions are
meaningless or because they are impossible to answer. The remainder of
this entry will be a discussion of some recent arguments for the
impossibility of metaphysics.
Let us suppose that we are confident that we are able to identify
every statement as either “a metaphysical statement” or
“not a metaphysical statement”. (We need not suppose that
this ability is grounded in some non-trivial definition or account of
metaphysics.) Let us call the thesis that all metaphysical statements
are meaningless “the strong form” of the thesis that
metaphysics is impossible. (At one time, an enemy of metaphysics might
have been content to say that all metaphysical statements were false.
But this is obviously not a possible thesis if the denial of a
metaphysical statement must itself be a metaphysical statement.) And
let us call the following statement the “weak form” of the
thesis that metaphysics is impossible: metaphysical statements are
meaningful, but human beings can never discover whether any
metaphysical statement is true or false (or probable or improbable or
warranted or unwarranted).
 Let us briefly examine an example of the strong form of the thesis
that metaphysics is impossible. The logical positivists maintained
that the meaning of a (non-analytic) statement consisted entirely in
the predictions it made about possible experience. They maintained,
further, that metaphysical statements (which were obviously not put
forward as analytic truths) made no predictions about
experience. Therefore, they concluded, metaphysical statements are
meaningless—or, better, the “statements” we classify
as metaphysical are not really statements at all: they are things that
look like statements but aren't, rather as mannequins are things that
look like human beings but aren't.
 But (many philosophers asked) how does the logical positivist's
central thesis
fare by its own standards? Does this thesis make any predictions
about possible experiences? Could some observation show that it was
true? Could some experiment show that it was false? It would seem not.
It would seem that everything in the world would look the
same—like this—whether this thesis was true or
false. (Will the positivist reply that the offset sentence is
analytic? This reply is problematic in that it implies that the
multitude of native speakers of English who reject the logical
positivists' account of meaning somehow cannot see that that sentence
is true in virtue of the meaning of the word
“meaning”—which is no technical term but a word of
ordinary English.) And, therefore, if the statement is true it is
meaningless; or, what is the same thing, if it is meaningful, it is
false. Logical positivism would therefore seem to say of itself that
it is false or meaningless; it would be seem to be, to use a currently
fashionable phrase, “self-referentially incoherent”.
 Current advocates of ‘metaphysical anti-realism’ also
advocate a strong form of the thesis that metaphysics is
impossible. Insofar as it is possible to find a coherent line of
argument in the writings of any anti-realist, it is hard to see why
they, like the logical positivists, are not open to a charge of
self-referential incoherency. Indeed, there is much to be said for the
conclusion that all forms of the strong thesis fall prey to
self-referential incoherency. Put very abstractly, the case against
proponents of the strong thesis may be put like this.  Dr. McZed, a
“strong anti-metaphysician”, contends that any piece of
text that does not pass some test she specifies is meaningless (if she
is typical of strong anti-metaphysicians, she will say that any text
that fails the test represents an attempt to use language in a way in
which language cannot be used). And she contends further that any
piece of text that can plausibly be identified as
“metaphysical” must fail this test. But it invariably
turns out that various sentences that are essential components of
McZed's case against metaphysics themselves fail to pass her test. A
test-case for this very schematic and abstract refutation of all
refutations of metaphysics is the very sophisticated and subtle
critique of metaphysics (it purports to apply only to the kind of
metaphysics exemplified by the seventeenth-century rationalists and
current analytical metaphysics) presented in van Fraassen 2002. It
is a defensible position that van Fraassen's case against metaphysics
depends essentially on certain theses that, although they are not
themselves metaphysical theses, are nevertheless open to many of the
criticisms he brings against metaphysical theses.
 The weak form of the thesis that metaphysics is impossible is
this: there is something about the human mind (perhaps even the minds
of all rational agents or all finite rational agents) that unfits it
for reaching metaphysical conclusions in any reliable way. This idea
is at least as old as Kant, but a version of it that is much more
modest than Kant's (and much easier to understand) has been carefully
presented in McGinn 1993. McGinn's argument for the conclusion that
the human mind is (as a matter of evolutionary contingency, and not
simply because it is “a mind”) incapable of a satisfactory
treatment of a large range of philosophical questions (a range that
includes all metaphysical questions), however, depends on speculative
factual theses about human cognitive capacities that are in principle
subject to empirical refutation and which are at present without
significant empirical support. For a different defense of the weak
thesis, see Thomasson 2009.