Before attempting to explain and assess moral arguments for the
existence of God, it would be helpful to have some perspective on the
goals of arguments for God’s existence. (I shall
generically term arguments for God’s existence “theistic
arguments.”) Of course views about this are diverse, but most
contemporary proponents of such arguments do not see theistic arguments
as attempted “proofs,” in the sense that they are supposed
to provide valid arguments with premises that no reasonable person
could deny. Such a standard of achievement would clearly be
setting the bar for success very high, and proponents of theistic
arguments rightly note that philosophical arguments for interesting
conclusions in any field outside of formal logic hardly ever reach such
a standard. More reasonable questions to ask about theistic
arguments would seem to be the following: Are there valid
arguments for the conclusion that God exists that have premises that
are known or reasonably believed by some people? Are the premises
of such arguments more reasonable than their denials, at least for some
reasonable people? Arguments that met these standards could have
value in making belief in God reasonable for some people, or even
giving some people knowledge of God’s existence, even if it turns
out that some of the premises of the arguments can be reasonably denied
by other people, and thus that the arguments fail as proofs.
It is of course possible that an argument for God’s existence
could provide some evidence for God’s existence, in the sense
that the argument increases the probability or plausibility of the
claim that God exists, even if the argument does not provide enough
support by itself for full-fledged belief that God exists. A
proponent of the moral argument who viewed the argument in this way
might in that case regard the argument as part of a cumulative case for
theism, and hold that the moral argument must be supplemented by other
possible arguments, such as the “fine-tuning” argument from
the physical constants of the universe, or an argument from religious
experience. A non-believer might even concede some version of a
theistic argument has some evidential force, but claim that the overall
balance of evidence does not support belief.
A major issue that cannot be settled here concerns the question of
where the burden of proof lies with respect to theistic
arguments. Many secular philosophers follow Antony Flew (1976) in
holding that there is a “presumption of atheism.” 
Believing in God is like believing in the Loch Ness Monster or
leprechauns, something that reasonable people do not do without
sufficient evidence. If such evidence is lacking, the proper
stance is atheism rather than agnosticism.
This “presumption of atheism” has been challenged in a
number of ways. Alvin Plantinga (2000) has argued that reasonable
belief in God does not have to be based on propositional evidence, but
can be “properly basic.” On this view,
reasonable belief in God can be the outcome of a basic faculty (called
the sensus divinitatis by theologian John Calvin) and thus
needs no support from arguments at all. In response some would
argue that even if theistic belief is not grounded in propositional
evidence, it still might require non-propositional evidence (such as
experience), so it is not clear that Plantinga’s view by itself
removes the burden of proof challenge.
A second way to challenge the presumption of atheism is to question
an implicit assumption made by those who defend such a presumption,
which is that belief in God is epistemologically more risky than
unbelief. The assumption might be defended in the following
way: One might think that theists and atheists share a belief in
many entities: atoms, middle-sized physical objects, animals, and
stars, for example. Someone, however, who believes in leprechauns
or sea monsters in addition to these commonly accepted objects thereby
incurs a burden of proof. Such a person believes in “one
additional thing” and thus seems to incur additional
epistemological risk. One might think that belief in God is
relevantly like belief in a leprechaun or sea monster, and thus that
the theist also bears an additional burden of proof. Without good
evidence in favor of belief in God the safe option is to refrain from
belief.
However, the theist may hold that this account does not accurately
represent the situation. Instead, the theist may argue that the
debate between atheism and theism is not simply an argument about
whether “one more thing” exists in the world. In
fact, God is not to be understood as an entity in the world at all; any
such entity would by definition not be God. The debate is rather
a debate about the character of the universe. The theist believes
that every object in the natural world exists because God creates and
conserves that object; every finite thing has the character of being
dependent on God. The atheist denies this and affirms that the
basic entities in the natural world have the character of existing
“on their own.” If this is the right way to think
about the debate, then it is not obvious that atheism is safer than
theism. The debate is not about the existence of one object, but
the character of the universe as a whole. Both parties are making
claims about the character of everything in the natural world, and both
claims seem risky. This point is especially important in dealing
with moral arguments for theism, since one of the questions raised by
such arguments is the adequacy of a naturalistic worldview in
explaining morality. Evidentialists may properly ask about the
evidence for theism, but it also seems proper to ask about the evidence
for atheism if the atheist is committed to a rival metaphysic such as
naturalism.
Something that resembles a moral argument for God’s existence,
or at least an argument from value, can be found in the fourth of
Thomas Aquinas’s “Five Ways” (Aquinas 1265–1274, I,
1, 3). Aquinas there begins with the claim that among beings who
possess such qualities as “good, true, and noble” there are
gradations. Presumably he means that some things that are good
are better than other good things; perhaps some noble people are nobler
than others who are noble. In effect Aquinas is claiming that
when we “grade” things in this way we are, at least
implicitly, comparing them to some absolute standard. Aquinas
believes this standard cannot be merely “ideal” or
“hypothetical,” and thus this gradation is only possible if
there is some being which has this quality to a “maximum”
extent: “so that there is something which is truest, something
best, something noblest and, consequently, something which is uttermost
being; for those things that are greatest in truth are greatest in
being, as it is written in Metaph. Ii.” Aquinas goes on to affirm
that this being which provides the standard is also the cause or
explanation of the existence of these qualities, and such a cause must
be God. Obviously, this argument draws deeply on Platonic and
Aristotelian assumptions that are no longer widely held by
philosophers. For the argument to be plausible today, such assumptions
would have to be defended, or else the argument reformulated in a way
that frees it from its original metaphysical home.
Probably the most influential versions of the moral argument for
belief in God can be traced to Kant (1788 [1956]), who famously argued
that the theoretical arguments for God’s existence were
unsuccessful, but presented a rational argument for belief in God as a
“postulate of practical reason.” Kant held that a rational,
moral being must necessarily will “the highest good,” which
consists of a world in which people are both morally good and happy,
and in which moral virtue is the condition for happiness. The
latter condition implies that this end must be sought solely by moral
action. However, Kant held that a person cannot rationally will
such an end without believing that moral actions can successfully
achieve such an end, and this requires a belief that the causal
structure of nature is conducive to the achievement of this end by
moral means. This is equivalent to belief in God, a moral being who is
ultimately responsible for the character of the natural world. 
Kant’s arguments will be discussed later in this article.
Kant-inspired arguments were prominent in the nineteenth century,
and continued to be important right up to the middle of the twentieth
century. Such arguments can be found, for example, in W. R.
Sorley (1918), Hastings Rashdall (1920), and A. E. Taylor
(1945/1930). Although Henry Sidgwick was not himself a proponent
of a moral argument for God’s existence, some have argued that
his thought presents the materials for such an argument (see Walls and
Baggett 2011). In the nineteenth century John Henry Newman (1870)
also made good use of a moral argument in his case for belief in God,
developing what could be called an argument from conscience.
In recent philosophy there has been a revival of divine command
metaethical theories, which has in turn led to new versions of the
moral argument found in such thinkers as Robert Adams (1987), John
Hare (1996), and C. Stephen Evans (2010). However, it is important to
see that there are versions of the moral argument for God’s
existence that are completely independent of such a divine command
theory, and this possibility can be seen in arguments developed by
Angus Ritchie (2012) and Mark Linville (2009). Perhaps the most
extensive and developed account of a moral argument for God’s
existence in recent philosophy is found in David Baggett and Jerry
L. Walls (2016).  This book examines a comprehensive form of moral
argument and extensively explores underlying issues. It goes without
saying that these renewed arguments have engendered new criticisms as
well.
Theoretical moral arguments for God’s existence can be
understood as variations on the following template:
As we shall see, there are a variety of features of morality that
can be appealed to in the first steps of the arguments, as well as a
variety of ways in which God might be thought to provide an explanation
of those features in the second steps. The use of the somewhat
vague phrase “objective moral facts” is intended to allow
for this variety. Both types of premises are obviously open to
challenge. For example, the first premise of such an argument can
be challenged by popular metaethical views that see morality as
“subjective,” or “expressive,” rather than
something that consists of objective facts, and also by moral
sceptics. The second premise can be challenged on the basis of
rival explanations of the features of morality, explanations that do
not require God. Arguments about the second premise then may
require comparison between theistic explanations of morality and these
rival views.
It is easy to see then that the proponent of a moral argument has a
complex task: She must defend the reality and objectivity of the
feature of morality appealed to, but also defend the claim that this
feature can be best explained by God. The second part of the task
may require not only demonstrating the strengths of a theistic
explanation, but pointing out weaknesses in rival secular explanations
as well. Both parts of the task are essential, but it is worth
noting that the two components cannot be accomplished simultaneously.
 The theist must defend the reality of morality against
subjectivist and nihilistic critics. Assuming that this task has
been carried out, the theist must then try to show that morality thus
understood requires a theistic explanation.
It is interesting to observe, however, that with respect to both
parts of the task, the theist may enlist non-theists as allies. 
The theist may well make common cause with ethical naturalists as well
as ethical non-naturalists in defending moral realism against
“projective” theories such as expressivism. However,
the theist may also enlist the support of “error theorists”
such as J. L. Mackie (1977), and “moral nihilists” such as
Friedrich Nietzsche (1887) in arguing that God is necessary for
objective morality. Nietzsche, for example, explicitly holds that
God does not exist, but also claims that God’s non-existence
undermines the reality of traditional western morality. The fact that
theists can enlist such unlikely allies does not mean the moral
argument for God’s existence is sound, but it does suggest that
the argument is not obviously question-begging, since both premises are
sometimes accepted by (different) non-believers.
One easily understandable version of a theistic moral argument
relies on an analogy between human laws promulgated by nation-states
and moral laws. Sovereign states enact laws that make certain
acts forbidden or required. If I am a U. S. citizen, and I earn
more than a small amount of money I am obligated to file an income tax
return each year. I am also forbidden, because of the laws that
hold in the United States, to discriminate in hiring on the basis of
age or race. Many people believe that there are moral laws that
bind individuals in the same way that political laws do. I am
obligated by a moral principle not to lie to others, and I am similarly
obligated to keep promises that I have made. (Both legal and
moral laws may be understood as holding prima facie, so that
in some situations a person must violate one law in order to obey a
more important one.)
We know how human laws come into existence. They are enacted
by legislatures (or absolute monarchs in some countries) who have the
authority to pass such laws. How then should the existence of
moral laws be explained? It seems plausible to many to hold that
they must be similarly grounded in some appropriate moral authority,
and the only plausible candidate to fulfill this role is God. 
Some philosophers have dismissed an argument of this type as
“crude,” presumably because its force is so obvious that no
special philosophical training is necessary to understand it and see
its appeal. The fact that one can understand the argument without
much in the way of philosophical skill is not necessarily a defect,
however. If one supposes that there is a God, and that God wants
humans to know him and relate to him, one would expect God to make his
reality known to humans in very obvious ways (See Evans 2010). 
After all, critics of theistic belief, such as J. L. Schellenberg
(1993), have argued that the fact that God’s reality is not
obvious to those who would like to believe in God is a grave problem.
If an awareness of moral obligations is in fact an awareness of
God’s commands or divine laws, then the ordinary person who is
aware of moral obligations does have a kind of awareness of God. 
Of course such a person might be aware of God’s laws without
realizing that they are God’s laws; she might be aware of
God’s commands without being aware of them under that
description. The religious apologist might view such a person as
already having a kind of de re awareness of God, because a
moral obligation is simply an expression of God’s will.
How can such an awareness be converted into full-fledged belief in
God? One way of doing this would be to help the person gain the
skills needed to recognize moral laws as what they are, as
divine commands or divine laws. If moral laws are experienced,
then moral experience could be viewed as a kind of religious experience
or at least a proto-religious experience. Perhaps someone who has
experience of God in this way does not need a moral argument (or any
kind of argument) to have a reasonable belief in God. This may be
one instance of the kind of case that Alvin Plantinga (2000) and the
“Reformed epistemologists” have in mind when they claim
that belief in God can be “properly basic.” It is
worth noting then that there could be such a thing as knowledge of God
that is rooted in moral experience without that knowledge being the
result of a moral argument.
Even if that is the case, however, a moral argument could still play
a valuable role. Such an argument might be one way of helping an
individual understand that moral obligations are in fact divine
commands or laws. Even if it were true that some ordinary people
might know that God exists without argument, an argument could be
helpful in defending the claim that this is the case. A
person might conceivably need an argument for the second level claim
that the person knows God without argument.
In any case a divine command metaethical theory provides the
material for such an argument. The revival of divine command
theories (DCT) of moral obligation is due mainly to the work of Philip
Quinn (1979/1978) and Robert Adams (1999). Adams’ version
of a DCT has been particularly influential and is well-suited for the
defense of the claim that moral knowledge can provide knowledge of
God. Adams’ version of a DCT is an account of moral
obligations and it must be distinguished from more general
“voluntarist” views of ethics that try to treat other moral
properties (such as the good) as dependent on God’s will. 
As explained below, by limiting the theory to obligations, Adams avoids
the standard “Euthyphro” objection, which claims
that divine command views reduce ethics to arbitrariness.
Adams’ account of moral obligations as divine commands rests on a more
general social theory of obligations. There are of course many types
of obligations: legal obligations, financial obligations, obligations
of etiquette, and obligations that hold in virtue of belonging to some
club or association, to name just a few. Clearly these obligations are
distinct from moral obligations, since in some cases moral obligations
can conflict with these other kinds. What is distinctive about
obligations in general? They are not reducible simply to normative
claims about what a person has a good reason to do. J. S. Mill (1874,
164–165) argued that we can explain normative principles without
making any reference to God. He contends that the “feeling of
obligation” stems from “something that the internal
conscience bears witness to in its own nature,” and thus the
moral law, unlike human laws, “does not originate in the will of
a legislator or legislature external to the mind.” Doubtless
Mill had in mind here such normative logical principles as “it
is wrong to believe both p and not-p at
the same time.” Mill argues that such normative principles hold
without any requirement for an “authority” to be their
ground. Mill’s view is plausible, though some theists have argued that
metaphysical naturalists have difficulty in explaining any kind of
normativity (see Devine 1989, 88–89). However, even if Mill is
correct about normativity in general, it does not follow that his view
is correct for obligations, which have a special character. An
obligation has a special kind of force; we should care about complying
with it, and violations of obligations appropriately incur blame
(Adams 1999, 235). If I make a logical mistake, I may feel silly or
stupid or embarrassed, but I have no reason to feel guilty, unless the
mistake reflects some carelessness on my part that itself constitutes
a violation of a moral obligation. Adams argues that “facts of
obligation are constituted by broadly social requirements.”
(ibid, 233) For example, the social role of parenting is partly
constituted by the obligations one assumes by becoming a parent, and
the social role of citizen is partly constituted by the obligations to
obey the laws of the country in which one is a citizen.
All obligations are then constituted by social requirements, according
to Adams. However, not all obligations constituted by social
requirements are moral obligations. What social relation could be the
basis of moral obligations? Adams argues that not just any human
social relation will possess the requisite authority:
“A morally valid obligation obviously will not be
constituted by just any demand sponsored by a system of social
relationships that one in fact values. Some such demands have no moral
force, and some social systems are downright evil.” (ibid, 242)
If a good and loving God exists and has created all humans, then the
social relation humans have to God has the right features to explain
moral obligations. For if moral obligations stem from God’s
requirements, they will be objective, but they will also be
motivating, since a relation to God would clearly be a great good that
humans would have reason to value. Since a proper relation to God is
arguably more important than any other social relation, we can also
understand why moral obligations trump other kinds of obligations. On
this view we can also explain why moral obligations have a
transcendent character, which is important because “a genuinely
moral conception of obligation must have resources for moral criticism
of social systems and their demands.” (ibid, 242–243)
Notice that the DCT Adams defends is ontological rather than
semantic: it is a claim that moral obligations are in fact
identical with divine commands, not a claim that “moral
obligations” has the same meaning as “divine
commands.” On his account, the meaning of “moral
obligation” is fixed by the role this concept plays in our
language. That role includes such facts as these: Moral
obligations must be motivating and objective. They also must
provide a basis for critical evaluation of other types of obligations,
and they must be such that someone who violates a moral obligation is
appropriately subject to blame. Adams argues that it is divine
commands that best satisfy these desiderata. God’s
existence thus provides the best explanation of moral
obligations. If moral obligations are identical with divine
commands (or perhaps if they are grounded in or caused to exist by
divine commands) an argument for God’s existence from such
obligations can easily be constructed:
This argument is stated in a deductive form, but it can easily be
reworded as a probabilistic “argument to the best
explanation,” as follows:
Obviously, those who do not find a DCT convincing will not think
this argument from moral obligation has force. However, Adams
anticipates and gives a forceful answer to one common criticism of a
DCT. It is often argued that a DCT must fail because of a dilemma
parallel to one derived from Plato’s Euthyphro. 
The dilemma for a DCT can be derived from the following question: 
Assuming that God commands what is right, does he command what is right
because it is right? If the proponent of a DCT answers
affirmatively, then it appears the quality of rightness must hold
antecedently to and thus independently of God’s commands. 
If, however, the proponent denies that God commands what is right
because it is right, then God’s commands appear arbitrary. 
Adams’ version of a DCT evades this dilemma by holding that God
is essentially good and that his commands are necessarily aimed at the
good. This allows Adams to claim that God’s commands make
actions obligatory (or forbidden), while denying that the commands are
arbitrary.
Although Adams’ version of a DCT successfully meets this
“Euthyphro” objection, there are other powerful
criticisms that have been mounted against this metaethical theory in
the literature. These objections can be found in the writings of Wes
Morriston (2009), Erik Wielenberg (2005, 2014, especially chapter 2),
and Nicholas Wolterstorff (2007), among others.  Wielenberg explicitly
defends as an alternative to divine command metaethics a view he calls
“godless normative realism”. This is essentially the view
that moral truths are basic or fundamental in character, not derived
from natural facts or any more fundamental metaphysical facts.  It
thus seems similar to the view often called “ethical
non-naturalism”.  This view certainly provides a significant
alternative to divine command metaethics.  However, it is worth noting
that some of the criticisms that metaphysical naturalists have against
theistic metaethics may apply to Wielenberg’s view as well.
Specifically, philosophers such as J. L. Mackie (1977) find
non-natural ethical qualities of any kind “queer” since
they are so unlike the realities discovered by science.  The
“brute moral facts” posited by Wielenberg as necessary
truths seem vulnerable to this same criticism.  In fact, the criticism
may be sharper against Wielenberg’s view than against theistic views,
since ethical truths may appear less odd in a universe that is
ultimately grounded in a person.  Responses to the objections of
Wielenberg, Morriston, and others have also been given (see Evans
2013, Baggett and Walls, 2011, 2016). Clearly the version of a moral
argument for God’s existence that rests on divine command theory will
only be judged powerful by those who find a DCT plausible, and that
will certainly be a minority of philosophers.  (Although it is worth
noting that no single metaethical theory seems to enjoy widespread
support among philosophers, so a DCT is not alone in being a minority
view.) Nevertheless, those who do find a DCT powerful will also see
moral obligations as providing strong evidence for God’s reality.
A variety of arguments have been developed that God is necessary to
explain human awareness of moral truth (or moral knowledge, if one
believes that this moral awareness amounts to knowledge). Richard
Swinburne (2004, 218), for example, argues that there is no
“great probability that moral awareness will occur in a Godless
universe.” On Swinburne’s view, moral truths are either
necessary truths or contingent truths that are grounded in necessary
truths. For example, it is obviously contingent that “It is
wrong to drop an atomic bomb on Hiroshima,” since it is
contingent that there exists a city such as Hiroshima. But one
might hold that this proposition is true (assuming it is) because of
some other truth such as “It is wrong intentionally to kill
innocent humans” which does hold universally and is necessarily
true. Swinburne does not think that an argument from moral facts
as such is powerful. However, the fact that we humans are aware
of moral facts is itself surprising and calls for an explanation.
It may be true that creatures who belong to groups that behave
altruistically will have some survival advantage over groups that lack
such a trait. However, moral beliefs are not required in order to
produce such behavior, since it is clear that “there are many
species of animals that are naturally inclined to help others of their
species, and yet do not have moral beliefs.” (Swinburne 2004,
217) If God exists, he has “significant reason to bring about
conscious beings with moral awareness,” since his intended
purpose for humans includes making it possible for them freely to
choose good over evil, since this will make it possible for them to
develop a relation to God. Swinburne does not think that this
argument provides very strong evidence for God’s existence by
itself, but rather that it provides some inductive support for belief
in God. It is one of several phenomena which seem more probable
in a theistic universe than in a godless universe. As we consider
more and more such phenomena, it will be increasingly improbable that
“they will all occur.” (ibid, 218) All of
these inductive arguments together may then provide substantial support
for theistic belief, even if no one of them by itself would be
sufficient for rational belief.
Swinburne’s version of the argument is quite brief and
undeveloped, but some claims that could be used to support a more
developed version of the argument (one that will be described below)
can be found in a well-known and much cited article by Sharon Street
(2006). Street’s argument, as the title implies, is in no way
intended to support a moral argument for theism. To the contrary, her
purpose is to defend anti-realist metaethical theories against realist
theories that view moral truth as “stance-independent” of
human attitudes and emotions.  Street presents the moral realist with
a dilemma posed by the question as to how our human evaluative beliefs
are related to human evolution. It is clear, she believes, that
evolution has strongly shaped our evaluative attitudes. The question
concerns how those attitudes are related to the objective evaluative
truths accepted by the realist. If the realist holds that there is no
relation between such truths and our evaluative attitudes, then this
implies that “most of our evaluative judgments are off track due
to the distorting influence of Darwinian processes.” The other
alternative for the realist is to claim that there is a relationship,
and thus that is not an accident or miracle that our evaluative
beliefs track the objective truths. However, this view, Street claims,
is scientifically implausible. Street argues therefore that an
evolutionary story about how we came to make the moral judgments we
make undermines confidence in the objective truth of those
judgments. Street’s argument is of course controversial and
thinkers such as Erik Wielenberg (2014) have argued against
evolutionary debunking arguments. Still, many regard such arguments as
problematic for those who want to defend moral realism, particularly
when developed as a “global” argument (Kahane, 2010).
Street’s argument has also been challenged by such critics as
Russ Shafer-Landau (2012). However, her argument, and similar
arguments, have been acknowledged by some moral realists, such as
David Enoch (2011) and Erik Wielenberg (2014) to pose a significant
problem for their view.  Enoch, for example, even though he offers a
response to Street’s argument, evidently has some worries about
the strength of his reply. Wielenberg, to avoid the criticism that in
a non-theistic universe it would be extremely lucky if evolution
selected for belief in objectively true moral values, proposes that
the natural laws that produce this result may be metaphysically
necessary, and thus there is no element of luck.  However, many
philosophers will see this view of natural laws as paying a heavy
price to avoid theism. It might appear that Street is arguing
straightforwardly that evolutionary theory makes it improbable that
humans would have objective moral knowledge.  However, it is not
evolution by itself that predicts the improbability of objective moral
knowledge, but the conjunction of evolution and metaphysical
naturalism. A good deal of the force of Street’s argument stems
from the assumption that naturalism is true, and therefore that the
evolutionary process is one that is unguided. Since, it is not
evolution by itself that poses a challenge to moral realism but the
conjunction of evolution and metaphysical naturalism, then rejecting
naturalism provides one way for the moral realist to solve the
problem. It does appear that in a naturalistic universe we would
expect a process of Darwinian evolution to select for a propensity for
moral judgments that track survival and not objective moral truths.
Mark Linville (2009, 391–446) has developed a detailed argument
for the claim that it is difficult for metaphysical naturalists to
develop a plausible evolutionary story as to how our moral judgments
could have epistemological warrant. However, if we suppose that the
evolutionary process has been guided by God, who has as one of his
goals the creation of morally significant human creatures capable of
enjoying a relation with God, then it would not seem at all accidental
or even unlikely that God would ensure that humans have value beliefs
that are largely correct.
Some philosophers believe that the randomness of Darwinian natural
selection rules out the possibility of any kind of divine guidance
being exercised through such a process. Some thinkers, including both
some atheists and some proponents of what is called “creation
science”, believe that evolution and God are rival, mutually
exclusive hypotheses about the origins of the natural world. What can
be explained scientifically needs no religious explanation. However,
this is far from obviously true; in fact, if theism is true it is
clearly false. From a theistic perspective to think that God and
science provide competing explanations fails to grasp the relationship
between God and the natural world by conceiving of God as one more
cause within that natural world. If God exists at all, God is not an
entity within the natural world, but the creator of that natural
world, with all of its causal processes. If God exists, God is the
reason why there is a natural world and the reason for the existence
of the causal processes of the natural world. In principle, therefore,
a natural explanation can never preclude a theistic explanation. 
But what about the randomness that is a crucial part of the
Darwinian story? The atheist might claim that because
evolutionary theory posits that the process by which plants and animals
have evolved in one that involves random genetic mutations, it cannot
be guided, and thus God cannot have used evolutionary means to achieve
his ends. However, this argument fails. It depends on an
equivocation in what is meant by “random”. When
scientists claim that genetic mutations are random, they do not mean
that they are uncaused, or even that they are unpredictable from the
point of view of biochemistry, but only that the mutations do not
happen in response to the adaptational needs of the organism. It
is entirely possible for a natural process to include randomness in
that sense, even if the whole natural order is itself created and
sustained by God. The sense of “randomness” required
for evolutionary theory does not imply that the evolutionary process
must be unguided. A God who is responsible for the laws of nature
and the initial conditions that shape the evolutionary process could
certainly ensure that the process achieved certain ends.
Like the other moral arguments for God’s existence, the
argument from moral knowledge can easily be stated in a propositional
form, and I believe Swinburne is right to hold that the argument is
best construed as a probabilistic argument that appeals to God as
providing a better explanation of moral knowledge than is possible in a
naturalistic universe.
There is a kind of argument from moral knowledge also implicit in
Angus Ritchie’s recent book From Morality to Metaphysics: The
Theistic Implications of our Ethical Commitments (2012).
 Ritchie presses a kind of dilemma on non-theistic accounts of
morality. Subjectivist theories such as expressivism can
certainly make sense of the fact that we make the ethical judgments we
do, but they empty morality of its objective authority. 
Objectivist theories that take morality seriously, however, have
difficulty explaining our capacity to make true moral judgments, unless
the process by which humans came to hold these capacities is one that
is controlled by a being such as God.
The moral argument from knowledge will not be convincing to anyone who
is committed to any form of expressivism or other non-objective
metaethical theory, and clearly many philosophers find such views
attractive. And there will surely be many philosophers who will judge
that if moral objectivism implies theism or requires theism to be
plausible, this is a
reductio of objectivist views. Furthermore, non-theistic
moral philosophers, whether naturalists or non-naturalists, have
stories to tell about how moral knowledge might be possible. 
Nevertheless, there are real questions about the plausibility of these
stories, and thus, some of those convinced that moral realism is true
may judge that moral knowledge provides some support for theistic
belief.
Many philosophers find Immanuel Kant’s moral philosophy still
offers a fruitful approach to ethics. Of the various forms of the
“categorical imperative” that Kant offers, the formula that
regards human beings as “ends in themselves” is especially
attractive: “Act in such a way that you always treat
humanity, whether in your own person or in the person of any other,
never simply as a means, but always at the same time as an end”
(Kant 1785 [1964], 96). Many contemporary moral philosophers
influenced by Kant, such as Christine Korsgaard (1996), see Kant as
offering a “constructivist” metaethical position. 
Constructivism is supposed to offer a “third way” between
moral realism and subjectivist views of morality. Like
subjectivists, constructivists want to see morality as a human
creation. However, like moral realists constructivists want to
see moral questions as having objective answers. Constructivism
is an attempt to develop an objective morality that is free of the
metaphysical commitments of moral realism.
It is, however, controversial whether Kant himself was a
constructivist in this sense. One reason to question whether this
is the right way to read Kant follows from the fact that Kant himself
did not see morality as free from metaphysical commitments. For
example, Kant thought that it would be impossible for someone who
believed that mechanistic determinism was the literal truth about
himself to believe that he was a moral agent, since morality requires
an autonomy that is incompatible with determinism. To see myself
as a creature who has the kind of value Kant calls
“dignity” I must not see myself merely as a machine-like
product of the physical environment. Hence Kant thought that it
was crucial for morality that his Critical Philosophy had shown that
the deterministic perspective on humans is simply part of the
“phenomenal world” that is the object of scientific
knowledge, not the “noumenal reality” that it would be if
some kind of scientific realism were the true metaphysical view. 
When we do science we see ourselves as determined, but science tells us
only how the world appears, not how it really is. Recognizing
this fact suggests that when Kant posits that humans have this
intrinsic value he calls dignity, he is not “constructing”
the value humans have, but recognizing the value beings of a certain
kind must have. Humans can only have this kind of value if they
are a particular kind of creature. Whether Kant himself was a
moral realist or not, there are certainly elements in his philosophy
that push in a realist direction.
If the claim that human persons have a kind of intrinsic dignity or
worth is a true objective principle and if it provides a key
foundational principle of morality, it is well worth asking what kinds
of metaphysical implications the claim might have. This is the
question that Mark Linville (2009, 417–446) pursues in the second moral
argument he develops. Linville begins by noting that one could
hardly hold that “human persons have intrinsic dignity”
could be true if human persons do not exist. Clearly, some
metaphysical positions do include a denial of the existence of human
persons, such as forms of Absolute Monism which hold that only one
Absolute Reality exists. However, it also seems to be the case
that some forms of Scientific Naturalism are committed to the denial of
“persons as substantive selves that essentially possess
a first-person point of view” (See Dennett 2006, 107). Daniel
Dennett, for example, holds that persons will not be part of the
ultimately true scientific account of things. Dennett holds that
to think of humans as persons is simply to adopt a certain
“stance” toward them that he calls the “intentional
stance,” but it is clear that the kind of picture of humans we
get when we think of them in this way does not correspond with their
intrinsic metaphysical properties. It is not clear how systems
towards which we adopt an “intentional stance” could be
truly autonomous and thus have the kind of value Kant believes human
persons have.
The argument from human dignity could be put into propositional form
as follows:
A naturalist may want to challenge premise (2) by finding some other
strategy to explain human dignity. Michael Martin (2002), for
example, has tried to suggest that moral judgments can be analyzed as
the feelings of approval or disapproval of a perfectly impartial and
informed observer. Linville (2009) objects that it is not clear
how the feelings of such an observer could constitute the intrinsic
worth of a person, since one would think that intrinsic properties
would be non-relational and mind-independent. In any case,
Linville notes that a “Euthyphro” problem lurks for such an
ideal observer theory, since one would think that such an observer
would judge a person to be intrinsically valuable because the person
has intrinsic value.
Another strategy that is pursued by constructivists such as Korsgaard
is to link the value ascribed to humans to the capacity for rational
reflection. The idea is that insofar as I am committed to rational
reflection, I must value myself as having this capacity, and
consistently value others who have it as well. A similar strategy is
found in Wielenberg’s form of ethical non-naturalism, since
Wielenberg argues that it is necessarily true that any being with
certain reflective capacities will have moral rights (Wielenberg,
2014, chapter 4). It is far from clear that human rationality provides
an adequate ground for moral rights, however. Many people believe that
young infants and people suffering from dementia still have this
intrinsic dignity, but in both cases there is no capacity for rational
reflection.
Some support for this criticism of the attempt to see reason as the
basis of the value of humans can be found in Nicholas
Wolterstorff’s recent work on justice (2007, especially Ch.
8). Wolterstorff in this work defends the claim that there are
natural human rights, and that violating such rights is one way of
acting unjustly towards a person. Why do humans have such
rights? Wolterstorff says these rights are grounded in the basic
worth or dignity that humans possess. When I seek to torture or
kill an innocent human I am failing to respect this worth. If one
asks why we should think humans possess such worth, Wolterstorff argues
that the belief that humans have this quality was not only historically
produced by Jewish and Christian conceptions of the human person, but
even now cannot be defended apart from such a conception. In
particular, he argues that attempts to argue that our worth stems from
some excellence we possess such as reason will not explain the worth of
infants or those with severe brain injuries or dementia.
Does a theistic worldview fare better in explaining the special
value of human dignity? In a theistic universe God is himself
seen as the supreme good. Indeed, theistic Platonists usually
identify God with the Good. If God is himself a person, then this
seems to be a commitment to the idea that personhood itself is
something that must be intrinsically good. If human persons are
made in God’s image, as both Judaism and Christianity affirm,
then it would seem to follow that humans do have a kind of intrinsic
value, just by way of being the kind of creatures they are.
This argument will of course be found unconvincing to many.  Some will
deny premise (1), either because they reject moral realism as a
metaethical stance, or because they reject the normative claim that
humans have any kind of special value or dignity. (Maybe they will
even think that such a claim is a form of “speciesism”.).
Others will find premise (2) suspect. They may be inclined to agree
that human persons have a special dignity, but hold that the source of
that dignity can be found in such human qualities as rationality. With
respect to the status of infants and those suffering from dementia,
the critic might bite the bullet and just accept the fact that human
dignity does not extend to them, or else argue that the fact that
infants and those suffering mental breakdown are part of a species
whose members typically possess rationality merits them a special
respect, even if they lack this quality as individuals. Others will
find premise (2) doubtful because they find the theistic explanation
of dignity unclear. Another alternative is to seek a Constructivist
account of dignity, perhaps regarding the special status of humans as
something we humans decide to extend to each other. Perhaps the
strongest non-theistic alternative would be some form of ethical
non-naturalism, in which one simply affirms that the claim that
persons have a special dignity is an
a priori truth requiring no explanation. In effect this
is a decision for a non-theistic form of Platonism. 
The proponent of the argument may well agree that claims about the
special status of humans are true a priori, and thus also opt
for some form of Platonism. However, the proponent of the
argument will point out that some necessary truths can be explained by
other necessary truths. The theist believes that these truths
about the special status of humans tell us something about the kind of
universe humans find themselves in. To say that humans are
created by God is to say that personhood is not an ephemeral or
accidental feature of the universe, because at bottom reality itself is
personal (Mavrodes 1986).
As already noted, the most famous and perhaps most influential version
of a moral argument for belief in God is found in Immanuel Kant
(1788). Kant himself insisted that his argument was not a theoretical
argument, but an argument grounded in practical reason. The conclusion
of the argument is not “God exists” or “God probably
exists” but “I (as a rational, moral agent) ought to
believe that God exists.” We shall, however, see that there are
some reasons to doubt that practical arguments can be neatly separated
from theoretical arguments.
Kant’s version of the argument can be stated in different
ways, but perhaps the following captures one plausible interpretation
of the argument. Morality is grounded in pure practical reason,
and the moral agent must act on the basis of maxims that can be
rationally endorsed as universal principles. Moral actions are
thus not determined by results or consequences but by the maxims on
which they are based. However, all actions, including moral
actions, necessarily aim at ends. Kant argues that the end that
moral actions aim at is the “highest good,” which is a
world in which both moral virtue and happiness are maximized, with
happiness contingent on virtue. For Kant “ought implies
can,” and so if I have an obligation to seek the highest good,
then I must believe that it is possible to achieve such an end. 
However, I must seek the highest good only by acting in accordance with
morality; no shortcuts to happiness are permissible. This seems
to require that I believe that acting in accordance with morality will
be causally efficacious in achieving the highest good. However,
it is reasonable to believe that moral actions will be causally
efficacious in this way only if the laws of causality are set up in
such a way that these laws are conducive to the efficacy of moral
action. Certainly both parts of the highest good seem difficult
to achieve. We humans have weaknesses in our character that
appear difficult if not impossible to overcome by our own
efforts. Furthermore, as creatures we have subjective needs that
must be satisfied if we are happy, but we have little empirical reason
to think that these needs will be satisfied by moral actions even if we
succeeded in becoming virtuous. If a person believes that the
natural world is simply a non-moral machine with no moral purposiveness
then that person would have no reason to believe that moral action
could succeed because there is no a priori reason to think
moral action will achieve the highest good and little empirical reason
to believe this either. Kant thus concludes that a moral agent
must “postulate” the existence of God as a rational
presupposition of the moral life.
One problem with this argument is that many will deny that morality
requires us to seek the highest good in Kant’s sense. Even
if the Kantian highest good seems reasonable as an ideal, some will
object that we have no obligation to achieve such a state, but merely
to work towards realizing the closest approximation to such a state
that is possible (See Adams 1987, 152). Without divine
assistance, perhaps perfect virtue is unachievable, but in that case we
cannot be obliged to realize such a state if there is no God. 
Perhaps we cannot hope that happiness will be properly proportioned to
virtue in the actual world if God does not exist, but then our
obligation can only be to realize as much happiness as can be attained
through moral means. Kant would doubtless reject this criticism,
since on his view the ends of morality are given directly to pure
practical reason a priori, and we are not at liberty to adjust
those ends on the basis of empirical beliefs.  However,
few contemporary philosophers would share Kant’s confident view
of reason here, and thus to many the criticism has force. Even
Kant admits at one point that full-fledged belief in God is not
rationally necessary, since one could conceivably seek the highest good
if one merely believes that God’s existence is possible (Kant,
1781–1787, 651).
Another way of interpreting Kant’s argument puts more stress
on the connection between an individual’s desire for happiness
and the obligation to do what is morally right. Morality requires
me to sacrifice my personal happiness if that is necessary to do what
is right. Yet it is a psychological fact that humans necessarily
desire their own happiness. In such a state it looks as if human
moral agents will be torn by what Henry Sidgwick called the
“dualism of the practical reason” (1884, 401). Reason
both requires humans to seek their own happiness and to sacrifice
it. Sidgwick himself noted that only if there is a God can we
hope that this dualism will be resolved, so that those who seek to act
morally will in the long run also be acting so as to advance their own
happiness and well-being. (Interestingly, Sidgwick himself does
not endorse this argument, but he clearly sees this problem as part of
the appeal of theism.) A contemporary argument similar to this
one has been developed by C. Stephen Layman (2002).
The critic of this form of the Kantian argument may reply that
Kantian morality sees duty as something that must be done regardless of
the consequences, and thus a truly moral person cannot make his or her
commitment to morality contingent on the achievement of
happiness. From a Kantian point of view, this reply seems right;
Kant unequivocally affirms that moral actions must be done for the sake
of duty and not from any desire for personal reward. 
Nevertheless, especially for any philosopher willing to endorse any
form of eudaimonism, seeing myself as inevitably sacrificing what I
cannot help but desire for the sake of duty does seem
problematic. As John Hare affirms, “If we are to endorse
wholeheartedly the long-term shape of our lives, we have to see this
shape as consistent with our happiness” (1996, 88).
The critic may reply to this by simply accepting the lamentable fact
that there is something tragic or even absurd about the human
condition. The world may not be the world we wish it was, but
that does not give us any reason to believe it is different than it
is. If there is a tension between the demands of morality and
self-interest, then this may simply be a brute fact that must be
faced.
This reply raises an issue that must be faced by all forms of
practical or pragmatic arguments for belief. Many philosophers
insist that rational belief must be grounded solely in theoretical
evidence. The fact that it would be better for me to believe p
does not in itself give me any reason to believe p. This
criticism is aimed not merely at Kant, but at other practical moral
arguments. For example, Robert Adams argues that if humans
believe there is no moral order to the universe, then they will become
demoralized in their pursuit of morality, which is morally undesirable
(1987, 151). The atheist might concede that atheism is (somewhat)
demoralizing, but deny that this provides any reason to believe there
is a moral order to the universe. Similarly, Linda Zagzebski
(1987) argues that morality will not be a rational enterprise unless
good actions increase the amount of good in the world. However,
given that moral actions often involve the sacrifice of happiness,
there is no reason to believe moral action will increase the good
unless there is a power transcendent of human activity working on the
side of the good. Here the atheist may claim that moral action
does increase the good because such actions always increase good
character. However, even if that reply fails the atheist may
again simply admit that there may be something tragic or absurd about
the human condition, and the fact that we may wish things were
different is not a reason to believe that they are. So the
problem must be faced: Are practical arguments merely
rationalized wish-fulfillment?
The theist might respond to this kind of worry in several
ways. The first thing to be said is that the fact that a
naturalistic view of the universe implies that the universe must be
tragic or absurd, if correct, would itself be an important and
interesting conclusion. However, apart from this, it makes a
great deal of difference how one construes what we might call the
background epistemic situation. If one believes that our
theoretical evidence favors atheism, then it seems plausible to hold
that one ought to maintain a naturalistic view, even if it is
practically undesirable that the world have such a character. In
that case a practical argument for religious belief could be judged a
form of wish-fulfillment. However, this does not seem to be the
way those who support such a practical argument see the
situation. Kant affirms that the limits of reason established in
The Critique of Pure Reason would silence all objections to
morality and religion “in Socratic fashion, namely, by the
clearest proof of the ignorance of the objectors” (1781, 1787,
30. See also 530–531.) In fact, the situation actually
favors theism, since Kant holds that theoretical reason sees value in
the concept of God as a regulative ideal, even though God’s
existence cannot be theoretically affirmed as knowledge. If we
appeal to God’s will to explain what happens in the natural
order, we undermine both science and religion, since in that case we
would no longer seek empirical evidence for causality and we would make
God into a finite object in the natural world (1781, 1787,
562–563). However, as a regulative ideal, the concept of God is
one that theoretical reason finds useful: “The assumption of a
supreme intelligence, as the one and only cause of the universe, though
in the idea alone, can therefore always benefit reason and can never
injure it” (1781, 1787, 560). There is a sense in which
theoretical reason itself inclines towards affirmation of God, because
it must assume that reality is rationally knowable: “If one
wishes to achieve systematic knowledge of the world, he ought to regard
it as if it were created by a supreme reason.” (Kant 1786, 298)
Although theoretical reason cannot affirm the existence of God, it
finds it useful to think of the natural world as having the kinds of
characteristics it would have if God did exist. Thus, if rational
grounds for belief in God come from practical reason, theoretical
reason will raise no objections.
For Kant the argument from practical reason for belief in God is not
a form of wish-fulfillment because its ground is not an arbitrary
desire or wish but “a real need associated with reason”
(Kant, 1786, 296). Human beings are not purely theoretical
spectators of the universe, but agents. It is not always rational
or even possible to refrain from action, and yet action presupposes
beliefs about the way things are (For a good interpretation and defense
of this view of Kant on the relation between action and belief, see
Wood 1970, 17–25). Thus, in some cases suspension of judgment is
not possible. The critic may object that a person may act as if p
were true without believing p. However, it is not clear that this
advice to distinguish action on the basis of p and belief that p can
always be followed. For one thing, it seems empirically the case
that one way of acquiring belief that p is simply to begin to act as if
p were true. Hence, to begin to act as if p were true is at least
to embark upon a course of action that makes belief in p more
likely. Second, there may well be a sense of “belief”
in which “acting as if p were true” is sufficient to
constitute belief. This is obviously the case on pragmatist
accounts of belief. But even those who reject a general pragmatic
account of belief may well find something like this appealing with
respect to religious belief. Many religious believers hold that
the best way to measure a person’s religious faith is in terms of
the person’s actions. Thus, a person who is willing to act
on the basis of a religious conception, especially if those actions are
risky or costly, is truly a religious believer, even if that person is
filled with doubt and anxiety. Such a person might well be
construed as more truly a believer than a person who smugly
“assents” to religious doctrines but is unwilling to act on
them.
Perhaps the right way to think of practical moral arguments is not
to see them as justifying belief without evidence, but as shifting the
amount of evidence seen as necessary. This is the lesson some
would draw from the phenomenon of “pragmatic encroachment”
that has been much discussed in recent epistemology. Here is an
example of pragmatic encroachment:
A plausible interpretation of this scenario is that ordinarily
claims such as the one I made, based on memory, are justified, and
count as knowledge. However, in this situation, the stakes are
raised because my life is at risk, and my knowledge is lost because the
pragmatic situation has “encroached” on the normal
truth-oriented conditions for knowledge. Pragmatic encroachment
is controversial and the idea of such encroachment is rejected by some
epistemologists. However, defenders hold that it is reasonable to
consider the pragmatic stakes in considering evidence for a belief that
underlies significant action (see Fantl and McGrath 2007). If
this is correct, then it seems reasonable to consider the pragmatic
situation in determining how much evidence is sufficient to justify
religious beliefs. In theory the adjustment could go in either
direction, depending on what costs are associated with a mistake and on
which side those costs lie.
In any case it is not clear that practical moral arguments can
always be clearly distinguished from theoretical moral arguments. 
The reason this is so is that in many cases the practical situation
described seems itself to be or involve a kind of evidence for the
truth of the belief being justified. Take, for example,
Kant’s classic argument. One thing Kant’s argument
does is call to our attention that it would be enormously odd to
believe that human beings are moral creatures subject to an objective
moral law, but also to believe that the universe that humans inhabit is
indifferent to morality. In other words, the existence of human
persons understood as moral beings can itself be understood as a piece
of evidence about the character of the universe humans find themselves
in. Peter Byrne (2013, 1998) has criticized practical arguments on
the grounds that they presuppose something like the following
proposition: “The world is likely to be organized so as to
meet our deepest human needs.” Byrne objects that this premise is
likely to be false if there is no God and thus arguments that assume it
appear circular. However, it is not clear that only those who
already believe in God will find this premise attractive. The
reason for this is that humans are themselves part of the natural
universe, and it seems a desirable feature of a metaphysical view that
it explain (rather than explain away) features of human existence that
seem real and important.
It seems likely therefore that any appeal to a practical argument
will include some theoretical component as well, even if that component
is not always made explicit. Nevertheless, this does not mean
that practical arguments do not have some important and distinctive
features. For Kant it was important that religious beliefs stem
from practical reason. For if religious belief were grounded
solely in theoretical reason, then such belief would have to conform to
“extrinsic and arbitrary legislation” (Kant 1790,
131). Kant thinks such a religion would be one grounded in
“fear and submission,” and thus it is good that religious
belief is motivated mainly by a free moral act by which the
“final end of our being” is presented to us (1790,
159). For any practical argument makes religious belief
existential; the issue is not merely what I believe to be true about
the universe but how I shall live my life in that universe.
It seems clear that no version of the moral argument constitutes a
“proof” of God’s existence. Each version
contains premises that many reasonable thinkers reject. However,
this does not mean the arguments have no force. One might think
of each version of the argument as attempting to spell out the
“cost” of rejecting the conclusion. Some philosophers
will certainly be willing to pay the cost, and indeed have independent
reasons for doing so. However, it would certainly be interesting
and important if one became convinced that atheism required one to
reject moral realism altogether, or to embrace an implausible account
of how moral knowledge is acquired. For those who think that some
version or versions of the arguments have force, the cumulative case
for theistic belief may be raised by such arguments.