There is a broad sense of “moral naturalism” whereby a
moral naturalist is someone who believes an adequate philosophical
account of morality can be given in terms entirely consistent with a
naturalistic position in philosophical inquiry more generally. As
science has developed over the last several centuries, it has seemed
to many that the kinds of facts that scientists investigate through
empirical methods are the only kinds of facts that there are. Religion
and superstition have fallen by the wayside; the only things that we
ought to believe in are the kinds of things that science can tell us
about. This increasingly common attitude combines a metaphysical
doctrine—that the only things that exist are natural
things—with an epistemological doctrine—that we know
about the world strictly by the use of experimentation and other
empirical methods. Moral naturalism refers to any version of moral
realism that is consistent with this general philosophical naturalism.
Moral realism is the view that there are objective, mind-independent
moral facts. For the moral naturalist, then, there are objective moral
facts, these facts are facts concerning natural things, and we know
about them using empirical methods.
Naturalism in this sense is opposed by those who reject a parsimonious
naturalistic metaphysics and stand willing to allow a domain of
nonnatural or supernatural facts to play an essential role in our
understanding of morality. Naturalism is also opposed by
“anti-realists”, including error theorists,
constructivists, relativists, and expressivists. According to error
theorists, there are no moral facts of any kind. And according to
constructivists, relativists, and expressivists, there are moral
facts, but these facts are subjective, rather than objective.
Anti-realists hold that, if there are any moral facts, these facts are
merely products of our contingent attitudes. Anti-realists are
typically moral naturalists according to the more general definition
of ‘moral naturalism’, as anti-realists typically attempt
to understand morality in terms that are consistent with general
philosophical naturalism. But for the purposes of this entry,
anti-realism should be understood as opposed to moral naturalism.
We have said that moral naturalism is a conjunction of three
claims:
Moral Realism: There are objective, mind-independent
moral facts.
Metaphysical Naturalism: Moral facts are natural
facts.
Epistemic Naturalism: We know moral claims are true
in the same way that we know about claims in the natural sciences.
But moral naturalism is sometimes associated with a fourth,
linguistic claim, about the nature of moral language. That
claim is:
Analytic Naturalism: Our moral claims are
synonymous with certain (highly complex) claims in the
natural sciences.
Of these four claims, Metaphysical Naturalism is often taken to be the
claim that is most central to the doctrine of moral naturalism. The
debate between naturalists and non-naturalists is typically taken to
be a debate about the nature of moral properties. Are those properties
natural or non-natural?—this seems to be a
straightforward metaphysical question.
But Metaphysical Naturalism is not an unproblematic thesis. What does
the naturalness of a fact or property consist in, exactly?
That’s a pretty basic question, but philosophers are often left
embarrassingly tongue-tied when called on to answer it. Some claim
(e.g., Bedke 2009, Enoch 2010, Lutz forthcoming) that natural
properties or facts are those that have causal
or explanatory power, while others have attempted to
distinguish natural properties from non-natural properties in other
metaphysical terms (see McPherson 2015). But the difficulty of
defining a “natural” property, often combined with a
general Humean or Kantian skepticism about philosophers’ ability
to meaningfully investigate any metaphysical questions, has made many
philosophers wary of discussing Metaphysical Naturalism
directly. Accordingly, many define moral naturalism through the lens
of Analytic Naturalism or Epistemic Naturalism.
We might define a “natural fact” not in metaphysical
terms, but rather in linguistic terms: as the kind of fact about which
we make certain kinds of claims—natural or
descriptive claims. Claims are or are not
“natural” depending on what kind of terminology they use.
Claims that use normative terminology like ‘good’,
‘bad’, ‘right’, ‘wrong’, etc. are
normative claims. Claims that avoid this use of evaluative
terminology, and instead use terminology common to the natural
sciences, are natural claims. If moral claims and natural claims are
synonymous, as the Analytic Naturalist holds, then moral and natural
claims must refer to the same facts. If the moral claims refer to the
same facts that natural claims refer to, it follows that moral claims
refer to natural facts. Thus, Analytic Naturalism can provide us with
a sensible and tractable explanation of how moral facts could be
“natural” facts (Parfit 2011, chapters 24–25).
Alternatively, we might define ‘natural facts’ in
epistemic terms: as those facts that can only be investigated through
empirical methods. Thus, if we accept Metaphysical Naturalism and
hold that moral facts are “natural”, this entails
Epistemic Naturalism—that moral facts are the kinds of facts
that we investigate using empirical methods. Shafer-Landau (2003)
defines a ‘natural’ fact in these epistemic terms, and so,
because he believes that we can know moral facts by using intuition
(which is not an empirical method), he rejects moral naturalism.
It might be tempting to say that moral naturalism should, properly
understood, consist in the conjunction of Epistemic, Metaphysical, and
Analytic Naturalism. But that suggestion would be unacceptable, as
there is a strong tension between Epistemic Naturalism and Analytic
Naturalism. If Analytic Naturalism is true, then it should be possible
(at least in principle) to go through a process of conceptual analysis
that would reveal the synonymy between moral claims and claims in the
natural sciences. But if this is possible, then substantive moral
principles are knowable a priori—which, in turn,
entails that substantive moral principles are not known in the same
way as scientific principles. Analytic Naturalism therefore seems to
entail that Epistemic Naturalism is false, and vice versa. Naturalists
who accept Analytic Naturalism are called, appropriately enough,
analytic naturalists. Naturalists who reject Analytic
Naturalism are synthetic naturalists, since they hold that
claims regarding relations between the moral and the natural are
synthetic rather than analytic.
This is not to say that analytic naturalists allow no room for
empirical investigation into morality—far from it. If, for
instance, an analytic naturalist were to hold that the term
‘good’ is synonymous with ‘pleasurable’, they
would hold that the claim “Pleasure is good” is analytic,
and knowable a priori. But the claim “It is good to
help others” would be the kind of claim that is amenable to
empirical investigation, in virtue of the fact that “It is good
to help others” would be synonymous with “It is pleasant
to help others”, and whether pleasure results from helping
others is the kind of claim that can be empirically investigated. So
analytic naturalists should be understood as saying that some
moral claims—in particular, moral claims that state general
relations between natural properties and moral properties (like
“Pleasure is good”)—are knowable a
priori. Synthetic naturalists claim that all moral
claims are synthetic claims, knowable by empirical methods.
In sum, while any moral naturalist will agree with the statement that
moral facts are natural facts, different philosophers will mean
different things by that statement.
Moral naturalism is an attractive view. As a form of realism, it
offers to make robust sense of moral objectivity and moral knowledge,
allowing for moral utterances to be truth-apt in straightforward ways
and for some of them to be true. And as a form of naturalism it is
widely seen as preferable to rival forms of moral realism. Moral
properties and facts, realistically construed, can often seem
unpalatably “queer”, as Mackie famously expressed it
(Mackie 1977, chapter 1, section 9): a realist can seem committed to
the existence of metaphysically far out entities or properties and
embarrassed by the lack of any plausible epistemic story of how we can
obtain knowledge of them. The naturalist offers to save realism but
eliminate the mystery.
Moral realism and general philosophical naturalism are both
attractive views in their own right. Moral realism seems necessary to
do justice to do our sense of right and wrong being more than a matter
of opinion, and philosophical naturalism has proven to be the most
successful project, ever, for advancing human knowledge and
understanding. And while anti-realists and non-naturalists dispute
realism and naturalism, respectively, moral naturalism is a plausible
conjunction of two plausible views.
In recent years, moral non-naturalism has been the subject of much
more discussion than moral naturalism, as moral non-naturalists have
discovered new ways of articulating and defending their view. But
along with an increase in the popularity of moral non-naturalism,
there has been a corresponding increase in the popularity of arguments
against non-naturalism. These arguments, indirectly, provide support
for moral naturalism. If there are arguments that have force against
the moral non-naturalist, but not the naturalist, then these arguments
give us reason to be naturalists about morality. While many objections
can and have been offered against non-naturalism, we’ll look at
the two most prominent here.
The first argument against normative non-naturalism concerns normative
supervenience. The normative supervenes on the natural; in all
metaphysically possible worlds in which the natural facts are the same
as they are in the actual world, the moral facts are the same as
well. This claim has been called the “least controversial thesis
in metaethics” (Rosen forthcoming); it is very widely accepted.
But it is also a striking fact that stands in need of some
explanation. For naturalists, such an explanation is easy to provide:
the moral facts just are natural facts, so when we consider
worlds that are naturally the same as the actual world, we
will ipso facto be considering worlds that are morally the
same as the actual world. But for the non-naturalist, no such
explanation seems available. In fact, it seems to be in principle
impossible for a non-naturalist to explain how the moral
supervenes on the natural. And if the non-naturalist can offer no
explanation of this phenomenon that demands explanation, this is a
heavy mark against non-naturalism (McPherson 2012).
It is highly controversial whether this argument succeeds (for
discussion, see McPherson (2012), Enoch (2011, Ch. 6), Wielenberg
(2014, Ch. 1), Leary 2017, Väyrynen 2017, Rosen forthcoming,). But if
it does succeed, then it provides a good reason to think that moral
properties, if they exist, must be natural properties.
The second argument against moral non-naturalism concerns moral
epistemology. According to evolutionary debunking
arguments, our moral beliefs are products of evolution, and
this evolutionary etiology of our moral beliefs serves to undermine
them. Exactly why evolution debunks our moral beliefs is a
matter of substantial controversy, and the debunking argument has been
interpreted in a number of different ways (Vavova 2015). Sharon Street,
whose statement of the evolutionary debunking argument has been highly
influential, holds that debunking arguments make a problem for all
versions of moral realism—her paper is entitled “A
Darwinian Dilemma for Realist Theories of Value.” But according
to another popular line of argument, these debunking arguments are only
problems for moral non-naturalism. The fundamental worry is that our
moral beliefs are the product of evolutionary facts rather
than moral facts. If this is so, this would serve to debunk our
moral beliefs, either because it is a necessary condition on justified
belief that you take your beliefs to be explained by the facts in
question (Joyce 2006, Ch. 6; Bedke 2009; Lutz forthcoming) or else because the
non-naturalist is left with no way to explain the reliability of our
moral beliefs (Enoch 2009, Schechter 2017).
But if moral naturalism is true, the realist needn’t grant the
skeptic’s premise that our moral beliefs are the product of
evolutionary facts rather than moral facts. If moral facts are
natural, then we needn’t see moral facts as being contrary to
natural, evolutionary facts. The moral facts might be among
these evolutionary facts that explain our moral beliefs. If, for
instance, to be good just is to be conducive to social
cooperation, then an evolutionary account that says that we judge
things to be good only when they are conducive to social cooperation
would not debunk any of our beliefs about goodness. This account would,
instead, provide a deep vindication of those beliefs (Copp 2008).
It is open to naturalists to say that the moral facts are wholly or
partly responsible for us having the moral beliefs that we have. This
allows them to address any number of different epistemic objections
that the moral non-naturalist seems ill-equipped to answer. If these
objections do succeed against only the non-naturalist, that’s a good
reason to think that moral properties, if they exist, must be natural
properties.
We’ve just seen that there is some reason to think that, if
there are any moral properties, those properties must be natural moral
properties. In this section, we’ll look at the most prominent
objections to moral naturalism.
By far the most famous and influential argument against moral
naturalism is G.E. Moore’s Open Question Argument (Moore 1903,
5–21). Moore’s thought is as follows. Suppose
“\(N\)” to abbreviate a term expressing the concept of
some natural property \(N\), maximally conducing to human
welfare perhaps, and suppose a naturalist proposes to define
goodness as \(N\)-ness. We swiftly show this to be false by supposing
someone to ask of something acknowledged to be \(N\), whether it was
good. This, Moore urges, is an open question. The point is,
essentially, that it is not a stupid question in the sort of way,
“I acknowledge that Jimmy is an unmarried man but is he, I
wonder, a bachelor?” is a stupid question: if you need to ask
it, you don’t understand it. Given what the words concerned
mean, the question of whether a given unmarried man is a bachelor is,
in Moore’s terminology, closed—there is no way for a
conceptually competent individual to be in doubt about the answer to
this question. So goodness and \(N\)-ness, unlike bachelorhood and
unmarried-man-hood, are not one and the same.
Of course the concepts may be coextensive. For all the Open
Question Argument shows, it may be the case, for instance, that a
thing is good if and only if it conduces to welfare: utilitarianism of
that kind might be a synthetic moral truth. But what the Open Question
Argument is supposed to rule out is that “good” and
“\(N\)” pick out, in virtue of semantic equivalence, not
two distinct and coextensive properties, but rather one and the same
property. As Moore emphasizes, we should distinguish the question,
“What is goodness?” from the question “What things
are good?” (1903, 5) The Open Question Argument is supposed to
rule out certain answers to the first question, i.e., naturalistic
answers such as “conduciveness to happiness.” But it is
not meant to rule out our answering the second question by offering,
e.g., “those things which conduce to happiness.”
A lot of fire has been directed at this little argument in the
century since Moore published it. A central worry is that he failed to
consider a crucial possibility. Consider the biconditional:
\(x\) is good iff \(x\) is \(N\).
Moore, as we saw, notes that this may express a claim about what
goodness is or a claim about what things are good. The former claim he
understands as a claim that “good” and
“\(N\)” are equivalent in meaning and so denote the
very same property. He failed, however, to notice the possibility that
they might denote the very same property even though they are
not equivalent in meaning. The assumption at work here David
Brink calls “the Semantic Test for Properties”, according
to which two terms pick out the same property only if they mean the
same (Brink 1989, chapter 6 and Brink 2001). Brink thinks we can be
confident that this assumption is false (and all the more so if we
understand sameness of meaning as something epistemically transparent
to competent speakers so that epistemic inequivalence implies semantic
inequivalence). One counterexample is by now proverbial:
\(x\) is water iff \(x\) is H\(_2\)O.
It seems obvious that “water” doesn’t mean the same as
“H\(_2\)O” (and all the more so if we take speakers as
authoritative as to what their words mean). For it was a discovery when
18th century chemists figured this fact out. But being
water and being H\(_2\)O are not just a case of a pair of coextensive
properties, such as being a cordate and being a renate. Being water and
being H\(_2\)O are one and the same identical property, the property
identity in question being a posteriori, not a priori
and certainly not analytic. So the Open Question Argument cannot refute
Metaphysical Naturalism. At most, the Open Question Argument gives us a
reason to be synthetic, rather than analytic, naturalists.
But it is not clear that the Open Question Argument proves even this
much. Another criticism, forcefully urged by Michael Smith, is that
the Open Question Argument seems to prove too much, being just a
particular instance of the piece of reasoning embodied in the Paradox
of Analysis. The practice of conceptual analysis, this reasoning goes,
aspires to provide real philosophical illumination; however, if all
analytic truths have to be as obvious as “a bachelor is an
unmarried male”, then all pieces of conceptual analysis must be
either false or trivial. That conclusion would be highly embarrassing
to much modern philosophy (Smith 1994, 37–39).  But once we
allow that analytic truths may be unobvious, the appearance of
openness in the question whether an \(N\) thing is a good thing ceases
to look very significant.
A further criticism of the Open Question Argument comes from William
Frankena (1939). Frankena worries that the Open Question Argument begs
the question at issue. “Is such-and-such, which is \(N\),
good?” is an open question precisely when a definition of
\(N\)-ness in terms of goodness is not an analytic truth—and
that is precisely what Moore is trying to establish. Moore seems to
owe us more support than has been given for the claim that all
questions concerning natural-moral identities are open.
One might claim that the failure of other attempted analyses of
‘good’ gives us a kind of inductive reason to think that
no analysis of goodness can be successful. This inductive argument, if
successful, might answer Frankena’s objection. But it is not
clear how strong such an inductive argument is. As Finlay (2014,
Ch. 1) argues, if it is true that goodness can be analyzed, the very
truth of that hypothesis predicts that every analysis except the
correct one will be false. Thus, it also predicts that every
question of the form ‘\(X\) is \(N\), but is \(X\) good?’
will feel open, except for the one question that includes the
correct analysis of goodness in place of \(N\). So we should not take
the existence of open questions of the form ‘\(X\) is \(N\), but
is \(X\) good?’ as data against the hypothesis that
‘good’ can be analyzed, since that data is actually
predicted by the hypothesis. The only way to know that an analysis
fails is to test it, and it’s always possible that the correct
analysis remains untested.
Although Moore’s original version of the Open Question Argument
today has few defenders, there have been a number of recent attempts
to refashion it into a more compelling form. One popular version of
the Open Question Argument, called the Normativity Objection (Scanlon
2014; Parfit 2011), sidesteps questions about the cognitive
significance of moral and descriptive terminology and appeals to
considerations regarding the natures of natural and normative
facts. Moral facts tell us what is good in the world and what
we have reasons or obligations to do. Natural
facts—the kinds of facts that scientists study—are facts
about the innate physical structure of the universe and the causal
principles that govern the interaction of matter. Those are obviously
just two different kinds of facts. Moral facts, because they are facts
about goodness, reasons, obligations, and the like,
are normative facts. But natural facts are not normative. In
trying to give a naturalistic account of morality, naturalists forgot
the most important thing: that moral facts aren’t purely facts
about the way the world is; they are facts about
what matters.
There are, generally, two ways in which a naturalist might respond
to this objection. First, a naturalist could say that moral facts
aren’t essentially normative; it may be the case that we
typically have reasons to act morally, but reason-giving
force is not part of the essence of moral facts. That suggestion might
have the feeling of an absurdity—of course moral facts are the
kinds of things that provide reasons; if an action is morally
required, that’s a good reason to do it! But according to some
“reforming definitions” of morality (Brandt 1979; Railton
1986), while we may intuitively think that moral facts give reasons,
that is a kind of defect in our conception of morality. It would be
more accurate and fruitful to define moral facts in terms that are not
necessarily reason-providing. Thinking about moral facts in this way
is different than how we typically think about moral facts—that
is why this kind of account constitutes a reforming
definition of morality—but we are talking about morality
all the same (Railton 1986).
The biggest problem for reforming definitions is that they suggest
that normativity is somehow dispensable to morality. But as Joyce
(2000, Ch. 1) argues, normativity is a non-negotiable
commitment of our moral discourse. If the only kinds of facts that
exist are natural, and natural facts are not a source of reasons for
everyone, then, argues Joyce, this amounts to a proof that moral facts
don’t exist. Reformers may respond by calling into question
Joyce’s notion of “non-negotiable” commitments. For
Joyce, it is obvious that facts that do not provide reasons for
everyone are, ipso facto, not moral facts. But it is
controversial whether any of our concepts have commitments that are
non-negotiable in this way (cf. Prinzing 2017).
The second way to respond to the Normativity Objection is to say
that moral facts are both natural and normative, in virtue of the fact
that normativity itself is a natural phenomenon. This suggestion might
also have a feel of absurdity to it. How could normativity be natural?
The most popular strategy for substantiating natural normativity is a
two-step strategy. First, show that all normative concepts can be
analyzed in terms of one, fundamental normative concept. Second, show
that that fundamental normative concept picks out a natural property.
There are a number of ways that such an account could proceed: here are
two recent, influential examples:
This two-step strategy is popular and promising, but it is certainly
not uncontroversial. Those moved by the Open Question Argument and the
Normativity Objection are skeptical that the second step of the
naturalizing strategy could ever be completed. Non-naturalists doubt
that it could ever be shown that the fundamental normative concept
picks out some natural property because normative properties and
natural properties just seem to obviously be different kinds of
properties. Wittgenstein claimed to “see clearly, as it were in a
flash of light, not only that no description that I can think of would
do to describe what I mean by absolute value, but that I would reject
every significant description that anybody could possibly suggest,
ab initio, on the ground of its significance”
(Wittgenstein 1965). David Enoch (2011) is more pithy, saying simply
that natural properties and normative properties are just too
different for any natural account of a fundamental normative
property to be satisfying.
But while many have felt the force of this “just too
different” intuition, it’s unclear what that charge amounts to.
In what sense are the natural and the normative “just too
different?” Schroeder thinks that the “too different”
intuition has force only if there is “a perfectly general single
truth about which any reductive view would be forced into
error” (Schroeder 2005, 14). The existence of such a truth would
be the proof that the natural and normative are just too different;
without such a truth, the non-naturalist hasn’t offered much by way of
an argument against naturalism. But because all normative
claims conceptually reduce to claims about reasons, argues
Schroeder, there will be no such general truth, provided that we have a
coherent account of the foundational notion of a reason. If all
normative claims are conceptually reducible to claims about
reasons, then a coherent account of reasons can explain all
normative claims, without error. These fundamental normative facts
about reasons are themselves explained by the natural facts to which
reasons reduce. But because this reduction of reasons will take the
form of a synthetic reduction, there end up being no
conceptual connections between the normative and the natural. This
general lack of conceptual connections between the normative and the
natural is what explains the presence of the “just too
different” intuition, and it is fully compatible with moral
naturalism as a synthetic metaphysical truth.
Schroeder’s response may succeed in providing a naturalist-friendly
explanation of the “just too different” intuition, but it
seems strange to say that the existence of numerous analytic relations
between different normative concepts, combined with a lack of analytic
relations between normative and natural concepts, should in any way
work to support the thesis that the normative is natural. It
may well be the case that the lack of conceptual connections between
the natural and normative is better explained by non-naturalism (Enoch
2011).
Derek Parfit’s Triviality Objection (Parfit 2011) is another
contemporary extension of the Open Question Argument. If moral
naturalism is true, says Parfit, then it will be possible to make moral
claims and natural claims and have those two claims be about the same
fact. Parfit worries that if the two claims are about the same fact,
then those two claims must contain all the same information. And a
statement of equivalence between any two claims that contain the same
information must be trivial. But moral claims that describe the
relationships between moral facts and natural facts are not trivial at
all—they are highly substantive.
Although Parfit’s focus on the nature of normative facts helps to
illuminate exactly what is supposed to be deficient about the
naturalist’s account, it is not clear that this Triviality Objection is
any more forceful than the Open Question Argument. Parfit’s central
motivating thoughts are that (a) natural-moral identity claims are
substantive rather than trivial, and therefore (b) moral claims contain
different information than natural claims do, which makes it plausible
that (c) moral claims concern a different kind of fact. These are
exactly the central thoughts behind Moore’s Open Question Argument, and
so we can expect naturalists to respond to this objection in largely
the same way that they respond to the Open Question Argument. And,
indeed, this is what we find. Naturalists have typically responded to
the Triviality Objection by saying that moral-natural identities
contain additional information in virtue of the fact that they tell us
something about the nature of the moral facts in question. Thus,
moral-natural identities are informative in the same way that other
natural identity claims (like water = H\(_2\)O) are (Copp 2017).
The last objection to moral naturalism that we will consider is the
Motivation Objection. This objection is a favorite of metaethical
expressivists, and they deploy it with equal fervor against all moral
realists, both naturalists and non-naturalists alike. But it is still
worthy of discussion as a major objection to naturalist moral realism,
because naturalism is the realist view that seems to have the most
problem answering the objection.
According to a view known as judgement internalism, you
can’t make a moral judgement and not be at least somewhat
motivated to act in accordance with it. If I sincerely judge that I
ought to give money to charity, then it seems that I must be at least
somewhat motivated to give when the opportunity arises. Someone who
lacks any inclination to give to charity does not really
judge that they ought to give to charity.
Judgement internalism is a plausible view, and, if it is true, that
spells trouble for moral naturalists. Plausibly, if a moral judgement
is just a belief to the effect that some natural fact obtains, I might
at least conceivably hold that belief and simply not give a damn. In
which case, if naturalism is true, internalism must be false. But many
philosophers—particularly expressivists—hold that
judgement internalism is true. So much the worse for naturalists.
What is at stake in the debate between judgement internalists and
their opponents (“externalists”, inevitably) is the
question of whether a certain kind of character is possible: the
amoralist. The amoralist is precisely the sort of person the
internalist says is not possible: a character who makes moral judgements
but couldn’t care less about them. He features prominently in two
influential defenses of externalism, found in the writings of David
Brink and Sigrún Svavarsdóttir (Brink 1986; Brink 1989,
chapter 3, section 3; Svavarsdóttir 1999, 2006). Both offer up
descriptions of people of just this kind urging that they are eminently
credible and all too intelligible.
Internalists deny that it is possible for anyone to be a genuine
amoralist. While someone might appear to be making moral
judgements they do not care about, such a person is in fact not making
genuine moral judgements at all, according to the internalist.
Rather they are making what R. M. Hare called inverted commas moral
judgements (1952, 124–126, 163–165).
The internalist claims that in the mouth of the amoralist, a moral
utterance fails to mean quite what it does when it is used by you or
me. What is missing is some action-guiding motivation-entailing
dimension of meaning that naturalism seems ill-suited to capture. This
is disputed by externalists such as Brink and Svavarsdóttir,
who deny that there is any such dimension to capture. However, a more
subtle alternative view (Copp 2001; cf. Barker 2000) might deny that
any such dimension was part of the “standard core meaning”
(Copp 2001, 18) of moral terms, but admit its presence as
something implicated, not entailed, by moral
utterances. Because this dimension is merely implicated, the
amoralist’s “Killing people is wrong but I couldn’t
care less”, which cancels the implicature, may be somehow
surprising and inappropriate, but it may nonetheless express a
coherent, meaningful thought.
This move might promise to account for much of the intuitive appeal of
internalism while remaining fundamentally naturalistic. That would
leave in place worries about the intelligibility of a possible
disconnection between thought about what is right, etc., and thought
about what to do. These, however, might recede as the naturalist puts
flesh on his account of moral properties. Thus, on Copp’s own
view, the truth conditions of moral concepts are determined, roughly,
by facts about which moral standards are such that their currency
would best conduce to meeting society’s needs (Copp 2001,
28–29, recapitulating Copp 1995). Certainly, you and I might
conceivably disagree about that while nonetheless coinciding
in all our motivations. At which point the issue is going to turn on
whether that sort of disagreement is really properly to be
considered moral disagreement at all.
In this final section, we will examine three leading versions of moral
naturalism in detail.
One important school of thought here is represented by philosophers
whose work is inspired by that of Aristotle. This view has its roots
in the writings of G. E. M. Anscombe, P. T. Geach, and the early
Philippa Foot, among others. Its contemporary representatives include
Philippa Foot (2001), Rosalind Hursthouse (1999), Martha Nussbaum
(1995), and Judith Jarvis Thomson (1996, 1997, 2001, 2008). As this
list makes clear, this is very much the official metaethical theory
among many important contemporary virtue ethicists.
According to (neo-)Aristotelian virtue ethics, the primary moral
concept is that of virtue. Virtue is a property of people; virtuous people are good people. So what does it take for
someone to be a good person? Aristotle’s influential
answer to that question is that what it takes to be a good thing is for that thing to
successfully perform its function. And, Aristotle argued, all
living things have a proper function, which is determined by their
nature. Just as hammers and nails have different functions which spring
from the nature of those things, living things have functions that are
also determined by their natures. Worker bees are supposed to collect
honey—worker bees that do this well are good bees. Venus
flytraps are supposed to capture flies—those that do this well
are good flytraps. And humans are good if they pursue their function,
as dictated by their nature.
A big problem here, it is widely supposed, is the biology.
Aristotelian ethics embraces an essentialist, teleological conception
of the nature of a species that doesn’t square with modern
science. And the prospects for grounding ethics in modern
post-Darwinian biology seem hopeless: evolutionary biology has very
little (at least of a positive nature) to tell us about metaethics
except insofar as it might be taken to add plausibility to the kind of
broad naturalism described at the outset. (Indeed, as noted,
evolutionary biology may debunk rather than support our moral
beliefs.) Nussbaum has sought to respond to claims of this sort that
have been ably canvassed in the work of Bernard Williams (Nussbaum
1995). Williams reads Aristotle as understanding questions about
human nature as “external” scientific questions to be
addressed independently of any ethical considerations. This, Nussbaum
charges, is a mistake: an external understanding of human nature would
indeed tell us little about ethics. Aristotle’s understanding of
biology and indeed science generally is what she calls
“internal”, and as such are pervasively informed by
substantive ethical understandings. But to understand ethical facts as
grounded in facts about human nature, where the facts about human
nature are understood in a way that is already pervasively and
substantively moralized, no longer looks much like a form of
naturalism, and appears quite consistent with a variety of competing
metaethical views such as constructivism, expressivism, or
non-naturalism.
Neo-Aristotelian naturalism is articulated at length and along
mutually similar lines in Foot’s Natural Goodness
(2001) and Hursthouse’s On Virtue Ethics (1999). We
will focus on Hursthouse, whose account is the clearer and more
detailed of the two. Ethical naturalism, according to Hursthouse,
views evaluation as an activity continuous with a kind of ethology
that is focused on the evaluation of living things as specimens of
their kind. In the case of plants, to say that an individual is a good
member of whatever its species may be is to evaluate how well its
parts and operations contribute in ways characteristic of that species
to the two ends of survival and reproduction. With at least some
animals a third end becomes salient—freedom from pain and
pleasure and enjoyment of sorts characteristic to the species in
question. And with social animals a fourth dimension comes into play:
the good functioning of the group (Hursthouse 1999, chapter
9). Evaluation of this kind allows us to say, following Foot, that a
free-riding wolf or a dancing bee who finds a source of nectar but
does not alert other bees to it are defective (2001, 96, citing
“Does Moral Subjectivism Rest on a Mistake?” in Foot
2002). Defectiveness in this context is a straightforwardly factual
matter. Given the normal characteristics of their species, male
cheetahs who help their heavily pregnant mates to hunt for food are to
be classed as defective, as are male polar bears who nurture their
young (Hursthouse 1999, 220–221).
Given such examples, a critic may urge that it’s hard to see how we
are here concerned here with evaluation as opposed simply to a
kind of classification. But Hursthouse demurs. A good human
being is a human being endowed with characteristics that conduce in
characteristically human ways to the four ends of survival,
reproduction, characteristic enjoyment and freedom from pain, and the
good functioning of the group. And, at the level of character, those
characteristics are just the virtues. But humans are special, as a
highly salient characteristic feature of human beings is
rationality. This makes the evaluation of human conduct very
different from that of cheetahs or polar bears. Being rational, we can
elect to assign some feature of our characteristic behavior no
normative weight at all, or even negative weight. There nonetheless
remains a distinctive and characteristically human way of carrying on:
the rational way, which we characteristically regard as good and take
ourselves to have reason to pursue (Hursthouse, esp.
221–222).
Once this is said, it might be objected that we’ve more or less left
the naturalism behind. We don’t need anything remotely like ethology to
tell us that we should favor ethical views supported by good reasons
over those not so supported. Nor do we need to be any sort of
naturalists to believe it. And if we’re concerned with what is
distinctively and characteristically human, we might legitimately
follow Williams in asking why we should make such a big deal about
rationality. Why not the making of fire, having sexual intercourse
without regard to season, despoiling the environment and upsetting the
balance of nature, or killing things for fun (Williams 1972, 73)?
There’s a natural and obvious answer to this, which appeals to widely
shared human commonalities of value. Perhaps we can bring this too
under the heading of the characteristically human, but those humans who
may not share these values might fairly retort, So what?
Aren’t they free, for all this quasi-ethological picture tells us, to
assign normative weights in their own ways? The hallmark feature that
is distinctive of naturalism, Hursthouse would respond, is the
regulatory role of the four ends (Hursthouse 1999, 224–226). But
these too seem to be decidedly up for grabs, as when she acknowledges
that nothing in particular need follow from her view about the ethical
status of (e.g.) celibacy and homosexual sex (Hursthouse 1999,
215).
We turn now to the views of Judith Jarvis Thomson. Thomson follows
Geach in her rejection of the view (which she associates in particular
with Moore) that “goodness” names a property of good
things, which are accordingly susceptible to more or less unrestricted
ranking by the “betterness” relation. “Good”,
Geach insists, is an attributive, not a predicative adjective (Geach
1956). To illustrate briefly: “brown” is predicative, as
“Hector is a brown mouse” is analysed straightforwardly as
“Hector is a mouse and he is brown;” the claims
“Hector is a brown mouse” and “Hector is an
animal” entail “Hector is a brown animal.”
“Enormous”, on the other hand, is attributive, as
“Hector is an enormous mouse” is not analyzed as
“Hector is a mouse and he is enormous.” An enormous mouse
may still be quite a tiny mammal. This has the effect of neutralizing
the Open Question Argument. If there’s no such thing as
goodness, but only goodness of a kind, then of course
we won’t be able to give an analysis of goodness.
Thomson’s account of goodness makes most sense if we consider it
through the lens of the concept of a ‘good toaster.’ A toaster is a
functional kind of thing; for something to be a toaster is for
it to toast things. And, for something to be a good toaster,
it must be something that toasts things well. The goodness of
a good toaster is not mysterious in any way. It is entirely a matter of
the toaster being composed and organized in such a way as to
efficiently and effectively perform its characteristic function. And if
you have no objection to the idea that some toasters are good and
others are bad, then you should have no objection to the idea that
other things can be good or bad as well.
There is such a property as being a good \(K\) only if \(K\) is a
goodness-fixing kind (Thomson 2008, 21). For instance,
“knife” is a goodness-fixing kind; thus, there is the
property of being a good knife. Goodness need
not always be understood in terms of a particular substantive. Things
can be good in other respects, as we see from examples such as
“good for use in making cheesecake” or “good for
Alfred” (Thomson 1997, 278). Thomson calls things that are good
in this way “good-modified.” Recognizing ways in which
things can be good-modified allows us to evaluate things that we might
not otherwise be able to evaluate. There is no such thing as “a
good smudge”, full stop, because smudges have no characteristic
functions or correctness standards. “Smudge”, according to
Thomson, is not a goodness-fixing kind in the way “knife”
is. But there might be a smudge that is good for using in a Rorschach
test, because “being used in a Rorschach test” is a
way that smudges can be good-modified. So that is a way that a smudge can be good
(Thomson 2008, 21–22).
Thomson also argues that we can relativize our notion of goodness to a
class of things. One can be a good piano player for a six-year old
without being a good piano-player, full stop. And this
class-relativization can occur whether we are talking about good
instances of kinds or good-modified things. Thus, we can have a good
typewriter (for a typewriter built in 1900), or an individual who is
good at crossword puzzles (for an athlete).
Thomson, following the two-step strategy outlined in Section 2.2,
holds that goodness is the most fundamental normative concept, and
that we can define different normative concepts in terms of
goodness. For instance, “for \(F\) to be a virtue in a [kind] \(K\)
is for it to be the case that (i) \(K\) is a goodness-fixing kind, and
(ii) a \(K\) is as good a \(K\) as a \(K\) can be only if it has \(F\),
and (iii) it is possible for there to be a \(K\) that lacks \(F\), and
(iv) it is not nomologically impossible for there to be a \(K\) that
has \(F\)” (Thomson 2008, 85). Thomson also defines notions of
“better”, “correct”, “ought”,
“reason”, and “defective” in terms of goodness
(Thomson 2008).
With an account of virtue in hand, we can now begin to define moral
terms. Thomson is a virtue theorist: to be moral is to be
virtuous. For Thomson, it makes no sense to ask whether an act is
morally good or not, because “act”, like
“smudge”, is not a goodness-fixing kind. Accordingly, acts
are only the kinds of things that can be good-modified. Just as there
is no such thing as a good smudge, but only smudges that are
good in some respect (e.g., for use in Rorschach tests),
there is no such thing as a good act, but only acts are
good in some respect—e.g., a moral respect. Acts are
morally good when they spring from an agent’s
morally virtuous traits. And a trait is a moral
virtue when a \(K\) is as morally good as a \(K\) can be only if
it has that trait (and it’s possible for \(K\) to either have or lack that
virtue) (Thomson 2008, 79).
Moral goodness is itself explained in terms of moral virtue
and vice concepts. There is no such thing as being morally good, full
stop, but only morally good-in-a-way; by being brave, generous, just,
prudent, etc. To have a moral virtue is a way of being good, but it is
a “second-order” way of being good, because moral goodness
is defined in terms of other kinds of goodness. (Thomson 1996, 144–147;
1997, 279–281; 2001, 59–67). As the examples of the good
toaster and the good knife illustrate, for Thomson the morally good is
just one sub-class of good things (and it is not a particularly large
sub-class; the non-morally good is vastly larger than the morally
good). In addition to the morally good, there are four other
sub-classes of goodness: the useful (as in “good for”
governing a verb), the skilful (“good at”), the enjoyable,
and the beneficial (as in “good for” governing a noun)
(Thomson 1996, 131–133). In general, Thomson suggests, a virtue
is a trait such that, whatever else is true of those among whom we
live, it is better if they have it (Thomson 1997, 282). For example,
generosity is a moral virtue because generous people will act in ways
that are beneficial for others.
All five kinds of goodness are natural properties. Being good for
use in \(\phi\)-ing is a matter of being such as to facilitate \(\phi\)-ing
in a way conducive to the wants that people typically seek to satisfy
when \(\phi\)-ing. Being good at \(\phi\)-ing is a matter of being capable of
\(\phi\)-ing in the way that people who want to \(\phi\) typically want to
\(\phi\) (Thomson 1996, 134–137). Thomson acknowledges that
enjoyment is a little tricky: some people enjoy what is not good
(example: Koolaid ), so a role must be given to expertise, which can be
hard to characterize (Thomson 1996, 138–140). The beneficial can
also be complicated. It is easy enough to account for with such things
as carpets. What is good for a carpet is what conduces to its being in
the condition that people who want carpets typically want their carpets
to be in (Thomson 1996, 141). In the case of plants and lower animals,
what is good for them is what conduces to health, and health is
whatever conduces to their being in a condition to do what they were
designed by nature to do (Thomson 2001, 56–57). What is good for
a person is the trickiest case. It’s not straightforwardly what
conduces to health, as something may be good for someone for reasons
that have little to do with health (example: going to law school
[Thomson 2001, 55]). Nor is it a matter of conducing to what one most
wants (example: I might most want to smoke 60 cigarettes a day [Thomson
2001, 54]). So she thinks the truth is some form of compromise between
the want story and the health story (Thomson 2001, 55–56). And
moral goodness is a matter of having character traits that promote
these other kinds of goodness (particularly by being beneficial).
This is a beautifully elegant and straightforward account that makes
a valiant attempt to represent moral claims, and indeed evaluative and
normative claims more generally, as straightforward matters of natural
fact. The main critical concerns that might be raised are liable to
echo points already aired. Thus, our earlier remarks about the role of
biology might make us suspicious of Thomson’s explication of health,
and so of the beneficial, in terms of nature’s designs. And if
Thomson’s account of the beneficial is in jeopardy, then so is her
account of moral virtue, since moral virtue is largely a matter of
acting in ways that are beneficial to oneself and others.
It is likely true that the property of being a good toaster is
nothing more than the naturally-respectable property of being useful
for toasting. But it remains controversial whether Thomson’s
naturalistic account of the goodness of good toasters can be extended
to provide an adequate account of the goodness of good
people.
If moral naturalism is, generally, the view that moral facts are the
kinds of facts that can be investigated empirically, in a broadly
scientific way, then no view captures the spirit of naturalism better
than Cornell realism. Cornell realism was developed by in the 1980s by
Boyd (1988), Brink (1986), Sturgeon (1985), and Railton (1986); the
view gets its name from the fact that Boyd, Brink, and Sturgeon were
working or studying at Cornell University at the time. It is a
comprehensive metaethical system, with interrelated linguistic,
metaphysical, and epistemological commitments, that is driven by a
commitment to mirroring scientific methodology in ethics as closely as
possible.
It might seem odd to suggest that we can come to know things about
morality by using scientific methodology. Empirical methods are all,
ultimately, grounded in an epistemology of observation. But,
as Gilbert Harman (1977, Ch. 1) famously argued, it does not seem that
we can observe moral facts in anything like the same way that we can
observe other kinds of natural facts. It’s rather obvious how we can
have empirical knowledge of natural properties such as redness
or roundness; they are directly observable. But
goodness doesn’t seem to be directly observable, and that
looks like an important disanalogy between moral properties and natural
properties.
The problem with this thought is that not all natural properties are
directly observable. Some kinds of natural properties are highly
complex, and knowable only through the functional role they occupy.
Consider, for instance, the property of being healthy. Being
healthy isn’t like being red; there’s no way that healthy
people look. Of course, there may be some characteristic visual signs
of healthiness—rosy cheeks, a spring in one’s
step—but these visual signs are neither necessary nor sufficient
for healthiness. These directly observable properties are
only indications of healthiness. Healthiness is a complex
natural property, wholly constituted by an organism’s body being
in the “proper” configuration. Healthiness has a robust
causal profile. There are many things that can cause or impede health
by their presence or absence: food, water, disease, etc. And there are
many things that will result from health in typical circumstances:
energy, long life, etc. Rosy cheeks and a spring in one’s step
are indications of healthiness because these are properties that
are—typically—caused by health. Our awareness of
the causal profile of healthiness thus gives us a way of figuring out
which things have or do not have the complex property of
healthiness.
The Cornell realists hold that goodness is exactly like
healthiness in all of these ways (Boyd 1988). Like
healthiness, goodness is a complex natural property that is not
directly observable, but nonetheless has a robust causal profile. Like
“healthiness”, “goodness” is not synonymous
with any simpler set of more directly observable claims. Instead,
“goodness” describes the functionally complex natural
property that is the effect of certain characteristic causes, and the
cause of certain characteristic effects. Many different things
contribute to or detract from goodness—things like pleasure or
pain, honesty or untruthfulness—and there are many things that
will result from goodness in typical circumstances—things like
human flourishing, or political peace. Because goodness is a natural
property with a complex causal profile, the property of goodness can
enter into explanatory relations. Thus, contra Harman, it is possible
for goodness to explain our observations (Sturgeon 1985). We can,
accordingly, observe whether something is good by looking for
indications of goodness. This is exactly the same way that we observe
whether something is healthy.
The great asset of Cornell realism is that it directly adopts widely
accepted views about the nature of natural properties and scientific
knowledge in order to answer the foundational questions of moral
metaphysics and moral epistemology. What are moral properties? Highly
complex natural properties, individuated by their causal
profiles—Boyd calls these homeostatic cluster
properties. Are there, generally, properties like this? Yes;
healthiness is one; moral properties are properties like
that. How do we know about moral properties? By looking for
directly observable properties that are characteristically
functionally upstream or downstream from the moral property that we
are interested in (provided that we have justified background beliefs
about the functional roles of moral properties). Do we, generally,
have knowledge like this? Yes; this is how we have scientific
knowledge; moral knowledge is knowledge like that. In this
way, the theoretical resources of scientific realism also turn out to
support moral realism (Boyd 1988).
A skeptic might object that it’s impossible to have justified
background beliefs about the functional profile of moral properties.
But this kind of objection threatens to prove too much. We are entitled
to rely on background beliefs in moral theory development because we’re
entitled to do so in science, generally (Boyd 1988, 189–191). Our
theories and background beliefs are justified together by their overall
coherence. So if there are no substantial metaphysical or
epistemological issues raised by the claims that healthiness
exists and that we can know about healthiness, then there
should be no substantial metaphysical or epistemological issues raised
by the claims that goodness exists and that we can know
about goodness.
It is not essential to Cornell realism that goodness be identified
with any particular complex natural property—different Cornell
realists have different first-order normative commitments.
The most influential of these accounts is due to Railton (1986).
Railton, like Thomson, holds that moral goodness is defined in terms of
what is non-morally good for agents. Whereas Thomson, as a
neo-Aristotelian, defines what is good for a human in terms of human
biology, Railton defines non-moral goodness in terms of the desires of
a fully-informed counterpart (see also Brandt 1979, Smith 1994). To
illustrate, Railton asks us to imagine a traveler, Lonnie, who feels
terrible because he is badly dehydrated. Lonnie does not know that he
is dehydrated, and so is not taking appropriate steps to make himself
feel better. But we can imagine a fully-informed version of
Lonnie—Railton names him Lonnie-Plus—who knows about
his dehydration and knows that drinking clear liquids will make him
feel better. Lonnie-Plus, who (like Lonnie) desires to feel better but
who (unlike Lonnie) knows the best means to that end, would choose to
drink clear fluids. The fact that Lonnie-Plus would choose to drink
clear fluids means that drinking clear fluids is good for Lonnie. But
this is not a relativist view of morality, because the fact that
Lonnie-Plus would choose to drink clear liquids is determined by
Lonnie’s circumstances and constitution, and facts about
Lonnie’s circumstances and constitution are objective facts. In
general: the complex natural property of being good for an
agent is identical to the complex natural property that
agent’s fully-informed counterpart would choose. This makes
goodness “objective, though relational” (Railton 1986,
167).
This is an intuitive account of goodness, but it’s certainly not
uncontroversial. Loeb (1995) argues that we have no way of knowing
what a fully-informed version of ourselves would
desire—it’s absurd to think that we have any basis for
making judgements about what we would desire if we knew literally
everything, since we are so far from being omniscient
ourselves. An omniscient agent’s desires might look nothing like
our own. Thus, what would satisfy an omniscient agent might well be
something that we would in no way recognize as beneficial.
We might also worry about the fact that, on Railton’s view, what
is morally good is grounded in what is non-morally good for agents,
and what is non-morally good for agents is grounded in those
agents’ contingent circumstances and constitution. This suggests
that moral facts would not provide the same reasons for everyone. As
we’ve already seen, Railton accepts this somewhat
counter-intuitive conclusion. That’s what makes his account a
“reforming definition”.
There may, in practice, be substantial overlap between the
metaphysical commitments of neo-Aristotelianism and Cornell realism.
Cornell realists say that the good is a certain higher-order natural
property. Neo-Aristotelians say that goodness has something to do with
human flourishing, which is itself a kind of higher-order natural
property. Both Cornell realists (Boyd) and neo-Aristotelians (Thomson)
have found the analogy with healthiness illuminating when
explaining the nature of moral properties (see also Bloomfield 2001).
So Cornell realists and neo-Aristotelians do tend to be similar in the
way that they conceive of normative properties. But they differ with
respect to what they say about language.
Neo-Aristotelians, such as Thomson, tend to favor an attributive
semantics for ‘good.’ To be good is always to be good in a way
or a good thing of its kind. But because Cornell realists
regard moral terms as terms for a certain kind of complex natural
property, they accept a causal reference theory for moral
terms, because a causal reference theory is the standard theory of
reference for natural kind terms.
Adopting the causal reference theory is a sensible thing for the
Cornell realists to do, for two reasons. First, it continues their
foundational commitment to treating moral properties as a kind of
causally-individuated natural property. And second, it helps them evade
the Open Question Argument (Brink 2001). By accepting a causal theory
of reference, the Cornell realists thereby reject a description theory
of reference; for a Cornell realist, moral terms cannot be defined in
any verbal way. They simply refer to the (complex higher-order natural)
property that causally regulates their use. This makes Cornell realism
a form of synthetic naturalism. As we saw in 1.2, Moore’s Open
Question Argument shows, at most, that analytic naturalism is
false.
But the Cornell realist’s semantics is also the source of the
most influential objection to Cornell realism. According to this
objection—Horgan and Timmons’s Moral Twin Earth Objection
(Horgan and Timmons 1991)—we do not use moral terms in the way
that the Cornell realist predicts.
To understand the Moral Twin Earth Objection, we need to first
understand how causal regulation semantics are supposed to work. The
following thought experiment, from Putnam (1975), has been highly
influential: Imagine a world—Twin Earth—where there is
no H\(_2\)O, but there is another substance called XYZ. This substance XYZ,
while distinct from H\(_2\)O, fills the rivers and lakes, is clear and
tasteless, etc. XYZ even has the property of being called
‘water’—when residents of Twin Earth fill up a glass with
XYZ from the tap, they will say “I have a cup of water.”
Yet for all this, we would not say that Twin Earth is a planet where
water is XYZ. We would say that this is a planet where there is no
water. There is, instead, another substance—XYZ—that
plays the same functional role. Yet when the person on Twin Earth fills
a cup from the tap and declares “I have a cup of water”,
that assertion seems true. What could account for that? Putnam argues
that the word ‘water’ just means something different on Twin Earth than
it does in the actual world. In the actual world, ‘water’ means H\(_2\)O
because, in the actual world, H\(_2\)O is that thing that is clear,
tasteless, fills the rivers and lakes, and is referred to with the
inscription ‘water.’ But on Twin Earth, ‘water’ means XYZ because, on
Twin Earth, it is XYZ that is clear, tasteless, fills the rivers
and lakes, and is referred to with the inscription ‘water.’ Natural
kind terms like ‘water’ refer to those properties that causally
regulate the use of those terms. That is why the word ‘water’ literally
means something different on Twin Earth than it does in the real
world.
According to the Moral Twin Earth Objection, things don’t work this
way at all for moral terms.
Imagine a world—Moral Twin Earth—that is exactly
like the actual world, except on Moral Twin Earth, people’s use
of moral terminology is causally regulated by different properties
from those in the actual world. People use moral terminology to praise
and blame and to guide action, but they take very different kinds of
actions to be worthy of praise or blame and they guide their actions
in very different ways. Thus, if the causal reference theory is true
for moral terms, the word ‘right’ literally means
something different on Moral Twin Earth than it does in the real
world—this is the common intuition that drives Putnam’s
original Twin Earth case. But we do not have the same judgement about
how people use moral language on Moral Twin Earth! If people on Moral
Twin Earth take different actions to be worthy of praise or blame, we
don’t conclude that our words ‘right’ and
‘wrong’ mean different things. We conclude that
there is a substantive moral disagreement between the denizens of
Moral Twin Earth and the people in our world, and that such
disagreement is possible only because we and the Twin Earthers mean
the same thing by our moral terms. Horgan and Timmons argue that this
proves that moral terms like ‘right’ and
‘wrong’ do not refer to whatever it is that causally
regulates their use. So much the worse for Cornell realism. (See
Dowell (2016) for a recent, influential criticism of this
argument).
To put the point another way: Assume that causal reference theory is
true for moral terms, and assume that different properties causally
regulate the use of moral terms in different societies. If both of
these assumptions are true, it follows that moral terms refer to
different things in different societies. And it does seem,
empirically, to be the case that different properties causally
regulate the use of moral terms in different societies. Thus, if
causal reference theory is true, cross-cultural moral disagreement
should be impossible. Just as someone on Twin Earth
doesn’t have a word in their language to refer to
water—they just refer to something else (XYZ) that they call
‘water’—people in different societies don’t
have words for right or wrong—they only have words
for something else that they call ‘right’ or
‘wrong.’ To the extent that this is a counter-intuitive
implication, this is a problem for causal reference theory. (It is
worth noting that some moral relativists have not found this
implication to be counter-intuitive at all. Prinz (2007) and Wong
(2006) have both defended versions of moral relativism that are
grounded entirely in the Cornell realists’ empirical
methodology.)
One might think that Cornell realists can respond by offering a new
account of moral language. But this response faces severe
difficulties, on two fronts. First, the causal reference theory is
what allows Cornell realists to avoid a commitment to analytic
naturalism and the accompanying Open Question Argument. If the causal
reference theory is false of moral terms, the naturalist may be forced
to accept a description theory of moral semantics. This would re-open
the Open Question Argument as an important line of objection to
naturalism.
Second, the causal reference theory for moral language is essential to
the Cornell realists’ methodological and epistemological
commitments. If moral goodness is the thing that regulates our use
of moral terminology, then the terms of our empirical
investigation are simple: we just investigate what regulates the use
of our moral language. But if the moral facts are not (necessarily)
the facts that regulate the use of our moral language, then which
facts are they? We need an answer to that question before we
can proceed with any empirical inquiry into morality. Consider: If,
for half of the world’s population, their use of the word
‘water’ were causally regulated by the odorless tasteless
stuff that fills rivers and lakes, but, for the other half of the
world, ‘water’ were causally regulated by the intoxicating
liquid found in wine, beer, and liquor, Lavoisier would have had no
methodological basis for concluding that water is H\(_2\)O (rather
than C\(_2\)H\(_6\)O.)
Because of this, the Moral Twin Earth objection is often presented as
a kind of extension of Moore’s Open Question Argument. The Open
Question Argument is, in Moore’s formulation, an attack on the
idea that there can be analytic natural-normative property identity
claims. But in a larger sense, the Open Question Argument picks out a
kind of epistemic shortcoming for moral naturalists. Moral naturalists
are committed to the idea that moral facts are a kind of natural
fact—but which natural facts are the moral facts? If
moral claims are synonymous with certain natural claims, we
can know by conceptual analysis which natural facts are the moral
facts. And if moral facts are the facts that causally regulate our use
of moral terminology, that provides us with another way of
investigating which facts are the moral facts. But if neither of those
stories are available, it seems that we have no way of
identifying which natural facts are the moral ones (Huemer 2005,
chapter 4; Bedke 2012). This would be a serious methodological
problem for moral naturalists, and would also mark a critical
disanalogy between moral epistemology and scientific
epistemology. This disanalogy would be crippling to Cornell realists,
who hold that there is no such disanalogy.
Frank Jackson’s Moral Functionalism is the most influential
contemporary version of analytic naturalism. (Finlay (2014) endorses
another version of analytic naturalism.) Jackson believes that ethical
properties are natural properties or, as he prefers to say in this
context, descriptive properties. His argument for this
appeals to the supervenience of the moral on the descriptive. This is
the claim that no two completely specified situations that differ in
their ethical properties can be exactly alike in their descriptive
properties. Supervenience entails that no two worlds that are exactly
like each other descriptively can differ ethically, which means that
ethical properties and descriptive properties are necessarily
coextensive. And Jackson does not believe there are any necessarily
coextensive but distinct properties. If two properties not only
coincide in the actual world but could not fail to coincide
we have, he contends, not two properties but one. Thus, Supervenience
entails that ethical properties are descriptive.
Jackson doesn’t just argue that ethical properties are
descriptive properties. He also has an account of which descriptive
properties ethical properties are (Jackson 1998, 129–134,
140–143). It goes as follows.
To begin with, take some platitudinous thoughts about morality and
write them down in a great big sentence.
FM1. Wrong actions ought to be discouraged
and shunned; right actions ought to be promoted and encouraged;
virtuous people are disposed to perform right actions and not to
perform wrong actions; vicious people are disposed to perform wrong
actions and not to perform right actions; right actions are right
because they have certain natural properties on which rightness
supervenes; similarly for wrong actions; and so on.
Now let’s transform this as follows:
FM2. Actions with property \(w\) stand in
relation \(o\) to being discouraged and shunned; actions with property
\(r\) stand in relation \(o\) to being promoted and encouraged; people
with property \(v_1\) are disposed to perform actions with \(r\) and
not to perform actions with \(w\); people with property \(v_2\) are
disposed to perform actions with \(w\) and not to perform actions with
\(r\); actions with \(r\) have \(r\) because they have certain natural
properties on which \(r\) supervenes; similarly for actions with
\(w\); and so on.
What we just did was to take all and only the moral terms in FM1,
get rid of them, and uniformly replace them with variables. FM2,
unlike FM1, doesn’t contain any moral terms. But that fact
is not yet very interesting, as FM2 isn’t really a
meaningful sentence. But we can turn it into one by simply doing
this:
FM3. There exists a property \(w\) and a
property \(r\) and a property \(v_1\) and a property \(v_2\) and a
relation \(o\) (and whatever further properties and relations are
designated by the variables in a complete statement of FM2) such that:
actions with \(w\) stand in \(o\) to being discouraged and shunned;
actions with property \(r\) stand in \(o\) to being promoted and
encouraged; people with \(v_1\) are disposed to perform actions with
\(r\) and not to perform actions with \(w\); people with \(v_2\) are
disposed to perform actions with \(w\) and not to perform actions with
\(r\); actions with \(r\) have \(r\) because they have certain natural
properties on which \(r\) supervenes; similarly for actions with
\(w\); and so on.
(Sentences like this that result from performing this sort of maneuver
are called Ramsey sentences.) Now notice something about
FM3. Unlike FM2, it is a meaningful if not very pretty
sentence. But unlike FM1, it is a sentence you would be able to
understand without possessing any moral concepts. All you need to do
is understand all the nonmoral, descriptive concepts in FM3 and
follow its rather complicated structure.
What FM3 says is that there are a bunch of things \(w, r, v_1\)
etc. that together play the complex roles FM3 specifies in the
complex structure FM3 describes. This isn’t yet quite
what’s wanted. What we want is a sentence that says
there’s exactly one bunch of such things. Logicians
have a standard trick for doing this. This calls for a decidedly
complicated sentence that goes like this:
FM4. There exists a property \(w\) and a
property \(r\) and a property \(v_1\) and a property \(v_2\) and a
relation \(o\) (etc.) such that: actions with \(w\) stand in \(o\) to
being discouraged and shunned; actions with property \(r\) stand in
\(o\) to being promoted and encouraged; people with \(v_1\) are
disposed to perform actions with \(r\) and not to perform actions with
\(w\); people with \(v_2\) are disposed to perform actions with \(w\)
and not to perform actions with \(r\); actions with \(r\) have \(r\)
because they have certain natural properties on which \(r\)
supervenes; similarly for actions with \(w\); and so on;
AND
for all \(w^*\) and all \(r^*\) and all \(v_1^*\) and all \(v_2^*\)
and all \(o^*\) (etc.): actions with \(w^*\) stand in \(o^*\) to being
discouraged and shunned; actions with property \(r^*\) stand in
\(o^*\) to being promoted and encouraged; people with \(v_1^*\) are
disposed to perform actions with \(r\) and not to perform actions with
\(w^*\); people with \(v_2^*\) are disposed to perform actions with
\(w\) and not to perform actions with \(r^*\); actions with \(r^*\)
have \(r^*\) because they have certain natural properties on which
\(r\) supervenes; similarly for actions with \(w^*\); and so on IF AND
ONLY IF \(w^* = w\) and \(r^* = r\) and \(v_1^* = v_1\) and \(v_2^* =
v_2\) and \(o^* = o\) (etc.).
Now suppose FM4 is true. Now we can do something neat: we can
define ethical terms in pristinely natural terms. Here’s
how. Let’s take “right.” “Right” is what
we replaced with the variable “\(r\)”. So we can just
say:
RIGHT. Rightness is the property \(r\) such that: There
exists a property \(w\) and a property \(v_1\) and a property \(v_2\)
and a relation \(o\) (etc.) such that: actions with \(w\) stand in
\(o\) to being discouraged and shunned; actions with property \(r\)
stand in \(o\) to being promoted and encouraged; people with \(v_1\)
are disposed to perform actions with \(r\) and not to perform actions
with \(w\); people with \(v_2\) are disposed to perform actions with
\(w\) and not to perform actions with \(r\); actions with \(r\) have
\(r\) because they have certain natural properties on which \(r\)
supervenes; similarly for actions with \(w\); and so on; AND …
(Uniqueness clause as for FM4).
This is neat because it allows us to offer reductive definitions of
moral concepts in spite of their highly holistic character. The fact
that moral concepts can all be defined in terms of one another might
make it seem prohibitively difficult to try to offer reductive
definitions of these concepts one by one. But by considering all moral
concepts together and offering reductive definitions of
networks of moral concepts, this difficulty can, perhaps, be
overcome.
But is FM4 true? Well, it depends how much structure we
offer. It depends, that is, on how rich and determinate its full
content is. And how rich is it? Well, we may in the first instance
think of the “platitudinous thoughts” we put into it as
giving the content of what Jackson calls “folk morality”
(Jackson 1998, 130):
The network of moral opinions, intuitions, principles, and concepts
whose mastery is part and parcel of having a sense of what is right
and wrong and of being able to engage in meaningful debate about what
ought to be done.
The trouble is that folk morality is pervasively contested. There’s
a lot of agreement, to be sure: we’d all be talking past each other
were there not (Jackson 1998, 132). But what’s left when you leave the
contested stuff out plausibly won’t furnish enough determinate content
to make the uniqueness clause we added at FM3 come out true.
So what Jackson proposes is that, instead of taking the input to this
analytic procedure to be folk morality in its current state, we should
take it to be what he calls “mature folk morality”, where
this designates what folk morality will have evolved into when critical
reflection has done all it can to sharpen it up.
We can then see how it may be possible to offer definitions in
descriptive terms of moral concepts. Our moral concepts serve to pick
out the properties that occupy the various roles in the network of such
roles specified by a suitable ramsification of mature folk morality.
And the properties that occupy these roles will be descriptive
properties, Jackson believes, in the light of the argument aired above.
Thus, moral terms pick out descriptive properties.
Jackson seeks to describe a reductive analysis of ethical terms that
understands them as picking out the properties that play a certain
role in the conceptual network determined by mature folk
morality. The most worrying difficulty with Jackson’s approach
is that this looks unpromising as a reductive analysis, as
there is a term in it that appears decidedly evaluative in character:
“mature” (Yablo 2000). “Mature” had better not
apply to any old terminal point our ethical development may happen to
take us to, but only to a terminus we could arrive at by good,
reasonable ethical discussion and argument. One possible answer in the
spirit of the wider theory might be to say that “mature”
picks out whatever plays the “mature” role in mature folk
morality. But that seems circular. After all, maturity in current folk
morality is plausibly pretty contested. There are many ways morality
could develop to a more settled state, and we are liable to differ
about which of them we count as maturation and which we would describe
less favorably. So a naturalistic account of ‘maturity’
fails to pick out one set of platitudes as being the unique platitudes
of mature folk morality. And if we attempt to narrow down the range of
sets of platitudes that might count as “mature folk
morality” by attempting to specify the
best candidate for mature folk morality, a central question
seems to be getting begged. Or, as we might say, echoing Moore, left
open.