Two negative theses comprise the central common non-cognitivist
claims, although current theories often endorse them only in qualified
form.  One thesis might be called semantic
nonfactualism. Simply put this thesis denies that predicative
moral sentences express propositions or have substantial truth
conditions. Thus semantic nonfactualism suggests that their contents
are not apt for robust truth or falsity. (The terms
‘substantial’ and ‘robust’ are inserted here
to make room for minimalist theories which offer deflationary accounts
of truth, truth-aptness and propositions. Such theories will be
discussed in more detail in section 4.1 below.) Moral predicates do
not denote or express properties and predicative moral sentences do
not therefore predicate properties of their subjects. The second
negative thesis can be called psychological
non-cognitivism. This thesis denies that the states of mind
conventionally expressed by moral utterances are beliefs or mental
states which fall on the cognitive side of the cognitive/non-cognitive
divide. Typically non-cognitivists accept both negative theses, though
there are views which accept one and not the other.
Some non-cognitivists have accepted these theses in their strongest
form – moral sentences in no way predicate properties, are apt
for truth or falsity, or express beliefs. But most current
non-cognitivists accept these negative claims only in a somewhat
weakened form. For example many non-cognitivists hold that moral
judgments’ primary function is not to express beliefs, though
they may express them in a secondary way. Others deny that
their contents are true or false in any robust sense but not
that they can be true or false in a deflationary sense
according to which there is no substantial property separating true and
false sentences.
Non-cognitivists deny neither that moral sentences are meaningful
nor that they are generally used by speakers in meaningful ways. Thus
different sorts of non-cognitivist couple their negative theses with
various positive claims about the meanings of moral sentences and about
the states of mind that they express. It is the diversity of positive
proposals that generates the different varieties of non-cognitivism.
Emotivists suggest that moral sentences express or evoke non-cognitive
attitudes towards various objects without asserting that the speaker
has those attitudes. Norm-expressivists suggest (roughly) that the
states of mind expressed by moral sentences are attitudes of acceptance
of various norms or rules governing conduct and emotion, perhaps
coupled with a judgment that the objects or action under discussion
comports with those norms. Prescriptivists suggest that these sentences
are a species of prescription or command, and may or may not offer an
account of the state of mind such judgments express.
While non-cognitivism was first developed as a theory about moral
judgments (Ogden & Richards 1923, 125. Barnes 1933) many of the
arguments for the position apply equally well to other sorts of
evaluative language. Thus most non-cognitivists today extend the
treatment to normative or evaluative judgments generally, and the
discussion below will often speak of normative or evaluative judgments
and terms – a category which includes as paradigms moral
judgments, judgments of rationality, and judgments of value.
 Cognitivism is perhaps best defined as the denial of non-cognitivism.
Cognitivists think that moral sentences are apt for truth or falsity,
and that the state of mind of accepting a moral judgment is typically
one of belief. They think that typical utterances of indicative
sentences containing moral predicates express beliefs in the same way
that other sentences with ordinary descriptive predicates typically
do. (There is some reason to be careful here since cognitivists may not
need to employ the sense of ‘express’ that expressivists
need to get their theory off the ground. See Schroeder 2008a.)
Different species of cognitivist disagree about the contents of moral
sentences and beliefs, about their truth conditions, and about their
truth. To discuss all the varieties would require a complete taxonomy
of possible metaethical positions. What they have in common, however,
is that they all deny that an adequate account of moral judgments can
be given consistent with the two negative non-cognitivist theses. 
It is useful to contrast non-cognitivism with one particular variety of
cognitivism in order to more clearly present what the non-cognitivist
is claiming. Various versions of cognitivist subjectivism equate moral
properties such as rightness with the property of being approved of by
some person or group. To be right is to be approved of by the speaker,
or the speaker and her friends, or the members of the speaker’s
society, or everybody. On many such views, when a speaker says
something is right she is in fact saying that she approves, or that she
and those like her approve. In one very good sense she would then have
expressed her approval – she said that she approved or that she
and her friends did. And, if approval is a conative rather than a
cognitive attitude, we might say that she expressed a non-cognitive
attitude. But this by itself is not sufficient to make the position
non-cognitivist. This variety of subjectivism agrees with one of the
positive non-cognitivist theses (that moral utterances conventionally
express non-cognitive attitudes), but it does not agree with either of
the essential negative non-cognitivist claims (that the judgments
don’t express beliefs and/or that they are not truth-apt). According to
this subjectivist theory, the moral utterance expresses the speaker’s
belief that she approves of the action and this has truth conditions
which are also the truth conditions of the sentence uttered. When a
non-cognitivist says that a sentence conventionally expresses an
attitude, she means to contrast the mode of expression with saying that
one has the attitude. A simple example gets the idea across. One can
express dislike of something by saying that one dislikes it. This is
the way that a cognitivist subjectivist thinks we express moral
attitudes. But one can also express dislike of something by booing or
hissing. This is much like the way some non-cognitivists think we
express moral attitudes. The latter way of expressing an attitude is
different from the way cognitivist subjectivists think we express moral
attitudes because it expresses the attitude without saying that we have
the attitude (Barnes 1933; Carnap 1937, 28–29.) 
The principal varieties of non-cognitivism can be distinguished by
focusing on the positive claims they make in explicating the semantic
function of moral expressions and the nature of the mental states
typically expressed by those who utter them in simple predicative
statements. 
Emotivists think moral terms in grammatically assertive utterances
function primarily to express emotion and perhaps also to elicit
similar emotions in others (Barnes 1933; Stevenson 1946; Ayer 1952,
Chapter 6). They can be read as suggesting that the right way to
explain the meanings of such terms is to point out that they are
conventional devices for performing a certain sort of speech act, one
which if sincere requires that the speaker have a certain attitude.
Sentences employing general predicates of positive moral evaluation
such as ‘right’, ‘good’,
‘virtuous’, and so on signal a non-cognitive pro-attitude
such as approval or preference. Sentences employing general predicates
of negative evaluation such as ‘wrong’, ‘bad’,
and ‘vicious’ signal negative non-cognitive
attitudes. Thus to call a person virtuous is to express an attitude of
approval and the speech act of doing so is analogous to the speech act
performed when we cheer for that person. The account can be extended
beyond general moral terms. Simple predicative utterances employing
the so-called thick moral terms such as ‘brave’ and
‘honest’ can then be thought of as performing this same
speech act while at the same time predicating the natural property
(say fearlessness in the case of bravery) which common usage of the
term seems to track. Thus thick moral terms can be thought of as
having both descriptive and emotive meaning. 
Some theorists who view themselves as emotivists suggest that even the
most general terms of moral evaluation have a descriptive meaning
rather than just an emotive or non-cognitive meaning (Stevenson 1944,
22; Hare 1952, suggests the same sort of idea within a prescriptivist
theory at 118). One such approach analyzes judgments applying a moral
predicate to a particular object or action as expressing approval or
disapproval of some property while at the same time predicating that
property of the object or item in question. This idea has been taken
over by contemporary hybrid expressivists (Jackson 1999; Barker 2000;
Ridge 2006, Ridge 2014). According to these theorists, a sentence such as
‘Lying is wrong’ both predicates a property of the act
type lying and expresses the speaker’s disapproval of that
property. Theories of this sort will be discussed in more detail in
the section on hybrid theories below.  They are mentioned here only to
note two points: (1) The hybrid idea was already present in the
writings of early noncognitivists. And (2) these more complicated
views are often adopted by theorists who begin from simpler theories
which are paradigm cases of non-cognitivism.
Prescriptivists suggest that moral judgments are a species of
prescriptive judgement and that moral sentences in the indicative mood
are semantically more akin to imperatives than indicatives. One way to
think of the idea is that moral terms function as force indicators on
analogy with mood.  Early prescriptivists thought that this had
radical implications for moral reasoning and argument. Carnap
suggested that moral judgments are equivalent to relatively simple
imperatives. The statement ‘Killing is evil’ means the
same thing as ‘Do not kill.’ On that basis he claimed that
there could be no moral knowledge or error (Carnap 1937; 23–24
& 29). 
By contrast current versions of prescriptivism, most developed in the
works of R. M. Hare, have attempted to vindicate moral thinking as a
rational enterprise. The main idea here is that while moral sentences
do in fact express a species of prescription much as ordinary
imperatives do, they express prescriptions of a special universal
sort. And it is largely because they are prescriptions of this sort
that they are subject to various consistency constraints, so that
accepting one moral judgment carries with it a requirement that one
accept other judgments in some respects like it. While Hare denies
that moral judgments are exactly equivalent to prescriptions
expressible in any other form of words, he does tell us a lot about
what they mean. Moral imperatives are universal in a number of
ways. They are to apply not just to the agent about whom they are made
(if they are made with respect to a particular agent) but also to any
agent who is similarly situated. And they apply to any action or
object which is relevantly similar to the actions or objects about
which the judgment is made. They apply to all relevantly similar cases
at any time and any place. Thus, very roughly, when one calls an
action right one is not only prescribing the action in question, but
also any relevantly similar action wherever and whenever it
occurs. And the prescription is addressed not only to the agent whose
action is up for assessment but also to every other person, including
the speaker and listeners. In this way, Hare believes, calling an
action wrong commits the speaker to judging wrong any relevantly
similar action done at any time and any place by any person.
With ordinary prescriptions, it isn’t obvious that there is a state of
mind that someone must be in if they utter or obey a command and which
we ought to characterize as accepting an imperative. Hare, himself at
one point argues that there is no substantive way of characterizing
the attitude a person must have if she expresses or accepts a
prescription or moral judgment (Hare 1952, 9–11). Even so,
prescriptivists have some reason for wanting to offer an account of
accepting a moral judgment if they want to explain moral practice.
Ordinarily we attribute moral judgments to people, even people who are
silent. So the prescriptivist will want to say something about our
basis for these attributions. An account of the attitude that
constitutes accepting a moral judgment will allow them to ground such
attributions. One suggestion is that the attitude of accepting a moral
judgment involves an intention to do what the judgments recommend.
Sincerely accepting a command directed at oneself involves doing it if
one is in circumstances where it applies and one is able and otherwise
intending to do it should one find oneself in those circumstances
(Hare 1952, 20). Since moral commands are universal according to the
theory, they will be directed at everyone. Thus anyone who sincerely
accepts a moral judgment will be disposed to do what they believe
right in circumstances where they can. Less sincere judgments may lack
this connection (Hare 1952, 169). The issue of which attitude, if any,
are involved in accepting a prescription is relevant to some of the
arguments over internalism that we will consider below.
Since non-cognitivism is a species of irrealism about ethics, it should
be unsurprising that many of its main motivations overlap with those
for other versions of ethical irrealism, especially with those for
error theories. Early non-cognitivists seem most concerned to defend
metaphysical and epistemic commitments incompatible with a realist
interpretation of moral claims. For example, moral judgments seem to
be empirically under-determined (Ayer 1952, 106; Mackie 1977, 39).
Hence they fail tests for meaningful discourse proposed by logical
positivists. If moral language is meaningful, it would be a
counter-example to the view. Thus early versions of non-cognitivism
were proposed by these theorists, not so much because they were
interested in moral philosophy but rather to render innocuous a seeming
counter-example to their own theories (Carnap 1937, 24–27; Ayer 1952,
107–109). 
More contemporary non-cognitivists have also been motivated by
similar underlying metaphysical and epistemic commitments. But they
have been as concerned with vindicating the legitimacy of moral
practice and argument as with anything else. As a result, they have put
more time and energy into explaining, and in a certain sense
justifying, the realist-seeming features of moral discourse in the
absence of a commitment to realism (Hare 1952; Blackburn 1984, 1998;
Gibbard 1990).
‘Quasi-Realism’ is Simon Blackburn’s name for this sort of
non-cognitivism, and especially his own version of expressivism. Yet
other sophisticated non-cognitivists, notably Allan Gibbard, have
been happy to work under the quasi-realist banner (Gibbard 2003,
18–19).  What especially distinguishes the quasi-realist project is an
emphasis on explaining why we are entitled to act as if moral
judgments are genuinely truth-apt even while strictly speaking they
are neither true nor false in any robust sense. Thus it is a commitment of a
quasi-realist that normative judgments are in an important way
different from most (other) paradigm descriptive judgments – enough 
so to render problematic their status as either true or 
false – and yet that a justification is nonetheless available for our
practices of treating them as if they were in fact so. What
exactly this comes to is hard to say without discussing some of the
special problems for non-cognitivism in general, since it is precisely
in offering solutions to those problems that the quasi-realist carries
out his program. Thus we will revisit the position later on in the
context of these problems.
Expressivists of all sorts think that moral sentences are
conventional devices for expressing pro and con attitudes towards
their objects. In this broad sense emotivists are expressivists; they
agree that moral language functions to express non-cognitive attitudes
of various sorts.  The claim that moral terms function much like ‘boo’
and ‘hurrah’ qualifies as expressivist in a broad sense.  In recent
years, however, the term ‘expressivist’ has come to be used in a
narrower way, to refer to views which attempt to construct a
systematic semantics for moral sentences by pairing them with the
states of mind that the sentences are said to express.  Such
expressivists hold that the meanings of all sentences containing moral
terms are determined by the mental states that they serve to
express.
For this to work, the sense in which moral sentences express the
attitudes which determine their semantic values must be fairly strict
and particular.  For in one sense perfectly ordinary indicative
sentences can express non-cognitive attitudes as when, ‘It is
ten o’clock already,’ can express impatience.  And, ‘Lying
sucks!’ and ‘I disapprove of lying,’ can each express
disapproval of lying.  Even so, we should not want to assimilate the
semantics of these sentences to one another.  Thus expressivists of
the narrower sort must identify a kind of expression which allows them
to distinguish the way in which “Lying is wrong,”
expresses the attitude that generates its semantic value, from the way
in which “I disapprove of lying,” or even “I think
that lying is wrong” might express the very same
attitude (Schroeder 2008a, 2008c).
Those who have taken up this expressivist program have provided a
number of candidates for the attitudes expressed by sentences
containing normative terminology.  Simon Blackburn, whose
quasi-realist project was briefly described above, has contributed
various ideas not only for the states expressed by indicative
sentences but also for complex embeddings of moral claims.  Hybrid
theories that put the expressive function of normative language into
the semantics (discussed below) also involve work of this sort. But
the proponent who has developed the program in the most systematic way
is Allan Gibbard. In two influential books Gibbard has proposed two
structurally similar accounts each of which employs a different base
noncognitive attitude.  In Gibbard (1990) the attitude was
norm-acceptance, whereas in Gibbard (2003) it was a planning attitude
akin to intending.  In each case he develops a strategy for combining
the relevant noncognitive attitude with belief to generate complex attitudes 
that can serve as the
semantic values of more complex sentences.  Mark Schroeder’s (2008c)
bifurcated attitude semantics is a self-conscious attempt to develop
these strategies yet further and to assess prospects for the general
strategy.
Gibbard’s Wise Choices, Apt Feelings (1990) proposes an
analysis of judgments regarding rationality according to which they
express a non-cognitive attitude of acceptance towards rules or
norms. From there he proceeds to reduce other normative judgments into
various more particular kinds of judgments of rationality, so that all
moral judgments are covered by the proposed analysis. Gibbard suggests
that normative judgments express the acceptance of systems of 
norms – rules dividing actions under naturalistic descriptions into
those which are forbidden, permitted and required. To call an action
rational is, to a first approximation, to express one’s acceptance of
a system of norms which allows it. To call an action irrational is to
express one’s acceptance of a system of norms which forbids it. And so
on (Gibbard 1990, 46). This is only Gibbard’s idea to a first
approximation, since a speaker may not have a determinate system of
norms in mind when he or she makes such a judgment. So Gibbard
suggests we would do better to think of judgments to the effect that
an action would be irrational as expressing rejection of any set of
norms which does not forbid it. More precisely, a normative judgment
predicating a normative term of a particular action rules out
combinations of descriptive judgments concerning the action with norms
that either permit, forbid, or require (as appropriate) actions
falling under those descriptions. More complex judgments are captured
using the sets of norm-world pairs which those judgments “rule
out” to represent the states of mind inconsistent with the
judgments in question. The basic idea can be illustrated with an
example. A judgment that action A is permissible is
incompatible with a pair the first member of which
represents A as a lie, and the second member of which is a
norm that rules out lying.  And it is inconsistent with many more such
combinations besides.  Given this, we can capture the content of the
judgment that action A is permissible by specifying the set
of world-norm pairs with which it is incompatible. (A more detailed
exposition of Gibbard’s technical apparatus can be found within the
discussion of the Embedding Problem below and in the supplementary document
  Embedding Problem Response Strategies.)
Gibbard develops his analysis to cover moral judgments by analyzing
such judgments in terms of judgments of rationality. An action is
wrong if and only if it fails to meet standards of action the
intentional or negligent violation of which in a normal state of mind
would be sufficient for finding the agent prima facie blameworthy. And
an action is blameworthy if it would be rational for the agent to feel
guilty and for others to resent the agent for doing the action (Gibbard
1990, 45). Since the rationality of guilt or resentment receives a
non-cognitive analysis, the approach generates a non-cognitive analysis
of moral judgments themselves.
 Gibbard’s more recent work (Gibbard 2003) retains many of the main
features of his norm-expressivist theory but it revises to some extent
the account of the non-cognitive attitudes involved in accepting a
normative judgment.  On the current view, such judgments express the
acceptance of plans, or perhaps better they express a state of mind
that we might think of as planning to act in this way or that
depending on the naturalistic circumstances one finds oneself in. More
complex judgments embedding normative terms express combinations of
such attitudes with further attitudes, including ordinary
beliefs. Whereas in the earlier work Gibbard used sets of world-norm
pairs to formally capture the contents of judgments, in the later work
he relies on what he calls “fact-prac worlds”.  Formally
they function in much the same way as the world-norm pairs did in the
earlier theory.  But with the fact-prac worlds apparatus contingency
plans take the place of norms as members of the pairs. Once again,
judgements will rule out other judgements represented by a set of
pairs.  The judgment that action A is permissible will be
inconsistent with various combinations of factual beliefs with plans.
Each of these combinations can be captured by a world representing a
way the world might be together with a second component consisting of
a plan, representing a commitment to act that the thinker might
have. For example the judgment that action A is permissible
will be incompatible with any pair the fact-representing member of
which represents action A as a lie, paired with a plan that
rules out lying.  And just as a similar idea allowed Gibbard to use
sets of norm-world pairs to capture the content of normative
judgments, he now can capture the content of a normative judgment by
specifying the set of fact-prac worlds with which it is incompatible.
When the apparatus is fully developed, the fact representing members
of the pairs can once again be thought of as possible worlds insofar
as they specify every detail of the world, and the plans are
hyper-plans insofar as they have an answer for what to do in every
circumstance.  Gibbard often calls these fully determinate fact-prac
worlds “fact-plan worlds”, just as you might expect given
what they are composed of. The resulting theory might now be called
‘plan-expressivism’ rather than
‘norm-expressivism’ though most of its important
structural features are very similar to those of his earlier norm
expressivist view. 
Further developments come in the form of Gibbard’s arguments for the
resulting theory: Gibbard suggests that people need to plan and need
ways to think about and represent their plans. He argues that they
would also need to think about what to do from the perspectives of
various other people and to formulate plans for arbitrary situations
they might find themselves in. If these claims are right, a language
might naturally develop in order to make such thinking easier. A
planning language modeled by the sets of world-plan pairs would serve
very well.  And in actual use it would operate much as our actual
normative language does. It is therefore reasonable to conclude that
our actual normative language is of this sort.  Furthermore conceiving
of these attitudes as involving contingency plans for descriptively
specifiable circumstances would allow us to explain the supervenience
of the moral on the descriptive.  The thoughts represented by the
fact-prac world apparatus represent such contingency plans. So the
supervenience of the normative on the descriptive falls naturally out
of the resulting story (Gibbard 2003).
Often philosophical positions are introduced in rather pure and stark
versions, only to be modified in light of arguments and objections so
as to become more like competing theories over time. It should not be
too surprising that this is the case in metaethics and that present
day non-cognitivist theories are less distinguishable from cognitivist
alternatives than earlier versions. It can even be a controversial
matter whether theories developed within the non-cognitivist tradition
but modified to handle objections still deserve the label. The
varieties of emotivism which postulate both descriptive meaning and
emotive meaning have sometimes aroused such suspicions and the more
developed hybrids discussed at the end of this section are in that
tradition. Furthermore, while paradigm non-cognitivists accept each of
the two negative theses outlined above, there are views which accept
only one of the two without the other. These positions constitute two
metaethical theories which we might think of as borderline cases lying
just outside the non-cognitivist region of logical space. 
Hermeneutic moral fictionalists are not semantic
non-factualists. Moral sentences are regarded as genuinely
truth-apt. Such sentences do have truth conditions and an assertive
sentence using a moral predicate does predicate a property. Yet, in
normal use these sentences are not strictly speaking true. Thus far
the hermeneutic fictionalist agrees with error theorists. But while
error theorists think that the falsity of moral sentences implies that
ordinary moral talk is massively in error, fictionalists
disagree. According to the hermeneutic fictionalist a speaker uttering
a false moral sentence is typically not expressing a belief in the
content expressed by the sentence. Rather such speakers are using it
fictively, and this use involves no error. Thus, fictionalists are
psychological non-cognitivists. Use of a moral sentence does not
communicate that the speaker believes the proposition expressed by
that sentence.  Rather speakers use such sentences to express other,
non-cognitive states of mind. Just as with standard versions of
non-cognitivism, fictionalists will generally offer a story about the
nature of the non-cognitive attitude expressed. For example, they may
suggest that the state of mind is an intention to act as if the moral
judgment expressing the intention is true (Kalderon 2005b). At the
same time, because they are not pursuing the expressivist semantic
program the expression relation need not be exactly what ordinary
expressivists take it to be.  Since they need not require a one–to–one
mapping of moral sentences onto states of mind that express them to
support their semantic theory, fictionalists can allow for more
variation in the states of mind such sentences (loosely)
express. Hermeneutic fictionalism is often contrasted with
revolutionary fictionalism. Revolutionary moral fictionalists think we
should reform our current cognitively committed use of normative
language to work roughly as the hermeneutic fictionalist thinks we
already do (Joyce 2001, 2005). They are thus not committed to
non-cognitivism about actual current use of moral terms in the way that
hermeneutic fictionalists seem to be. Revolutionary fictionalists
could be read as proposing that we convert to using moral language to
express something other than belief with our indicative moral
sentences, but revolutionary fictionalists have not usually presented
their reforms in that way. That should not be too
surprising. Fictionalist rejection of semantic nonfactualism leads
most taxonomists to omit fictionalism from the non-cognitivist
genus. Still at least one prominent hermeneutic fictionalist has
presented his view as a version of non-cognitivism (Kalderon 2005b)
drawing on some comments in MacIntyre (1981, 15–18).
For more detail on fictionalism see the entry on
 fictionalism.
In contrast, Terry Horgan and Mark Timmons have propounded a view
which they call Nondescriptivist Cognitivism. As the label suggests,
they do not regard their view as a species of non-cognitivism, but
like fictionalism the view does accept one of non-cognitivism’s two
constitutive negative theses while rejecting the other. However, with
respect to each thesis Horgan and Timmons’s choices contrast with
those made by fictionalism. Nondescriptivist cognitivism spurns
psychological non-cognitivism, but embraces semantic nonfactualism, at
least insofar as it rejects the claim that moral sentences describe
the world or predicate genuine properties (Horgan & Timmons 2000;
Timmons 1999). The precise content of the view can be difficult to pin
down.  Horgan and Timmons challenge a standard Humean division of the
mind into a domain of cognitive states which represent the world as
being some way and a separate domain of noncognitive states that do
not represent the world.  Rather they think there is an important
division within the cognitive domain between beliefs that
represent the world and beliefs that do not do this but which have
non-descriptive but cognitive content. Nondescriptive Cognitivism then
holds that moral judgments express such nondescriptive but cognitive
states. Indicative sentences apt for expressing these mental states
(in one sense of ‘express’) also semantically
express the contents of these nondescriptive states just as on a
more standard picture indicative sentences semantically express the
propositions that are the contents of sentences that (in a different
sense of ‘express’) express beliefs. Whether this is in fact a
distinctive cognitivist position will depend on the best way of
dividing up different sorts of mental states.  Some will think that
Horgan and Timmons have stipulated a new use for old terms, but they
respond by defending phenomenological criteria for dividing cognitive
from non-cognitive mental states that justify counting
nonrepresentational states among the cognitive.
However that debate comes out, it is nevertheless worth noting the
view as one which makes trouble for the standard division between
cognitivist and non-cognitivist views.  Together with fictionalism it
illustrates a position which accepts only one of the two negative
theses constitutive of standard non-cognitivism. If such views are
coherent this would suggest the two negative theses are logically
independent.
 Hybrid-expressivist theories can be thought of as another sort of
borderline case but for a different reason. These theorists combine
the positive claims of expressivism – that moral sentences are
conventional devices for the expression of pro-attitudes and that
moral attitudes are (partly) non-cognitive with features of
cognitivism – that moral sentences predicate properties and that moral
attitudes are (partly) cognitive.  There are a variety of ways of
combining these ideas and various extant theories adopt many of the
options.
We’ve already noted a tendency for emotivists and prescriptivists
to allow a kind of secondary descriptive meaning for moral terms over
and above their expressive meaning in order to capture the way that
moral statements can be used to convey descriptive information.  If I
know that you are a utilitarian you might convey the information that
an action maximizes utility by telling me that it is right. In such
cases, what the speaker successfully conveys depends on the audience’s
knowledge of the speaker’s moral views. One sort of hybrid theorist
incorporates this idea into the semantics of moral expressions. Such
theorists suggest that moral utterances as a matter of their semantics
predicate a property, one which is determined by the speaker’s moral
attitudes, while at the same time expressing a non-cognitive attitude
towards that property. Proponents hope that the view will have
advantage in explaining the communication of factual information with
moral terms and with handling the embedding problem (explained below),
while also explaining the motivational efficacy of moral
judgements. One implementation of this view equates the main semantic
content of a moral predicate with the property it picks out (via a
function from the speaker’s attitudes to the relevant properties),
while use of the predicate conventionally implicates the presence of a
pro or con attitude (Barker 2000). A different implementation of the
strategy incorporates both components into the semantic values of
moral terms, even while the descriptive content is a function of the
non-cognitive attitude expressed.  More specifically on this way of
developing the idea, moral sentences to the effect that something is
right semantically both express a proposition – that the action has a
particular property – and a particular positive attitude toward that
particular property. The particular property picked out itself depends
on the non-cognitive attitudes of the speaker, insofar as the property
predicated is the most general property towards which the speaker
holds the non-cognitive attitudes expressed by the very same
judgement(Ridge, 2006a, 2006b, 2014).  One upshot is that the descriptive
content of a speaker’s judgements can vary over time as the object of
her attitudes change. John Eriksson(2009) suggests that R. M. Hare was
an early adopter of this kind of hybrid theory.
A contrasting sort of hybrid theory holds the descriptive content
of moral predicates constant.  Such views are often modeled on slurs
or epithets, as explicated in a certain way. It is plausible and
perhaps even standard to think of slurs as semantically expressing a
certain descriptive property (being a member of such and such a group,
say) while also conventionally expressing a negative attitude towards
those with the property. Copp (2001, 2009) and Boisvert (2008) suggest
that moral terms could function in the same way.  Here again there are
various ways to work out the details.  Advocates of the approach can
note that it has advantages over the previous kind of hybrid theory in
explaining communication insofar as the descriptive content remains
fixed from speaker to speaker (Schroeder 2009). And they claim that
the view does so without undermining the standard hybrid explanation of the
motivational efficacy of moral judgements. Other theorists suggest
that pejoratives like ‘idiot’ present a better model than slurs (Hay
forthcoming).
As the literature develops hybrid views get more complicated and
subtle. Close relatives of these theories claim to elude objections
directed at each of the above variants and yet the resulting theories
are probably best understood as developments of these simpler variants
(Schroeder 2013;Toppinen 2013).
Perhaps hardest to characterize as a species of non-cognitivism are the claims of several recent theorists who suggest that non-cognitivism is best understood as a metasemantic theory. The claim seems to be that non-cognitivism is a theory not about the meaning of moral sentences or about the contents of moral thoughts, but rather a story at a different level about how sentences and thoughts come to have these meanings or contents (Charlow 2015; Chrisman 2012; Pérez Carballo 2014; Ridge 2014; Silk 2015). One motivation for the view seems to be that it allows noncognitivists to take advantage of ordinary semantic theories and hence avoid the embedding problem. There isn’t yet a lot of literature disputing the idea, but Alwood (2016) expresses some skepticism about the advantages of the approach. It is at least worth thinking about which of the standard motivations for non-cognitivism in ethics support the view when it is construed as a metasemantic theory. Chances are the literature will take up such questions in the near future and subsequent versions of this entry will say more about the developments to come.  
Non-cognitivism is motivated by a number of considerations, most rooted
in metaphysics, the philosophy of mind or epistemology. 
At the beginning of the 20th Century, G. E. Moore’s open question
argument convinced many philosophers that moral statements were not
equivalent to statements made using non-moral or descriptive terms. For
any non-moral description of an action or object it seemed that
competent speakers could without confusion doubt that the action or
object was appropriately characterized using a moral term such as
‘good’ or ‘right’. The question of whether the
action or object so described was good or right was always open, even
to competent speakers. Furthermore, in the absence of any systematic
theory to explain the possibility of synthetic as opposed to analytic
identity claims, many were convinced that this showed that moral
properties could not be identified with any natural (or supernatural)
properties. Thus Moore and others concluded that moral properties such
as goodness were irreducible sui generis properties, not identical to
natural properties (Moore 1903, 15). 
The non-naturalists, however, had neglected another option consistent
with the thought underlying the open question argument. Perhaps moral
predicates did not refer to properties at all, and perhaps their
meaning was not analyzable in non-moral descriptive terms not because
they referred to irreducibly moral properties but because, despite
appearances, they were not referring expressions at all. In other
words, semantic nonfactualism about moral terms entails that questions
of the sort highlighted by Moore could not be closed by any amount of
competence with the expressions used to ask them because the
expressions in question are not in fact equivalent. Thus
non-cognitivists could argue that moral expressions used in such open
questions did not function to represent anything or to predicate any
property and as such were not equivalent to any descriptive or
referring expressions. Rather they merely served to convey emotion
(Ogden and Richards 1923, 125). Speakers to whom such questions seemed
open were tacitly aware of this difference in function and hence not
in a position to equate moral expressions with descriptive
expressions.
Contemporary philosophers recognize the possibility that sentences
that express identities might be synthetic as opposed to analytic or
true by definition. We can discover that water is the same stuff as
H2O without being able to infer it from the meanings of the
terms involved (Kripke 1972; Putnam 1975a). And descriptive naturalists
about morality have pointed out that the openness of Moore’s question
to competent speakers does not rule out the possibility of securing the
identity of a moral property with a naturalistic property through
empirical discoveries that do not rely on the expressions in question
having the same meaning (Boyd 1988). Yet many contemporary defenders of
non-cognitivism suggest that the open question argument still provides
ammunition for their claims. Even if we cannot infer from the openness
of a question that the referents of two terms used to ask that question
are distinct, we might still have reason to think that the two
expressions do not mean the same thing. Thus non-cognitivists have used
the open question argument to suggest that moral terms contain a
normative element completely lacking in descriptive terms and which
should be cashed out along the lines that the non-cognitivists
favor.
The open question argument can be seen as providing independent
support for what is sometimes called Hume’s Law – the claim that
one can never validly deduce an ‘ought’ from an
‘is’ (Hume 1888, 469). According to Hume’s Law, no set of
premises consisting entirely of non-moral descriptive statements is
sufficient to entail a moral or normative conclusion. The
non-cognitivist is in a position to explain this, insofar as her
positive proposal for the functioning of moral terms will suggest they
do more than merely describe the world. She will say that moral terms
essentially express a positive attitude, or function to commend. Purely
descriptive terms do not. Nothing can be the conclusion of a valid
argument which is not already implicit in the premises. Thus
descriptive claims cannot entail the extra expressive or imperatival
component that according to the non-cognitivist is part of the meaning
of moral terms (Hare 1952, 32–49).
There are of course many ways to resist these arguments. Perhaps moral
expressions are analytically equivalent to naturalistic expressions,
but these analyticities are themselves not obvious even to competent
speakers (Lewis 1989, 129). This may be because no analyticities are
obvious, or it may be because moral analyses in particular are
especially complex. One moral that could be drawn from the history of
Twentieth Century analytic philosophy is that if there are any
analyticities, competent speakers can question them. This is the
paradox of analysis. If any definition can be questioned by a
competent speaker, and we think there are at least some definitions
sufficient to underwrite analytic truths, then the mere fact that a
speaker can doubt a candidate analysis may not tell against that
analysis. An equivalence could be analytic because competent speakers
tacitly respect it, for the most part acting as if the equivalence is
true (Lewis 1989, 130). It has been suggested that moral concepts are
role concepts analogous to the concepts of various mental states as
conceived by functionalists. The idea is that commonsense morality
embodies a theory of morality which specifies the ways in which
various moral properties (rightness, wrongness, goodness, badness,
fairness, etc.) are related to each other and to other
properties. When we put all of the claims of the commonsense theory
together it specifies a role that each property must play in terms of
the other properties it relates to.  The role concept so-specified for
each term might then be the concept of the referent of that term
(Jackson and Pettit 1995). If so we should expect such concepts to be
quite complex. And their complexity might make it hard to recognize
the adequacy of any analysis, even for speakers who tacitly respect
the equivalence so defined.
Relatedly, some theorists have wanted to resist Hume’s Law, arguing
that one can in fact validly draw normative or moral conclusions from
purely descriptive premises (Foot 1958–9; Searle 1964). It is actually
quite difficult to find an adequate formulation that is immune to
counter-example, although many theorists suspect there is nonetheless
something right about Hume’s claim (Humberstone 1996).
There may be a problem for those more sophisticated forms of
non-cognitivism according to which moral terms have both descriptive
and prescriptive or expressive meaning when these are coupled with
reliance on the Open Question Argument. Suppose that the postulated
extra expressive or prescriptive component in moral terms explains why
competent speakers would not equate moral terms with descriptive
analyses of them and that it also explains why we cannot validly infer
a moral conclusion from non-moral premises. If moral terms have
descriptive meaning in addition to their non-cognitive element one
should be able to validly argue in the other direction. The problem is
that competent speakers are just as likely to wonder about the validity
of such inferences as they are to wonder about those going from
descriptive premises to normative conclusions. If the openness of such
questions to competent speakers is sufficient to refute claims of
meaning equivalence, it should here refute theories which include
descriptive meanings in an otherwise non-cognitive analysis. If the
arguments that lead non-cognitivists to postulate descriptive meaning
are sufficiently compelling it seems they should not rely on the open
question argument to support their views. Woods (2015) presses a related worry against even non-hybrid non-cognitivist theories. If the conventional function of moral terms is to express attitudes, it should seem Moore-paradoxical (that is pragmatically incoherent) to deny that one approves of the things one believes good or right. But many such claims don’t seem pragmatically incoherent. 
Naturalism in metaphysics has been on the ascendancy for some time,
though it is often somewhat difficult to ascertain exactly what the
position amounts to. Metaphysical naturalists claim that there are
only natural properties, in some good sense of the term
‘natural’. Usually naturalism is taken to rule out at
least the existence of supernatural entities or properties. And one
standard way that naturalists have defended their position has been to
reduce seemingly mysterious properties or objects which might appear
to be non-natural to more familiar purportedly natural
properties. That is, they have tried to show that these objects or
entities are nothing over and above some set of natural properties or
objects appropriately arranged. One strategy is to identify seemingly
suspect properties with natural properties, either via connecting
definitions or through synthetic identities. In this way the seemingly
suspect properties can be allowed into the naturalist’s ontology
without undermining the commitment to naturalism. Many naturalists
have taken this approach to moral properties (Firth 1952; Railton
1986; Boyd 1988).
Non-cognitivism is not a form of reductive
naturalism about the contents of moral judgments, beliefs and
sentences. It does not equate the property seemingly predicated in
such judgments with any natural property, precisely because it denies
that the (primary) function of such expressions is to predicate
properties.  But in another good sense non-cognitivists are
naturalists. They offer a reduction of the attitude of accepting a
moral judgment to a perfectly naturalistic sort of attitude such as
the attitude of approval or disapproval. And they do not postulate any
properties which cannot be reduced to natural properties. Thus another
motivation for accepting non-cognitivism has been naturalism. If
someone doubts the prospects for reducing moral properties to natural
properties (perhaps under the influence of the open question
argument), they need not concede that there are any extra-natural or
supernatural properties.  One can simply reinterpret even the moral
judgments one accepts as predicating no properties at all. Or, as
with the more sophisticated versions of non-cognitivism, one can allow
them to predicate natural properties and argue that the appearance
that they do something other than this is due to the additional
expressive component in their meaning. One’s naturalism will then not
commit one to giving up moral judgments or reducing moral properties
to natural properties (Ayer 1952, 106–7).
Many non-cognitivists have argued for their theories based on
motivational internalist premises. Motivational internalists believe
that there is some sort of conceptual or necessary connection between
moral judgments on the one hand and motivations to act on the other.
 The nature of the connection is a matter of some dispute and theorists have
suggested and refuted a variety of candidates (Hare 1952, 20; Brink 1989, 37ff.; Smith 1994, 60ff; Darwall 1997). Non-cognitivists have often supported their theory by arguing
from versions of judgment internalism, which postulate a necessary
connection between accepting a moral judgment on the one hand and
being motivated to act on it on the other (Stevenson 1937; Hare 1952; Blackburn 1998; Gibbard 1990). This sort of internalism is
controversial, so that leading non-cognitivists have had both to
defend judgment internalism and to argue that their favored theory
should be accepted as the best explanation of the sort of internalism
they attempt to vindicate.
You can find defenses of various versions of judgment internalism
which support somewhat different but still necessary connections
between accepting or uttering a moral judgment on the one hand and
being motivated on the other. One version makes the connection very
tight – if one accepts a judgment one is motivated to do what it
says we ought to do. Others are looser, requiring motivation only in
rational persons (Korsgaard 1986; Smith 1994, 61) or perhaps in normal
members of a community (Dreier 1990; Horgan & Timmons 1992; 164–5).
Depending on which version a theorist defends, different versions of
non-cognitivism can explain the necessity of the connection, although
not all versions can be easily explained using non-cognitivist
resources. The tightest connection which requires motivation in anyone
who accepts the judgment that some action is right is rather well
explained by a very simple version of emotivism on which a judgment
that some action is right conventionally expresses one’s approval of
that action. One can only sincerely use that expression when one has
the attitude just as one can only sincerely cheer for some team or
person if one has a positive attitude towards them. Sincere utterance
requires motivation, that’s part and parcel of this sort of emotivist
theory.
On the other hand, this easy explanation of the strong internalist
thesis has liabilities. Such strong internalism may be too strong to be
credible insofar as it rules out amoralists – those who accept moral
judgments without being at all motivated to do what they recommend.
Such people may be possible and even actual (Brink 1989, 46; Svavarsdóttir 1999). If so,
simple emotivism of the sort described is refuted because the sincerity
conditions for making the judgment require the motivation not present
in the amoralist. Examples such as the amoralist have led internalists
to posit more moderate, defeasible, but still necessary connections
between moral judgments and motivation (Korsgaard 1986; Dreier 1990;
Smith 1994). More complex versions of non-cognitivism can make the
connection with actual motivation looser and thereby withstand the
amoralist challenge. But not every more moderate internalist principle
will be easily explained by a corresponding non-cognitivist theory.
Some versions of moderate internalism require that rational people will
be motivated in accordance with their own moral judgments (Smith 1994,
61). It isn’t clear what version of non-cognitivism can take
advantage of this sort of defeasible connection. On any theory where
the acceptance of a moral judgment is constituted by the acceptance of
a non-cognitive attitude, it should be the case that those who
genuinely hold the judgment have the attitude. This should apply to
the irrational as well as the rational.
Other responses to the amoralist are available consistent with
non-cognitivism. One such response is not to accept a defeasible
version of internalism, but rather to claim that amoralists do not have
genuine moral beliefs. What an amoralist expresses when she makes a
moral claim that she is disinclined to honor involves using the moral
predicate in an “inverted commas sense” – a sense
which alludes to the value judgments of others without itself
expressing such a judgment (Hare 1952, 145–6). Many cognitivists have
not found this a persuasive characterization of all amoralists (Brink
1989, 46–7). Alternatively, non-cognitivists can point out that a
sentence can conventionally express an attitude even when uttered by
people who don’t have the requisite attitude. For example, one can
apologize without feeling sorry or actually caring about what is at
issue (Joyce 2002). But it is not so easy to see how to carry this over
to the treatment of accepting a moral judgment in the absence of
uttering a moral sentence. We would like there to be grounds to
attribute the belief or acceptance of a moral judgment to those who
are silent on some grounds, and it isn’t clear exactly what resources
are available to a non-cognitivist if it doesn’t involve being in some
attitudinal state. Even if one can sincerely apologize without having
any special feeling or attitude as one does so, it seems we would not
say of a person that they were sorry unless they had such an attitude.
Thus the analogy with apology only takes us so far.
Hare’s most famous argument for the action-guiding character of
moral judgments is the Missionaries and the Cannibals Argument. He
suggests an example in which our translation practices seem to indicate
that when we use moral words from our home language to translate words
and concepts from another language, what is most important to us is
that native users of the language or concepts generally use them to
guide choice and action (Hare 1952, 148–9). If this is right, it
establishes a connection of the following form: Necessarily the
acceptance of a moral judgment will normally incline society members
to do what is recommended by that judgment. This version will require
an intention to act or something similar in most people much of the
time, but it will not require such an intention from everybody all of
the time. The argument thus supports a version of moderate internalism.
And, according to Hare, people who utter general commands that are
directed at themselves will normally but not invariably act in
accordance with those commands (Hare 1952, 169). So this much of
prescriptivism fits with the sort of internalism that Hare’s arguments
support. But, insofar as Hare also suggests that accepting a command
directed at oneself requires an intention to act accordingly (Hare
1952, 20), he seems committed to a closer connection between moral
judgment and motivating states than the Missionaries and Cannibals
Argument vindicates.
Thus far we have been considering internalism as a reason to accept
non-cognitivism based on a sort of inference to the best explanation.
Insofar as non-cognitivism can explain the connection between normative
or moral judgments and motivation we have some reason to accept it.
But the explanations so far have relied on the positive part of
non-cognitivism – the part that connects the meanings of moral
terms to commendation or the expression of attitudes. The denial of
cognitivism so far has played no role. Since the expressivist or
prescriptivist component of non-cognitivist theories does not by itself
entail the denial of cognitivism, a cognitivist could take them on
board and explain a species of internalism just as non-cognitivists do
(Copp 2001).
There is, however, a popular non-cognitivist strategy for arguing
that they are uniquely placed to explain judgment internalism. This
strategy proceeds from the Humean idea that belief alone is incapable
of motivating action. The Humean Theory of Motivation, as it has come
to be known, postulates that motives must always be composed of desires
for some end, possibly along with some relevant means-ends belief (Hume
1888, 413; Smith 1987). The theory is supposed to rule out any state of
mind which both qualifies as a cognitive state and which would be
sufficient to motivate action by itself without supplementation from
some independent desire. If moral judgments necessarily motivate, even
in the absence of further desires, the theory seems to entail that they
cannot be genuine beliefs. They must be conative rather than cognitive
states, or at the very least be composites to which the non-cognitive
component is essential. Even if beliefs are also constituents of the
judgment, those beliefs will not be identical to it, since they can
persist in the absence of motivation while the moral judgments
necessitate motives (Blackburn 1998, 97–100).
This argument too can be resisted by cognitivists. It presupposes a
particularly strong version of internalism. If the nature of the
necessary connection between moral judgments and motives is of a
defeasible kind, it will be possible for someone to accept the
judgment while remaining unmotivated (Korsgaard 1986; Dreier 1990;
Smith 1994). And even a stronger version of judgment internalism might
be consistent with various subjectivist cognitivist theories,
especially those which relativize the truth of moral judgments to
individual agents. Such theories can make the truth conditions for the
judgments include the presence of certain attitudes in the speaker and
claim that speakers are highly accurate in tracking that part of their
truth conditions (Harman 1978; Dreier 1990.). Furthermore, despite its
lofty pedigree, the Humean Theory of Motivation is itself subject to
dispute (Bromwich 2010; Dancy 1996; Darwall 1983; Nagel 1970; McDowell
1981; Swartzer 2013, 2018; van Roojen 1995, 2002).
It is relatively common ground among moral theorists that moral properties
supervene on non-moral properties. Two items cannot differ in their
moral properties without differing in some non-moral property as well.
Or to put the point in terms more suited to the non-cognitivist, virtually all
agree that it is inappropriate to treat two items as morally
distinguishable without believing that they are also distinguishable in
some other way. If two actions are otherwise indistinguishable, labeling one as
good thereby commits one to labeling the other as good. 
Some non-cognitivists have argued that this uncontroversial datum
supports their theories against rival alternatives. Hare seems to have
introduced the term ‘supervenience’ to the philosophical
literature (Hare 1952, 145) and he suggested that his own theory,
universal prescriptivism, was uniquely placed to explain it. Insofar as
moral prescriptions were by their nature universal they would prescribe
or proscribe any action which was sufficiently similar to the action up
for evaluation. Thus Hare included supervenience as one of the
phenomena that any adequate metaethical theory should explain and he
counted it as a point in favor of his theory that it did so. But the
feature of his theory that did the explanatory work was not its
non-cognitivism – rather it was that it required the judgments
to be universal in the ways he specified. In fact, Hare himself
suggested that the supervenience of moral judgments on descriptive
features was part and parcel of these judgments having a secondary
descriptive meaning (Hare 1963, 7–22).
Other contemporary expressivist theories can use a similar approach to
explaining supervenience. Take a version of expressivism which says
that a moral judgment that such and such an action is wrong predicates
a nonmoral property of that action and at the same time expresses
disapproval of that property. This too will explain supervenience,
insofar as the speaker will be committed by that moral judgment to
disapproving of anything else with that property. Gibbard’s (1990)
world-norm pair apparatus in which the judgments express attitudes
towards norms that pick out actions by their natural features will
generate the same sort of result. (His 2003 update inherits this
feature as will be explained below.) Thus each of these theorists is
able to explain supervenience. Many cognitivist theories can also
explain supervenience. Reductive naturalists theories will also be
able to do the necessary explanatory work. If moral properties just
are natural properties, there should be no surprise if two items
cannot differ in their moral properties without also differing in
their natural properties(Dreier 1993). We might thus conclude that
supervenience does not favor either cognitivism or
non-cognitivism.
Simon Blackburn, however, argues that the phenomenon of
supervenience especially favors non-cognitivism. According to
Blackburn, it is not just the simple fact that moral properties
supervene on nonmoral properties that needs to be explained. Nor is it
just that appropriate moral predication must supervene on nonmoral
predication, to put the point in a way that does not beg the question
against non-cognitivism. It is rather to explain how honoring the
supervenience constraint can be a requirement of linguistic competence,
even while there is no analytic entailment from nonmoral claims to
moral claims. In other words, what needs explaining is how
supervenience can be a conceptual requirement even while there is no
analytic equivalence between moral properties and any non-moral
property. Blackburn thinks that we require such an explanation even if
there are metaphysically or nomically necessary connections between
moral and nonmoral terms or properties. For, he thinks, it is hard to
see how such nomic or metaphysical connections could justify the
analytic status of the supervenience thesis. People can be ignorant of
nomic necessities for it is an empirical matter what natural laws
govern our world. And they might be ignorant of certain metaphysical
necessities while knowing all the truths about the meanings of their
terms. So these necessities cannot justify the apriori and analytic
status that the supervenience requirement has. Or to put the same point
differently, a requirement to recognize some constraint that one should
recognize merely in virtue of having competence with the appropriate
terms cannot be explained by citing a fact which mere linguistic
competence does not put one in a position to recognize.
Blackburn’s favored explanation of the difference in status between
the two claims is roughly as follows: Moral judgments must supervene
on judgments regarding natural properties because it is the point of
moral judgments “to guide desires and choices among the natural
features of the world” (Blackburn 1993, 137). Since this sort of
explanation makes reference to our purposes in using moral terms rather
than to an independent realm of moral fact, Blackburn thinks it
supports a quasi-realist account rather than a straightforward realist
theory. He goes on to suggest that because the explanation relies on
facts about what beliefs can coexist with linguistic competence, there
is “no further inference to a metaphysical conclusion”
(Blackburn 1993, 143).
It should be obvious that Blackburn’s argument is not entirely
independent of the arguments for non-cognitivism that we have already
surveyed. The claim that there is no analytic entailment from any
natural property to any moral property is simply Hume’s Law – a
datum often supported through use of the open question argument. Thus
any reductive naturalist about moral properties will deny that premise
of the argument along with the validity of the open question argument.
(Dreier 1993) The thought that an explanation which involves the
practical purposes to which moral judgments are put must favor
non-cognitivism over cognitivism might well depend on accepting a
Humean division between inert beliefs and motivating
desires. Anti-Humeans just think that action-guiding purposes can be
served by beliefs concerning genuine properties (McDowell 1981;
Bromwich 2010; Swartzer 2013, 2018; van Roojen 1995). And cognitivists who agree that
the analytic status of supervenience needs explanation will not need
to deny that such explanations require claims about what the competent
can believe; on many understandings of analyticity, analytic claims
just are claims the linguistically competent must accept (Dreier
1993).
  Allan Gibbard (2003) has recently proposed a new argument for
the supervenience of normative judgements grounded in his fact-prac world apparatus as a
representational device for capturing normative judgments. Given that
account of the content of normative judgments it will turn out to be
necessary that those with moral attitudes are committed to normative
judgments which treat descriptively identical items the same for
purposes of planning.  This is because the plans themselves must be
formulated so as to individuate circumstances of action using
“recognitional” concepts.  Thus any two recognitionally identical
circumstances will yield the same plan of action. If Gibbard’s reasons
for thinking that plans must be formulated in recognitional terms are
cogent, this result would allow the theory to explain the relevant
phenomenon of supervenience. It does not, however, show that a
cognitivist theory might not do just as well on its own terms.
Theorists sometimes present the motivations for noncognitivism as rooted in the distinctive nature of moral disagreement.  For example, Gibbard (1990) begins with a puzzle about how (for instance) two people who both fully understand the prisoner’s dilemma scenario can still disagree over what it is rational for someone in such a situation to do.  It doesn’t seem that they are asking after the meaning of the word ‘rational’ yet there also doesn’t seem to be any descriptive fact over which they disagree.  And Stevenson (1944) begins his book by distinguishing the kind of disagreement in play when two people disagree in their ordinary beliefs from “disagreements in attitude” which involve conative clash.  Having made the distinction he suggests that moral disagreements involve both, and then uses that diagnosis to motivate his own noncognitivism as developed in the rest of the book. 
While each of these theorists highlights disagreement, it seems that
disagreement is only part of what generates the argument for
noncognitivism.  On one reading, Gibbard’s argument seems to tacitly
involve one of the assumptions that makes the Open Question Argument
seem compelling – that property identities are fully
transparent to competent thinkers.  Our confidence that the dispute
over what is rational in the prisoner’s dilemma dispute is not over a
descriptive fact seems rooted in the stipulation that all the
descriptive facts are clear to both thinkers.  But that stipulation
only settles the matter if we further assume that the identity of
rationality and the property picked out the the relevant description (if indeed there is such and identity) will
be transparent to the parties to the dispute.  So this reading of
Gibbard’s argument will have it stand or fall with the Open Question
Argument.
On a second reading of Gibbard’s argument it emphasizes the
distinctive practical or action-guiding nature of moral concepts.
What any purely descriptive account of the dispute leaves out is that
the parties disagree about what to do when in a prisoner’s dilemma.
This version of Gibbard’s point aligns with Stevenson’s –
there is a kind of practical disagreement that purely cognitive
analyses of moral arguments leave out.  If that is the point of
adverting to disagreement we are back with the motivating concerns
discussed in section 3.3.  So it may be best to just think of
disagreement as highlighting these prior ideas.
One strategy of objection to non-cognitivism is to find fault with the
main motivating ideas. We have already surveyed many of these in the
course of discussing the arguments for non-cognitivism. We now turn to
objections resting on the content of the theory rather than its
motivations. 
Non-cognitivism as it is often presented is incomplete. It gives us
an account of the meanings of moral expressions in free standing
predicative uses, and of the states of mind expressed when they are so
used. But the identical expressions can be used in more complex
sentences, sentences which embed such predications. Thus far we have
not considered what the expressions might mean when so used. We say
things such as the following:
It is true that lying is wrong.

 Lying is not wrong.

 I wonder whether lying is wrong.

 I believe that lying is wrong.

 Fred believes that lying is wrong.

 Is lying wrong?

 If lying is wrong he will be sure to do it.

 If lying is wrong then so is misleading truth-telling.
So, in addition to their analyses of unembedded predication,
non-cognitivists owe us an account of the meanings of more complex
sentences or judgments such as these. Of course there are some
desiderata we would like an adequate account to fulfill.  (1) One is
compositionality; the meaning of a complex sentence embedding a moral
claim should be a function of the meaning of its parts so as to
explain the ease with which speakers can understand novel normative
sentences. (2) Another is that it should preserve and explain the
logical relations between moral judgements and other judgements which
embed them, at least for central cases. And (3), we want the account
not to require implausible verdicts in attributing attitudes to people
who use the sentences. For example, if a non-cognitivist says the
meaning of ‘Lying is wrong’ is to express disfavor towards
lying, that does not yet provide a good explanation of the attitude
expressed by the very same words used in many embedded contexts. When
those words occur in the antecedent of a conditional, or when a person
says, ‘I wonder if lying is wrong’ they they are typically
not being used to express such disapproval. The point here is not that
these desiderata cannot be satisfied. Leading contemporary
non-cognitivists have all tried to provide accounts. As it turns out,
the task is difficult and generates much controversy.
Geach thought that the second and third desiderata would be especially
hard to accomplish simultaneously. Normally we believe that the status
of an argument as valid depends, at least in part, on the words not
shifting in meaning as we move from premise to premise. But the
simplest story of the meaning of moral terms, that they are devices
for expressing pro and con attitudes, seems then to require that they
mean something else when embedded in the antecedents of
conditionals. Consider the following example from Geach (1965,
463):
(P1) If tormenting the cat is bad, getting your little
brother to do it is bad

 (P2) Tormenting the cat is bad.

Ergo, getting your little brother to torment the cat is
bad.
The argument is valid. But if the entire meaning of ‘tormenting
the cat is bad’ in the second premise is well explained by
saying that it is suited for use in expressing disapproval of
tormenting the cat, then that meaning cannot be the same as the
meaning it has in the first premise (which one might accept even if
one approves of tormenting cats). This doesn’t show that the
expression is not being used emotively in the second premise; a
descriptivist can agree to that. But it does indicate that more will
need to be said to explain what is going on. For straightforwardly
descriptive arguments of the same form, the explanation of why the
argument is valid relies on the idea that the phrase in the antecedent
has a constant meaning that it represents both unembedded and
embedded. This is what Geach has called The Frege Point: “A
thought may have just the same content whether you assent to its truth
or not; a proposition may occur in discourse now asserted, now
unasserted, and yet be recognizably the same proposition” (Geach
1965, 449). As Geach saw it, we need to think of predication as
constant across embedded and unembedded occurrences of predicative
moral sentences so as not to commit a fallacy of equivocation in
making arguments. (It is due to Geach’s invocation of Frege in this
context that the embedding problem is often called the Frege-Geach
problem.  Searle 1962 independently raises a version of the same
objection and some credit W. D. Ross (1939, 34–38) with an earlier yet
statement of the objection.)
Semantic nonfactualism, the non-cognitivist commitment to the view
that moral judgments do not express propositions or predicate
properties, rules out one simple way of explaining matters. (But see
the discussion of hybrid theories below and in the supplementary
document
  Embedding Problem Response Strategies.)
If there is no proposition expressed in normal predicative uses of
moral expressions we eliminate one candidate for a constant element
that generates relations of implication with other expressions
embedding the same form of words. Arguably we need some other
candidate to provide the commonality. As Geach noted, it isn’t
plausibly the attitude expressed by the a free-standing sentence since
this feature doesn’t always survive embedding as we saw. Perhaps it
might be some predictable function of this attitude. That would serve
the goal of providing a compositional semantics for the terms in
question.
It isn’t just that semantic nonfactualism eliminates a candidate for
the constant element uniting embedded and unembedded uses of the same
normative expression. Such nonfactualism also serves to complicate the semantics,
because it eliminates a straightforward and easy way of explaining
how different beliefs can be inconsistent and how one belief can
commit one to another.  On a standard model for belief in general,
belief content is propositional and two beliefs are inconsistent when
their contents – the propositions they are directed at – are
inconsistent. And one belief logically commits one to another when the
content of the first entails the second. Those two ideas, plus an
account of what it is for contents – that is propositions – to be
inconsistent is all you need to explain the logical relations among
beliefs. It isn’t even really important to this general point that the
contents be propositions.  The point is that if you treat all beliefs
as inheriting their logical properties from the logical properties of
their contents in this way, you get a relatively simple story about
attitudinal inconsistency and commitment.
Once you say that ordinary beliefs and moral beliefs represent
different types of attitude towards their contents (if they have
contents at all) you can’t any longer tell the simple story.  This
remains so even if the theory can allow moral attitudes to have
contents in some sense and even if these contents are the same kind of
thing as the contents of ordinary beliefs. That’s because the
different relations to those contents (taking different attitudes
towards them) will need to be taken into account. The resulting theory
will need more complicated inconsistency and inference-licensing
rules.  I’ll use R. M. Hare’s (1952) logic of phrastics and neustics
to illustrate. Because it furthers my purpose in providing this
example I’m going to assume that sincere speech acts using moral terms
express attitudes and that these attitudes are what we attribute when
say they believe something about morality.  This may be more than Hare
was committed to himself.
Hare thought we could model the logic of speech acts by employing one
element that represented a possible way things might be (the phrastic)
and a second element that in effect gave instruction for how to
interpret the point of the representation (the neustic). For our
purposes here we can think of the first element as the contents of the
attitude expressed by the speech act and it would not distort the
theory too much to say they are propositions. On this way of
presenting things, several different speech acts expressing a number
of different attitudes will all involve the same phrastic.  The
differences between them will be represented by differences in the
neustic. The belief that P will be expressed by a speech act
which is represented by a neustic that reflects the status of
assertion and a phrastic that represents P. A question about
whether P is the case will be represented by the same phrastic,
but a different neustic – the one that represents the speech act
as a question rather than an assertion. The sentence which expresses
the thought that P is good (say) will also employ this same
phrastic. What distinguishes it from the first two is once again the
neustic which will reflect that this judgement is a universal
prescription to bring about P.  This means that we cannot
compute the logical compatibility or incompatibility of two judgements
by noting the compatibility or incompatibility of their phrastics
which we are treating as their contents. The assertion of P and
the attitude it expresses is different from the assertion
that P is good and the attitude it expresses.  Standard
semantic theory captures this by assigning these judgements different
contents.  Within the theory which treats the phrastic as the content,
the difference must be captured by assigning them different neustics
as a reflection that they’re supposed to be different kinds of speech
acts and to express different kinds of attitudes.  There isn’t yet a
problem with that.  But insofar as the judgements clearly have
different consistency conditions and involve different logical
commitments the resulting logic must now include principles that allow
differences in attitude type to matter to consistency and
inconsistency.
Hare was aware of the point. And if we were dealing with only a few
different types of attitude and corresponding expressive speech act it
should be no difficulty at all.  But once we introduce new sentences
joining the terms we have so far with logical connectives we are
likely to need to postulate yet further attitude types and to need
further principles to capture their logical properties. Such complex
sentences express attitudes that don’t reduce to the attitudes which
would be expressed by either conjunct (Schroeder 2008c, 49).  It would
thus be wrong to equate the attitude expressed with either
accepting the one attitude or accepting the other.  Relatedly, a
speech act “asserting” a disjunction with one normative
disjunct and one non-normative disjunct should be a new kind of speech
act.  It doesn’t universally prescribe anything, nor (on the theory
we’re working with) does it assert anything. And similarly for the
attitude expressed by that speech act. It will be a new type of state
of mind. So we’ll need a new sort of neustic to capture the kind of
speech act this is. And we’ll need additional rules to tell us about
the logic of speech act types represented by those neustics.
Schroeder (2008b, 2008c) dubs the distinction between
inconsistencies that involve one attitude-type directed towards
inconsistent contents, A-type inconsistencies and contrasts them with
B-type inconsistencies which postulate inconsistencies that stem from
incoherences between the attitude types in conjuction with their
contents. For example approving of a proposition and disapproving of
the same proposition is inconsistent (if it is) not in virtue of
directing one and the same attitude at inconsistent propositions, but
rather because two allegedly incompatible attitude-types are directed
at the same proposition.  And he notes that the clearest examples of
genuine inconsistency – beliefs in contradictories and intentions
to pursue inconsistent courses of action – seem to be A-type. He
further suggests that this would be a reason to prefer an A-type model
if non-cognitivists could construct one.
Non-cognitivists have developed various ingenious strategies for
constructing a theory that preserves the intuitive logical relations
between normative attitudes, non-normative attitudes and various mixed
attitudes, along with the sentences that express them. We will briefly
survey some main variants below.  For a more thorough survey see the
supplementary document
 Embedding Problem Response Strategies,
which can be read in place of the remainder of section 4.1.
Much of the recent innovation in developing non-cognitivist theories is
motivated by a desire to address the embedding problem.  In what
remains of this section we will briefly survey three differing approaches to
the task, which may also be combined. These are (1) developing a logic
of the sentences by explaining how that logic falls out of logical
relations among the attitudes they express, (2) exploiting minimalism
with regard to truth and related notions to provide an account of certain
locutions, and (3) allowing the descriptive semantic component
postulated by hybrid expressivist theories to explain the logical
relations among normative sentences and attitudes.
The idea behind a logic of attitudes is to change the normal order of
explanation to explain why normative sentences and attitudes bear the
logical relations that they do to other sentences and attitudes.  As
noted above, standard cognitivist accounts of a domain of discourse
will explain the consistency or inconsistency of states of mind by
citing the consistency or inconsistency of that state’s content, that
is what it represents. The belief that dogs howl is inconsistent with
the belief that dogs don’t howl because their contents (that dogs do
or don’t howl) are inconsistent with one another.  And similarly for
the sentences expressing those beliefs. Since noncognitivists don’t
postulate such representational contents they can’t deploy that
explanation.  But they might still be able to do justice to the fact
that normative judgments and sentences stand in logical relations to
one another if they can explain how the judgments themselves stand in
certain logical relations to to one another and then go on to explain
that the sentences are inconsistent just because they express
judgments that are inconsistent.
One such approach has been to suggest that the complex moral or
normative judgments are higher order attitudes aimed at the
judgements that would be expressed by the sentences which they
embed. These higher order attitudes might either be complex beliefs
(Blackburn 1971) or further non-cognitive judgments (Blackburn 1984)
expressed by the corresponding complex sentences. The hope is that
these judgments will have rational connections to the other judgments
that are likely to play a role in valid arguments. If all goes well, a
kind of pragmatic incoherence or irrationality will be involved when
someone accepts the judgments of a valid argument so analyzed while at
the same time rejecting the conclusion. Such a speaker would be in a
state similar to those uttering sentences of the sort that feature in
Moore’s paradox, such as ‘It is raining but I don’t believe that
it is.’
A simple example of this sort of approach comes from
Blackburn. Conditionals express higher order attitudes towards
accepting certain conjunctions of attitudes. “If lying is wrong,
telling your little brother to lie is wrong,” (when sincerely
uttered) expresses approval of making disapproval of getting one’s
brother to lie “follow upon” disapproval of lying.
Logical entailments involving moral judgments are explained as
follows: A constellation of attitudes which includes the attitudes
expressed by the conditional and by the seemingly assertive premises
but not those expressed by the conclusion is irrational, because it
goes against the purposes of moral discourse. Somewhat more
sophisticated ways of developing this strategy can be worked out but
the basic idea is well exemplified in this proposal. The logic of
attitudes strategy has met with much resistance on the part of
cognitivists. One line of thought is that these proposals conflate
genuine inconsistency with mere pragmatic incoherence (Hale 1986;
Schueler 1988; Brighouse 1990; Zangwill 1992; van Roojen 1996). And
non-cognitivists have responded with increasingly more sophisticated
proposals about the logic of attitudes, including several proposals
that do not employ higher order attitudes (Baker & Woods 2015; Blackburn 1988b; Gibbard 1990, 2003; Horgan and Timmons 2006b; Schroeder 2008a, 2008b,
2008c). These are discussed in more detail in the supplementary
document Embedding Problem
Response Strategies.
Some have suggested that minimalism or deflationism about truth or
truth aptness can allow non-cognitivists to bypass some of the above
debates. A very rough characterization of minimalism about truth will
hopefully suffice to explain. Minimalist theories are often presented
by contrast with theories of truth according to which truth is some
sort of “substantial” relation or property. For example
correspondence theories which claim that truth involves a real
relation between truth-bearers and reality are often cited as paradigm
cases of a substantial theory of truth. Most minimalists about truth
suggest that truth is not such a substantial property. Different
minimalists formulate their positive claims in somewhat different
ways. One version suggests that all you need to know to understand the
‘is true’ locution is that it is appropriate to use it in
conjunction with any indicative sentence which is itself appropriate
in the context of use. To call a sentence true is just to assert or
affirm the sentence (Ramsey 1927). There are other variants besides
this one. What we need to note is just that the suggestion helps
explain the meaning of normative sentences in one embedded context,
namely the one in which it is embedded along in an ‘is true’
construction.  Extensions of this minimalist strategy have attempted
to deploy minimal conceptions of other notions such as truth-aptness,
proposition (Horwich 1990, 18–22) and more besides to extend the
account to normative sentences seeming to employ these notions. Some
minimalists have even claimed that these ideas will help with
constructions that don’t obviously involve terms that get minimal
treatments. Discussion of those proposals is found in the
supplementary document
 Embedding Problem Response Strategies.
We noted earlier that non-cognitivists have long granted to evaluative
utterances and thoughts some secondary “descriptive
meaning” and that hybrid theorists have gone on to give that
descriptive content nearly co-equal status. One motivation for such
views is rooted in a strategy for solving the embedding problem:
Hybrid theorists hope to explain logical relations among moral
judgements by using the descriptive component of meaning to do much of
the work. Hybrid theorists have differed over whether the
non-cognitive component is expressed semantically by some component of
the sentence or pragmatically. Still hybrid theorists tend to agree
that the belief contents are part of the semantic values of the
sentences that express them (Jackson 1999, Barker 2000; Copp 2001;
Ridge 2006a, 2006b, 2014; Boisvert 2008; Copp 2009).  This would seem
to entail that these sentences are inconsistent with any judgement
that a sentence expressing only the belief component would be
inconsistent with. Hybrid theorists can thus use the alleged
descriptive component of the meanings of moral judgments to generate
most of the required logical relations that moral judgements bear to
other judgements, supplementing the basic account just enough to
account for complications introduced by the non-cognitive component of
relevant judgements.
Cognitivists have raised doubts about the adequacy of several of these
proposals due to the manner in which the descriptive meaning is
determined by many of these theories(van Roojen 2005; Schroeder 2009)
and how they can be used to communicate the content they allegedly
have (Schroeder 2009). Hybrid theorists have, of course, resisted
these complaints (Alm 2007, Ridge 2007; Eriksson 2010). and hybrid
theories that take epithets and slurs as their model aren’t subject to
the same objections (Copp 2001, 2009; Boisvert 2008). A more thorough
discussion of these issues can be found in the supplementary document
 Embedding Problem Response Strategies.
A well-known objection to non-cognitivism pays close attention to the
distinction between explaining logical relations on the one hand, and
explaining the use of moral judgments in reasoning on the other. Even
if the embedding problem is solved, so that we know what moral
utterances mean and what complex sentences embedding them also mean,
we might still think it irrational to reason in accordance with
ordinary logical principles applied to such judgments. The basic idea
here is that conditionals with moral antecedents and nonmoral
consequents should, together with the moral judgment in the
antecedent, license acceptance of the consequent. Thus someone who
accepts such conditionals would be rational to infer the consequent
upon coming to accept the antecedent. But if expressivism is correct,
accepting the antecedent just is holding a non-cognitive
attitude. Thus the licensed inference is really a form of wishful
thinking, for a non-cognitive change of attitude has licensed a change
of belief. For example, suppose someone accepts a judgment expressible
by saying, “If doing an action is wrong, George will do
it.” Normally we think that it would be rational for that person
to infer the belief that George will hit Sam upon coming to accept
that hitting Sam is wrong. But according to non-cognitivism, coming to
accept that hitting Sam is wrong is just a change of non-cognitive
attitude, and it can seem wrong to think that a change in such
attitudes can rationalize a change in belief. It looks like the
non-cognitivist is committed to approving of something analogous to
wishful thinking. That is they believe something, not because of a
change in their evidence but because of a change in attitude alone
(Dorr 2002). Some non-cognitivists will resist by suggesting that the
conditionals themselves are only rational to accept when one thinks
that changes of mind about the antecedent will depend on beliefs about
facts that are evidentially relevant to the conclusion (Budolfson 2011; Lenman 2003; Mabrito 2013;).
Enoch (2003) presents an alternative response which is criticized in (Schroeder 2011,
chapter 9).
Another issue to do with moral reasoning has to do with
uncertainty, insofar as we can be uncertain of our moral judgements
and this will affect how we reason with them. Michael Smith (2002)
argues that non-cognitivists have insufficient resources to distinguish
variations in moral certainty from differences in both the perceived
importance of what is being judged right or wrong and in the stability of
such judgements under the influence of new information. The gradable
dimensions of desire seem to be strength and stability. If strength is
used to represent importance and stability to capture stability of
judgements in the face of new information desires will lack a
dimension to represent the certainty with which the moral
judgement is held. Cognitivists, by contrast, can allow perceived importance to be captured
by a further belief – the belief that the matter is of a certain
importance. So they can let certainty just be a matter of credence and robustness in the face of new evidence be just what it seems. Non-cognitivists, as usual, won’t just concede the point.  Rather they will explain how their theories have the resources to make the needed distinctions. Lenman (2003c) is an early response in this vein. And Sepielli (2012) argues that any view with enough structure to solve Frege-Geach can also make the relevant distinctions. Still, there has not yet been a lot of work by non-cognitivists on credence as applied to moral judgements. Staffel (forthcoming) is thus an important development, offering an account of credence for non-cognitivists and responding to Smith’s argument along the way.
It has seemed obvious to many that non-cognitivism has much in common
with various relativist metaethical views. Though non-cognitivists may
deny that the truth values of moral judgments are relative to
speakers or agents because such judgments have no truth values,
non-cognitivists have often accepted something similar to relativism.
For non-cognitivists hold that it is semantically appropriate for a
person to utter a moral judgment whenever she wishes to express the
relevant non-cognitive attitude. And many noncognitivists also believe that
there are few rational constraints
on holding the relevant attitudes.  But then it is hard to see how
consistent moral judgments can be mistaken (Carnap 1937, 30; Hare
1963, 110). If relativism is problematic, it isn’t obvious that
non-cognitivism avoids the problems.
Still many non-cognitivists have argued that the view does not entail
or justify relativism. They claim that whether or not a moral judgment
is mistaken is itself a matter for moral theorizing. A speaker should
only call a moral judgment true if he or she accepts that judgment. A
speaker who expresses his or her acceptance of relativism in the
normal way might say something such as “They’re both saying
something true”. This might seem to be expressing commitment to
a very deferential moral theory – one according to which each
agent should just do what she believes is right. The non-cognitivists
who adopt this response argue that this natural interpretation of such
claims is correct.  What may seem to be a higher level metaethical
claim – that no consistent set of moral judgments is
mistaken – , is really just another moral judgment and hence one
which would be rejected by any moral judge with substantive moral
commitments (Blackburn 1998, 296 & 304; Timmons 1999; Horgan and
Timmons 2006c).

If this line of argument works it will allow
non-cognitivism to gain the allegiance of those who wish to deny
relativism while giving the motivations that lead to both it and
non-cognitivism their due.
Many think it a desideratum in metaethical theorizing that a candidate
theory be consistent with all or most normative theories actually
defended by serious normative ethical proponents. This idea has played
some role in the debate over the embedding problem insofar as some of
the proposals have been inconsistent with substantive positions taken
in the debate about the possibility of moral dilemmas (Gibbard 1990, 88; van Roojen
1996, 324). But even aside from that particular
issue, the desideratum can make a good deal of work for the
non-cognitivist because of the variety of kinds of moral theory and
the variety of differing but allegedly consistent judgments proposed
by theorists.
A simple example non-cognitivists need to be able to distinguish is
that judgements of rightness from judgements of goodness. According to
standard non-consequentialist theories, rightness and goodness can
come apart. In other words, a right action can be such as not to
produce the most goodness. Of course consequentialists deny this, and
non-consequentialists who use agent-relative values to specify the
rightness of actions can also deny that rightness and goodness come
apart in this way (Broome 1991, chapter 1). But even if they are
incorrect as a matter of substantive moral philosophy, it would seem
that competent moral judges can hold views of the sort described
without contradiction. Non-cognitivists would like to be able to give
an explanation of this consistent with their analyses.  Hence they
need a way of distinguishing the psychological states involved in
making the two sorts of judgement.
A salient strategy might be to claim that they attach to different
things – rightness to actions and goodness to states of affairs.
Still it seems that competent speakers can and do consistently judge
certain actions right but not good. A different strategy would be to distinguish
varieties of positive attitudes such that one sort involves a kind of
approval distinctive of rightness, whereas another involves a kind
distinctive of goodness. Yet another method would be to use something
like the two step approach Gibbard uses when he analyzes judgments of
rightness in terms of judging it rationally appropriate to feel guilt
and anger at certain actions. The approval could be all of the same
sort, but the objects of approval might be feelings of guilt in one
case and feelings of sorrow in the other, even when these feelings are
directed at one and the same object such as an action. No doubt there
are other available strategies so the problem does not by itself
constitute an objection. It can however complicate the task of
constructing an adequate non-cognitivist theory, especially since it
can impact the force of other objections as with the embedding problem
and moral dilemmas noted above.
A discussion of an additional issue raised in trying to account for
the variety of moral judgments with in a non-cognitivist framework is
found in the following supplementary document.
Supplement on
 Agent-Centered Teleology
Non-cognitivist success in handling the embedding problem and related
worries about reasoning would put non-cognitivists in a stronger
argumentative position. But  some commentators have suggested
that success at this endeavor might be a mixed blessing. Success may
indicate not that non-cognitivism is the right account of moral
judgments, but instead that the contrast with cognitivism is not stark
enough to make out a real distinction. Perhaps the distinction between
cognitivism and non-cognitivism collapses as non-cognitivist theories
are modified to capture all of the phenomena that cognitivists
challenge them to explain. While both its advocates and those who
argued strenuously against it would likely find themselves somewhat
disoriented if this were correct, it does seem that non-cognitivists
would be most upset by this result. For their position was defined by
denying key components of standard realist positions. If the
cognitivist/non-cognitivist dichotomy does not hold up, it would seem to
show either that the standard positions were not after all committed to
those components, or that those commitments could not be avoided by
plausible theories. 
Early versions of non-cognitivism did not seem subject to this sort
of objection, precisely because they did not worry much about
vindicating overall moral practice. Carnap (1937, 30–31) was happy to
convict ordinary moral thinking of error. But as non-cognitivists have
attempted to make sense of and explain most of the seemingly realist
features of moral practice, it might seem hard to sustain the claim of
a sharp contrast between factual language on the one hand and normative
language on the other. Several challenges based on roughly this idea
find a home in the recent literature.
One way to push the point is to challenge the non-cognitivist to
distinguish non-cognitivism from cognitivist relativism. A speaker
relativist is in a particularly good position to highlight the
suggestion that there is little difference between sophisticated
non-cognitivism and cognitivism. Both speaker relativists and
non-cognitivists can say that the appropriateness of a moral judgment
depends on a speaker’s attitudes. If the non-cognitivist suggests that
moral judgments predicate properties in a secondary way (perhaps to
handle embedding), the cognitivist relativist can agree. And the
theories can agree that the property predicated is determined as a
function of the speaker’s moral attitudes. Thus it becomes increasingly
difficult to say precisely what the difference between the views is
(Dreier 1999). 
Another line of argument with a similar upshot proceeds from
minimalism of the sort we have already canvassed. Deflationism about
truth or truth-aptness can be used to argue that there is no room for
non-cognitivism of the sort that succeeds in vindicating much of moral
practice. If there is no more robust understanding of truth conditions
than can be secured by minimalism about truth conditions, it will be
difficult for the quasi-realist non-cognitivist to make the
distinctive negative semantic claim – that
moral judgements are never true and not the kind of thing that can be
true or false. Simple moral sentences may be truth apt if all there is
to having truth conditions is to meet minimal requirements of having a
meaningful use, being in the right mood, and combining grammatically
with other sentences to yield more complex embeddings.  Furthermore,
if the minimalist strategy extends to beliefs, so that all there is to
being a belief is to be a state of mind expressible by such minimally
truth–apt sentences, moral judgements will be beliefs. The
quasi-realist program to vindicate as much of ordinary moral practice
might thus endanger non-cognitivism when carried to this
extreme. Success would leave us with no way to distinguish plausible
non-cognitivism from cognitivism.
More concretely, some semantic theorists have proposed that all that
is needed to have minimal truth conditions is for a set of judgments
to satisfy two constraints: (1) Sentences composed of the relevant
expressions must exhibit the syntactic surface features of
paradigmatic truth-apt sentences such as those used to express ordinary assertions, and they must
embed grammatically in more complex sentences such as conditionals,
propositional attitude ascriptions, and so on. (2) Use of these
expressions must exhibit a certain amount of discipline so that there
are clearly appropriate and inappropriate conditions for using them in
sentences of the form noted in the first condition (Boghossian 1990,
Wright 1993; Divers and Miller 1994). Normative discourse seems to
meet both of these constraints relatively straightforwardly, and this
may mean that moral sentences are truth-apt and that some of them are
true (Divers and Miller 1994).
Early critics of the collapse argument resisted on the basis of an
alleged constitutive connection between truth-aptness and genuinely
cognitive states. Such theorists regard it as a platitude about
indicative sentences that they are conventionally apt for making
assertions and that assertions express beliefs. If belief-expression
is one of the criteria for truth-aptness, non-cognitivists will be in
a position to use psychological non-cognitivism as a reason to deny
that moral judgments are genuinely representational even when they
meet minimalist requirements (Jackson, Oppy, Smith 1994). So-called
minimal truth conditions can remain part of the quasi-realist program
so long as this is compatible with denying that moral judgements
express beliefs.
Partly in  response to this move, minimalist defenders of the collapse argument have
responded by moving to the notion of minimal belief.  They can say that
a state of mind is a belief and hence cognitive if and only if it is
one expressed by a sentence with truth conditions.  Since minimalism
secures minimal truth conditions, indicative moral sentences have
truth conditions and the states they express are beliefs. If the
argument works, quasi-realist non-cognitivism would undermine its own
right to employ both of the negative constitutive claims distinctive
of non-cognitivism.
Minimalist non-cognitivists have regrouped in various ways.  One way
is to resist the extension of the minimalist strategy to
belief (Sinclair 2007). Another is to distinguish minimal and robust
notions of belief and representation. Minimal beliefs would need only
to be states of mind expressed in assertions by indicative sentences,
while robust beliefs would meet some stronger requirement of
representationality (Blackburn 2006).  Non-cognitivism would then be committed to the
view that moral judgements did not express robust belief (Sinclair
2006; McDonald 2012). The hope would be to contrast the entire
minimalist package with robust truth, robust truth-conditionality, and
robust belief. Such quasi-realist minimalists would be trying to find
truth conditions which are (1) sufficient to make sense of using
sentences having such truth-conditions in all of the ways that we use
paradigmatically truth-apt sentences, and (2) which still fall short
of robust representational truth conditions. 
One might be a bit worried about the dialectic.  If there are
minimal and non-minimal readings of all the distinctive claims that can
be used to distinguish cognitivism from non-cognitivism, we may lose
are grip on the distinction between the positions (Dreier, 2004b).
It is in any case controversial whether the minimalist proposal is
viable, either for truth conditionality or for belief, let alone for
further extensions beyond these (Dreier 2006; Dunaway 2010). 
One final sort of worry about the distinctiveness of non-cognitivism
is worthy of mention. This worry is that if too many domains of
discourse are such that they require non-cognitive analysis, the
contrast between cognitive and non-cognitive domains on which the view
depends will be hard to sustain. Blackburn, for example, suggests
quasi-realist approaches not just to moral discourse, but also to
modality, causation and probability. One may wonder what he means to
deny about these domains that is not also applicable to the rest of
our seemingly contentful judgments (Rosen 1998).  This kind of
collapse is in danger of assimilating the putatively cognitive and the
putatively non-cognitive from the other 
direction – by making the former look more like the
latter, rather than the other way around as with the worries about
minimalism. Even Blackburn himself on occasion expresses worries about
this problem (Blackburn 1993, 34), but more commonly he and other
non-cognitivists resist the worry by pointing to other domains of
discourse which are not amenable to non-cognitivist analysis. 
A short discussion of a still different collapse argument employed
against noncognitivism by Frank Jackson and Philip Pettit, one which
has generated quite a bit of literature, can be found in the following
supplementary document.
Supplement on
 Assertion Conditions and Truth-Conditionality
Non-cognitivism first came on the scene as a rather starkly drawn
alternative to prevailing cognitivist and realist construals of moral
discourse. As it developed to enable it to explain features of moral
discourse relied on by its critics, the view became more subtle and
presented a less stark contrast with realist positions. The main
negative claims were often somewhat moderated. For example, the claim
that moral judgments had no descriptive meaning evolved into a claim
that any such meanings were secondary. The claim that moral judgments
could not be true or false became the claim that they could be true or
false only in a minimal or deflationary sense. Not all of the shifts
have been embraced by all non-cognitivists, but it is fair to say that
current versions are more complex and subtle than the theories from
which they descend. As a result the arguments for and against the views
have gotten rather intricate and even technical. That trend is likely
to continue for at least a while longer as ideas from other areas of
philosophy are employed to further hone the objections and fill out the
responses to them. 