Because of its variable meanings, a
definition of ‘mystical experience’ must be partly
stipulative. Two, related, senses of ‘mystical experience’
will be presented, one a wide definition reflecting a more general
usage, and the second a narrow definition suiting more specialized
treatments of mysticism in philosophy.
In the wide sense, let us say that a ‘mystical
experience,’ is:
We can further define the terms used in the definition, as
follows:
The inclusion of ‘purportedly’ is to allow the
definition to be accepted without acknowledging that mystics ever
really do experience realities or states of affairs in the way
described.
A ‘super sense-perceptual experience’ includes
perception-like content of a kind not appropriate to sense perception,
somatosensory modalities (including the means for sensing pain and body
temperature, and internally sensing body, limb, organ, and visceral
positions and states), or standard introspection. Some mystics have
referred to a “spiritual” sense, corresponding to the
perceptual senses, appropriate to a non-physical realm. A super
sense-perceptual mode of experience may accompany sense perception (see
on “extrovertive” experience, Section 2.1). For example, a
person can have a super sense-perceptual experience while watching a
setting sun. The inclusion of the supersensory mode is what makes the
experience mystical.
A ‘sub sense-perceptual experience’ is either devoid of
phenomenological content altogether, or nearly so (see the notion of
“pure conscious events,” in Sections 5 and 6), or consists
of phenomenological content appropriate to sense perception, but
lacking in the conceptualization typical of attentive sense perception
(see below on “unconstructed experiences”).
‘Acquaintance’ of realities means the subject is
aware (putatively) of the presence of (one or more)
realities.
‘States of affairs’ includes, for example, the
impermanence of all reality and that God is the ground of the self.
‘Acquaintance’ of states of affairs can come in two forms.
In one, a subject is aware of the presence of (one or more) realities
on which (one or more) states of affairs supervene. An example would be
an awareness of God (a reality) affording an awareness of one’s utter
dependence on God (a state of affairs). In its second form,
‘acquaintance’ of states of affairs involves an insight
directly, without supervening on acquaintance, of any reality. An
example would be coming to “see” the impermanence of all
that exists following an experience that eliminates all
phenomenological content.
It is not necessary that at the
time of the experience the subject could tell herself, as it were,
what realities or state of affairs were then being disclosed to her.
The realization may arise following the experience. 
Mystical experience is alleged to be “noetic,” involving
knowledge of what a subject apprehends (see James, 1958). To what
extent this knowledge is alleged to come from the experience alone will
be discussed below (Section 8.5).
Generally, philosophers have excluded purely para-sensual experiences
such as religious visions and auditions from the mystical. The
definition also excludes anomalous experiences such as out of body
experiences, telepathy, precognition, and clairvoyance. All of these
are acquaintance with objects or qualities of a kind accessible to the
senses or to ordinary introspection, such as human thoughts and future
physical events. (A degree of vagueness enters the definition of
mystical experience here because of what is to count as a
“kind” of thing accessible to non-mystical
experience.)
In the wide sense, mystical experiences occur within the religious
traditions of at least Judaism, Christianity, Islam, Indian religions,
Buddhism, and primal religions. In some of these traditions, the
experiences are allegedly of a supersensory reality, such as God or
Brahman (or, in a few Buddhist traditions, Nirvana, as a reality (See
Takeuchi, 1983, pp. 8–9). Many Buddhist traditions, however, make no
claim for an experience of a supersensory reality. Some cultivate
instead an experience of “unconstructed awareness,”
involving an awareness of the world on an absolutely or relatively
non-conceptual level (see Griffiths, 1993). The unconstructed
experience is thought to grant insight, such as into the impermanent
nature of all things. Buddhists refer to an experience of tathata or
the “thisness” of reality, accessible only by the absence
of ordinary sense-perceptual cognition. These Buddhist experiences are
sub sense-perceptual, and mystical, since thisness is claimed to be
inaccessible to ordinary sense perception and the awareness of it to
provide knowledge about the true nature of reality. Some Buddhist
experiences, however, including some Zen experiences, would not count
as mystical by our definition, involving no alleged acquaintance with
either a reality or a state of affairs (see Suzuki, 1970).
In the narrow sense, more common among philosophers, ‘mystical
experience’ refers to a sub-class of mystical experience in the
wide sense. Specifically it refers to:
A unitive experience involves a phenomenological de-emphasis,
blurring, or eradication of multiplicity, where the cognitive
significance of the experience is deemed to lie precisely in that
phenomenological feature. Examples are experiences of the oneness of
all of nature, “union” with God, as in Christian
mysticism, (see section 2.2.1), the Hindu experience that Atman is
Brahman (that the self/soul is identical with the eternal, absolute
being), the Buddhist unconstructed experience, devoid of all
multiplicity. (On “unitive” experiences see Smart 1958 and
1978, and Wainwright, 1981, Chapter One.) Excluded from the narrow
definition, though present in the wide one, are, for example, a
dualistic experience of God, where subject and God remain strictly
distinct, without any blurring of the boundaries, a Jewish kabbalistic
experience of a single supernal sefirah, and shamanistic
experiences of spirits. These are not mystical in the narrow sense,
because not unitive experiences in any degree.
Hereafter, ‘mystical experience’ will be used in the
narrow sense, unless otherwise noted. Correspondingly, the term
‘mysticism’ will refer to practices, discourse, texts,
institutions, and traditions associated with unitive experiences.
Care should be taken not to confuse mystical experience with
“religious experience.” The latter refers to any experience
having content or significance appropriate to a religious context or
that has a “religious” flavor. This would include much of
mystical experience, but also religious visions and auditions,
non-mystical Zen experiences, and various religious feelings, such as
religious awe and sublimity. Also included is what Friedrich
Schleiermacher identified as the fundamental religious experience: the
feeling of “absolute dependence” (Schleiermacher,
1963). 
We can call a numinous (from “numen” meaning
divine or spirit) experience, a non-unitive experience.Your garden-variety sense of
God’s (mere) “presence” would count as a numinous
experience. Numinous experiences contrast with religious experiences
that involve, for example, feelings but no alleged acquaintance with
non-sensory realities or states of affairs.
Rudolf Otto reserved the term “numinous experience” for
experiences allegedly of a reality perceived of as “wholly
other” than the subject, producing a reaction of dread and
fascination before an incomprehensible mystery (Otto, 1957). In the
sense used here, Otto’s “numinous” experience is but one
kind of numinous experience.
Mystical and religious experiences can be classified in various
ways, in addition to the built-in difference between mystical super
sense-perceptual and sub sense-perceptual experiences. This section
notes some common classifications.
When any experience includes sense-perceptual, somatosensory, or
introspective content, we may say it is an extrovertive
experience. There are, then, mystical extrovertive experiences, as in
one’s mystical consciousness of the unity of nature overlaid
onto one’s sense perception of the world, as well as non-unitive
numinous extrovertive experiences, as when experiencing God’s
presence when gazing at a snowflake. When not extrovertive, we may say
an experience is introvertive. An experience of
“nothingness” or “emptiness,” in some mystical
traditions, and an experience of God resulting from a disengagement
from sense experience, would be examples of introvertive experiences
(For further elaboration see section 4).
A favorite distinction of Western philosophers is between dualistic
and monistic experiences. A dualistic experience maintains a
distinction, however tenuous, between the subject and what is
disclosed. Thus, theistic experiences are ordinarily dualistic,
retaining, at some level, a distinction between God and the
mystic. Monistic experiences are the extreme of unitive experiences,
in that they dissolve all duality. They are either experiences of the
absolute ontological oneness of everything, so that in a deep sense
the distinctions are illusory, or are pure conscious experiences.
“Union” with God signifies a rich family of experiences
rather than a single experience. “Union” involves a
falling away of the separation between a person and God, short of
identity.  Christian mystics have variously described union with the
Divine. This includes Bernard of Clairvaux (1090–1153)
describing unification as “mutuality of love,” Henry Suso
(1295–1366) likening union with God to a drop of water falling
into wine, taking on the taste and color of the wine (Suso, 1953,
p. 185), and Jan van Ruysbroeck (1293–1381) describing union as
“iron within the fire and the fire within the iron” (see
Pike, 1992, Chapter 2, and Mommaers, 2009). Generally, medieval
Christian mysticism had at least three stages, variously described, in
the union-consciousness: quiet, essentially a prelude to the union
with God, full union, and rapture, the latter involving a feeling of
being “carried away” beyond oneself (see Pike, 1992,
Chapter 1).
Theistic mystics sometimes speak as though they have a consciousness
of being fully absorbed into or even identical with God. Examples are
the Islamic Sufi mystic al-Husayn al-Hallaj (858–922) proclaiming,
“I am God” (see Schimmel, 1975, Chapter 2), and the Jewish
kabbalist, Isaac of Acre (b. 1291?), who wrote of the soul being
absorbed into God “as a jug of water into a running well.”
(see Idel, 1988, p. 67.) Also, the Hasidic master, R. Shneur Zalman of
Liady (1745–1812) wrote of a person as a drop of water in the
ocean of the Infinite with an illusory sense of individual
“dropness.” And, the (heretical) Christian mystic, Meister
Eckhart (c. 1260–1327/8) made what looked very much like
identity-declarations (see McGinn, 2001 and Smith, 1997). It is still
controversial, however, as to when such declarations are to be taken
as identity assertions, with pantheistic or acosmic intentions, and
when they are perhaps hyperbolic variations on descriptions of
union-type experiences.
In theurgic (from the Greek theourgia) mysticism a mystic
intends to activate the divine in the mystical experience. (See Shaw,
1995, p. 4.) Thus, a Christian mystic who intends to activate
God’s grace, is involved in theurgy. Nonetheless, while
typically theistic mystics claim experience of God’s activity,
many do not claim this to result from their own endeavors, while
others refrain from declaring the activation of the divine as the
purpose of their mystical life. So they are not involved in theurgic
activity. The Jewish Kabbalah is the most prominent form of theurgic
mysticism. In it, the mystic aims to bring about a modification in the
inner life of the Godhead (see Idel, 1988).
Apophatic mysticism (from the Greek,
“apophasis,” meaning negation or “saying
away”) is contrasted with kataphatic mysticism (from
the Greek, “kataphasis,” meaning affirmation or
“saying with”). Apophatic mysticism, put roughly, claims
that nothing positive can be said about objects or states of affairs
which the mystic experiences.  These are absolutely indescribable, or
“ineffable.” The next section deals with the topic of
ineffability. So, apophatic theology typically will be negative
theology, that we can say only what God is not.  Kataphatic mysticism
does make claims about what the mystic experiences. Pertaining to God,
this means that God can be described by positive terms. Analytic
philosophers of mysticism have been working largely with kataphatic
conceptions. (But for an exception see Alston 2005 in the Other
Internet Resources.) 
An example of apophatic mysticism is in the classical Tao text,
Tao Te Ching, attributed to Lao Tsu (6th century
B.C.E.), which begins with the words, “Even the finest teaching
is not the Tao itself. Even the finest name is insufficient to define
it. Without words, the Tao can be experienced, and without a name, it
can be known.” (Lao Tsu, 1984). Applied to God, apophatic
mysticism maintains that the experience of God can be described only
by saying what God is not. Pertaining to God, kataphatic mysticism
says that God can be described by positive terms. The two need not be
exclusive but represent two stages, respectively, in mystical
contemplation.
William James, (James, 1958, 292–93) deemed
“ineffability” or indescribability an essential mark of the
mystical. It is not always clear, however, whether it is the experience
or its alleged object, or both, that are to be ineffable. A logical
problem with ineffability was noted long ago by Augustine, “God
should not be said to be ineffable, for when this is said something is
said. And a contradiction in terms is created, since if that is
ineffable which cannot be spoken, then that is not ineffable which is
called ineffable” (Augustine, 1958, pp. 10–11). To say that
X is ineffable is to say something about X,
which contravenes ineffability. This problem has been raised anew by
Alvin Plantinga (Plantinga, 1980, 23–25) and Keith Yandell 
(Yandell, 1975).
Several responses to this problem are possible for the mystic. One is
to avoid speech altogether and remain silent about what is revealed in
experience. Mystics, however, have not been very good at this. A
second possibility is to say that an ineffable object has no
phenomenological properties but has non-phenomenological properties
(Jones, 2016). A third is to distinguish first-order from second-order
attributions, where “ineffability” is a second-order term
solely about first-order terms. To say, then, that something is
“ineffable” would be to assert that it could not be
described by any first-order terms, “ineffability” not
being one of them. A third possibility is to say that
“X is ineffable” is really a statement about the
term ‘X,’ saying about it that it fails
to refer to any describable entity. A fourth possibility lies in the
ongoing negation of whatever is said about X, ad
infinitum, in an infinite
“unsaying” or taking back of what has been said (See Sells,
1994, Chapter 1).
An example of unsaying can be found in the endless negations in some
Madyamika and Zen Buddhist meditative consciousness. Since the
truth about reality – as it is – lies outside of our
conceptualizations of it, we cannot say that truth, only
experience it. Hence, when we say, “Reality is not
reality,” that is, that reality as it is differs from what we
take it to be conceptually, we must also say that “Reality is not
- not reality.” Otherwise we will have been caught in
conceptualizing about reality (saying about it that it is not what our
conceptualizations say it is). We must then immediately negate the
latter saying by saying that reality is neither not-reality nor not
not-reality. And so on. (See Thich Nhat Hanh, 1994, Chapter 5.) A
second, theistic, example of this approach is in the negative theology
of (Pseudo) Dionysius (c.500) for whom God was “a most
incomprehensible absolute mystery,” about which we can only say
what it is not. Such continuing negation points beyond discourse to
experience.
A fifth possibility is William Alston’s observation that when mystics talk about ‘indescribability’ they refer to the
difficulty of describing in literal terms, rather than by metaphor,
analogy, and symbols.(Alston, 1991)
The sixth solution to ineffability would come from Richard Gale (1960)
and Ninian Smart (1958, 69) each of whom have argued that
‘ineffability’ is (merely) an honorific title marking the
value and intensity of an experience for a mystic. Similarly, Wayne
Proudfoot argues that the ineffability-claim is not describing but
prescribing that no language system shall be applicable to it, and so
serves to create and maintain a protective sense of mystery
(Proudfoot, 1985, 125–27). However, experiences of things
ineffable exist in art and music (see Gallope 2017), as well as in
everyday experience. Think of the impossibility of describing the
taste of coffee to someone who has never tasted it. (King, 1988). This
diminishes the argument that ascriptions of ineffability are aimed at
protective strategies.
 
Some philosophers think that a stress on ineffability signifies an
attempt to consign mysticism to the “irrational,” thus
excluding it from more sensible human pursuits. Grace Jantzen has
advanced a critique of the emphasis on ineffability as an attempt to
remove mystical experiences from the realm of rational discourse,
placing them instead into the realm of the emotions (Jantzen, 1995, p.
344). Others have staunchly defended the “rationality” of
mysticism against charges of irrationalism (Staal, 1975). The issue of
ineffability is thus tied into questions of the epistemic value of
mystical experiences, to be discussed below in section 8. 
Scholars of mysticism sometimes stress the “paradoxical”
nature of mystical experiences. We can discern four relevant senses of
‘paradoxical’: (1) According to its etymology,
‘paradoxical’ refers to what is surprising or
“contrary to expectation.” (2) Language can be
intentionally ‘paradoxical’ in using a logically improper
form of words to convey what is not intended to be logically absurd.
This may be for rhetorical effect or because of difficulty in
conveying a thought without resort to linguistic tricks. (3) As in
philosophy, a ‘paradox’ can involve an unexpected logical
contradiction, as in the “Liar Paradox.” (4) Walter Stace
sees paradoxality as a universal feature of mystical experiences,
equating ‘paradoxality’ with an intended logical
contradiction (Stace, 1961, 212. See section 4 below).
Insofar as mystical experience is out of the ordinary, and the unitive
quality strange (for ordinary folk, at least), reports of them may
very well be surprising or contrary to expectation. (Mystics, though,
might in time find their experiences to be expected.) Hence, they may(
be paradoxical in sense (1). Reports of mystical experiences may be
paradoxical also in sense (2), because at times mystical language does
assume logically offensive forms, when actual absurdity may not be
intended. However, paradox in this sense occurs less frequently in
first-hand reports of mystical experiences and more in second-order
mystical systems of thought (Moore, 1973, and Staal, 1975).
There is no good reason for thinking that reports of mystical
experience must imply logical absurdity, as in (3) or (4). As we have seen above, while
there do occur forms of expression that are contradictory, the
contradiction is often removed by the device of “unsaying”
or canceling out, which propels the discourse into a non-discursive
realm.
The attempt to designate mystical experiences as paradoxical in
senses (3) and (4) may result from being too eager to take logically
deviant language at its most literal. For example, Zen Buddhism speaks
of reaching a state of mind beyond both thought and
“no-thought.” However, rather than referring to a middle
state, neither thought nor no-thought, often the intention is to point
to a state of mind in which striving is absent, and labeling of mental
activities ceases. The mind of “no effort” strives neither
for thought nor for no-thought. No logical absurdity infects this
description. In a different direction, Frits Staal has argued that
paradoxical mystical language has been used systematically to make
logically respectable claims (Staal, 1975). While mystics use much
literal language in describing their experiences (see Alston, 1992,
80–102), the literality need not extend to paradox in senses (3) or
(4).
 Philosophers have differed over the nature of mystical experiences
regarding what extent mystical content is putatively
“given” to the mystic or rather constructed by the mystic
in accordance with the social-mystical tradition in which he or she is
embedded. The next three sections present this debate among
philosophers of mysticism. 
Various philosophers, sometimes dubbed “perennialists,”
have attempted to identify common mystical experiences across cultures
and traditions (see Huxley, 1945 and Schuon, 1975). Such a position has
occurred in psychological studies as well (Taves and Asprem, 2017).
Walter Stace’s perennialism has generated much discussion
(Stace, 1960, 1961). Stace proposes two mystical experiences found
“in all cultures, religions, periods, and social
conditions.” He identifies a universal extrovertive
experience that “looks outward through the senses” to
apprehend the One or the Oneness of all in or through the multiplicity
of the world, apprehending the “One” as an inner life or
consciousness of the world. The Oneness is experienced as a sacred
objective reality, in a feeling of “bliss” and
“joy.” Stace’s universal extrovertive experience (or
the experienced reality, it is not always clear which) is paradoxical,
and possibly ineffable (Stace, 1961, 79).
Secondly, Stace identifies a universal, “monistic,”
introvertive experience that “looks inward into the
mind,” to achieve “pure consciousness,” that is, an
experience phenomenologically not of anything (Stace, 1961, 86). Stace
calls this a “unitary consciousness.” Some have called
this a “Pure Conscious Event” or “PCE”
(Forman, 1993b and 1999. See section 6 below). A PCE consists of an
“emptying out” by a subject of all experiential content
and phenomenological qualities, including concepts, thoughts, sense
perception, and sensuous images. The subject allegedly remains with
“pure” wakeful consciousness. Like his extrovertive
experience, Stace’s universal introvertive experience involves a
blissful sense of sacred objectivity, and is paradoxical and possibly
ineffable. Stace considers the universal introvertive experience to be
a ripening of mystical awareness beyond the halfway house of the
universal extrovertive consciousness. Jones (2018) argues for
extrovertive experiences not being merely stunted introvertive ones,
but full experiences in their own right. Marshall (2005) has developed
a detailed phenomenology of extrovertive experiences. 
Stace assimilates theistic mystical experiences to his universal
introvertive experience by distinguishing between experience and
interpretation. The introvertive experience, says Stace, is the same
across cultures. Only interpretations differ. Theistic mystics are
pressured by their surroundings, says Stace, to put a theistic
interpretation on their introvertive experiences. Ninian Smart also
maintained the universality of the monistic experience, arguing that
descriptions of theistic mystical experiences reflect an interpretive
overlay upon an experiential base common to both theistic and
non-theistic experiences (Smart, 1965).  The psychologist, Ralph
Hood, has argued extensively that psychometric studies provide
“strong empirical support” for “the common core
thesis” of mystical experience (Hood, 2006).
Stace has been strongly criticized for simplifying or distorting
mystical reports (For a summary, see Moore, 1973,) and for failing to
properly describe the difference between extrovertive and introvertive
experiences (for example, Almond, 1982, chapter 4). For example, Pike
criticizes the Stace-Smart position because in Christian mysticism
union with God is divided into discernible phases, which find no basis
in Christian theology. These phases, therefore, plausibly reflect
experience and not forced interpretation (Pike, 1992, Chapter 5).
In contrast to Stace, R. C. Zaehner identified three types of
mystical consciousness: (1) a “panenhenic” extrovertive
experience, an experience of oneness of nature, one’s self included,
(2) a “monistic” experience of an undifferentiated unity
transcending space and time, and (3) theistic experience where there is
a duality between subject and the object of the experience (Zaehner,
1961). Zaehner thought that theistic experience was an advance over the
monistic, since the latter, he thought, expressed a self-centered
interest of the mystic to be included in the ultimate. 
William Wainwright has described four modes of mystical extrovertive
experience: a sense of the unity of nature, of nature as a living
presence, a sense that everything transpiring in nature is in an
eternal present, and the Buddhist unconstructed experience. Wainwright,
like Zaehner, distinguishes two mystical introvertive experiences, one
of pure empty consciousness, and theistic experience marked by an
awareness of an object in “mutual love” (Wainwright, 1981,
Chapter 1).
Much philosophical disagreement has taken place over questions
concerning PCEs, allegedly an “emptying out” by a subject
of all experiential content and phenomenological qualities, including
concepts, thoughts, sense perception, and sensuous images. Do such
events ever really occur, and if they do, how significant are they in
mysticism? Defenders of PCEs depend on alleged references to pure
consciousness in the mystical literature. One striking example is the
Buddhist philosopher, Paramaartha (499–569), who stated explicitly that
all of our cognitions were “conditioned” by our concepts
save for the non-sensory “unconditioned” Buddhist
experience of emptiness (see Forman, 1989). Another example cited is
from the writings of the Christian mystic Meister Eckhart that describe
a “forgetting” that abandons concepts and sense experience
to sink into a mystical “oblivion” (Forman, 1993a). In
addition, Robert Forman has testified to a PCE he himself endured,
describing it as an empty consciousness from which one “need not
awake” (Forman, 1993b).
Here is a sampling of important criticisms of the defense of Pure
Conscious Events (PCEs): (1) Reports of PCEs found in the literature
may not be decisive in establishing the occurrence of PCEs. We should
suspect the phenomenon of “idealization” in these reports.
Idealization occurs when an ideal goal is presented as achieved, when
it wasn’t. Whether or not pure consciousness ever occurs, we should
suspect it might be presented as though it did because strived for
by the mystic. (2) The PCE defenders exaggerate the centrality of
complete emptying out in mysticism. It is questionable if it is central
in the mainstream of Christian mysticism, for example, where typically
the mystic forgets all else only to better contemplate God. Typical is
the Christian mystic Jan Ruysbroeck who wrote that emptying oneself is
but a prelude to the mystical life of contemplating God through an act
of Divine grace (Zaehner, 1961, 170–71). Likewise, the “shedding
of corporeality” in early Hasidism was meant, for example, to
enable the mystic to contemplate the unified supernal structure of the
divine sefirot. And the Zen master, Dogen (1200–1253), wrote
about “wrongly thinking that the nature of things will appear
when the whole world we perceive is obliterated” (Dogen, 1986,
39). (3) Accordingly, reports of “emptying out” and
“forgetting” may refer only to an emptying of ordinary
experiential content, making room for an extraordinary content. This
accords well with the conception of ayin (nothingness) in
Jewish mysticism, which is positively saturated with divine reality
(Matt, 1997). Some have claimed that even for Meister Eckhart
“emptying out” is having one’s mind on no object other than
God, rather than an absolute emptiness of content (Matt, 1997). (4)
The Islamic Sufi fana experience (“passing away”)
is sometimes described as an unconscious state, and the Sufi might
become purely unconscious upon finding God, in wajd (Schimmel,
1975, 178–79). Therefore, an emptying out might sometimes simply be
pure unconsciousness. (5) Even if a subject honestly reports
on a pure conscious episode, there may have been conceptual events the
subject either repressed or experienced in a nebulous way (see
Wainwright, 1981, 117–119). These latter simply do not remain for
memory. 
Constructivism stands against perennialism. ‘Constructivism’ underscores the conceptual
“construction” of mystical experience. Let us call
‘soft constructivism’ the view that there is no mystical
experience without at least some concepts, provided by one’s cultural
conditioning, concepts being what “construct” an
experience. Let us call ‘hard constructivism’ the view
that a mystic’s specific cultural background massively constructs
— determines, shapes, or influences — the nature of
mystical experiences (See Hollenback, 1996, Jones, 1909, Introduction,
and Katz, 1978 and 1983). On the assumption that mystical traditions
are widely divergent, hard constructivism entails the denial of
perennialism. Soft constructivism is strictly consistent with
perennialism, however, since consistent with there being some
trans-cultural mystical experience involving concepts common across
mystical traditions. Both hard and soft constructivist arguments have
been mobilized against the existence of PCEs.
Here is a sampling of soft constructivist arguments against PCE
defenders: (1) PCEs are impossible because of the “kind of
beings” that we are (Katz, 1978, 59). It is a fact about humans
that we can experience only with the aid of memory, language,
expectations, and conceptualizations. Therefore, we cannot have a
“pure” awareness, empty of all content. (2) PCEs cannot be
“experiences” (see Proudfoot, 1985, Chapter 4, and Bagger,
1999, Chapter 4). We must distinguish, the claim goes, between an
“event” and an “experience.” That X
has “an experience” E entails that X
conceptualizes E. Hence, even if pure conscious events happen
to occur, they do not count as “experiences” until the
subject conceptualizes them. At that moment, they cease to be
“pure consciousness.” (3) A survey of mystical literature
shows that typical mystical experiences are conceptual in nature and
not empty of concepts. (4) An epistemological objection: Subjects
could not know they had endured a PCE. They could not know this during
a PCE, because it is supposed to be empty of all conceptual content
(Bagger, 1999, 102–3). A subject could not know this by remembering
the PCE, since there is supposed to be nothing to observe while it is
going on, and hence nothing to remember. Neither could a subject
surmise that a PCE had transpired by remembering a
“before” and an “after,” with an unaccounted
for middle. This would fail to distinguish a PCE from plain
unconsciousness. Indeed, it seems to matter little whether a subject
who emerges with mystical insights underwent a PCE or was simply
unconscious. (5) A second epistemological objection: Suppose a PCE has
occurred and that a subject knows that, somehow. Still, there is a
problem of the relationship of a PCE to the subsequent claims to
knowledge, such as when Eckhart purportedly grounds knowledge of the
soul and God as one, in a PCE (see Forman, 1993a). If in a PCE
subjects were empty of all experiential content, they could not claim
to have had acquaintance of anything (Bagger, 1999, 102–3). 
Several objections can be raised against the Soft Constructivist
Position:
While our cultural sets shape our ordinary experience, there is
no good reason why we could not enjoy experiences on a pre-conceptual
level of awareness, especially through a regimen of training. Steven
Katz, the author of this argument, notes our “most brutish,
infantile, and sensate levels” of experience when we were
infants (Katz, 1988, 755). It is hard to see why in principle we could
not retrieve such an unconceptualized level of experience.
It makes little difference whether a PCE is called an
“experience” or an “event.” A PCE occurs within
a wider experience of the subject, including the subject’s coming out
of the PCE and assigning it meaning. Let this wider experience be the
“experience” under discussion, rather than the PCE
alone.
Neuropsychological studies of mystical experience point to the
possibility of events of pure consciousness. A theory by Eugene
d’Aquili and Andrew Newberg (d’Aquili and Newberg, 1993 and 1999)
claims to account for PCEs by reference to occurrences in the brain
that cut off ordinary brain activity from consciousness. This theory,
if upheld, would provide physiological support for episodes of pure
consciousness (for more on this theory see section 8.7.1.)
There need be no problem about mystics knowing they had
PCEs. If we accept a reliabilist account of knowledge, a belief is
knowledge if produced by a reliable cognitive mechanism (perhaps with
some further conditions). In order to have knowledge, a person does
not have to be aware of and judge evidence, nor be cognizant of the
reliability of the mechanism that produces the knowledge. Hence,
“awakening” from (what is in fact) a PCE, if it produces
the belief that one has “awakened” from a PCE, could be a
reliable cognitive mechanism sufficient for knowing one had had a PCE.
If we stick to an evidentialist conception of knowledge, mystics might
be able to have evidence they had endured a PCE, though not at the
precise time of its occurrence. Here’s how: (a) By hypothesis, a
PCE is an event of conscious awareness. (b) A conscious event can have
elements one does not note at the time, but recalls afterward. This is
especially possible when the recall immediately follows the event. (c)
Therefore, it should be possible for a mystic who endures a PCE to
recall immediately afterward the very awareness that was present in
the PCE, even though that awareness was not an object of consciousness
at the time of the PCE. Since the recall takes place just following a
PCE, the entire complex becomes enfolded into one recognizable
“experience” of the mystic, for which the mystic has
evidence.
Defenders of PCEs can champion their epistemological significance,
although PCEs are not of anything. Recall that the noetic
quality of a mystical experience can come from an acquaintance of
states of affairs involving an insight directly, without supervening on
acquaintance of any reality (see Section 1.1, clause (5)). In addition,
an experience is mystical as long as it allegedly grants such an
acquaintance. Neither need the insight be exactly simultaneous with
what makes the experience mystical. Hence, a person could undergo a
PCE, which then granted acquaintance of states of affairs by a direct
insight. The PCE plus the insight would constitute a complex mystical
experience that afforded awareness of a state of affairs not otherwise
accessible.
Hard Constructivism’s main argument against any perennialism, not
only against defenders of PCEs, may be presented as follows (Katz,
1978):
Premise (A): The conceptual scheme a mystic possesses massively
determines, shapes, or influences the nature of the mystical
experience.
Premise (B): Mystics of different mystical traditions possess
pervasively different conceptual schemes.
Conclusion: Therefore, there cannot be a common experience across
cultural traditions. That is, perennialism is false.
The hard constructivist denies the distinction between experience and
interpretation, since our conceptual apparatus massively shapes our
very experience. Regarding Premise (B), Katz has edited a massive
volume with the aim of displaying the stark differences between
mystical experiences of different traditions, due to
linguistic,cultural, religious, and sociological factors (Katz,
2013).
First cousin to this objection is the objection that theistic
experiences in particular are theory-laden, their interpretation as
theistic a result of being embedded in a propensity to think
theistically. That is why, allegedly, such experiences are rarely
reported by those not already theists or in theistic communities. Such
experiences, then, are “polluted”by theory (Oppy, 2006,p. 350).
This section summarizes objections against hard constructivism that
are not objections to soft constructivism as well.
It seems quite possible for subjects in the first instance to apply
“thin” descriptions to experiences, involving only a small
part of their conceptual schemes. Only on second thought, perhaps, will
they elaborate on their experience in terms of the richness of their
home culture. This would be like a physician with a headache, who
experiences pain in the first instance just like ordinary folk and only
subsequently applies medical terminology to the headache (Compare King,
1988). If so, there is a possibility of common first-instance mystical
experiences across cultures, contrary to Premise A.
Premise A is thrown into further doubt by expressions of
surprise by mystics-in-training about what they experience (see
Gellman, 1997, 145–46 and Barnard, 1997, 127–130), as well
as by heretical types of experience occurring with mystics
acculturated in orthodox teachings, such as Meister Eckhart and Jacob
Boehme (See Stoeber, 1992, 112–113).  These illustrate the
possibility of getting out from under one’s mystical background to
have new experiences. Likewise, hard constructivism’s inherently
conservative take on mysticism will struggle to explain
transformations within mystical traditions, and cannot easily account
for innovative geniuses within mystical traditions. George Wall has
replied regarding religious experience by pointing out how
individualistic such experiences can be. A person might have a Jesus
experience at one time and a Buddhist one at another time (Wall, 1995,
p. 302). 
Two people walk together down the street and see an approaching
dog. One experiences the dog as “Jones’s favorite black terrier
that came in second in last year’s competition,” while the other
experiences it as “a stray mutt that the dog-catchers should take
away.” Because of the excessive conceptual differences in their
experiencing, the constructivist would have to insist that there was no
worthwhile sense in which both dog-sighters had the same experience.
However, there is an interesting sense in which they are having the
same experience: seeing that black dog at that place, at that time.
Similarly, there might exist an interesting commonality of experiences
across mystical traditions, most plausibly theistic ones, despite
conceptual disparity. The conceptual differences might not be
sufficient to deny this important commonality (see Wainwright, 1981,
25).
Specific cultural conditioning does not influence everyone to the
same degree and in the same way. Individuals have rich and varied
personal histories that influence their experiential lives in widely
differing ways. Some accept cultural restraints gladly; others rebel
against them; still others are blessed with a creative spirit, etc. A
“fat people must drive fat cows” approach to mysticism
fails to mirror the complex human phenomenon of acculturation.
Mystical traditions characteristically involve disciplines aimed at
loosening the hold of one’s conceptual scheme on subsequent experience.
Techniques practiced for years promote a pronounced inhibition of
ordinary cognitive processes, sometimes called
“deautomization” (Deikman, 1980). This plausibly restricts
the influence of one’s cultural background on one’s mystical
experiences, in turn making possible identical experiences across
mystical traditions.
The hard constructivist over-emphasizes the influence of
pre-mystical religious teaching on the mystic’s experience. Mystical
experiences can circle around and reinvent meaning for the doctrines.
An example is the Jewish Kabbalistic transformation of the notion of
mitzvah (“commandment”) to that of
“joining” or “connection” with God. Starting
with commandment, the mystic ends up with devekut,
“clinging” to God.
Hard Constructivism fails to account well for widely differing
mystical understandings of the same religious text. For example, the
Hindu text, The Brahma Sutra, is monistic for Shankara
(788–820), a “qualified dualism” for Ramanuja (c.
1055–1137), and yet again a strict dualism, for Madhva
(1199–1278) (see Radhakrishnan, Introduction, 1968). Likewise,
the teaching of emptiness in the Buddhist text the Prajnaparamita
Hrydaya Sutra (The Heart Sutra), receives quite
disparate unpacking in different streams of Buddhism. It’s plausible
to conclude that distinct experiences were responsible, at least in
part, for these differences.
On the one hand, talk about mystical experiences “the
same” across all mystical traditions should be taken with a
tablespoon of salt, if scholars claim to have discovered them solely
from isolated descriptions of experiences. It is difficult to assess
the nature of an experience without attending to how it
“radiates” out into the structure of the local mystical
theory and life of which it is a part (See Idel, 1997). Nevertheless,
it does seem possible to generalize about experiences “similar
enough” to be philosophically interesting.
“Inherentists” believe that there are experiences
inherently religious or mystical. These experiences come with their
religious or mystical content built in as would redness be built in to
a sense experience.  Attributionists believe that there are no
inherently religious or mystical experiences. There are only deemed
religious by the subject or a group. Among their ranks is to be
counted William James. A leading attributionist, Ann Taves, contends
that first people or groups will have experiences of what strikes them
as being “special.” Only then, depending on various
factors will they attribute a religious or mystical meaning to them.
(Taves, 2009) Some neuropsychological studies seem to support this
position. (Azari, et al, 2001). Taves is thus as much an
anti-constructivist as she is anti-inherentist. The constructivist
sees religious or mystical experiences to be constituted from the very
start by cultural conditioning. The attributionist denies this, in
favor of a tiered or “block-building” approach from
experiencing something “special” to a religious or
mystical conclusion.  William Forgie has argued, as would an
attributionist, that there could not be an experience “of
God,” if we understand experience “of X” to
mean that it is phenomenologically given that the experience is
of X (Forgie, 1984, 1994). Forgie argues that
phenomenological content can consist of general features only, and not
features specifically identifying God as the object of experience. He
compares this to your seeing one of two identical twins. Which one of
the two you perceive cannot be a phenomenological given. Likewise,
that you experience precisely God and not something else cannot be
a phenomenological datum.  Nelson Pike argues, against
Forgie, that the individuation of an object can be a component of the
phenomenological content of an experience, drawing on examples from
sense perception (Pike 1992, Chapter 7).
Both philosophers restrict experiences of God to phenomenal content
somehow analogous to sense perception. This might be a
mistake. Consider, for example, that God could appear to a person
mystically, and at the same time transmit, telepathy-like, the thought
that this was God appearing. Imagine further that this thought had the
flavor of being conveyed to one from the outside, rather than as
originating in the subject. The thought that “This is God
appearing” would be part of the phenomenological content of the
subject’s present (complex) experience (though not part of the
mystical mode of the experience as defined in section 1.1), and yet
not be the product of an interpretation by the subject. 
In his celebrated, The Varieties of Religious Experience
(London 1925, p. 415), Williams James, asked, “Do mystical states
establish the truth of those theological affections in which the
saintly life has its roots?” This question can be divided into
two: (Q1) Is a person warranted in thinking that his or her experiences
are veridical or have evidential value? And (Q2) Are “we,”
who do not enjoy mystical experiences, upon examining the evidence of
such experiences, warranted in thinking them veridical or endowed with
evidential value? While related, these questions can be treated
separately.
The major philosophical reply in the affirmative to (Q1) may be
called the “Doxastic Practice Approach.” The major defense
of an affirmative reply to (Q2) may be called the “Argument from
Experience.”
William Alston has defended beliefs a person forms based on mystical
and numinous (in the terminology of this entry) experience,
specifically of a theistic kind (Alston, 1991, 100). Alston defines a
‘doxastic practice’ as consisting of socially established
ways of forming and epistemically evaluating beliefs (the
“output”) from a certain kind of content from various
inputs, such as cognitive and perceptual ones (Alston, 1991, 100,
Alston 2005, chapters 9–11). The practice is beholden to an
“over-rider system” which is a background system of
beliefs against which beliefs supported by the practice are checked
for possible over-riders. The practice of forming physical-object
beliefs based on sense perception is an example of a ‘doxastic
practice’ and the practice of drawing deductive conclusions from
premises is another. Now, Alston argues that the justification of
every doxastic practice is “epistemically circular,” that
is, its reliability cannot be established in any way independent of
the practice itself (see Alston, 1993). This includes the
“sense-perception practice.” However, we cannot avoid
engaging in doxastic practices. Therefore, Alston contends, it is a
matter of practical rationality to engage in the doxastic
practices we do engage in providing there is no good reason to think
they are unreliable. 
 Now, there are doxastic practices consisting of forming beliefs
about God, God’s purposes for us, and the like, grounded on religious
and mystical experiences such as “God is now appearing to
me.” Such, for example, is the “Christian Doxastic
Practice.” This practice has an over-rider system consisting of
scriptures and Christian dogma. The over-rider system also includes
guidelines resulting from the past history of the mystical Christian
Doxastic Practice. It follows from Alston’s argument that it is
rational for a person in such a practice to take its belief outputs as
true unless the practice is shown to be unreliable. Thus we have an
affirmative answer to question (Q1).
Most objections to Alston are equally objections to the Argument from
Experience (to be presented below) or come from general
epistemological complaints. The latter will not occupy us
here. Objections that apply to Alston only, include Jonathan Kvanvig’s
faulting of Alston for a loose employment of
“rationality.” Kvanvig argues that no one meaning of that
term can do the work Alston does with it (Kvanvig, 1994). Another
objection is that Alston moves from “It is practically rational
to engage in a Christian doxastic practice” to: “It is
rational for me to believe the Christian doxastic practice is
reliable.” However, it is quite possible to be practically
rational to engage in a doxastic practice while failing to believe it
is reliable. This was David Hume’s attitude to sense perception. Hume
could not help engaging in the sense-perception practice, and thought
it was practically rational to do so. But it was not the case that
Hume thought the sense-perception practice reliable (Matthias Steup,
1997).
 Others argue that there is a problem with the construction of the
over-rider system of the Christian mystical practice. This is because
the guidelines gleaned from the history of the practice, so it is
argued, were compromised by androcentric bias and outdated scientific
beliefs. These detract from the practice’s epistemic
legitimacy (Gellman, 2011). (See Section 9 below.) It is also a
question whether the Christian doxastic practice approach is able to
justify conversion experiences. In such experiences the subject is not
yet Christian and cannot employ the Christian over-rider system when
becoming convinced to accept the Christian practice and its over-rider
system. 
Various philosophers have defended the evidential value, to one
degree or another, of some religious and mystical experiences,
principally with regard to experiences of God (see Baillie, 1939,
Broad, 1953, Davis, 1989, Gellman, 1997 and 2001a, Gutting, 1982,
Swinburne, 1991 and 1996, Wainwright, 1981, and Yandell, 1993). These
philosophers have stressed the “perceptual” nature of
experiences of God. We can summarize the approach as follows:
Experiences of God have a subject-object structure, with a
phenomenological content allegedly representing the object of the
experience. Also, subjects are moved to make truth claims based on such
experiences. Furthermore, there are mystical procedures for getting
into position for a mystical experience of God (see Underhill, 90–94),
and others can take up a suitable mystical path to try to check on the
subject’s claims (see Bergson 1935, 210). In all these ways,
experiences of God are perceptual in nature.
Such experiences count as (at least some) evidence in
favor of their own validity. That a person seems to experience some
object is some reason to think he or she really does have experiential
contact with it. So, experiences of God count as (at least some)
evidence in favor of their own validity.
Agreement between experiences of people in different places,
times, and traditions, enhances the evidence in favor of their validity
(see Broad, 1953). Hence, agreement about experiences of God in diverse
circumstances enhances the evidence in their favor.  
Further enhancement of the validity of a religious or mystical
experience can come from appropriate consequences in the life of the
person who had the experience, such as increased saintliness (See
Wainwright, 1981, 83–88).
(1)–(4) yield initial evidence in favor of the validity of
(some) experiences of God.
Kai-Man Kwan has developed this type of argument further by specifying
theistic experience, in particular, as a “well-established type of
experience.” The tokens of such a type of experience occur to many
people and on repeated occasions, have a common ontology, and are
communicable in a coherent conceptual framework. This strengthens an
argument from experience for theistic experience (Kwan, 2012,
p. 511).
 Whether any experiences of God are veridical in the final reckoning
will depend on the strength of the initial evidential case, on other
favorable evidence, and on the power of counter-considerations against
validity. Defenders of the Argument from Experience differ over the
strength of the initial evidential case and have defended the staying
power of the Argument against counter-evidence to
varying degrees. All agree, however in advancing a positive answer to
question (Q2). 
Several philosophers have argued against either the doxastic
practice approach or the Argument from Experience, or both (see Bagger
1999, Fales, 1996a, 1996b, and 2001, Gale, 1991, 1994, and 1995, C.B.
Martin, 1955, Michael Martin, 1990, Proudfoot, 1985, and Rowe, 1982).
Here the focus will be on objections related specifically to mystical
and numinous experience, rather than to general epistemological
complaints,
Philosophers have disputed the Argument from Experience on the
grounds of alleged disanalogies between experiences of God and sense
perception. Two issues must be examined: (a) whether the disanalogies
exist, and (b) if they do exist, whether they are epistemologically
significant.
The analogy allegedly breaks down over the lack of appropriate
crosschecking procedures for experiences of God. With sense perception,
we can crosscheck by employing inductive methods to determine causally
relevant antecedent conditions; can “triangulate” an event
by correlating it with other effects of the same purported cause; and
can discover causal mechanisms connecting a cause to its effects. These
are not available for checking on experiences of God. Evan Fales argues
that “crosscheckability” is an integral part of any
successful perceptual epistemic practice. Therefore, the perceptual
epistemic practice in which mystical experiences of God are embedded is
severely defective (Fales, 200) In addition, Richard Gale (1991),
argues that in experiences of God there is missing agreement between
perceivers as well as the possibility of checking whether the perceiver
was in the “right” position and psychological and
physiological state for a veridical experience. For similar reasons,
C.B. Martin concludes that claims to have experienced God are
“very close” to subjective claims like “I seem to see
a piece of paper” rather than to objective claims like “I
see a piece of paper” (C.B. Martin, 1955).
William Rowe observes that God may choose to be revealed to one
person and not to another. Therefore, unlike with sense perception, the
failure of others to have an experience of God under conditions similar
to those in which one person did, does not impugn the validity of the
experience. Therefore, we have no way of determining when an experience
of God is delusory. If so, neither can we credit an experience as
authentic (Rowe, 1982).
Some philosophers have argued that there could never be evidence for
thinking a person had perceived God (Gale, 1994 and 1995, and Byrne,
2001). For there to be evidence that a person experienced an object O,
and did not have just an “O-ish-impression,” it would have
to be possible for there to be evidence that O was the common object of
different perceptions (not necessarily simultaneous with one another).
This, in turn, would be possible only if it were possible to
distinguish perceptions of O, specifically, from possible perceptions
of other objects that might be perceptually similar to O. This latter
requirement is possible only if O exists in both space and time.
Space-time coordinates make it possible to distinguish O from objects
of similar appearance existing in other space-time coordinates. God,
however, does not exist in both space and time. Therefore, there could
never be evidence that a person had experienced God.
Although Alston defends the perceptual character of
mystical experiences of God for his doxastic practice approach, there
is no restriction to the perceptual on the inputs of a doxastic
practice. Any cognitive input will do. Hence, disanalogies between
experiences of God and sense perception, even if great, would not be
directly harmful to this approach (Alston, 1994).
Regarding the bearing of the alleged disanalogies on the Argument
from Experience, the disanalogists take the evidential credentials of
sense perception as paradigmatic for epistemology. They equate
confirming and disconfirming evidence with evidence strongly analogous
to the kind available for sensory perception. However, the evidential
requirement should be only “confirming empirical evidence,”
be what it may. If God-sightings have confirming evidence, even if
different from the kind available for sense perception, they will then
be evidentially strengthened. If God-sightings do not have much
confirming empirical evidence, be it what it may, they will remain
unjustified for that reason, and not because they lack crosschecks
appropriate to sense perception.
Perhaps the disanalogy proponents believe that justification of
physical object claims should be our evidential standard,
because only where crosschecks of the physical object kind are
available do we get sufficient justification. However, our ordinary physical object beliefs are far over-supported
by confirming evidence. We have extremely luxurious constellations of
confirming networks there. Hence, it does not follow that were mystical
claims justified to a lesser degree than that, or not by similar
procedures, that they would be unjustified.
A problem with the argument from God’s lack of dimensionality is
that the practice of identifying physical objects proceeds by way of an
interplay between qualitative features and relative positions to
determine both location and identity. The judgments we make reflect a
holistic practice of making identifications of place and identity
together. There is no obvious reason why the identification of God
cannot take place within its own holistic practice, with its own
criteria of identification, not beholden to the holistic practice
involved in identifying physical objects (See Gellman, 2001a, Chapter
3, for a sketch of such a holistic practice). We should be suspicious
of taking the practice of identifying physical objects as paradigmatic
for all epistemology.
In the end, the Argument from Experience might have to yield to the
Doxastic Practice Approach. One reason is that it is doubtful if many
experiencers of God make truth claims solely on the basis of their
mystical experiences, rather than within a doxastic practice. For
example, as Rowan Williams has commented concerning Teresa of Avila,
she would never have imagined that her experiences alone were
sufficient evidence for any truth.  The criterion of authenticity for
her experiences was how they related to subsequent concrete behavior,
as judged by and within her religious practice. Mystical experience as
such was given no special authority. Nelson Pike writes similarly
about John of the Cross that John thought that, “The private
experiences of individual mystics have no value whatsoever as sources
of information”, and that “To treat them as such is to
risk a variety of pitfalls of considerable threat to the spiritual
life” (Pike, 1986, p. 16).
A second reason why the Argument from Experience might have to yield
to the Doxastic Practice Approach is that if, as noted in section 8.4,
identification of God takes place in an holistic practice, then quite
plausibly this is a social practice in which one judges one’s mystical
experiences to be of God. Turning again to the example of
Teresa, her experiences in themselves did not always give her assurance
that she was not experiencing the Devil rather than God. She
adjudicated the issue from within the teachings of the Church. Finally,
it is an open question to what extent alleged God-experiences are
sufficiently detailed to provide grounds to the subject that they are
of God. Hence, a subject’s judgment that a particular
encounter is with God might well be the fruit of assimilating the
present event into a larger social practice. Recently, Gellman has
argued that the Argument from Experience might just collapse into the
doxastic practice approach (Gellman, 2008).  
A critique of the Argument from Experience for the epistemic value
of theistic experiences comes from the facts of religious diversity.
This critique applies to non-theistic experiences as well. In the
history of religions, we find innumerable gods, with different
characteristics. Shall we say they all exist? Can belief in all of them
be rational? (Hick, 1989, 234–5) In addition, there are experiences of
non-personal ultimate realities, such as the Nirguna Brahman of Indian
religions. Nirguna Brahman cannot be an ultimate reality if God is
(Hick, 1984, 234–5). The Argument from Experience cannot work for both,
so works for neither. Furthermore, different theistic faiths claim
experience of the one and only God, ostensibly justifying beliefs that
are in contradiction with one another (see Flew, 1966, 126). If the
Argument from Experience leads to such contradictory results, it cannot
provide evidence in favor of the validity of experiences of God.
In reply to this objection, straight away we can discount
experiences of polytheistic gods because of their being embedded in
bizarre, fantastic settings, and because of the relative paucity of
reports of actual experiences of such beings. Regarding clashing
experiences within theistic settings, Richard Swinburne has proposed an
ascent to generality as a harmonizing mechanism. Swinburne believes
that conflicting descriptions of objects of religious experience pose a
challenge only to detailed claims, not to general claims of having
experienced a supernal being (Swinburne, 1991, 266).
John Hick has proposed a “pluralistic hypothesis” to
deal with the problem of religious diversity (Hick, 1984, Chapter 14).
According to the pluralistic hypothesis, the great world faiths embody
different perceptions and conceptions of one reality that Hick
christens “the Real.” The Real itself is never experienced
directly, but has “masks” or “faces” which are
experienced, depending on how a particular culture or religion thinks
of the Real. The Real itself is, therefore, neither personal nor
impersonal, these categories being imposed upon the Real by different
cultural contexts. Hence, the typical experiences of the major faiths
are to be taken as validly of the Real, through mediation by the local
face of the Real.
Hick has been criticized for infidelity to the world’s religious
traditions. However, we should understand Hick to be providing a
theory about religions rather than an exposition of religions
themselves would endorse (for criticism of Hick see Gavin d’Costa,
1987). Some propose harmonizing some conflicting experiences by
reference to God’s “inexhaustible fullness” (Gellman, 1997,
Chapter 4). In at least some mystical experiences of God, a subject
experiences what is presented as proceeding from an intimation of
infinite plenitude. Given this feature, a claim to experience a
personal ultimate, for example, can be squared with an experience of an
impersonal ultimate: one “object,” identified as God or
Nirguna Brahman, can be experienced in its personal attributes or in
its impersonal attributes, from out of its inexhaustible plenitude.
Whether any of these solutions succeed, the body of experiential data is too
large for us to simply scrap on the grounds of contradictory claims. We
should endeavor to retain as much of the conflicting data as possible
by seeking some means of conciliation.
Bertrand Russell once quipped that “We can make no distinction
between the man who eats little and sees heaven and the man who drinks
much and sees snakes. Each is in an abnormal physical condition, and
therefore has abnormal perceptions” (Russell, 1935, 188). C.D.
Broad wrote, to the contrary, “One might need to be slightly
‘cracked’ in order to have some peep-holes into the
super-sensible world” (Broad, 1939, 164). Thus is the issue
engaged whether we can explain away religious and mystical experiences
by reference to naturalistic causes.
  Wainwright has argued that a naturalistic explanation is
compatible with the validity of an experience since God could bring
about an experience through a naturalistic medium (Wainwright, 1981,
Chapter 2). However, we should take into account that there might be
naturalistic explanations that would make it implausible that God would
appear in just those ways (this is elaborated in section 8.7.2).
Various psychological naturalistic explanations of religious and
mystical experience have been offered, including pathological
conditions such as: hypersuggestibility, severe deprivation, severe
sexual frustration, intense fear of death, infantile regression,
pronounced maladjustment, and mental illness, as well as
non-pathological conditions, including the inordinate influence of a
religious psychological “set” (see Davis, 1989, Chapter 8,
and Wulff, 2000). In addition, some have advanced a sociological
explanation for some mysticism, in terms of the socio-political power
available to an accomplished mystic (Fales, 1996a, 1996b).
Naturalistic proposals of these kinds exaggerate the scope and
influence of the cited factors, sometimes choosing to highlight the
bizarre and eye-catching at the expense of the more common occurrences.
Secondly, some of the proposals, at least, are perfectly compatible
with the validity of experiences of God. For example, a person’s having
a religious psychological set can just as well be a condition for
enjoying and being capable of recognizing an experience of God, as it
can be a cause of delusion.
Neuropsychological research has been conducted to look for unique
brain processes involved in religious and mystical experiences,
resulting in a number of competing theories (see Wulff, 2000). The
“explaining away” enters when one claims that
“It’s all in the head.” d’Aquili and Newberg
(d’Aquili and Newberg 1993 and 1999), propose the prefrontal
area of the brain as the locus of special brain activity during
mystical episodes. Through “deafferentiation,” or cutting
off of neural input to that area of the brain, they claim, an event of
pure consciousness occurs. The patterns set up in the brain create an
overwhelming experience of “absolute unitary being.” If
reinforcement of a certain hypothalamic discharge then occurs, this
will prolong the feeling of elation, and will be interpreted as an
experience of God. Otherwise, there will arise a deep peacefulness due
to the dominance of specified hypothalamic structures.  This gets
interpreted as an experience of an impersonal, absolute ground of
being. The theory associates numinous experiences with variations in
deafferentiation in various structures of the nervous system, and
lesser religious experiences with mild to moderate stimulation of
circuits in the lateral hypothalamus. The latter generate religious
awe: a complex of fear and exaltation (see d’Aquili and Newberg,
1993, 195). The brain functions in related ways in aesthetic
experience as well (d’Aquili and Newberg, 2000).
The authors themselves do not say their theory shows there to be
nothing objective to mystical or religious experience. However, they do
recommend explaining away objective differences between, for example,
theistic and non-theistic experiences. And their theory could be
utilized in a “It’s all in the head” strategy.
Batson, Schoenrade and Ventis (1993) maintain (comparing religious
experiences to creative problem solving) that a person who has a
religious experience faces an existential crisis, and attempts to
solve it within fixed cognitive structures, which are embedded in the
brain’s left-hemisphere. This yields no solution. The person may then
undergo a transforming religious experience, in which the brain
temporarily switches from left-hemisphere to right-hemisphere
dominance, from verbal/conceptual thinking to non-verbal insight
“beyond” the person’s dominant conceptual structure. The
switch then reverberates back to restructure the left-hemisphere
conceptual network, now made apt for dealing with the existential
crisis. The right-hemisphere switch can account for the sense of
‘ineffability,’ since the right hemisphere is not analytic
or verbal (See Fenwick 1996 and Michael Persinger et
al. 1994). Because the shift involves “transcending”
the cognitive, it may explain the conviction of having contact with a
“transcendent realm.” If offered as a naturalistic
“explaining away,” this theory would imply that what a
person thinks is an experience of God, say, is really an experience of
temporary right-hemisphere dominance. The theory has the drawback,
however, of applying only to conversion experiences, and not to other
religious and mystical episodes.
Other theories that have attracted attention include one focusing on
anomalous features of the temporal lobes of the brain, the locus for
epileptic conditions (Persinger, et al 1987). One study even claims to
have discovered a correlation between temporal lobe epilepsy and
sudden conversion experiences (Dewhurst and Beard, 1970). James
Austin, a neurologist and himself a Zen practitioner, has developed a
theory of brain transformations for prolonged Zen meditative practice
(Austin, 1998). The theory is based on gradual, complex changes in the
brain, leading to a blocking of our higher associative
processes. Austin believes that the Zen kensho experience,
according to Austin an experience of reality “as it is in
itself,” is an experience with (relatively) shut down neural
activity. McNamara advances that the amygdala creates
religious experience, including mystical experience, and implicates
the prefrontal cortex where religious excitement can be
stimulated. (McNamara,2009, 93 and 109) Other theories exist as
well. For a review and good explanation of this topic see (Schjoedt,
2009, esp. 325–327)
The variety of neuropsychological theories shows that the entire
project is in its infancy. The great variety counts against accepting
any one theory at this time. (Jones, 2016). In addition, methods
involved in deriving Neuropsychological explanations have been
attacked as inadequate. This is especially true of the theories,
respectively, of Persinger and of d’Aquili and Newberg (See
Jones, 2016, 149–151; Sloan, 2006). Also, we must be careful to
determine what the researcher’s conception is of mystical
experience. 
A neuropsychological theory can do no more than relate what happens in
the brain when a mystical or religious experience occurs. It cannot
tell us that the ultimate cause for a theory’s favored
brain-events was altogether internal to the organism.  On the other
hand, such a theory could help rule out cases of suspected deception
and block the identification of mystical experiences with mere
emotion. True, there may not be out-of-brain
“God-receptors” in the body, analogous to those for
sensory perception, which might reinforce a suspicion that it’s
all in the head. However, out-of-brain receptors are neither to be
expected nor required with non-physical stimuli, as in mystical
experiences. God, for example, does not exist at a physical distance
from the brain.  Furthermore, God could act directly upon the brain to
bring about the relevant processes for a subject to perceive God.
On the other hand, a neuropsychological theory would put pressure on
claims to veridical experiences, if it could point to brain processes
implausibly grounding a veridical experience. The implausibility would
flow from a being of God’s nature wanting to make itself known by just
that way. Suppose, for (an outlandish) example, researchers convinced
us that all and only alleged experiencers of God had a brain-defect
caused only by a certain type of blow to the shoulder to people with a
genetic propensity to psoriasis, and that the area of the defect was
activated in the experiences. This might not prove that experiences of
God were delusory, but would raise serious doubts. It is too early in
the research, however, to say that implausible brain conditions have
been found for experiences of God.
Some philosophers have argued that because the “modern
inquirer” assumes everything ultimately explicable in
naturalistic terms, in principle we should reject any supernatural
explanation of mystical and religious experience (see Bagger, 1999).
Invoking God to explain mystical experiences is like invoking miracles
to explain natural phenomena. We should match our elimination of
miracles from our explanatory vocabulary with an elimination of a
supernatural explanation of mystical experiences of God. Hence, we do
not have to wait until we discover a live alternative explanation to
the theistic explanation of mystical experiences of God. We should
resist a theistic explanation in the name of our epistemic standards.
Hence, we should reject both the doxastic practice approach and the
Argument from Experience.  
This argument raises the important question of the relationship
between theistic explanation and a naturalistic program of
explanation.  Various theistic philosophers have attempted to square
special divine activity with a modern scientific understanding of the
world (see for example, Swinburne, 1989 and Plantinga, 2011). Whether
they have succeeded is a question beyond the scope of the present
essay, however. Of course, a person for whom supernatural explanation
is not a live option would have reason to reject the Argument from
Experience and refuse to engage in a doxastic practice of identifying
valid God-experiences. However, most defenders of the Argument from
Experience advance it at best as a defensible line of reasoning,
rather than as a proof of valid experiences of God that should
convince anyone, and the doxastic practice approach is not meant to
convince everybody to participate in a theistic doxastic practice (see
Gellman, 2001b).
 Kai-Man Kwan has significantly expanded the Argument from
Experience in a way that avoids from the start several objections to
that argument (Kwan, 2011). Kwan argues for what he calls a
“holistic empiricism,” which considers an array of
dimensions of human experience: the noetic – consisting of
epistemic seemings; the qualitative – the feel or tenor of what
it is like to have the experience; and the volitional, of action,
choice, deliberation, and the like. Kwan argues that when judging the
credentials of religious experience, we should take into account the
following experiences, in addition to narrowly selected religious
experience: experiences of the natural world, of the self, existential
experience, interpersonal experience, moral experience, aesthetic
experience, and intellectual experience.
Kwan argues that the integration, in the appropriate way, of these
types of experience coherently and fruitfully constitutes a defeasible
justification for relying on the product of religious belief. Kwan
argues in this way for theistic belief in particular. A similar
argument is forthcoming for judging narrowly construed mystical
experience. The unit of justification of believing a proposition when
having had a mystical experience would be the entire holistic complex
of the mystic’s experience. Going beyond, but including, discrete
mystical episodes, the mystic is able to fashion a cumulative case for
mystical conclusions. 
 If Kwan’s argument is sound, it avoids the objection based on
dissimilarities between mystical and religious experiences, narrowly
considered,on the one side, and sense experience on the other. The
unit of justification, it turns out, encompasses far more than the
mystical experience itself. Kwan also seems to neutralize objections
from neuroscience against the validity of mystical experiences. Belief
in the deliverances of mystical experience will seek justification far
beyond what can be possibly identified with a discrete, local brain
analogue to the mystical experience itself.
Some feminist philosophers have criticized what they perceive as the
androcentric bias of male philosophers of mysticism. There are three
main objections: (1) Contemporary male philosophers treat mysticism as
most centrally a matter of the private psychological episodes of a
solitary person. Philosophers believe these private experiences reveal
the meaning and value of mysticism (Jantzen, 1994 and 1995). Instead,
philosophers should be studying the socio-political ramifications of
mysticism, including its patriarchal failings. Sarah Coakley maintains
that the focus of mysticism should be on the ongoing contemplative
practice and all that entails. (Coakley 2009). (2) At times. scholars
of mysticism have systematically ignored or marginalized much of
women’s mysticism. Closer attention to women would reveal the
androcentric bias in male mysticism (Jantzen, 1995). Nancy Caciola
(2000, 2003) argues that the criteria the Church developed for
authentic mystical experiences curtailed the power of women in the
Church. For example, on the basis of theories about female physiology,
women were deemed more vulnerable to devil possession than men. Hence
one was to be more suspicious that women are devil-possessed, and not
God-possessed, than about men. More recently, Coakley notes that while
some analytic philosophers attend to the mysticism of Teresa of Avila,
they do not do justice to the content of her mystical writings,
picking out experiences only. (3) The traditional male construction of
God has determined the way male philosophers think of theistic
experience. Thus, theistic experience is conditioned from the outset
by patriarchal conceptualizations and values, and by sex-role
differentiation in the practice of religion (Raphael,
1994). Typically, the view states, men understand theistic experience
as a human subject encountering a being wholly distinct, distant, and
overpowering. A paradigm of this approach is Rudolf Otto’s
“numinous experience,” of a “wholly other”
reality, unfathomable and overpowering, engendering a sense of dreaded
fascination. The mystic is “submerged and overwhelmed” by
his own nothingness (Otto, 1957). Otto claims that this is the
foundational experience of religion. This approach, it is claimed, is
mediated by the androcentrism of Otto’s worldview, entrapped in
issues of domination, atomicity, and submission. Some feminist
thinkers deny the dichotomy between the holy and the creaturely that
makes Otto’s analysis possible (see Daly, 1973 and Goldenberg,
1979).  Feminist theologians stress the immanent nature of the object
of theistic experience, and bring to prominence women’s
experience of the holy in their fleshly embodiment, denigrated by
androcentric attitudes.
Feminists have entered the debate on constructivism and mystical
experience by supporting the constructivist position (Lanzetta, 2005,
especially Chapter One). They do so in the name of anti-essentialism
and diversity of experience. The thinking that there is a common,
unconstructed, essence to mystical experience has worked against the
recognition of women’s experiences as properly mystical. 
The feminist critique poses a welcome corrective to undoubted
androcentric biases in mysticism and mystical studies. The feminist
critique should help neutralize the conception of the solely
private nature of mysticism and religious experience, introduced to
philosophy largely by William James. Objection (2) has begun to bring
about a welcome change with scholarship dedicated to women’s mysticism
and its significance (see for example, Hurcombe, 1987, Brunn and
Epiney-Burgard, 1989, Beer, 1993, and Borchert, 1994). Several
collections on women mystics have helped change the over-emphasis on
men mystics. (See, for a good example, Furlong, 2013.) Regarding (3),
we must distinguish between Otto’s androcentric claim that his type of
numinous experience constitutes religious experience at its most
profound, and the rich variegation of religious and mystical
experience of men throughout history. This includes men’s experiences
of God’s immanent closeness as well as mystical union with God, quite
opposite, by feminist lights, to Otto’s numinous experience. The study
of gender in religious experience and mysticism has barely begun and
promises new insights into and revisions of our understanding of these
human phenomena. 
Some maintain there is an intrinsic connection between mysticism and
moral behavior. This is because mystical experience blurs or erases
the distinction between the subject and others (Stace, 1961) and so
removes the barrier to moral motivation, or because, as typically in
monistic mysticism, the ego disappears entirely (Browning,
1979). Several scholars have argued, to the contrary, that some forms
of mysticism are incompatible with morality. (Danto, 1987 and Kripal,
2002). One charge is that a conceptual requirement of morality is the
recognition of individuals other than oneself to whom one has
obligations and to whom one is to display moral virtues. However,
monistic mysticism eliminates all distinctions between one person and
others. All are One. Hence, monistic mysticism precludes being
moral. Morality must be between “independently real
persons.” (Wainwright, 1983, pp. 211–12.) Others argue that
morality can get off the ground solely with the ability to
conceptualize “the well-being of others” without the need
to recognize others as ontologically independent beings. (Zelinski,
2007, Jones, 1993).This leaves open whether this is morality or mock
morality since it might be lacking in fundamental moral
sentiments. Wainwright, for example, argues that the ideal of
detachment, common in monistic mysticism, can be quite detrimental to
the self-investment and emotional attachment required in moral
commitment and behavior.
David Loy argues that even if monistic morality not be incompatible
with morality, it fails to reveal the best way to help people with
compassion. (Loy, 2002) Others maintain, more strongly, that there is
no intrinsic connection between mystical experience and moral
behavior.  We need look no further than to Christian complaints about
mystical moral excesses, the Mahayana Buddhist rejection of the
alleged selfishness of the ideal of the arhat in Theravada Buddhism,
or the moral scandals of some Eastern mysticism in the West.(Kripal,
2002). If moral behavior does follow it does not issue from mystical
experience but from the mystic’s cultural setting. The mystic
must fall back on the normative behavioral standards of the group,
standards not derivable from monistic experience. Mystical experience,
so the charge goes, in itself is amoral without the addition of
cultural guidance. However, it seems that much will depend on the
mystical practice meant to lead to mystical experience as to its moral
or amoral orientation. The resulting behavior will be a consequence of
both the practice undertaken to reach mystical experience and the
experience itself. (See Jones, 2016, Chapter 5).