Even though legendary accounts abound, very little can be said
precisely about Nāgārjuna’s life. That Nāgārjuna
was a Buddhist monk who lived some time between 150 and 250 CE,
probably mainly in southern India is rarely disputed. If we want to go
beyond these bare facts, however, intricate historical detective work
is required. Some interesting connections have been discovered by this
but they are of limited importance in the present context which is
primarily aimed at providing information about Nāgārjuna’s
philosophical works. The interested reader is referred to Mabbett 1998
and Walser 2005 for further discussion.
Fortunately there is more information about Nāgārjuna’s
works than there is about his life but the situation is still far from
ideal: it is not easy to come up with a precise list of texts
Nāgārjuna composed. This is partly due to the fact that
different authors bearing the name “Nāgārjuna” might have
lived during different periods of the development of Buddhist thought
in India, and partly due to the tendency of attributing newly composed
works to the great authorities of the past. For the present purposes,
however, we can divide Nāgārjuna’s works into three main
groups (further discussion can be found in Ruegg 1981). In the list I
give here the ascription of the works mentioned to Nāgārjuna
is largely uncontested.
The Fundamental Wisdom of the Middle Way (MMK)
(Mūlamadhyamakakārikā). This is the most
important of Nāgārjuna’s works. In its 450 stanzas it
expounds the entire compass of his thought and constitutes the central
text of the “philosophy of the Middle Way”. It has been
commented upon by a large number of later authors. (See Ye 2011, Siderits/Katsura 2013).
The Sixty Stanzas on Reasoning
(Yuktiṣaṣṭikā). 
A shorter treatise, discussing the notions of emptiness and
dependent origination (pratītyasamutpāda).
The Seventy Stanzas on Emptiness
(Śūnyatāsaptati).  Another short treatise,
dealing in addition with questions of agency and the two truths.
The Dispeller of Disputes
(Vigrahavyāvartanī). In this work of seventy verses
with an autocommentary in prose Nāgārjuna responds to a set
of specific objections raised against his system. These objections
come both from Buddhist and non-Buddhist opponents and initiate
discussions of topics which do not get much coverage in
Nāgārjuna’s other works (in particular epistemology and the
philosophy of language). (See Westerhoff 2010).
The Treatise on Pulverization
(Vaidalyaprakaraṇa). A very interesting and difficult
work in which Nāgārjuna sets out to refute the logical
categories of the non-Buddhist Nyāya school. Like d. this text
has never attracted the attention of classical commentators.
The Precious Garland (Ratnāvalī).  A long text
addressed to a king containing a comprehensive discussion of ethical
questions. Because discussion of the theory of emptiness plays a
comparatively minor role in this text it is sometimes subsumed under
the epistolary works (see below).
The hymns (Catuḥstava). There is some discussion
which of the various hymns ascribed to Nāgārjuna actually
make up the quartet of ‘four hymns’ often referred to in
the commentarial literature. They differ in interesting respects from
the works mentioned in the preceding section. Common to many of them
is a positive conception of ultimate truth which ascribes specific
qualities to it and gets close to the theory of Buddha-nature
(tathāgatagarbha) that became very important in the
later development of Buddhist thought.
The epistolary works. The Friendly Letter
(Suhṛllekha), like the Precious Garland
(Ratnāvalī), which is sometimes assigned to this
group is a work addressed to a king. This fact may explain why the
text is primarily concerned with ethical matters. It devotes
relatively little space to the kind of philosophical discussion which
is Nāgārjuna’s most characteristic contribution to Buddhist
thought.
The central concept around which all of Nāgārjuna’s
philosophy is built is the notion of emptiness
(śūnyatā). Emptiness is of course always the
emptiness of something, and the something Nāgārjuna has in
mind here is svabhāva. Different terms have been used to
translate this word into English: “inherent existence” and
“intrinsic nature” appear to be the more popular choices,
but “substance” and “essence” have also been
proposed. None of these cover the full complexity of the term,
however. We therefore have to give some more detailed account of the
way svabhāva is characterized in Nāgārjuna’s
thought. By understanding what empty things are supposed to be empty
of we simultaneously gain a more precise understanding of the concept
of emptiness.
We can distinguish two main conceptual dimensions of the concept of
svabhāva, an ontological one, which refers to a
particular way in which objects exist, and a cognitive one, which
refers to a way in which objects are conceptualized by human beings.
Within the ontological dimension we can distinguish three different
understandings of svabhāva: in terms of essence, in terms
of substance, and in terms of absolute reality. (Even though this
distinction is largely based on Madhyamaka authors later than
Nāgārjuna it is still a useful heuristic tool for
understanding the philosophical point he was trying to make.)
If we understand svabhāva in terms of essence it has
to be considered a property an object could not lose without ceasing to
be that very object: the svabhāva of fire is to be hot,
the svabhāva of water to be wet: whatever ceases to be
hot is no longer fire, whatever ceases to be wet is no longer water.
According to this understading svabhāva is also
identified with the kind of specific qualities
(svalakṣaṇa) that allow an observer to distinguish
an object from other things: by knowing that something is hot, together
with a variety of other svalakṣaṇas we know that
what we have in front of us is fire rather than something else. It is
important to note that this concept of svabhāva (which
plays only a small role in Nāgārjuna’s writings but becomes
more important in later Madhyamaka writers) is not the target of the
Madhyamaka critique. When Nāgārjuna argues that things are
empty of svabhāva it is not this notion of essence he is
concerned with. The philosophically more important understanding of
svabhāva is an understanding in terms of substance.
In Buddhist philosophical thought preceding Nāgārjuna we
find the distinction between primary existents (dravyasat)
and secondary existents (prajñaptisat). Primary
existents constitute the objective and irreducible constituents of the
world out there while secondary existents depend on our conceptual and
linguistic practices. Some Buddhist schools would hold that only
atomic moments of consciousness are really real whereas everything
else, including shoes and ships and sealing-wax is a mere aggregate of
such moments constructed by our conceptualizing mind. According to
this theory the entire world around us would be relegated to the
status of mere secondary existents, apart from the moments of
consciousness which are primary existents. In this
context svabhāva is equated with primary existence and
denotes a specific ontological status: to exist with
svabhāva means to be part of the basic furniture of the
world, independent of anything else that also happens to exist. Such
objects provide the ontological rock-bottom on which the diverse world
of phenomena rests. They provide the end-point of a chain of
ontological dependence relations.
Nāgārjuna argues, however, that there is no such end-point
and denies the existence of an ontological foundation (see Westerhoff
2017). This fact is sometimes used as support of the accusation that
Madhyamaka is really a nihilistic doctrine, a doctrine that nothing
exists. For if the secondary existent is reduced to the primary, and
if there is no primary, what is there left? This interpretation has a
relatively long history, beginning in ancient India and continuing to
find supporters nowadays (see Spackman 2014, Westerhoff
2016). Nevertheless, there are powerful systematic and historical
reasons against it. First of all, it is not clear that this kind of
ontological nihilism is in fact a consistent position (if there is
nothing, is there not at least the fact that there is nothing,
i.e. something?). Secondly, the Mādhyamikas themselves are very
clear that their position avoids both of the extreme views, the view
that believes in the existence of svabhāva as well as
its nihilistic opposite.
It is the understanding of svabhāva as a primary
existent or substance that constitutes the main target of
Nāgārjuna’s philosophical criticism. Before we have a closer
look at the form this criticism takes we must briefly mention the
final ontological understanding of svabhāva,
namely svabhāva as absolute
reality. If svabhāva is regarded as the true nature of
phenomena it is sometimes characterized as not brought about by any
causal process, as unchangeable and as independent of any other
object. The interesting problem arising here is that for the
Madhyamaka the true nature of phenomena is emptiness, i.e. the absence
of svabhāva understood as substance, and that
svabhāva understood in this way is also
characterized as not brought about by any causal process, as
unchangeable and as independent of any other object. So it seems to be
the case that something that has all these properties must exist (since
there is svabhāva which is the true nature of phenomena)
and must not exist (since, the Madhyamaka argues,
svabhāva understood as substance does not exist). In the
Buddhist commentarial literature we find several different ways of
dissolving this contradiction (for more discussion see Westerhoff
2009: 40–46). One way of tackling the issue is by
differentiating two senses in which svabhāva can be
“independent of any other object”. This can be understood
as the familiar understanding of substance as a primary existent noted
above. But it can also be understood as meaning “not dependent
on any specific phenomenon”. We could then argue that emptiness
as the true nature of phenomena is to be understood
as svabhāva and thus as independent only in the second,
but not in the first sense. This is due to the fact that
svabhāva in the sense rejected by Madhyamaka thinkers is
regarded as a superimposition mistakenly projected onto objects which
in fact lack it (see below). Thus emptiness only exists as long as
svabhāva understood as substance is mistakenly projected
onto some object or other. Emptiness does not depend on any specific
phenomenon to exist, but there has to be some phenomenon mistakenly
conceived for emptiness to exist. Emptiness is not some kind of
primordial reality ante rem but a corrective to a mistaken
view of how the world exists. This account boils down to saying that
there really are only two ways of understanding svabhāva:
as essence and as substance. What was earlier called
svabhāva as absolute reality is only a specific form of
svabhāva understood as essence: in the same way as heat
is an essential quality of fire emptiness is an essential quality of
all phenomena. Things could not be the things they are without being
empty.
In concluding our exposition of the different conceptual dimensions
that make up the concept of svabhāva in Madhyamaka
thought we finally have to consider the cognitive understanding of the
term. This constitutes an indispensable component of
Nāgārjuna’s concept since for him the purpose of determining
the existence or non-existence of svabhāva is not just to
arrive at a theoretically satisfactory understanding of reality but is
taken to have far more comprehensive implications for how we interact
with the world. Realization of the non-existence of
svabhāva is supposed to have important soteriological
consequences as part of Buddhist practice; ultimately it is understood
to be the way to the liberation from suffering, the final of the famous
four noble truths expounded by the Buddha. It is important to realize
that svabhāva understood as substance that
Nāgārjuna rejects is not a theoretical posit, an entity an
insufficiently sophisticated philosopher might postulate, but a kind
of cognitive default, a way of superimposing something onto the world
that is automatic and immediate and not the result of detailed
theoretical reflection. We carry out such superimpositions when we
regard the rapidly changing set of psycho-physical aggregates that
constitutes us as a single, permanent, independent self but also in our
daily interaction with other persons, medium-sized dry goods,
linguistic representations and so forth. These then lead to all sorts
of painful emotional entanglements and constitute the key source of
suffering described in the Buddhist teachings. It is crucial to keep in
mind in this context that the Madhyamaka distinguishes between the
understanding of the absence of svabhāva or emptiness and
its realization. The former is a purely intellectual response resulting
from being convinced by the Madhyamaka arguments; it does not
entail that phenomena will no longer appear as having
svabhāva. They will only cease to appear in this way as a
result of the realization of emptiness. The aim of Madhyamaka thought
is therefore not simply to present an accurate account of the nature of
the world, but to bring about a cognitive change, a change in the way
in which the world appears to us. It is useful to compare this
situation with the perception of an optical illusion such as the
Müller-Lyer illusion in which two lines of equal length appear to
be of different length. By using a ruler we can convince ourselves that
our perception deceives us; by learning more about perceptive
mechanisms we can understand why we perceive the lines in the way they
do. But none of this implies that the lines will in the end
look as if they are equally long.
As we noted earlier the understanding of svabhāva in
terms of substance (which is rejected by Nāgārjuna) conceives
of it as an end-point in a series of dependence relations. Various
kinds of dependence relations are discussed in the Madhyamaka
literature; the most important ones for our purposes are mereological
dependence (the dependence of a composite object on its parts), causal
dependence (the dependence of an effect on its cause) and conceptual
dependence (the dependence of an object on the conceptualizing mind).
For the Madhyamaka these dependence relations are equivalent to the
extent that none ever bottoms out. They do have different weight in
their philosophical argumentation, however, since only establishing
that conceptual dependence does not have a foundation is sufficient for
establishing the absence of svabhāva in the comprehensive
sense intended by the Madhyamaka philosophers. Even if there was no
foundation for mereological dependence, i.e. even if there were no
partless particles, or no foundation of causal dependence, i.e. no
first cause there would still remain an important sense in which things
exist substantially, namely independent of human cognition and
conceptualization. Only if we can show that no objects exist
independently with respect to conceptual dependence are we able to
establish Nāgārjuna’s anti-foundationalism in the full
sense.
It is interesting to note that despite the fact that arguing for the
non-existence of svabhāva and the establishment of the
theory of universal emptiness is the central concern of
Nāgārjuna’s philosophy we do not find a “master
argument” to accomplish this (see Siderits 2000: 228 and 2003:
147). Of course we do find systematic lists of the core Madhyamaka
arguments, in particular in the later scholastic developments of this
school but none of them is regarded as the single argument that
settles the matter once and for all. The reason for this comes
directly from the comprehensive rejection
of svabhāva. If nothing has its nature intrinsically and
independently there can also be no argument for a particular thesis
that by its very nature establishes its conclusion independent of the
context in which it is made and independent of the audience towards
which it is directed. The Madhyamaka refutation of
svabhāva must proceed in a step-by-step manner. If there
is someone who believes that some objects of kind x exist
substantially the Madhyamaka will produce an argument to show that
these objects really lack svabhāva. For another opponent,
who thinks that not the xs but the ys are substantial
a different argument has to be used. It is plausible, however, that
there are certain areas of human thought in which human beings
inevitably superimpose svabhāva on things which in fact
lack it. A great deal of Madhyamaka literature is devoted to the
discussion of these, and to arguments showing their lack of
svabhāva. The following section will examine some of
these areas more closely.
In Nāgārjuna’s discussion of causation we usually find him
investigating a set of alternative ways in which cause and effect could
be related. Each of these is subsequently found to be unsatisfactory.
As a result Nāgārjuna does not conclude that causation is
impossible, but that our understanding of the causal relation must be
based on some faulty premiss. This premiss is the presupposition that
cause and effect exist with their own svabhāva. What this
means is that they are qualitatively distinct, independent objects:
first the cause exists without the effect, later the effect can exist
without the cause, once the cause has passed out of existence.
Apart from being independent of each other, cause and effect are also
independent of the cognizing mind. The chain of causes and conditions
is something that exists out there in the world, independent of human
interests and concerns. Nāgārjuna intends to show that
because there is something wrong with all the understandings
of causation usually encountered, the difficulty is likely to lie in a
mistaken supposition that underlies all of them.
In his most well-known discussion of causation Nāgārjuna
distinguishes four ways in which things could be causally be brought
about. They could be produced
The idea that things are their own causes is a
somewhat peculiar one. The Buddhist discussion usually distinguishes
two different views under this heading: that cause and effect are the
very same object, and that the effect is somehow contained in the
cause. One plausible candidate for the identity of cause and effect is
persistence through time. The idea here is that the cause of the
present rock is the rock one second ago, and that these two rocks are
the very same thing. Of course this only works if we are not
endurantists, i.e. if we do not think that there are different temporal
slices all of which make up the rock. If this is the case then what we
are looking at here is one part of an object causing another, rather
than one object causing itself. For a perdurantist who believes there
is some object wholly present during each time there is the difficulty
that we usually believe causes to temporally precede their effects. No
object can be temporally prior to itself, however.
Assuming that the effect is somehow already contained in the cause
(or in the causal field, that is in the collection of the cause and all
the necessary background conditions) might be a more interesting way of
spelling out self-causation. This also entails that when the cause is
present, the effect is present too, contrary to our usual assumption
that it is the cause which brings about the effect at a later time.
Furthermore we are not able to find the effect if we look amongst the
components of the causal field: amongst petrol, oxygen, a spark and so
forth there is no explosion to be found. This does not mean that given
a sufficiently detailed description of the causal field we might not be
able to infer the effect. But this would hardly be sufficient to allow
us to speak of the containment of the effect in the cause.
To assume that cause and effect are distinct phenomena might strike
us as the most natural understanding of causation. Yet
Nāgārjuna argues that cause and effect cannot be
substantially distinct. This is because the effect depends
existentially on the cause (if the cause did not exist the
effect would not exist) and cause depends at least notionally
on the effect (if there was no effect the cause would not be called
“cause”). The kind of independence demanded by substantial
existence, by existence by svabhāva, is simply not
available for things which are cause and effect. On the other hand if
we had a set of objects that were distinct in the required sense it
would be hard to see how we could make sense of any of these being
either cause or effect since no pair of objects from the set would be
connected by a dependence relation. For any two objects from this set
that we label “cause” and “effect” we can
similarly imagine reversing the assignment as the existence of any one
does not influence the existence of any other. But this implies that
it cannot be the causal relation we are talking about, since in
general the roles of cause and effect cannot be switched.
The most convincing way of understanding this alternative is in
terms of a cause that contains the effect in itself as a potentiality
that is actualized given certain conditions. A block of marble (the
cause) may be said to contain a statue (the result) as a potentiality
that is made real by a variety of supporting conditions, namely the
sculptor’s actions. Here cause and effect are not wholly distinct
(since the block and the statue share some parts) nor are they
identical (since the block is not the statue), thereby avoiding the
difficulties implied by the preceding two accounts. This account is
fine as far as it goes, but it would not support the contention that
either cause or effect exist substantially, with
svabhāva. The supporting conditions could not exist
without the block and the statue could not exist without either or
these. None of the objects involved have the roles they play from
their own side, independently of one another.
A final possibility to envisage is that causation is neither
self-causation nor causation from a distinct object. This is usually
regarded as the complete absence of causation since the first three
alternatives are taken to be exhaustive: if these alternatives are
ruled out the only remaining possibility is that there are no causal
relata since there is no causal relation. A big difficulty with this
view is that it fails to account for our ability to grasp facts about
the world, since our epistemic access is most plausibly understood as
causal. If there is no causal interaction between our sense-organs and
the objects out there how is knowledge of the world possible at all? A
further concern is the fact that the world appears to us to be
causally ordered. It is not the case that more or less anything follows
from anything else, but that certain things only follow from certain
other things. As such an account that denies the existence of causal
relations altogether cannot be a satisfactory account of the world as
we experience it.
Neither of the four alternatives just examined allows a plausible
understanding of cause and effect as existing with
svabhāva. Nāgārjuna therefore argues that
there must be something wrong with the assumption that cause and
effect exist in this way. They are not independent but mutually
dependent. The dependence of the effect on the cause is easy to
understand: if there was no cause there would not have been any
effect. But how can we make sense of the reverse? Even if the cause
had not produced the effect if would still have existed (even though
it would not have been called “cause”). There are three
different ways in which we can make sense of Nāgārjuna’s
assertion that the cause depends existentially on the effect.
(a) Firstly we can argue that if Nāgārjuna debates
with an opponent who holds that since a cause has its property of being
a cause essentially, its notional dependence on the effect will entail
its existential dependence. For something being a cause essentially
means that this is a property it could not lose without ceasing to be
that very object. But since the presence of this property depends on
existence of the effect, the existence of the cause as that very object
also depends on the existence of the effect.
(b) A second interpretation which does not have to assume that causes
are essentially causes argues that Nāgārjuna does not intend
to refer to the existential dependence of some particular cause on its
effect but rather to the existential dependence of the
property of being a cause on the property of being an
effect. If an object a falling under property P notionally
depends on something falling under Q this means that the
property P existentially depends on the property Q,
as P can only exist if some object falls under the property
‘identical with the property Q’, i.e., if the
property Q exists.
The property ‘being the left side of my body’ depends
existentially on the property ‘being the right side of my
body’, even though the objects falling under each do not
existentially depend on one another. This is due to the fact that one
property could not exist without the other one, but the objects falling
under them could. In the case of cause and effect we could therefore
interpret Nāgārjuna as saying that the properties
‘being a cause’ and ‘being an effect’ depend
existentially on one another, even though the existential dependence of
objects falling under them is not symmetric: the effect depends
existentially on the cause, but the cause does not need the effect for
its existence.
(c) The third and final reading claims that while Nāgārjuna
undoubtedly also wanted to assert the existential dependence of the
properties ‘being a cause’ and ‘being an
effect’ on each other he moreover made the claim that not only
the particular object which is the effect needs the cause for its
existence, but the cause also needs the effect. Such a reading can be
supported by considering an entire causal field, that is the cause
together with the necessary background conditions, rather than just
particular causes. A causal field is a cognitive artefact, a collection
of objects assembled with the sole purpose of explaining why a
particular effect came about. Divorced from this explanatory role there
is no reason for introducing the concept at all. We might therefore
want to argue that the causal field also depends for its existence on
the effect it produces. This is of course not to say that every member
of the causal field existentially depends on the effect they jointly
bring about: the spark, petrol, and so forth would still exist, even if
they for some reason did not manage to bring about an explosion. But
the collection only exists if there is some effect it causes. Whether
we want to argue that a causal field depends for its existence on the
effect it brings about is intimately connected with our view of the
existence of collections. We might either think that whenever the are
some objects there is the collection of those objects. Or we might deny
that every arbitrary assembly of objects constitutes a collection. We
would then argue that for some objects to form a collection there must
be something which makes them hold together as a collection, for
example that they all exemplify a property, or that they were put
together for a specific purpose. If we adopt the first view of
collections then clearly a causal field will only depend nominally on
its effect, since ‘being a causal field bringing about that
effect’ is only one way in which we can refer to the pre-existent
collection that contains all the elements of the causal field, but not
anything which brings it about. Adopting the second conception,
however, it may be the case that the only thing that binds all
the members of the causal field together is that they are considered to
be the things that jointly bring about a particular effect. In the
absence of this effect the collection disintegrates and ceases to
exist.
Nāgārjuna seems to favour the second interpretation when he
asserts that a cause could not exist without an effect. (MMK 4.3) It
is significant that what is denied here is not just the ascription of
the label ‘cause’ to some object because it is related to
some other object, the effect, but the existence of the cause in the
absence of the effect.  Nāgārjuna endorses not just the
uncontroversial notional dependence of the cause on its effect, but
its existential dependence as well. Applied to the discussion of
causal fields this implies that a causal field can only exist if the
effect it brings about does, and for this reason cannot be taken to
exist whenever all of its members do. If we adopt this third, stronger
reading then we have to conclude that for Nāgārjuna causes
and effects are both notionally and existentially dependent on one
another. They therefore cannot exist from their own side, irrespective
of the existence of one another.  Moreover, they also depend for their
existence on us, because it is our cognitive act of cutting up the
world of phenomena in the first place that creates the particular
assembly of objects that constitutes a causal field, which then in
turn gives rise to the notions of cause and effect. This entails that
the causal field, cause and effect are empty
of svabhāva.
An important point we must not lose sight of in the context of the
discussion of causation is that while showing that objects stand in
causal relations is sufficient for showing that they are empty of
svabhāva in some way (since they do not exist
independently of one another), this on its own would not be sufficient
support for Nāgārjuna’s thesis of universal emptiness. Just
the fact that some objects are cause and effect does not mean that they
exist in any way dependent on human cognition, and it is this
dependence on cognition or conceptualization that is generally regarded
as the most profound understanding of emptiness. (It is also useful to
note in this context that the Ābhidharmikas, a Buddhist school
that was one of the main targets of Nāgārjuna’s criticism saw
no conflict between objects being causally produced and their
possessing svabhāva.) Mark Siderits (2004: 411) has
pointed out that what we have to argue first of all is that the objects
we usually interact with are causally produced so that speaking about
them involves essential reference to causality. We further need to
appeal to the principle that if some object essentially involves a
property that is conceptually constructed then the object is
conceptually constructed too. Chess games are conceptually constructed,
and since “the book describing the longest chess game ever played”
essentially involves chess games it is conceptually constructed too.
But, as Nāgārjuna set out to show, since the causal relation
does not exist from its own side, is conceptually constructed, and
therefore empty, each causally related object must be so constructed
and therefore empty in the most profound sense of being conceptually
constructed.
The discussion of change, in particular that of spatio-temporal
change, of motion, occupies a prominent position in
Nāgārjuna’s arguments. In the second chapter of the MMK we
find a long discussion of the impossibility of motion. Parallels with
Zeno’s paradoxes have been drawn and it has been argued that
Nāgārjuna’s aim was to refute certain views of the structure
of space and time (Siderits and O’Brien 1976). Nevertheless, there is
some evidence that Nāgārjuna two main aims were something
else: firstly, to reject a substantialist interpretation of some of the
key notions of the Buddhist teaching and, secondly, to defend a
specific view of the relation between individuals and their
properties.
Nāgārjuna employs two key arguments that we might want to
call the property-absence argument and the property-duplication
argument. The first (MMK 2:3–3, 9–10) questions the suitability of such
statements like “the mover moves” because there are difficulties
conceiving of a mover without motion. Nāgārjuna argues that
there is a difficulty with thinking of the individual (the mover) and
the property (the motion) in the familiar way, as mutually independent
objects. In the case of a blue vase the vase and the blueness can exist
without each other (at least as long as we are not trope theorists)
whereas there clearly is no mover that does not move. The two stand in
a dependence relation since the individual depends on the property it
instantiates. It therefore cannot exist by svabhāva.
The second argument (MMK 2:5, 11) states that if we were to think in
terms of a mover moving there would be two motions rather than one:
that motion which makes the mover a mover, and that motion by which it
moves. The reason for this is that a mover is an example of an
individual where a distinction between its constitutive and
instantiated properties cannot be drawn. The constitutive property is
what constitutes an individual (something is a cube, or a pot, or a
vase) and the instantiated properties are had by the individual (it is
heavy, or round, or blue). If we apply these notions to the case of
the moving mover we would require two different motions: one which
constitutes the individual and one which is its property. But of
course there is only one motion: that of the moving mover. The point
Nāgārjuna makes here is not just there are problems when
analyzing statements like “the mover moves”, “the
thunder roars” and so forth in terms of an ontology of
constitutive and instantiated properties but the more general
observation that this has implications for the way we can apply these
terms even to more usual statements like “the vase is
blue”. That the distinction between constitutive and
instantiated properties makes no sense in the case of “the mover
moves” shows that there is no substantial distinction between
these properties, and that the conceptualization of a situation in
terms of these is purely a result of cognitive convenience. Since we
want to stress certain features we speak of a blue, round vase instead
of a vase-shaped, round, blue thing or a vase-shaped, blue, round
thing, but this in no way implies that there is a fundamental
difference between the properties “being a vase”,
“being round”, and “being blue” so that only
one of them is constitutive while the others are instantiated. There
is no ready-made world that is already sliced in such a way.
When Nāgārjuna argues that neither mover nor motion exist
by svabhāva he first of all makes an important point
about some central concepts of the Buddhist world-view. The goal of
the Buddhist path is the liberation from cyclic existence, a form of
existence that is nothing but the moving about (samsṛ)
through a succession of rebirths. When Nāgārjuna speaks
about the mover (gati) he has in mind both the familiar
motion from one end of the road to another one as well as the motion
from one life to the next. Nāgārjuna’s arguments to the
effect that mover and motion are interdependent, that the beginning
and end of motion are not to be found “out there” in the
world entail that the person who is reborn, the cyclic existence he is
reborn in and the liberation from that cyclic existence do not exist
substantially.
Nāgārjuna’s second main point is that his analysis of
motion has specific implications for our view of individuals and
properties. The aim of his arguments is to show that the distinction
between individuals and properties is not one which exists independent
of our conceptualizations. As the talk about the ‘property’
instantiated by an individual like a mover or a clap of thunder had to
be explained in terms of a single feature seen in two different ways
– as constitutive and as instantiating – in the same way
talk of the properties of ordinary individuals such as a blue vase
could be seen to be equally a reflection of the division of their
features into constitutive and instantiating properties, something
which is just a reflection of our pragmatic concerns in conceptualizing
the individual in question, but not a reflection of its intrinsic
nature.
For the Madhyamaka school conceiving of substances as individuals
instantiating properties is deeply unsatisfactory. For the sake of
illustration (and using an Indian example) suppose that water-atoms are
substances and that their only intrinsic property is wetness. Now what
is the individual in which wetness inheres? As it is not characterized
by any other properties it must be some kind of propertyless bare
particular. What makes it a bare particular? Given that we are dealing
with substances here it had better not depend on some other object. But
if it is a bare particular by svabhāva and being a bare
particular is therefore its intrinsic nature we are in the same
situation as we were with the water-atoms and their wetness. For now we
can ask what the individual is in which being a bare particular
inheres, and then we are well on our way into an infinite regress. Note
that this problem does not got away if we feel uneasy about the
property ‘being a bare particular’ and do not want to admit
it. For we have to assume that the individual has some determinate
nature due to which it is a bearer of its properties and the difficulty
will just reappear with whatever we take such a nature to be. It does
not help much if we conceive of substances as particularized properties
or tropes instead. For then it is unclear how we can individuate one
wetness-trope from another. We cannot differentiate them according to
the individuals in which they inhere because we have just rejected the
existence of individuals at the level of substances. We cannot say that
this wetness-trope is different from that because they turn up in
different samples of water, since the samples of water are just
collections of tropes. Of course we could try to tell apart the various
trope-substances by the collections in which they occur (or, more
precisely, by which other tropes they are related to via a higher-order
compresence-trope). The difficulty for this is that it introduces
dependence-relations via the back door, for every trope will
existentially depend on being connected to just these other tropes via
a compresence-trope — we cannot take a trope and
‘move’ it to another collection. As we want to conceive of
substances as entities that are not existentially dependent on one
another this approach inevitably introduces a certain tension into our
system. It thus becomes apparent that once more a conceptual scheme
that can be more or less straightforwardly applied to non-substances
breaks down once we attempt to analyse the supposedly foundational
objects of our world in terms of it. While the analysis of a red apple
into an individual and the property it instantiates is at least on the
face of it unproblematic, the same analysis cannot be carried out when
dealing with ultimate existents.
 Nāgārjuna’s criticism of substance
does not just apply to the world of objects, to the phenomena around
us, but equally to the world of subjects, that is our own and other
persons’ self. This is very much in harmony with the Buddha’s own
conception of a person that rejected a self existing with
svabhāva. Such a self would have to be conceived of as
distinct from both our body and our psychological states, as
essentially unchanging, as a unifier of our diverse beliefs, desires
and sensory impressions, and as an agent that makes the decisions that
shape our lives. The alternative presented by the Buddha is a view of
the self that regards it as a continuously changing array of five
psycho-physical aggregates (the physical body, sensation, perception,
intellect, and consciousness) without an inner core. Many of the
arguments Nāgārjuna presents in rejection the notion of a
substantially existent subject bear a close resemblance to those
brought forward by the Buddha himself. 
 Nevertheless his works also provide us with some arguments with
a distinctly Nāgārjunian slant. In MMK 18:2a the opponent
wonders: ‘if there was no self, where would the self’s
properties come from?’ The worry behind this question is that the
undeniable fact that there are properties of the self—since the
Madhyamaka does not want to deny that seeing, feeling, tasting and so
forth takes place — implies that there must be a bearer of such
properties, i.e. a self. Since properties depend existentially on
something that instantiates them a self must be postulated as the
instantiator of all the mental properties we observe. It appears as if
we need a substratum for the psychological states, desires, beliefs and
so on. However, the body, because of its continuously changing nature,
cannot be regarded as adequate for such a substratumhood. Therefore
some kind of self has to be postulated. But if we take into account the
distinction between constitutive and instantiated properties described
above it seems possible to dissolve this worry. Nāgārjuna
differentiates between the property we see as constituting an
individual (such as roundness in the case of a circle, treeness in the
case of a tree etc.) and those properties that the individual is then
taken to instantiate (such as redness in the case of the circle, and
greenness in the case of the tree). As became evident in the discussion
of motion where Nāgārjuna introduces this distinction, the
difference between constitutive and instantiated properties is not
regarded as bearing any ontological weight. It is rather a reflection
of our epistemic priorities and practical concerns that we describe an
object as a tree which is green, rather that as a green object which
has the property of treeness. There is therefore no fundamental
ontological difference between a substratum (dravya) and the
qualities (guṇa) that inhere in it, contrary to
the view that is e.g. held by the Naiyāyikas. 
(See the entry on 
  Analytic Philosophy in Early Modern India (Navya-Nyāya).)
 When we speak of an individual having a property we nominalize
the predicate expressing the property we take to be constitutive and
ascribe the instantiating properties to the individual thus created.
There is, however, no deep ontological reason why we could not change
our view of what the constitutive and what the instantiating properties
are, and thereby describe the very same situation in terms of different
individuals and properties. But if we accept this picture of ontology
it is evident that we are not obliged to infer the existence of a
substratum or underlying individual from the existence of a quality. Of
course the Mādhyamika does not deny that there are a variety of
sensory and mental events that happen in close temporal and causal
connection. But our ascription of these to a single self does not
commit us to the existence of such a self at the ontological level, any
more than the ascription of redness to a circle commits us to the
existence of an individual — the circle — and the redness
it instantiates. In the same way in which we select one property, such
as circularity, as constitutive and then group all the other properties
around this new-found ‘individual’, in the same way we
select certain properties of a causal nexus of sensory and mental
events, some ‘shifting coalition of psycho-physical
elements’ and group the remainder of the properties around this
new-found ‘self’. To speak of the self and its properties
in terms of substratum and quality is perfectly acceptable, as long as
we do not assume that such talk is based on a distinction with an
ontological grounding.
Another issue Nāgārjuna raises (in MMK 9:3) concerns the
epistemic status of the self. A difficulty arises once we note that in
its role as a unifier of our cognitive life a substantial self is the
subject of all experiences, but at the same time given the
distinctness of such a self from our body and all parts of our mental
life it must also be distinct from all experiences. So in order to
have epistemic access to our self it must be able to function as a
cognitive object. Since we assume, however, that it is not only a
cognitive subject but also intrinsically a cognitive subject it cannot
ever occupy this role — at least if we make the plausible
assumption that being an object and being a subject are mutually
incompatible properties. Now given that we do not seem to be able to
acquire knowledge of the self by introspection or by observation of
the outside world it appears that the only cognitive route left open
to us is inference. We have to establish by an argument that the self
exists. It might strike us as slightly curious that what seems to be
the most intimate object of our acquaintance has to be known by a most
indirect route. We might also consider it as somewhat epistemically
implausible to assume that everybody’s belief in a self is arrived at
by a process of drawing inferences from a set of clues. One Nyāya
argument for the existence of the self based on the supposed
existential dependence of qualities on a substratum has already been
discussed above. The Mādhyamika will be reluctant to accept it
since he does not agree with the Nyāya ontology of individuals
and properties it presupposes. Other arguments would obviously have to
be dealt with on a case-by-case basis. But the Mādhyamika will
argue here that in fact no such argument is needed, since it is
perfectly possible to account for our self-awareness, as long as we
give up the conception of a substantial self. If we conceive of the
self as a temporally stretched-out compound of psychophysical events
then there is no fundamental difficulty that the same type of event
turns up on the cognizing subject side on one occasion, and on the
cognized object side on another. Given that there is no unified
substratum constituting the self there is also no necessity for
something to be essentially a subject of experience. As different
parts can play different roles at different times our self-knowledge
can be just explained by a momentary identification with a mental
event that presently functions as a cognizing subject.
Given that Nāgārjuna rejects the picture of a substantial
self described above we have to consider which alternative picture we
are presented with instead. The self is obviously seen as depending on
the five constituents, which rules out the assumption that any
independently existent substance could be regarded as a self. The
emerging view of the self is characterized by two main properties.
Firstly it is to be regarded as a sequence of events that stand in
close temporal and causal relations. Physical processes cause sensory
events, which are then framed by concepts, used as the basis of
decisions, which give rise to actions, which in turn set physical
processes in motion which cause new sensory events and so forth. The
self is not seen as a cognitive nucleus which stays constant amidst the
stream of changing sensory impressions and mental deliberations, but
rather as the entire set of such sensory and mental events which are
interconnected in complicated ways.
Not only does the self depend for its existence on the constituents,
but the constituents only acquire their existence as distinct parts of
the stream of mental and physical events by being associated with a
single self, which, regarded as a constitutive property, produces the
basis for postulating the individual in which the various properties
of the self inhere. It is precisely this reason that keeps the
Mādhyamika from regarding the constituents as ultimate existents
(dravya) and the self as merely imputed
(prajñapti). For the Mādhyamika not only is there
no substantial self, there is also no substantial basis on which a
non-substantial self could be built. Secondly, the self is
characterized by a mistaken self-awareness. This means that the self
which is essentially a sequence of events does not regard itself in
this way, but considers itself to be a substantial self, that is an
essentially unchanging unified agent distinct from its physical and
mental properties. To this extent it is deluded about its real
nature. Nāgārjuna therefore compares the agent to an
illusion created in a magical performance that in turn brings about
another illusion (MMK 17:31–32). This construction allows him to
reconcile his rejection of a substantial self as an essentially
unchanging unifier of our mental live distinct from both its physical
and mental attributes with the acceptance of the self as an agent who
will experience the results of his actions, an assumption which could
not be relinquished within the Buddhist worldview. This is a very
important point, since the identification of the self with a causally
interlinked set of events might tempt us to throw out all prudential
considerations for our future selves, as well as those for other
selves. Since none of these have any ultimate existence we might think
that all actions referring to them in some way (that is all our
conscious actions) are all equally insubstantial too, so that in the
ultimate analysis it does not make any difference how we act.
Nāgārjuna counters this view by distinguishing the view from
the inside of an illusion from that from the outside. When we are
dreaming and are not aware we are doing so we understandably prefer to
leave a building by using the stairs, rather than jumping out of the
window. For somebody who is not dreaming, however (and also for our
later, waking selves) it does not make any difference whether we jump
or not since at the ultimate level (from the point of view of the
awakened one) there is no fundamental difference between the two
actions. This does not imply that whilst we are still under the thrall
of the illusion we should leave all prudential and moral
considerations behind. On the contrary, as long as we are under the
influence of the illusion we have to act in accordance with its laws,
even if we might suspect that it is an illusion. Unlike in the case of
dreaming, where the mere wondering whether we are dreaming sometimes
allows us to see through the nature of the dream the mere suspicion
that there is no substantial self is (unfortunately) not yet a
realization of the emptiness of the self.
The Indian philosophical tradition distinguishes a variety of
epistemic instruments (pramāṇa) by which epistemic
objects (prameya) are accessed. Which epistemic instruments
were accepted and how their function is understood differs amongst
different philosophical theories. In his discussion of epistemology
Nāgārjuna lists four such instruments: perception
(pratyakṣa), inference (anumāna),
recognition of likeness (upamāna), and testimony
(āgama). His primary concern is not a discussion of the
nature and interrelation of these different epistemic instruments, but
the question of how to establish any particular set of such
instruments, whether it is the one just indicated or a different one.
Once we have agreed that the existence of epistemic objects is
established by the epistemic instruments (as for example the existence
of the desk in front of me is established by my perceptual abilities,
in this case primarily non-defective vision) we then have to address
the further question of how to establish the instruments. How do we
know that these instruments are good guides to the objects out there in
the world?
There are three different ways in which we can try to establish the
means of knowledge. First of all we could regard them as established
by mutual coherence. Secondly we could assume that the epistemic
instruments justify themselves. We do not have to go beyond perception
to realize that perception usually delivers an accurate picture of the
world, but perception itself presents a faithful representation of the
world and of its own validity.  Finally one could regard the epistemic
instruments and objects as mutually establishing each other. The
instruments establish an object by giving us epistemic access to
it. But we could also argue that the epistemic object in turn
establishes the epistemic instruments.  Given that we manage to
interact with the objects of knowledge more or less successfully (as
confirmed by the evolutionary success of our species) there must be
something amongst our cognitive means which gives us a relatively
accurate account of the way things are. In this way epistemic success
allows us to establish the means of knowledge via the objects
successfully cognized.
Nāgārjuna does not devote a great deal of discussion of to
the first alternative, the establishment of the means of knowledge by
mutual coherence. The reason for this is that this is hardly a position
his realist Naiyāyika opponent will want to adopt. There are,
after all, coherent fairy-tales. Let us therefore have a closer look at
the other two alternatives, paying particular attention whether there
is any way in which the epistemic objects and instruments could be
construed as having their nature intrinsically, that is, as existing
with svabhāva.
Regarding the epistemic instruments as self-established has the
immediate advantage of avoiding two difficulties. Firstly we get
around the infinite regress of establishing the instruments by other
instruments, which then in turn need yet other instruments to
establish them, and so forth. Unlike other forms of infinite regress
which Nāgārjuna accepts (such as an infinitely extended
chain of causes and conditions) this regress is vicious, since the
burden of proof is transferred in its entirety to the preceding stage,
as a epistemic instrument would have to establish all the succeeding
ones. Secondly the self-establishment of the epistemic instruments
allows the opponent to hold on to the assumption that everything
knowable is established by such instruments. It might be attractive to
give up this assumption in order to escape the vicious regress, but
this then makes it necessary to give a special reason explaining why
ordinary objects are by established epistemic instruments, but not the
instruments themselves.
Despite these advantages, Nāgārjuna argues, there are some
serious problems with the assumption that the epistemic instruments are
self-established. First of all, if an epistemic instrument, such as
visual perception, was self-established it should be able to exist
independently of the existence of an object of vision. But if we then
assume that it is an essential property of visual perception to see,
visual perception must be able to function as its own object, as
otherwise there might be no other object to be seen. This,
Nāgārjuna claims, then leads to a problem already encountered
in his analysis of motion. The mover and the place being moved over
cannot exist simultaneously, since motion takes time; vision cannot see
something that exists simultaneously with it (such as itself), since
vision takes time too (MMK 3:2–3, see also Garfield 1995: 139–139).
Secondly, observing again that if the epistemic instruments are
self-established they will be established independently of the objects
known, Nāgārjuna argues as follows. Assume that we wanted to
chose those amongst all the different means of cognitive access to the
world that deliver accurate knowledge of the nature of the objects
known, that is, that qualify as epistemic instruments. We would select
all those that have a specific internal quality. The possession of this
quality would then guarantee that its possessor delivered accurate
information about the nature of the objects cognized. But how is the
connection between the specific internal quality and the correct
representation of the object justified? After all there are all sorts
of properties our means of cognitive access to the world can have, so
how do we know that a specific one is a guide to accurate
representation?
Suppose we are presented with a set of fancy mechanical devices and
are asked to select the five best tin openers from these. No detailed
study of the internal properties of each will allow us to accomplish
that task. We have to analyse each in relation to a tin and try to
determine the way in which it might open it. Only then would we be able
to conclude which particular properties of the mechanisms are
correlated with good tin-opening abilities. In the same way we can only
regard an internal quality of a way of accessing the world as a
characteristic of an epistemic instrument once we have assessed it in
relation to the objects cognized. Only then can we conclude that this
particular property really leads us to the knowledge of the nature of
the object, rather than doing something else. But in this case the
establishment of the epistemic instruments can no longer be regarded as
self-establishment since it incorporates reference to other objects
(namely the objects known) at an essential place.
If the argument for the self-establishment of the epistemic
instruments is not successful, the remaining option is to argue that
the instruments and objects mutually establish one another. Assume
that I see an apple on the table. The existence of the apple, the
epistemic object, is established by the epistemic instrument which is
perception. But we could equally argue the other way round: that the
object known establishes the epistemic instrument. This would invite
the immediate objection that we then need prior cognitive access to
the object known, and if we have this we must already have established
the epistemic instrument. We are therefore pointlessly establishing it
twice. But if we somehow gain this access without relying on the
epistemic instruments the whole project of establishing these
instruments seems futile, since it is precisely the justification of
our instruments used in gaining knowledge of the world that we have
set out to scrutinize.  We will therefore need a different
argumentative strategy to argue for the mutual establishment of
objects known and epistemic instruments, and in particular for the
establishment of the latter by the former.  One way of going about
this (which does not commit us to the viciously circular mutual
establishment criticized by Nāgārjuna) is to argue that
because the epistemic object is perceived, there must be something
bringing about such a perception, and this is the epistemic
instrument. In this case the apple establishes the existence of the
epistemic instrument by which it is known. An essential prerequisite
for this latter direction of establishment is of course
success. Because we successfully apprehend an apple our means of
apprehension is regarded as an epistemic instrument. If we were
susceptible to frequent apple-hallucinations that disappeared once we
tried to touch them we would not regard perception as a reliable
apple-detector, that is, as an epistemic instrument. But since we are
generally successful in our cognitive interactions with the world and
normally only perceive the existence of apples that are indeed there
the very fact that we successfully apprehend a world of outside
objects serves as an argument for regarding the successful means of
apprehension as epistemic instruments. An immediate difficulty with
this procedure is that we also need an epistemic instrument for
establishing the success of our cognitive actions, that is to
ascertain whether we really are perceiving the apple or just an
apple-hallucination.
Nothing seems to rule out that some epistemic instrument first
deceives us about what we see, and later deceives us about the outcome
of whatever procedure we use to establish whether the first cognition
was successful. But this need not rule out any attempts of mutually
establishing the epistemic instruments and objects if we do not use
epistemically suspect procedures (which we know to have lead to
unsuccessful cognitions in the past) to establish the success of our
cognitive actions. A more worrying question is whether the mutual
establishment of instruments and objects – if successful –
actually delivers the account of epistemic instruments
Nāgārjuna’s opponent wants to defend. In order to see this
we have to note first that the notion of ‘successful cognitive
apprehension’ referred to above cannot just be an act of
cognition that leads to a successful action, as many of our cognitions
(and many of the beliefs subsequently acquired) are never acted
upon. We therefore also have to include coherence with other
cognitions or beliefs as a criterion for the success of some epistemic
instruments as well. Our cognition of the apple on the table might
therefore be deemed successful if it either leads to a successful
action (we reach out, grasp the apple, and eat it) or if it coheres
with other epistemic instruments (for example with my memory of buying
a bag of apples and putting them on the table). However, the
difficulty with employing coherence in this way is that we have to
select a certain set of cognitions or beliefs that we hold fixed, so
that we can then evaluate the status of other cognitions relative to
them. One problem now is of course how to assure the accuracy of this
selected set: if they are not accurate themselves coherence with them
has very little argumentative weight.
Nāgārjuna’s account of epistemology is supposed to
fulfill a purpose both at the object- as well as at the meta-level. At
the object-level epistemic instruments and objects are just another
set of central concepts that have to be investigated as entities
potentially existing with svabhāva. Nāgārjuna
argues that the various ways in which the epistemic instruments and
objects could be established are either not satisfactory or fail to
show that they exist with svabhāva. At the meta-level
Nāgārjuna’s theory of epistemology is supposed to
provide the theoretical background of his own account of emptiness. As
the theory of emptiness is something we are supposed to acquire
knowledge of it is essential to get clear about the means by which we
are supposed to do so, and indeed about what our epistemic object
consists of in this case. These two projects are inherently
interconnected. For according to the standard Nyāya theory of
epistemology Nāgārjuna encountered, knowledge is acquired by
using a set of procedures (such as perception or inference) the nature
of which it is to produce knowledge and which convey information about
a set of objective, mind-independent set of individuals that are the
bearers of specific qualities. But a theory that thus presupposes the
existence of objects of knowledge with distinct natures which the
means of knowledge could adequately represent could hardly be used as
a basis for knowing emptiness, for it presupposes exactly what the
theory of emptiness denies. A substantial part of
Nāgārjuna’s epistemological discussion is therefore
dedicated to a criticism of the standard Nyāya theory of
knowledge. Nāgārjuna sets out to establish that nothing can
be regarded as intrinsically an epistemic instrument or object. The
two have to be mutually established: the instrument establishes the
object by giving us cognitive access to it, our successful interaction
with the object establishes the instrument as a trustworthy route to
the object. Something will therefore be classified as an epistemic
instrument or object not because this is a reflection of its intrinsic
nature, but because it is regarded as such once a reflective
equilibrium has been reached. We use beliefs about the nature of the object
in order to test our hypotheses concerning the instruments of acquiring such beliefs,
these hypotheses are then in turn used to assess our view of the nature of the object.
Language is not a topic that is given much explicit discussion in
Nāgārjuna’s works. This does not mean that such matters
were not important to him, but merely that his extant writings do not
contain an extended connected discussion of the impact of his theory of
emptiness on his view of language.
Nevertheless it is possible to extract some of
Nāgārjuna’s views on this philosophically highly
interesting issue from remarks found at different places in his
works.
Most importantly it is apparent that the Madhyamaka theory of
emptiness is not compatible with a the idea of a ‘ready-made
world’, that is of a world that exists independently of human
interests and concerns and already shows a particular kind of
structuring that our structured language could then set out to
reflect.  If nothing exists with svabhāva nothing in the
world could exist from its own side and nothing could bear a structure
that is intrinsic to it, rather than something ascribed to it from the
outside. Moreover, the Mādhyamika will reject the classic
correspondence theory of truth, according to which the truth of a
statement is grounded in a similarity of structure between a statement
and the bit of the world it refers to. This also entails a rejection
of the corresponding view of how language works, namely that our
sentences manage to connect up with the world via a set of objectively
existent structural similarities. The main reason for this rejection
is that the Mādhyamika cannot find any sufficiently substantial
relation that would allow us to bind together world and word at the
most fundamental level. The most plausible candidate for linking words
and their referents is the causal relation, for example by using it to
construct a causal chain from an ‘initial baptism’ to our
present use of the term. But as Nāgārjuna has argued in
detail the causal relation itself is conceptually constructed. But if
causation cannot be regarded as a relation that functions objectively,
independent of the concepts we employ then it can hardly be regarded
as a mind-independent way of founding the relationship between
language and the world.
An alternative account which the Mādhyamika might want to adopt
is one which does not conceive of truth in terms of correspondence
with an exterior reality but rather in terms of assertability
conditions. In this case a statement is regarded as true if conditions
obtain that warrant our asserting the statement. What makes the
statement that water is wet true is not a structural correspondence
between it and a fact about water, but that we have something that
justifies us in making this statement. What this justification
consists in depends on the further details of our theory of truth; it
might be based on facts about empirical observation, about coherence
with other beliefs, about pragmatic success and so forth. This view of
course implies that there could not be any truths that are in
principle beyond our ability to know them. This is because we could
never have a warrant for asserting such statements, and the existence
of such a warrant is precisely what we consider the truth of the
statements to consist in.  Such statements would have to be regarded
as lacking a truth-value.  This kind of denial of
verification-transcendent truths in turn agrees very well with
Nāgārjuna’s contextualist epistemology.  For if nothing is
intrinsically an epistemic instrument nothing can be intrinsically
beyond the grasp of such instruments either. As what constitutes an
epistemic instrument is context-dependent, that a certain truth cannot
be accessed by some instrument is context-dependent too. There is no
context-independent concept of knowledge we could use to form the idea
of a truth that lies beyond all epistemic contexts.
According to the Madhyamaka view of truth there can be no such thing
as ultimate truth, a theory describing how things really are,
independent of our interests and conceptual resources employed in
describing it. All one is left with is conventional truth, truth which
consists in agreement with commonly accepted practices and conventions.
These are the truths that are arrived at when viewing the world through
our linguistically formed conceptual framework. But we should be wary
of denigrating these conventions as a distorting device that
incorporates our specific interests and concerns. The very notion of
‘distortion’ presupposes that there is a world untainted by
conceptuality out there (even if our minds can never reach it) that is
crooked and bent to fit our cognitive grasp. But the very notion of
such a ‘way things really are’ is argued by the
Mādhyamika to be incoherent. There is no way of investigating the
world apart from our linguistic and conceptual practices, if only
because these practices generate the notion of the ‘world’
and of the ‘objects’ in it in the first place. To speak of
conventional reality as distorted is therefore highly misleading,
unless all we want to say is that our way of investigating the world is
inextricably bound up with the linguistic and conceptual framework we
happen to employ.
There are two worries one might have with the rejection of the notion
of an ultimate truth. First of all one might think that progress in
human inquiry requires that we question what we now believe to be
truths and perhaps replace them with other beliefs. Even a cursory
acquaintance with the history of science will show that we are where
we are now only through a persistent process of replacing beliefs we
once held to be true, but no longer hold to be true. But it seems hard
to explain what our justification for this is if it is not trying to
bring our beliefs into greater accordance with the way things are. All
we ever seem to be dealing with according to the Madhyamaka view is a
purely immanent notion of truth where the only kind of truth we have
access to is a reflection of conventional human practices and
agreements. In response to this the Mādhyamika might want to make
the point that it is at least sometimes advantageous to treat truths
as if they had a more than conventional grounding, that is as if they
were not just the product of agreement with commonly accepted
practices and conventions.  This is precisely because such practices
need improvement from time to time, and since a spirit of inquiry is
facilitated more by the idea that there is a mind-independent truth
waiting to be discovered. The Mādhyamika could thus argue that
for pragmatic reasons we should conceive of truths as reflections of
an objective, external reality even though we do not think that there
are any such truths in fact. We might object at this point that if the
notion of the existence of at least some verification-transcendent
truths is pragmatically useful, whoever believes in truth as warranted
assertability then has to believe that some truths are not
conventional, since asserting this is now supported by a warrant. But
this will not just turn the anti-realist into a realist against his
will, since his embracing of non-conventional truths is dictated by
purely practical concerns: we are considerably better off if we build
our inquiries on the convenient fiction of non-conventional
truths. But they remain just that, namely convenient fictions; the
anti-realist does not think, as the realist does, that the existence
of such truths is in any way grounded by the way the world is
independent of our interests and concerns.
Another worry with the Mādhyamika’s rejection of an
ultimate truth is that emptiness cannot then be regarded as the
ultimate truth either. But surely, one will argue, for the
Mādhyamika emptiness is the end-product of the correct analysis of
phenomena, and thereby indicative of the way things really are.
However, emptiness is not to be understood as a description of reality
as it is independent of human conceptual conventions, as its main
purpose it to combat the wrong ascription of svabhāva to
things. The absence of svabhāva or emptiness is nothing
phenomena have within themselves, but only something which is projected
onto them from the outside in an attempt to rectify a mistaken
cognition. Therefore the theory of emptiness is not to be regarded as
an ultimately true theory either. Such a theory would describe things
as they are independent of human interests and concerns. But the theory
of emptiness is intricately bound up with such interests and concerns:
if there were no human minds who mistakenly read the existence of
svabhāva into phenomena which lack it there would be no
point in having a theory to correct this. It is only due to our
erroneous view of things that the theory of emptiness is required as a
corrective.
The preceding discussion has discussed some of the main topics
Nāgārjuna addresses in order to refute their existence by
svabhāva: causation, change, the self, knowledge,
language, and truth. This is not a comprehensive exposition of the
Madhyamaka view, however, not just because there are aspects of
Nāgārjuna’s thought we have not mentioned here (such has his
discussion of time and his account of ethics), but because Madhyamaka
thought regards itself as a philosophical antidote against
superimpositions of svabhāva wherever they arise. It is
therefore by necessity more comprehensive than the arguments found in
Nāgārjuna’s works. They provide examples of argumentative
procedures and discussions of putative examples of
svabhāva prominent amongst Nāgārjuna’s
opponents. But the Madhyamaka project consists not just in the
explanation and defense of these arguments (even though most of the
positions Nāgārjuna argues against are of more than
historical importance) but has to be continued in the debate with the
defenders of svabhāva in the contemporary philosophical
discussion. It is apparent that Madhyamaka philosophy is opposed to the
brand of realism currently found in much of contemporary analytic
philosophy (Michael Devitt (1997: 41) characterizes this succinctly as
the claim that ‘most current common-sense and scientific physical
existence statements are objectively and mind-independently
(deflationary) true’). Things that exist in a mind-independent
manner exist with svabhāva, even though they might be
dependent in all other kinds of ways. (Even if everything out there
depended on every other thing, as long as the entire network of
dependence-relations was mind-independent it would exist with
svabhāva). Of course the Mādhyamika’s talk of
“mind-dependence” does not refer to dependence on any
individual mind, as a solipsist would assume, but collective
dependence on all the minds there are. This view raises a variety of
interesting questions that Madhyamaka philosophy has to address. First
of all there is the question of how to make sense of objects like Mt
Everest depending on all our minds collectively. It is clear how we
could say something like this about things existing merely by the
force of convention, such as the objects traded on the stock
market. But how could something like a mountain be merely
conventionally existent? Secondly, given the Madhyamaka rejection of a
correspondence-theoretic account of truth, how can it come up with a
theory of meaning and truth that is not committed to some sort of
structural isomorphism between word and world but still gives us a
robust account of what distinguishes true from false sentences?
Thirdly, if it is not facts out there that settle what is true how can
the Mādhyamika avoid the unacceptable relativistic conclusion
that we cannot criticize epistemic or ethical practices which differ
from ours? Fourthly, how can we make sense of an ontology without
foundations in which there are no substantially existent objects on
which everything else depends? (For an interesting formal model of
such an ontology see Priest 2009, 2014. This question has obvious systematics connections with the current discussion of grounding.) Many aspects of these
questions have been addressed in vast body of commentarial literature
that was written in the nearly two millennia since Nāgārjuna
composed his key philosophical works. Other still remain to be
addressed. One of these is the question to which extent Madhyamaka thought is essentially linked to Buddhism. This is a question that has attracted more interest recently especially from researchers that study Madhyamaka primarily as a philosophical, rather than as a religious tradition. (For some interesting reflections on matter this see McGuire 2017).

If we consider the lively status of Madhyamaka studies today it seems evident that the questions Nāgārjuna asked and the system of
philosophy he founded in the second century remain very much alive in
the twenty-first.